03e7064075f71f3d3c197974338034e9d8fbfccc
Thursday Orals O-001 Dissociation Between Cardiovascular Aging and Developmental Programming of Cardiovascular Disease
 Y Niu A D Kane B J Allison E J Camm C  Lusby J L Tarry-Adkins T  Ashmore A J Murray S E Ozanne D A Giussani 

University of Cambridge University of Cambridge University of Cambridge University of Cambridge University of Cambridge University of Cambridge University of Cambridge University of Cambridge University of Cambridge University of Cambridge 
We have demonstrated that fetally-derived neuronally-enriched exosomes (FNEs) can be isolated from maternal blood as early as the first trimester. Here we further characterize FNEs as a potential non-invasive tool to probe human in-utero neurodevelopment. METHODS: Maternal plasma samples were precipitated with ExoQuick solution and FNEs were isolated with biotinylated anti-Contactin-2/ TAG1 antibody-streptavidin matrix immunoabsorption. Total exosome content (CD81), placental contamination (PSG-1) and sonic hedgehog (SNHH) protein levels were quantified by ELISA. Expression of CD81 was examined in fixed human fetal brain at 15-19 wks from healthy pregnancies (HP) and those with heavy current ethanol (FAS). Immunostainings utilized primary antibodies followed by FITCcongugated secondary antibodies. The FNE fraction in maternal plasma was 2-20%. FNEs crossreacted weakly with PSG-1. In the 1 st/ 2 nd trimester, there was a positive correlation between PSG-1 and gestational age (GA, r=0.52, p=0.03) but none between GA and CD81 (r=0.03, p=0.87) . SNHH FNE levels normalized to CD81 were significantly reduced in FAS compared to HP (p=0.03). CD81 was widely distributed within fetal brain but was reduced in FAS. Mean maternal plasma/cord plasma FNE ratio was 0.89 at term. CONCLUSIONS: We expand on our novel methods for isolating FNEs from maternal plasma as a non-invasive method to probe fetal neurodevelopment. Decreased levels of SNHH in FNEs from FAS suggest that EtOH alters signaling for neuroproliferation and potentially decreases innate neuroprotection. Exosomal proteins are seen in many regions of the developing brain but may be altered in disease. Placental contamination of FNEs is minimal but increases with GA. Placental passage of FNEs is robust at term. Further research is needed to characterize the correlation between maternal blood FNEs and structural/molecular fetal brain injury. *Figure(s) will be available online. (ID) and anemia in addition to high gestational weight gain (GWG). High GWG in this group may increase inflammation. Recent evidence suggests obesity is a risk factor for ID due to inflammatorymediated increases in hepcidin, the major iron-regulatory hormone. Our study objective was to assess the effect of prepregnancy body mass index (ppBMI) and GWG on hepcidin, iron status and inflammation among women with twins. METHODS: A prospective cohort of women ≥19 years with uncomplicated twin gestations and who delivered ≥ 24 weeks gestational age (GA) were recruited between 2011 and 2014. BMI was classified according to the WHO and GWG was categorized using the 2009 IOM pregnancy weight gain guidelines. Maternal iron status and inflammation included hemoglobin (Hgb), hepcidin, serum iron, ferritin, transferrin receptor (TFR), total body iron (TBI), erythropoietin (EPO) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). Analysis was conducted using SPSS v22 with significance set at 0.05. RESULTS: Our population included 64 women with twins. Approximately 49% had a ppBMI ≥ 25.0 at the onset of pregnancy. Most women failed to meet GWG recommendations. At the first study visit (mean GA 23.0 ±6.8), 32.1% of women were anemic compared to 48.4% of women at delivery (mean GA 35.3 ±2.3), p<0.01. Mean Hgb at delivery was lowest among women with inadequate GWG (10.8 g/dL ± 1.8, p=0.04). TFR (>8.5 mg/L) and EPO significantly increased across gestation, p=0.02 and p=0.03, respectively. IL-6 was positively associated with hepcidin at delivery (r= .43, p<0.01). No iron status or inflammatory indicators were significantly associated with ppBMI or total GWG. However, when stratified by ppBMI, GWG was negatively correlated with TFR (r= -.49, p=0.02) and positively correlated with ferritin (r= .56, p<0.01) only among women with a normal ppBMI. Women with inadequate GWG had lower levels of ferritin (p=0.04) and TBI (p=0.02) at delivery. These women were also more likely to have a preterm birth (PTB) (p=0.02) and deliver an infant <2500 g (p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that GWG below IOM recommendations in women carrying twins increased the risk of maternal Fe insufficiency and PTB. These data do not support the premise that excessive GWG or high ppBMI increases inflammation and risk of ID women carrying twins. (EGFR) is abundantly expressed in placenta and is further increased in preeclamptic placenta. Our objective was to assess whether EGFR signaling regulates sFlt1 secretion. METHODS: We isolated primary trophoblast then 1) inhibited EGFR with either siRNAs or gefitinib (orally available EGFR inhibitor), or 2) inhibited major downstream EGFR adaptor molecules and measured sFlt1 secretion. We also added EGF peptide at varied concentrations and measured EGFR expression and sFlt1 secretion. Finally, EGFR expression was assessed in primary trophoblasts treated with esomeprazole and pravastatin. RESULTS: Inhibiting EGFR with gefitinib or siRNAs significantly reduced sFlt1 secretion by 30-70% from baseline ( Figure 1 ). Small molecules inhibiting the downstream adaptor molecules MEK1/2 (U0126), Erk/12 (PD98059), c-RAF (ZM336372) and JAK2 (AG490) potently induced a dose dependent reduction in sFlt1 secretion. Adding low dose EGF (up to 1.0pg/ml) increased EGFR gene expression and increased sFlt1 secretion. Interestingly, the effects of EGF followed a bell-shaped curve: >1ng/ml of EGF down-regulated EGFR and reduced sFlt1 secretion, whereas >100ng/mL EGF up-regulated EGFR and increased sFlt1 secretion. Treating primary trophoblast with Esomeprazole or Pravastatin dose dependently reduced sFlt1 (as we've previously reported) coincident with a significant dose-dependent reduction in EGFR mRNA expression. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a new level of molecular regulation for sFlt1. EGFR appears to positively regulate sFlt-1 secretion. The implications are that identifying drugs that block EGFR signaling (such as gefitinib which is currently in clinical use) may be a novel therapeutic strategy. 8.6 % closure vs. 89.2 ± 3.2; p = 0.03). No difference in tube formation was noted in terms of branch points per high power field (17.6 ± 1.0 vs. 17.1 ± 1.4; p = 0.77) or closed loops per high power field (3.1 ± 0.4 vs. 3.3 ± 0.5; p = 0.76.). CONCLUSIONS: Cord blood ECFCs obtained from infants exposed to PE in utero showed impaired growth and migration. Difference in tube formation was not noted. While not all functional properties are impacted by the in utero environment exposure of PE, the noted persistent dysfunction of endothelial progenitor cells, may contribute to the increased risk of cardiovascular disease later in childhood and early adulthood in these infants. sham surgeries. After induction, EMS mice were randomly divided to receive IP CXCL12, AMD3100 (a CXCR4 antagonist) or vehicle control. FACS was conducted on blood samples to identify circulating DsRed cells. Lung, liver, and spleen were harvested 4 weeks after induction, followed by FACS for DsRed cells. Paraffin embedded tissue sections were stained by immunofluorescence for DsRed. The slides were visualized using confocal microscopy. qRT-PCR was used to characterize the sorted DsRed cells in lung, liver and spleen. RESULTS: Circulating DsRed endometriosis-derived cells were identified in all animals with transplanted endometriosis and not in controls. A significantly higher number of DsRed cells were found in the CXCL12 treated group during the first 17 days after induction. No difference was found in AMD3100 group compared with those receiving vehicle treatment. FACS analysis revealed endometriosis-derived cells in lung, liver, and spleen of animals with EMS. Significantly higher numbers of endometriosis-derived cells were seen in the tissues of the CXCL12 treated group, while no DsRed cells were found in the AMD3100 treated group or controls. DsRed endometriosis-derived cells were higher in spleen than in lung and liver, respectively. Immunofluorescence staining showed results consistent with FACS analysis. qRT-PCR showed that the sorted cells from lung, liver, and spleen expressed CXCR4 and endometrial mesenchymal stem cell (eMSC) markers CD140B and CD146, but not hematopoeitic stem cell marker CD45. CONCLUSIONS: Endometriosis-derived cells, which express stem cell markers and CXCR4, are capable of migrating to distant organs. CXCL12 treatment increased mobilization and engraftment, while blockade of CXCL12 prevented engraftment. Hematologic dissemination driven by the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis is involved in the spread of endometriosis. CXCR4 antagonists are a potential novel therapy to prevent the spread of this disease. . Literature evidence suggests a pathophysiological role for enhanced PRL signaling in human endometriosis. Patients suffering from systemic hyperprolactinemia and endometriosis were successfully treated with a dopamine receptor (DR) agonist leading to disappearance and shrinkage of endometriotic lesions. However, prolactin produced in extrapituitary sites cannot be blocked by DR agonists. Gene expression studies demonstrated an upregulation of PRLR and PRL mRNA in human endometriotic lesions suggesting a role for local hyperprolactinemia in endometriosis. To block PRLR-mediated signaling, we developed a neutralizing PRLR antibody BAY-094 (005-C04). This antibody acts as a noncompetitive PRLR antagonist in vitro and its in vivo application mimicked the phenotype of PRLR deficient female mice [1] . We previously demonstrated that drugs used for the treatment of endometriosis in women were effective in a murine endometriosis interna model [2] . In this model, endometriosis interna severity (rated by the depth the myometrium is invaded by endometrial tissue) is enhanced by systemic hyperprolactinemia induced by pituitary isografting under the kidney capsule. Using this model we compared the effects of the PRLR-antibody BAY-094 to classical anti-estrogenic treatment strategies, danazol and bromocriptine in a therapeutic setting. The PRLR antibody BAY-094 completely blocked endometriosis interna in this model to the same extent as an antiestrogen or a GnRH antagonist. Bromocriptine and the androgenic progestin danazol showed slightly reduced efficacy. Uterine weight as a measure of estrogenic activity was not affected by BAY-094. CONCLUSIONS: In contrast to estrogen-depleting approaches that are not suited for long-term treatment in premenopausal women, application of the PRLR antibody did not interfere with estrogen signaling in mice To investigate the role of TRPV2 in stromal decidualization an in vitro decidualization assay in hESC and an in vivo decidualization assay using a menstruation mouse model (MMM) were used. RESULTS: Trpv2 -/mice showed a significantly lower survival rate per litter. However, the number of blastocysts after 4 days in vitro culture were not different between wild type and Trpv2 -/animals. In addition, in vivo decidualization experiments using a MMM revealed successful decidualization in only 20% of Trpv2 -/animals compared to 80% in the Trpv2 +/+ mice. Remarkably, mRNA and functional expression of TRPV2 in hESC decreased significantly after 5 days of in vitro decidualization. In order to illuminate possible upstream signaling pathways, blockers of different pathways were tested. Interestingly, inhibitors of the protein kinase A signaling pathway significantly modulated in vitro decidualization and strongly affected the TRPV2 expression in hESCs. CONCLUSIONS: These data showed a significant lower survival rate per litter in Trpv2 -/mice, that is not caused by abnormalities in blastocyst development. In addition, these results suggest a possible role of TRPV2 in the decidualization process, since the percentage of decidualized animals was lower in Trpv2 -/mice. In addition, these data provide evidence for a reduced TRPV2 expression after decidualization. All together, these results suggest an important role of TRPV2 in the onset of decidualization. from control (CON) and IUGR fetuses to test the effect of hypoxia on gluconeogenic genes (PCK1, PGC1A), AMPK phosphorylation (P-AMPK), and insulin signaling (P-AKT, P-FOXO1). METHODS: Primary hepatocytes were isolated from CON (n=5-6) and IUGR (n=8-10) fetal sheep. Glucose production, adjusted to protein content, was measured after 24h treatment in glucose-free media with lactate and pyruvate in the absence or presence of 500 nM DEX and 100 µM cAMP (D+C) . For mRNA analysis by qPCR, hepatocytes were studied basally or with D+C or 100 nM insulin in normoxia (21% O 2 ) or hypoxia (3% O 2 ) for 4 or 24h. For protein analysis by western blot, hepatocytes were treated with insulin (0, 1, 10 nM) for 15 min following 4h of normoxia or hypoxia. Data were analyzed by ANOVA. RESULTS: IUGR hepatocytes had higher glucose production in response to D+C compared to CON hepatocytes (P<0.05). In CON and IUGR hepatocytes, hypoxia for 4h increased PCK1 and PGC1A mRNA (P<0.005) and D+C further increased PGC1A (P<0.001). However, at 24h PCK1 increased with D+C (P<0.005) but not hypoxia; this PCK1 increase was higher in IUGR hepatocytes than in CON hepatocytes (P=0.06). PGC1A mRNA increased synergistically with hypoxia and D+C (P<0.001). Hypoxia increased P-AMPK by 50% in IUGR cells yet the response was 4-fold greater in CON cells (P<0.05). Insulin increased P-AKT and P-FOXO1 in CON and IUGR cells (P<0.001). P-AKT, but not P-FOXO1, was further increased with hypoxia in IUGR cells only (P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with maintenance of increased HGP, IUGR hepatocytes had increased glucose production and PCK1 expression. We speculate that this may be due to decreased P-AMPK in response to hypoxia rather than impaired insulin signaling given maintained P-AKT and P-FOXO1 activation. Further, hypoxia alone in CON and IUGR hepatocytes increased PCK1 and PGC1A expression acutely. Thus, sustained hypoxia-induced PGC1A mRNA and decreased P-AMPK may provide a link to persistently increased HGP in IUGR fetuses with hypoxia. The uv-ua difference was significant for total Cholesterol (p=0.033), HDL (p<0.001) and LDL (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: We found a net uptake of cholesterol from the umbilical circulation to the fetus. Cholesterol uptake from HDL was similar to that of LDL, making HDL an important exogenous source of cholesterol in the term human fetus. AJP, 2010) . Altered regulation of hypoxia signalling by increased prolyl hydroxylase domain (PHD) expression in the PR fetal lung may be the mechanism responsible for reduced surfactant (Orgeig et al, AJP, 2015) . To understand the role of PHDs in regulating surfactant maturation, we evaluated the effect of PHD inhibition in the lung of the Control compared with the PR fetus. METHODS: PR was induced by carunclectomy (n=13). At 131 & 132d gestation (term=150±3d) fetuses received a bolus of saline (Control (C+S), 11; PR+S, 7) or PHD inhibitor (C+DMOG, 8; PR+DMOG, 6) in the lung via a non-obstructive tracheal catheter. Expression of genes regulating surfactant maturation PCYT1A, LPCAT, LAMP3, ABCA3) were quantified in lung tissue at 133d by qRT-PCR. Total phosphatidylcholine (PC) was measured in lung lavage. Numerical density of SFTP-B positive cells in lung tissue was determined by point counting. Data were analysed by one-way ANOVA with Duncan posthoc test (P<0.05). RESULTS: PR+S reduced P a O 2 , O 2 saturation & fetal weight compared with C+S. There was reduced expression of surfactant proteins (SFTP-A, -B, -C), lipid transporter LPCAT & total lavage PC in the C+DMOG & PR+S fetal lung compared to C+S (Fig 1) . There was reduced expression of surfactant lipid regulatory genes PCYT1A, LAMP3 and ABCA3 in C+DMOG fetuses compared to C+S and PR+S. There was no further effect of PR+DMOG on expression of genes compared to PR+S alone. There was no effect of either PR or DMOG on the numerical density of SFTP-B positive cells in the fetal lung. CONCLUSIONS: The PHD inhibitor, DMOG, mimics the effect of PR, reducing surfactant maturation in the lung of the C fetus. Interestingly, there was no cumulative effect of PR+DMOG, suggesting a maximal downregulation of surfactant system maturation following chronic hypoxemia in the PR fetus. Supported by the NHMRC of Australia *Figure(s) will be available online. Expression of lactate transporters (MCT1 and MCT4) were analysed in tissue biopsies (n=5) by qRT-PCR. Primary (HPMC) and immortalised (MeT-5a) mesothelial cells were treated with dichloroacetate (DCA), which inhibits the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK1), and analysed for markers implicated in lactate biosynthesis (SLC2A1, PDK1, LDHA). RESULTS: Endometriosis lesions had increased MCT1 mRNA (p<0.01) compared with adjacent peritoneum from women with endometriosis. Expression of MCT4 was altered in the peritoneum of women with endometriosis being higher in the tissue recovered adjacent to lesions (p<0.01). DCA treatment decreased concentrations of mRNAs encoded by SLC2A1, PDK1 and LDHA (HPMC p<0.01, MeT-5a p<0.01). Concentrations of lactate in culture media were also reduced (p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Endometriosis is associated with a shift in the metabolic activity of mesothelial cells resulting in increased secretion of lactate ('Warburg effect'). We obtained evidence that lactate transport proteins are differentially regulated with MCT1 (lactate importer) increased in endometriosis lesions and MCT4 (lactate exporter) increased in adjacent peritoneum. Our data is consistent with a reciprocal metabolic reprogramming of adjacent peritoneum and ectopic lesions supporting supply of lactate from peritoneum to the endometriosis lesion. We also showed that DCA reduces glycolysis and lactate production in mesothelial cells. Since DCA is already used to treat lactic acidosis and certain cancers, 'repurposing' of DCA and/or related compounds may offer potential as therapeutics for endometriosis. Effluxed endometrium acquires adaptive survival characteristics via dysregulated signaling and epigenetic mechanisms that eventually cause disease. Cytochrome (CYP) p450 enzymes metabolize endogenous and exogenous substrates to critically affect organ pathophysiology. KLF11, a transcription factor diminished in endometriosis, epigenetically represses an array CYP enzymes such as model enzyme CYP3A4. We show here that Transforming growth factorβ (TGFβ) regulates KLF11 and thereby alters endometrial metabolism. METHODS: Ishikawa cells were treated over a time course with 10ng/ ml of TGFβ1 or vehicle. Additional cells were transduced with wt-KLF11 or empty vector (EV). KLF11 and canonical TGFβ pathway (TGFβR1, 2, SMAD2, 3, 7) expression was evaluated by promoter assays and qPCR. Wildtype and Klf11-/-mice with surgically induced lesions were injected daily with vehicle or a TGFβR1 inhibitor (TRI). Additionally the animals were treated with selective epigenetic histone acetylase/deacetylase inhibitors that targeted KLF11. Murine lesions as well as paired eutopic and ectopic endometrial samples from 28 patients with endometriosis were evaluated for CYP3A4 by Immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: KLF11 was up-regulated early (0-8hours) followed by sustained repression (4-48 hours) in TGFβ treated cells. KLF11 repressed TGFβ receptors, SMAD 2 and 3 levels but activated repressor SMAD 7. KLF11 thus repressed canonical TGFB/SMAD signaling. Sustained KLF11 repression mimics loss of Klf11 with disease progression in the Klf11-/-animal model as well as selective lesional loss of KLF11 in human disease. Loss of Klf11 epigenetically activates CYP3A4 expression in time course, animal model and human disease lesions corroborating disease relevance. TRI reduced disease progression in Klf11-/-mice. When combined with an epigenetic inhibitor disease progression was further abrogated. CONCLUSIONS: Dysregulation of the TGFβ signaling pathway is implicated in endometriotic progression. We show here that altered endometrial metabolism, a crucial mechanism that facilitates adaptive and disease-specific pathophysiology is mediated by TGFβ via an alternative KLF11 mechanism. Inhibition of the SMAD pathway in vivo reduced disease progression in Klf11 -/-mice which was further diminished INTRODUCTION: BCL6, a transcriptional repressor, is emerging as a biomarker of eutopic endometrial dysfunction in women with endometriosis. We have previously demonstrated over-expression of BCL6 in women and non-human primates with endometriosis and evidence of expression modulation by phosphorylated STAT3 and the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AhR). Gli1 is a known target of BCL6 in other tissues, a downstream effector of IHH signaling, and an important factor in implantation and decidualization. The objective of this study was to determine the effects of altered endometrial BCL6 expression on Gli1 expression. METHODS: Real-time, RT-PCR assessment of mRNA, Western blot assessment of protein, and ChIP PCR assessment of BCL6 binding site occupancy in one or more of the following: endometrial tissue from normal volunteers, normal endometrial stromal cell culture, and the Ishikawa endometrial epithelial adenocarcinoma cell line. RESULTS: Endometrial expression of Gli1 and BCL6 mRNA show opposite trends: In normal whole endometrium, Gli1 was suppressed 5-fold in the secretory phase, while BCL6 increased 2-fold. In cultured stromal cells from fertile controls, treatment with the AhR atagonist, GNF351, results in increased BCL6 mRNA (3-5 fold) and decreased Gli1 mRNA (4 fold). Ishikawa cells, a model for endometrial epithelial cells, show a similar pattern: Treatment with 10 -6 M Medroxyprogesterone (MPA) for 24 hours increases BCL6 mRNA expression 2-3 fold, but decreases Gli1 expression 4-5 fold. Further, BCL6 siRNA knockdown of BCL6 increases Gli1 expression 1.7-fold. ChIP-PCR using an anti-BCL6 monoclonal antibody show a BCL6 binding site in the region of -305 to -202 of the Gli1 promoter that is minimally occupied with estradiol treatment, but increased almost 20-fold with the addition of 10 -6 M MPA. CONCLUSIONS: Endometrial BCL6 and Gli1 are expressed in opposite patterns in both stromal and epithelial cells. Increased BCL6 expression inhibits Gli1 expression by a mechanism that includes direct binding to the Gli1 promoter. Decreased Gli1 expression may play a role in progesterone resistance and decidualization defects in women with endometriosis. Although BCL6 protein can undergo multiple posttranslational modifications that can potentially affect function, simply changing expression levels leads to functional consequences. Pro-Tumorigenic Profile in Myometrium of Diet-Induced Vitamin D Deficient Mouse Model. Heba Elhusseini, 1 Mohamed Abdelaziz, 1 Noura Eziba, 1 Sherif Shaaban, 1 Sunil Halder, 1 Nahed Ismail, 2 Michael Diamond, 1 Ayman Al-Hendy. 1 1 Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA; 2 University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Uterine fibroids are the most common hormonedependent benign tumors in uterus, affecting up to 70% of reproductive aged women. We were first to report that vitamin D deficiency is a risk factor for uterine fibroids, as confirmed later by other groups. We reported that vitamin D3 inhibits fibroid cell proliferation in vitro as well as in vivo in two animal models. It is not yet established how vitamin D3 deficiency affects molecular changes in the uterus which may lead to development of uterine fibroids. We studied the effect of vitamin D deficiency on proliferation of normal myometrial cells in vivo. C57BL/6 female mice were randomized into two groups: control, n=10, fed on ordinary diet and vitamin D deficient group, n=10, fed on vitamin D deficient diet for 3 months. At the end of the experiment blood samples were collected from all animals to measure the serum levels of vitamin D3 using ELISA. All animals were sacrificed, myometrial tissue were collected and assessed using immunohistochemistry (IHC) and western blot analyses. RESULTS: Serum level of vitamin D3 was significantly lower (50%) in vitamin D deficient group compared with control group. IHC revealed increased expression of PCNA (91%±1) in vitamin D deficient group versus (68%±3) in control group (p=0.007) and Ki67 (91%±1) in vitamin D deficient group versus (59%±11) in control group (p=0.009). TGFβR2 were significantly higher (83%±3) in vitamin D deficient mice versus (19%±1) in control group (p=0.0006). Progesterone receptors were over expressed; (PR-A) (72%±7) in vitamin D deficient group versus (36%±6) in control group (p=0.0002) and (PR-B) (81%±8) in vitamin D deficient group versus (31% ±1) in control group (p=0.0001). The levels of caspase3 were reduced in the vitamin D deficient group revealing (6%±4) versus (75%±1) in control group (p=0.0001). Western blots analyses revealed increased protein expression of PCNA, PR-A and PR-B and reduced level of vitamin D receptor (VDR) in vitamin D deficient group compared to control group. Future study will determine the levels of inflammation associated markers (CD3, CD69, CD11b and FoxB3) between the two groups CONCLUSIONS: Vitamin D3 deficiency may induce a pro-fibroid like molecular profile in myometrial tissue which in turn can initiate and/or propagate fibroid formation Hypoxic Response Mediated by Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1α in Uterine Leiomyoma and Myometrium. Hiroshi Ishikawa, Linlin Xu, Tatsuya Kobayashi, Guiwen Wang, Makio Shozu. Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan. INTRODUCTION: Although uterine leiomyomas proliferate and enlarge within hypoxic environments, a hypoxic response in uterine leiomyoma and myometrium has not been observed. Moreover, it has been reported that protein expression of hypoxia inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α), a transcription factor that mediates various hypoxic responses, does not occur in uterine leiomyoma; however, the abundant extracellular matrix surrounding leiomyoma cells may affect the detection of HIF-1α protein, thus making the interpretation of in vivo data difficult. Here, we determined whether hypoxia induces HIF-1α and HIF-mediated hypoxic responses in uterine leiomyoma and myometrium in vitro. The IRB at our facility approved the protocol. We obtained consent from participants who underwent hysterectomy for symptomatic leiomyoma. We cultured primary leiomyoma and myometrial cells obtained from surgical specimens under hypoxia (1% oxygen) or normoxia (21% oxygen) with or without cobalt chloride (CoCl 2 , 150 µM), and then extracted total RNA and protein. We performed RT-qPCR, immunoblotting, and chromatin immunoprecipitation-qPCR to determine mRNA levels, protein levels, and the binding of HIF-1α to the promoter of HIF target genes, respectively. RESULTS: Hypoxia induced a significant increase in the level of HIF-1α protein up to 6 h in both leiomyoma and myometrial cells, with much lower induction levels in the leiomyoma cells. CoCl 2 , a hypoxia mimetic, also significantly induced HIF-1α protein expression. In contrast, HIF-1α mRNA levels were significantly decreased without any initial increase in both leiomyoma and myometrial cells up to 12 h with a significantly lower decrease in the leiomyoma cells. Hypoxia significantly increased the mRNA expression all 9 HIF target genes tested: ALDOA, ENO1, GAPDH, HK1, LDHA, PFKL, PFKFB3, SLC2A1, and VEGFA. Moreover, hypoxia induced the binding of HIF-1α to putative HIF response elements on the promoter of all 3 HIF target genes: ENO1, LDHA, and VEGFA. All of the hypoxic responses including those to CoCl 2 were attenuated in leiomyoma cells. CONCLUSIONS: Hypoxia induces HIF-mediated hypoxic responses in both leiomyoma and myometrial cells. The attenuated responses in leiomyoma cells may reflect the tolerance of uterine leiomyoma to hypoxia, which may be acquired by exposure to chronic hypoxia. The hypoxia-induced down-regulation of HIF-1α mRNA is a unique characteristic of uterus-derived cells. Overactive bladder syndrome (OBS) is a common health problem. We have shown that vitamin D elicits robust antiinflammatory response in human myometrial cells (Thota et. al., 2013) . Recent studies documented expression of vitamin D receptors in human bladder. We hypothesize that vitamin D deficiency in a risk factor for OBS, which induces a heightened inflammatory microenvironment in bladder wall leading to hyper-excitability and premature contractions of the detrusor muscle. Our aim to assess effect of vitamin D and Paricalcitol on expression of inflammatory cytokines and invitro contractility in human detrusor muscle cells. We have shown that in PCOS, nutrient ingestion stimulates proatherogenic inflammation that is independent of obesity. We examined the effect of salsalate administration on nutrient-induced tolllike receptor-2 (TLR-2) RNA and TLR-2 and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) protein from mononuclear cell (MNC) along with the ovarian androgen response to HCG administration in lean women with PCOS. METHODS: Seven lean women with PCOS diagnosed on the basis of secondary amenorrhea and hyperandrogenemia were selected for study. Subjects ingested 100 ml of dairy cream, received a single 5000 IU IM injection of HCG and underwent a hyperglycemic infusion (130 mg/dl) within 5-8 days of menses. Subjects received salsalate 3 gm daily for 12 weeks and were retested after treatment. MNC were isolated from pre-and post-treatment blood samples drawn while fasting and 2 hours after cream ingestion and the hyperglycemic infusion. The TLR-2 RNA content and the protein content of TLR-2 and MMP-2 were respectively quantified by RT-PCR and Western blotting. Testosterone (T) and androstenedione (A) were measured by RIA from blood samples drawn at 0, 24, 48 and 96 hours after HCG administration. Steroidogenic Factor 1 (SF-1, NR5A1) Is Required for Sertoli Cell Survival. Chandra S Miryala, 1 Prashanth Anamthathmakula, 1 Morgan Brisse, 1 Jennifer C Condon, 1,2 Pancharatnam Jeyasuria. INTRODUCTION: Sex-determining region Y (Sry) gene expression in the post indeterminate fetal gonad leads to Sertoli cell differentiation, seminiferous cord formation and male differentiation. This is followed by an up regulation of SF-1 expression in the male when compared to the female gonad. The aim of this study is to understand SF-1 gene function in the developing Sertoli cell. We speculate, from preceding reports, that SF-1 ablation will lead to Sertoli cell loss and thereby impair the functional development of the testis. The SF-1 gene was conditionally ablated in the Sertoli cells on gestation day 14.5 by crossing Amh-Cre/homozygous SF-1 floxed female mice withhomozygous SF-1 floxed male mice. Knockout embryos were exposed to 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BRDU) by injecting timed pregnant dams with BRDU. In order to examine the loss of cells due to apoptosis we used Tunel staining. Testes were collected from male embryos dissected from timed pregnant mice from gestation days 15.5, 16.5, 17.5 and 18.5. RESULTS: Gross histological analysis of the knockout mice revealed a marked loss of seminiferous tubules compared to the wildtype animals. The loss of seminiferous tubules was concomitant with a loss of germ cells. Antibody staining for BRDU incorporation showed a loss of proliferation of Sertoli cells in knock out animals. The consequence of the loss of Sertoli cells was manifested by a decline in germ cell number as demonstrated by Vasa specific staining. There was a high level of apoptotic cell death in both the E15.5 and E16.5 testes. Our studies have demonstrated that ablation of SF-1 at embryonic stage E14.5 results in the loss of Sertoli cells and thus impaired seminiferous cord formation. The degeneration of germ cells following the Sertoli cell loss demonstrates that germ cells require Sertoli cells for survival. Very few seminiferous tubules survive into adulthood and they stain SF-1 positive suggesting that they escaped ablation in the fetal testis. Some of these adult seminiferous tubules are Sertoli cell only which suggest a reorganization of dispersed Sertoli cells to reform seminiferous tubules occurs after the loss of the adjacent germ cells in the fetal gonad. Galactose Classic galactosemia, an inborn error of metabolism, is characterized by accumulation of galactose and its metabolites to toxic levels. A majority of women with this disorder suffer from premature ovarian insufficiency and infertility. The underlying mechanism of oocyte damage in this disorder remains unclear. Recently, we have shown that galactose and its metabolites, galactose 1-phosphate and galactitol deteriorate oocyte quality by altering microtubule morphology and chromosomal alignment. The aim of the study was to explore the mechanism by which galactose and its metabolites deteriorate oocytes quality and function. METHODS: Metaphase II mouse oocytes, with (n=120) and without cumulus cells (n=120), were exposed for 4 hours to galactose (2 µM), galactitol (11 µM) and galactose 1-phosphate (0.1 mM), concentrations equivalent to plasma levels present in patients compliant with a galactoserestricted diet. Generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) was evaluated by Cellular Reactive Oxygen Species Detection Assay Kit and apoptosis was determined by TUNEL assay. Mitochondrial membrane potential was evaluated by the JC-1 Assay. RESULTS: Most oocytes exposed to galactose and its metabolites showed poor oocyte quality, independent of cumulus cells. Treatment with these metabolites led to ROS overproduction, increased apoptosis ( Fig.1) and mitochondrial dysfunction. In addition, cumulus cell viability was significantly reduced. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: In-vitro exposure to galactose and its metabolites compromise oocyte quality through a mechanism involving mitochondrial damage and overproduction of ROS which mediates alteration of intracellular redox potential balance. Supplementation with antioxidants and/or compounds that can further lower or eliminate galactose and its metabolites could improve follicle dysfunction and female infertility in women with classic galactosemia. Hyperstimulation Syndrome (OHSS). Cuihong Zheng, Bindu Menon, Thippeswamy Gulappa, KMJ Menon. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. INTRODUCTION: OHSS is a complication in assisted reproduction, arising from the administration of exogenous gonadotropins to induce ovulation. Increase in serum VEGF levels is an important marker for OHSS. We have shown that expression of VEGF closely parallels the expression levels of LHR mRNA in response to hCG treatment of PMGS-primed rats. We hypothesized that transient downregulation of LHR expression that occurs in response to preovulatory LH surge or in response to the administration of exogenous hCG to induce ovulation prevents OHSS. Conversely, aberration of this transient downregulation might contribute to OHSS by the secretion of VEGF. In the present studies, we tested this hypothesis by examining whether the transient downregulation of LHR and the resultant suppression of VEGF production seen in controlled PMSG/hCG-induced ovulation model, are altered in the OHSS model. METHODS: OHSS was induced in immature female rats by s.c. injection of 20 IU of PMSG for four consecutive days, followed by 30 IU of hCG on the 5th day. A control group received a single injection of 50IU of PMSG followed by 30 IU of hCG 48h later. Rats were sacrificed and ovaries harvested 0, 12, 24, and 48h after hCG. RESULTS: A significant increase was seen in both ovary diameter and weight in the OHSS group. Vascular permeability was also found to be significantly higher in the OHSS group. LHR mRNA expression was significantly downregulated in the control at 12h after hCG injection, but increased slowly after 24h reaching normal levels by 48h. The pattern of VEGF expression closely paralleled the LHR expression in the control group. In the OHSS group, although LHR downregulation occurred at 12h after hCG injection, LHR mRNA levels was significantly higher at 24 and 48h, compared to the control. Furthermore, the expression of VEGF mRNA in the OHSS group remained high following hCG treatment and showed a steady increase in a time-dependent manner. VEGF protein, measured by ELISA, also showed a similar trend (55, 75 and 90 pg/ mg protein at 0, 24 and 48h respectively, P<0.01 vs. control ). Thus, in the OHSS group, LHR and VEGF expression remained at higher levels following hCG treatment, compared to the control. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that dysfunctional LHR downregulation after hCG administration and the resultant increase in VEGF production might contribute to the onset of OHSS. Preoperative Culture-independent sequenced-based analysis of the skin at cesarean incision sites has the potential to provide new insights on the etiology and prevention of SSI. We sought to characterize the skin microbiome at the incision site in women undergoing cesarean delivery and compare microbial community structures in women with and without SSI. This was a planned secondary analysis of a randomized trial in pregnant women undergoing cesarean. Skin swabs were obtained at the site of planned cesarean incision immediately prior to preoperative surgical skin preparation and stored at -80C until DNA extraction. 16s rRNA V4 region was sequenced using Illumina MiSeq. Operational taxonomic units were assigned using the Greengenes reference database. Reads were clustered by QIIME at 97% similarity and specimens were rarefied to a read depth of 1200. Analysis including Shannon diversity and specific taxon abundance were compared between women with and without SSI. RESULTS: Preoperative skin swabs were obtained from 144 patients; 21 were excluded for low DNA yield, and 123 were analyzed. SSI occurred in 6 (4.9%) patients. The skin microbiome at cesarean incision site of pregnant women as a group was characterized predominantly by Corynebacteriaceae (32%), Staphylococcaceae (26%), Clostridales (10%), and Lactobacillaceae (9%). Microbial diversity appeared greater in women with SSI compared to those without SSI, although the difference was not statistically significant. Further, abundance of Dialister sp. (an anaerobic gram-negative bacteria present in oral, gastrointestinal, and the genitourinary tracts) was significantly higher in women with SSI (P=0.002). *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary data suggest differences in the preoperative skin microbiome at the site of cesarean incisions in women who subsequently have SSI. If confirmed, these findings would inform new strategies for preventing SSI after cesarean. Stress in the Placenta. Fredrick J Rosario, 1 Theresa L Powell, 1,2 Thomas Jansson. 1 1 University of Colorado AMC, Aurora, CO, USA; 2 University of Colorado AMC, Aurora, CO, USA. INTRODUCTION: Low maternal folate levels are linked to fetal growth restriction and increased perinatal morbidity and mortality, however the underlying mechanisms remain elusive. Recent studies suggest that placental insufficiency is associated with placental mitochondrial dysfunction and increased endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We have previously shown that mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a folate sensor and that mTOR Complex 1 (mTORC1) regulates the transcription of genes involved in mitochondrial electron transport chain complexes (METCC) in the trophoblast. We tested the hypothesis that maternal folate deficiency decreases protein expression of METCC and causes ER-stress in the placenta. METHODS: Four-week old ICR female mice (n=7) were fed a control diet (folic acid (FA), 6 mg/kg) or a folate-deficient diet (FD 0 mg/kg) for 6 weeks prior to mating and throughout pregnancy. At E18.5, dams were killed and fetuses and placentas were collected. Protein expression of electron transport chain subunits and phosphorylation of Grp78, ATF4, and XBP-1, (markers of ER stress) in placental homogenates was quantified by Western blot. At mating folate deficient (FD) mice had lower serum folate (-60 %). Folate deficiency did not affect maternal blood glucose, food intake or body weight gain during pregnancy. At E18.5, fetal weight in the FD group was decreased (-17%, p<0.05), whereas placental weight, litter size and crown rump length were unaltered. Maternal FD decreased the placental expression of electron transport chain complexes I (NDUFB8; -45% p<0.02), III (UQCRC2; -49% p<0.01) and V (ATP5α; -71% p<0.001). Furthermore, maternal FD increased expression of phosphorylated Grp78 (+30 % p<0.05), Atf4 (+45%, p<0.01), and XBP-1 (+40 %, p<0.01), markers of ER stress. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report to link maternal FD to decreased protein expression of METCC (I, III and V) and increased ER stress in vivo, providing novel insight into the effects of maternal folate deficiency on placental function. We speculate that the effect of FD on electron transport chain subunit expression is mediated by mTORC1 inhibition. Our data indicate that maternal folate deficiency impairs placental mitochondrial function, which together with increased ER-stress, may compromise placental function and cause fetal growth restriction. INTRODUCTION: Obesity in pregnancy is common and associated with many pregnancy-related complications such as failed induction of labor (IOL). Leptin, an adipocytokine important in energy homeostasis, is found in higher levels in obese individuals, and has been demonstrated to have an inhibitory effect on myometrial contractility. We hypothesize that leptin plays a role in the mechanism of dysfunctional labor. Thus, we sought to compare the maternal plasma leptin levels in women that had a successful vaginal delivery post-IOL vs. those who had a C-section post-IOL. METHODS: This case-control study utilizes the University of Iowa Maternal-Fetal Tissue Bank (IRB#200901784). A total of 168 women underwent IOL. 54 delivered via Cesarean section and 114 women delivered vaginally. Maternal/neonatal characteristics were collected/ verified in the electronic medical record. Leptin and total protein levels from third trimester samples were measured using commercially available ELISAs. Statistical analyses were performed and logistic regression models were constructed using regression identified and clinically significant confounding variables. All variables were tested at significance level of 0.05. RESULTS: After normalizing leptin for total protein (leptin/protein [pg/ mcg]), women with failed IOL had higher values (0.5 vs 0.3, P = 0.01). Women with failed IOL were more likely to have obesity (mean BMI 32 vs 27, P = 0.0002), preeclampsia (13% vs 2%, P = 0.008), lower Bishop score (3 vs 5, P < 0.001), lower parity (0.3 vs 0.9, P < 0.001) and meconium-stained fluid (35% vs 13%, P = 0.002). They were also more likely to require multiple induction methods (two or more methods) (93% vs 73%, P = 0.008). In a multivariable regression model, Bishop score was the only covariate associated with successful IOL (OR 1.5, P < 0.001). BMI (OR 0.92, P < 0.001), preeclampsia (0.12, P = 0.010), use of multiple methods of induction (OR 0.22, P = 0.008) and leptin/protein (OR 0.42, P = 0.017) were all associated with failed IOL. After controlling for Bishop score and preeclampsia, leptin/protein was still significantly associated with a decreased likelihood of successful induction of labor with an odds ratio of 0.47 (P = 0.046). CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with our hypothesis, elevated leptin/protein levels are associated with failed IOL. Our data support the hypothesis that leptin is an important factor in explaining why obese women are more likely to have dysfunctional labor and failed induction of labor. INTRODUCTION: Type 2 diabetes is an independent risk factor for the development of endometrial adenocarcinoma. We hypothesized that hyperinsulinemia promotes abnormal endometrial proliferation, and sought to characterize molecular mechanisms for this effect in vivo, particularly for the role of insulin receptor isomers, IR-A and IR-B. To eliminate the confounder of obesity, we chose a lean, non-diabetic but hyperinsulinemic model, the MKR transgenic mouse. METHODS: We extracted uteri from MKR (n=9) and WT (n=5) mice at 15 weeks of age. Histology for endometrial dating and hyperplasia was performed. Gene expression for insulin receptor isomers IR-A and IR-B, IGF-1R, ERα, PGR, and cell cycle regulators were assessed by qRT-PCR. Each group was analyzed in the proliferative and secretory phases (PP and SP) via log transformation and 2-tailed t-test. RESULTS: Endometrial hyperplasia was present in 1 of 9 (11%) of MKR mice, and in none of the WT. MKR mice had 24-fold higher mean cyclin E expression during PP (p<0.05), and a 30% reduction in p27 during SP (p=0.059) relative to WT. In WT, IR-A mRNA increased 1.6fold (p=0.005) between PP and SP. Whereas, in MKR mice, IR-A was similar between PP and SP, and reduced relative to WT (p=0.01). Mean IR-B levels were similar in MKR and WT. IGF-1R was dramatically reduced by 70% in MKR mice relative to WT during PP (p<0.02). MKR and WT had similar expression of ERα, ERα co-activator NCOA2, PGR, FKBP52 and HOXA10. CONCLUSIONS: Here we isolated the endometrial effect of excess insulin from obesity and unopposed estrogen in an in vivo model. Hyperinsulinemia promotes endometrial hyperplasia by altering regulators of the cell cycle. Increased proliferation occurred despite no change in ERα or PGR, and a protective reduction in mitogenic receptors, IR-A and IGF-1R. suppressor (Pten) mutations. Transcription factor KLF11 is diminished in human endometriosis and is associated with rapid disease progression. KLF11 is a tumor suppressor in pancreatic cancer. We characterize here for the first time the tumor suppressive role of KLF11 and Ras along the spectrum of progression from endometrial cells to endometriosis, endometrioid and clear cell ovarian cancer METHODS: Ishikawa and T-HESC endometrial cells were transduced with KLF11, RASG12V (RAS) singly and in combination as well as their respective shRNA's and controls. Proliferation and apoptosis were livemonitored and filmed by the IncuCyte system. RNA was evaluated by PCR Arrays for proliferation and apoptosis. Tumor foci in soft agar and colony counts were evaluated. A tissue microarray (TMA) of endometrium, endometriosis, endometrioid or clear cell ovarian cancer from 84 patients was evaluated by immunohistochemistry for KLF11 and Ras expression. RESULTS: Proliferation was lowest and apoptosis highest in all KLF11 transduced cells, intermediate levels were noted with controls, RAS and KLF11 or RASsiRNA. Maximal levels were seen with KLFshRNA with RAS. Correspondingly, tumor foci and colony counts corroborated these results as was dysregulation of oncogenic and apoptotic pathways in PCR Assay. We characterized aberrant cell cycle progression via transcriptional dysregulation of KLF11 target cyclinA2. In the TMA KLF11 levels progressively declined from endometrium to endometriosis to ovarian cancer. In contrast RAS mutant expression increased with progression to cancer. CONCLUSIONS: KLF11 is a well characterized human disease gene. Diminished lesional KLF11 results in endometriotic progression. Our data suggests that continued decline of tumor suppressive functions with de novo oncogene mutations promotes development of ovarian cancer. Endometriosis may be a precancerous stage for a subset of ovarian cancer wherein determination of KLF11 and RAS levels in excised lesions could have prognostic significance. Higher Associations of immune cells with pathological evidence of tumor aggressiveness were determined using ANOVA and univariate and multivariate analyses and correlated with progression free (PFS) and overall survival (OS). The average age of the study cohort was 63 years, 86% were Caucasian, 11% African American and 3% Hispanic or Asian. Endometrioid and non-endometrioid histologies comprised 88% and 12% of the cases. 76% had stage I disease, 7% stage II, and 17% had stage III or IV disease. 81% of the study population had <2/3 myometrial invasion (MI) and 78% patients had no lymphovascular space invasion (LVSI). Mean pre-operative immune cell concentrations were 8x10 9 /L, 5x10 9 /L, 0.6x10 9 /L, 2x10 9 /L and 0.3x10 9 /L for total white blood cells (WBC), neutrophils, monocytes, lymphocytes and platelets, respectively. 12% of patients had a higher neutrophil count (>7x10 9 /L) and 18% had a higher monocyte count (>0.7x10 9 /L). Total WBC, neutrophils, monocytes and platelets were significantly correlated with stage, however no significant correlations were identified among grade, MI or LVSI with respect to immune cells. Age, grade, histological subtype, MI and LVSI were all correlated with PFS and OS. By univariate analysis, higher neutrophils and higher monocytes were associated with reduced OS (p<0.05). On multivariate analysis, higher monocytes were associated with a worse PFS (p=0.07). Higher lymphocyte counts were associated with improved PFS (p=0.05) and OS (HR=0.61, p<0.01) by multivariate analysis. CONCLUSIONS: We identified that higher monocyte and lower lymphocyte counts were associated with poorer survival. These routine and inexpensive markers may serve as important pre-operative indicators of tumor aggressiveness. Tumor-associated macrophages and lymphocytes should be investigated further in patients with endometrial cancer. While an increasing body of evidence supports the origin of both CS elements from a common epithelial cell that undergoes sarcomatous dedifferentiation, limited information is available about the role of somatic mutations and copy number variations. The objective was to evaluate the genetic landscape of uterine and ovarian CSs by wholeexome-sequencing (WES). We analyzed the mutational landscape of 63 fresh frozen CS biopsies and 5 primary CS cell lines by WES. We also performed multi region WES in separate carcinoma and sarcoma areas to resolve the genetic architecture and evolutionary histories of CS. Finally, in transfection experiments we validated somatic histone 2A and 2B mutations as potential drivers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) . RESULTS: Our results demonstrated the presence of two major genetic types of uterine CSs [i.e., uterine serous carcinoma-like (USC) profile and endometrioid carcinoma-like profile (EAC)] and provided evidence that both subtypes, as well as ovarian CS, arise from sarcomatous transformation of carcinomas. We found an excess of mutations in histones H2A and H2B, as well as significant amplification of the segment of chromosome 6p. We also found frequent deletions comprising TP53 and MBD3, and frequent amplification of chromosome segments containing PIK3CA, CCNE1, TERT and c-MYC. Amplifications of the histone cluster and TERT were significantly more frequent in CS than their epithelial counterparts. Stable transgenic expression H2A and H2B in USC cell lines suggested a role in sarcomatous transformation. Comparison of the phylogenetic relationships of carcinomatous and sarcomatous elements of the same tumors demonstrated separate lineages resulting in these two components. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide new insight into the origins of uterine and ovarian CS and define the genetic landscape of this type of malignant tumor. These findings also suggest new therapeutic targets for these highly aggressive neoplasms. Mechanical Induction of Oogonial Stem Cell Differentiation. Julie A MacDonald, Dori C Woods, Jonathan L Tilly. Northeastern Univeristy, Boston, MA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Oogonial stem cells (OSCs) can provide a renewable source of oocytes throughout reproductive life. Yet, all women experience progressive depletion of oocytes to the point of exhaustion, driving menopause. Since OSCs persist in ovaries after ovarian failure, we hypothesize that ovarian aging disrupts external cues necessary for continued differentiation of OSCs into oocytes. Here we tested if changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) surrounding OSCs, and by inference mechanical forces, may serve as key participants in OSC function and ovarian aging. METHODS: Ovaries collected from 6-week (young) and 14-month (aged) C57/BL6 mice were probed for collagen type I and type IV protein levels. To study differentiation, feeder cell-free cultures of OSCs (passage 30-35) isolated from young mice were seeded into culture wells coated with 10 µg/cm 2 of collagen type I or IV, or an equal mixture of both, and then assayed for in vitro derived (IVD) oocyte formation (Nature Protocols 2013 8:966) . To study mechanical force effects, OSCs were seeded onto flexible silicone membranes coated with ECM protein, and vacuum pressure was applied to achieve three distinct doses of tensile strain, after which IVD oocyte formation was measured. For gene expression, RNA was isolated from cultured OSCs and evaluated by quantitative PCR. All experiments were replicated 3 times, and statistical significance determined by ANOVA and Student's t-test. RESULTS: Levels of collagen type I and IV were decreased in ovarian tissue with age. Compared with control OSC cultures, a combination of collagen type I and IV, but not either collagen alone, enhanced expression of the meiosis initiation gene, Stimulated by retinoic acid gene 8 twofold (P<0.05), and increased IVD oocyte formation by 140% (P<0.005). Addition of tensile strain at a cellular level further enhanced oogenesis by OSCs seeded onto ECM in a force dependent manner (P<0.05). Gene expression profiling revealed that integrin subunits α3, αV, β1, and β5, which transduce signals from ECM, were all highly expressed in OSCs. CONCLUSIONS: These findings collectively highlight a novel role for ECM and mechanosensitive signaling pathways in promoting mammalian OSC differentiation. When viewed with the ECM compositional changes observed to occur in ovaries with age, we conclude that loss of OSC differentiation due to disruption in ECM and mechanostimulatory signaling contributes to age-associated oocyte exhaustion and ovarian failure (Support: NIH R37-AG012279). Behavior of Trisomic Human Amniotic Fluid Cells in Culture: A Model for Aneuploidy Study. Margaret Dziadosz, Michael Chan, Ross Basch, Bruce K Young. New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. INTRODUCTION: Trisomy is a common chromosomal abnormality associated with fetal loss and multi-systemic complications of survival in humans. Animal models cannot inform developmental pathophysiology in trisomies. Previous studies have shown slow cell kinetics and reliable differentiation into hematopoietic and neural lineages of trisomic human amniotic fluid cells (AFC). We investigated the behavior of trisomic AFCs compared with euploid AFCs in culture to guide better understanding of abnormal development. METHODS: Amniotic fluid was collected from women identified at risk for fetal abnormality at second trimester amniocentesis. Three samples were identified as trisomic (2x Trisomy21, 1x Trisomy18). AFCs were isolated and cultured to observe morphology and multiplication potential. Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) was performed to evaluate cell surface markers of pluripotency, as euploid AFCs are known to be pluripotent. Cells were grown as 3D spheroids for differentiation into osteogenic, chondrogenic and neural lineages. Immunohistochemistry staining and fluorescent imaging was performed for analysis of lineage markers. Trisomic cultures were compared to matched euploid controls. RESULTS: Fetal Trisomy 18 and Trisomy 21 AFCs were morphologically indistinguishable from euploid samples. Trisomic AFCs exhibited rapid division for a 96 hr period, exceeding euploid pace. FACS analysis using antibodies for stem cell pluripotency markers SSEA4, TRA-1-60 and CD90 revealed expression patterns similar to euploid samples. Trisomy18 spheroids differentiated similarly to euploid samples into osteogenic, chondrogenic and neural lineages. Trisomy21 samples uniformly induced either more weakly or did not induce at all into all three lineages. * Figure( (HDP) has been proposed to be a central mechanism of fetal neurodevelopmental comprise. Recently it has been shown that pre-eclampsia increases the risk of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 1 . Here we examine the association between HDP and ADHD in the offspring and whether circulating factors in serum from women with a HDP alter early patterns of fetal neuronal growth. We used data of 13192 children who participated in the 7-year old wave of the Millennium Cohort Study (MCS), representative of children born in the UK in the year 2000-2001. HDP including raised blood pressure, eclampsia, pre-eclampsia or Toxaemia were reported by the mothers 9 months after delivery. ADHD was parent-reported at age seven years based on a diagnosis by a doctor. Logistic regression was used for data analysis adjusting for maternal age, body mass index, smoking, depression, pre-pregnancy hypertension among others. To examine fetal neuronal growth, gestational day (GD) 14 rat cortical neurons were treated with 3% serum from either 5 severe cases of preeclampsia or 5 matched controls for 24h. The complexity of 75 individual neurons (15 neurons x 5 serum samples per group) was analysed using a modified line intercept approach to measure neurite number, total neurite length and branching. RESULTS: 991 women reported HDP and 169 children were diagnosed with ADHD. We found an association between HDP and ADHD (adjusted OR 1.8, [95% CI 1.03, 3.07]). In addition, exposure of GD 14 rat cortical neurons to serum from women with established preeclamspia lead to a significant increase in neuronal growth and branching (P<0.001: n=75), when compared to those treated with serum from healthy controls. CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort study, we found that HDP was associated with increased risk of ADHD even after adjusting for several potential confounders. We also show that exposure to serum from women with a hypertensive disorder of pregnancy, can alter early patterns of fetal neuronal growth, which in turn may affect early patterns of brain wiring, which has been implicated in ADHD. It is not known whether infants conceived after all types of infertility treatment have a higher risk of birth defects than infants conceived naturally. We aim to determine the rate of some major congenital anomalies in live birth of the pregnancies resulted from all types of infertility treatment. METHODS: Data were extracted from NCHS, Vital Statistics database and included a cross-sectional analysis of twin live births in the US from 2011 to 2013. We used the general checkbox in birth certificate whether the pregnancy resulted from infertility treatment. The infertility treatments are grouped into two separate categories in birth certificates: 1) Assisted reproductive technology (ART) (e.g. in vitro fertilization (IVF), gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT)) and 2 (None-ART): Fertility enhancing drugs, artificial insemination, or intrauterine insemination (IUI). 27, 29 and 34 States have reported information on infertility treatment and the type of infertility treatment used in 2011, 2012 and 2013 respectively. We compared the rate of congenital abnormalities in ART and none-ART with those who had naturally conceived. RESULTS: From 8,581,826 birth certificates which reported information on infertility treatment, 66,751 were in ART group and 56,204 in None-ART. The rates of some congenital anomalies and adjusted risk ratios have been demonstrated in the CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that CCHD occur more often also in pregnancies resulted from fertility enhancing drugs, artificial insemination, or intrauterine insemination. Although the mechanism is not clear, couples considering infertility treatment should be informed of all potential risks and benefits. ART is an indication for fetal echocardiography. It may come in consideration that all pregnancy conceived by infertile couples after all types of infertility treatment may need fetal echocardiogram. The prospective nature of birth cohort studies and wealth of epidemiological data and biological samples provide unique opportunities to address effects of early life exposures on health outcomes later in life. Epigenetic mechanisms attract increasing attention as a potential link between the genetic and environmental determinants of health. We aimed to study the relationship of prenatal exposure to pesticide and other pollutants with epigenetic modifications in children from birth through adolescence. METHODS: Urinary phthalate and organophosphate pesticide (OP) metabolites were measured during pregnancy in 400 women from the CHAMACOS study, an ongoing longitudinal birth cohort of low-income Mexican-Americans living in agricultural Salinas Valley, California. We characterized DNA methylation using 450K Infinifum BeadChips and pyrosequencing of LINE-1 and Alu repeats in bloods collected from children at several time-points. Expression of 2400 human miRNAs was measured by Targeted Sequencing using novel HTG platform. Health outcomes included length of gestation, birth weight, neurodevelopment and obesity parameters. We observed a modification of effects of OP exposure on these health outcomes by PON1 phenotype and genotype. Maternal phthalate levels in CHAMACOS women were similar to US cohorts, while organophosphate metabolite levels were higher. Phthalate metabolites were associated with child BMI Z-score, waist circumference, isoprostane and adipokine levels. Expression of miRNAs and DNA methylation differed by sex and were also associated with prenatal factors. The PON1-108 that affects birth outcomes and neurodevelopment was strongly associated with PON methylation. The relationship was even more pronounced after adjusting for blood composition. Using causal mediation analysis, we found statistically significant indirect effects of methylation providing evidence that DNA methylation mediates the relationship between PON1-108 genotype and PON1 enzyme expression. CONCLUSIONS: Genetic and epigenetic markers provide insights into mechanisms of adverse birth outcomes, obesity and neurodevelopment and effects of in utero exposure to environmental pollutants. Unlike genetics, epigenetic mechanisms could be reversible and understanding of their role may lead to better protection of pregnant women and children, and improved public health. Mitochondrial dynamics involve fission and fusion, events essential for mammalian cell homeostasis, and whose alterations are implicated in a variety of diseases. Dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1) is a key player in mitochondrial fission (MF) that, when activated by phosphorylation, is recruited to integral mitochondrial proteins such as mitochondrial fission factor (Mff), thereby inducing fission. We recently reported that elevated ceramide (CER) levels in preeclampsia (PE) increase the expression of Bcl-2 ovarian killer (BOK), a pro-death mitochondrial protein, thereby inducing placental cell death. As no information is available on MF in the human placenta, we sought to examine MF and its regulation by the CER/BOK axis. METHODS: Levels of Drp1 and Mff as well as their association were assessed by western blot (WB), and immunoprecipitation (IP) in placentae and mitochondrial isolates from PE (n=20), and normotensive age-matched controls (AMC, n=20). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to monitor MF in PE and AMC placentae. Human choriocarcinoma JEG3 cells were treated with synthetic CER16 and MF was evaluated by WB, IP and TEM. Active phospho-Drp1, its mitochondrial recruitment and association to Mff, were assessed by IF. In human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293-GFP-BOK), changes in Drp1 and Mff were evaluated in conditions of BOK induction by doxycycline and silencing by siRNA. RESULTS: Drp1 expression and association to Mff increased in placentae from PE vs. AMC. TEM showed augmented MF in PE. Notably, mitochondria isolated from PE showed elevated Drp1 expression and this associated with an accumulation of CER as measured by high performance liquid chromatography linked to tandem mass spectrometry. Exposure of JEG3 cells to CER16 increased Drp1 expression and its mitochondrial translocation where it co-localized with Mff. controls) is sufficient to inhibit spiral artery growth, which leads to abnormal uteroplacental blood flow, placental damage, and fetal growth restriction. Since angiotensin II increases placental sflt-1 (soluble VEGF receptor) production, which sequesters spiral artery VEGF, we hypothesized that stimulating uterine VEGF expression by microbubbleconjugated gene delivery may rescue the phenotype. METHODS: Litter size and birthweight were measured in 21 WT and 23 TG dams without an intervention. Metrial triangle AGT, angiotensin II, VEGF, and sflt-1 were quantitated by qRT-PCR, ELISA, and HPLC/ mass spec (PRISM-SRM). Uterine vascular targeted transfections were performed in 16 WT and 16 TG virgin mice using either VEGF or luciferase plasmid conjugated to cationic microbubbles using our published protocols. Uterine luciferase expression was monitored by intraperitoneal luciferin injection and bioluminescence. Metrial triangle VEGF and sflt-1 at day 12.5 post gene transfection were measured by ELISA. Spiral artery architecture at day 16.5 was determined by 3D microCT imaging. RESULTS: Transgenic dams expressed more AGT and angiotensin II in the metrial triangle during spiral artery development with an increased sflt-1/VEGF ratio, which inhibited spiral artery angiogenesis compared with WT controls. TG dams had significantly smaller pups than WT controls, which persisted if transfected with luciferase, but was rescued by VEGF-gene delivery. Metrial triangle sflt-1 levels were reduced in VEGF transfected TG dams at day 12.5 and uterine spiral artery growth and branching was intermediate between WT and TG animals. CONCLUSIONS: Recently published work in mice suggested increased VEGF expression in maternal decidual cells may lead to placental insufficiency. Our data suggest that increasing VEGF expression in maternal uterine endothelial cells may have the opposite effect and ameliorate the pathology of abnormal sflt-1 production . STBEV incubated vessels, NO contribution to vasodilation was decreased (∆AUC 12.2±11.6 vs. 88.8±18.4 in controls, p<0.05) but increased to control values after LOX-1 blocking (∆AUC 98.9±14.8, p<0 .05). SOD did not improve MCh induced maximal vasodilation in STBEV incubated arteries (52.2±9.9%), and no changes in superoxide were found in uterine artery sections. eNOS expression was lower (p<0.05) in the STBEV incubated vessels as compared with vessels in which the LOX-1 receptor was blocked. CONCLUSIONS: STBEVs impaired vascular function in uterine arteries, via a LOX-1-dependent mechanism. STBEVs reduced NO contribution to vasodilation, which appeared to be due to changes in eNOS expression not superoxide production. Thus elevated levels of circulating STBEVs may contribute to the development of endothelial dysfunction in PE women. Lipid Peroxides Activate Neutrophil TET2 in Preeclampsia. William H Nugent, Maria E Teves, Sonya L Washington, Jerome F Strauss III, Scott W Walsh. Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia (PE) is associated with increased placental lipid peroxidation (LOOH) and sterile neutrophil activation. A potential epigenetic mechanism governing neutrophil activation involves TET2-mediated enzymatic conversion of promoter region methylated cytosines to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC). Base excision repair enzymes then convert the 5-hmC to unmethylated cytosine, which allows for specific increases in inflammatory gene expression. We hypothesized that the newly described DNA demethylating enzyme TET2 is activated by LOOH and potentiates neutrophil activation. Inhibitors of inflammation may work in part by preventing TET2 activity. METHODS: Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis was performed on PE vs. normal pregnant (NP) omental fat biopsies to determine neutrophil TET2 expression and localization. Gene and protein expression for TET2 were conducted on the neutrophil HL-60 cell line following treatment with PMA (neutrophil activator), PMA + LOOH, or PMA + LOOH + aspirin, a recommended treatment to prevent PE in women at risk. Fluorescence IHC (IHC-F) was used to observe the translocation of TET2 from cytosol to nucleus as an indicator of activity. Zymo's Quest 5-hmC Detection Kit assessed differences in 5-hmC. RESULTS: IHC staining demonstrated a distinct localization of TET2 protein to the nuclei of neutrophils in PE versus a more diffuse, cytoplasmic distribution for NP. Exposure of HL-60 cells to PMA or PMA + LOOH yielded a respective 3 and 6 fold increase in TET2 gene expression (p<0.001), which was supported by western blotting with a respective 2-and 4-fold increase in protein expression. Additionally, separation of the nuclear and cytosolic cellular compartments for western blotting revealed a clear redistribution of TET2 protein to the nucleus in the PMA+LOOH group. This translocation was confirmed by confocal microscopy (p<0.001) and was attenuated by pretreatment with 10 -4 M aspirin (p<0.001). TET2 expression and distribution were associated with an 8-and 23-fold increase in 5-hmC modified cytosines for USP20, a genetic indicator of 5-hmC modifications, for PMA and PMA+LOOH, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Lipid peroxidation stimulates TET2 activation, which can alter epigenetic regulation of gene expression, perhaps explaining the abnormal neutrophil activation in PE. We speculate that the beneficial effects of aspirin may include inhibition of neutrophil activation.  Bisulfite modified maternal leukocyte DNA of 44 women in the first trimester, of which 33 remained NL and 11 developed PE was analyzed on a 450k platform. CpG sites that were differentially methylated in PE v. NL were identified. A few select CpG sites were chosen based on high statistical significance and greatest fold change and were validated using pyrosequencing. We compared the percent methylation using a t-test, developed ROC curves to define cutoffs, did Principle Components Analysis to see which CpGs contributed most to separation of cases and controls for all with sensitivity (Sn) and specificity (Sp) > 70%, developed a model with 3 key CpGs and then determined Sp and Sn as well as positive and negative predictive value (PPV, NPV) when applied to this cohort. RESULTS: 50 CpG sites were selected with p =10 -4 -10 -7 and absolute fold change of 1.1 -1.9 that were both hypo and hypermethylated in PE. Pyrosequencing validated differences in 33 out of 50 at p < 0.05. Using % cutoffs in CpG sites cg07102368 (49%), cg14780446 (51%), and cg11670789 (8%), if +++ then 73% sensitive and 100% specific at discriminating PE in 46 samples with PPV 100% and NPV 92%. Of these three CpG sites, one is in a known differentially methylated region, one in an open reading frame and one in a CpG island associated with gene PLA2G4C, involved in cell signalling in inflammation and cell growth. CONCLUSIONS: Differential methylation profiling on first trimester maternal leukocyte DNA, initially by 450K platform then validated using pyrosequencing, demonstrates a set of differentially methylated CpG sites that can predict later PE in this cohort, with the most promising set of 3 CpG sites showing 73% sensitivity and 100% specificity for detection. This needs to be replicated in an independent cohort, however, if confirmed a readily accessible biomarker which can predict future PE with near 100% accuracy and detect the majority of cases may allow interventions, such as low dose aspirin < 16 weeks, to actually prevent PE. Factor in the Pathogenesis of Endometriosis. Hans M Albertsen, Rakesh Chettier, Kenneth Ward. Juneau Biosciences, LLC, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. INTRODUCTION: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified several genomic regions that contribute to the genetic predisposition for developing endometriosis. To identify the strongest and most reliable gene candidates we performed a large GWAS replication and we examined the biologic relevance of the implicated genes. METHODS: A GWAS replication study was performed on 734 newly collected, surgically confirmed, Caucasian endometriosis patients and 11,005 matched population controls. To select the most strongly and reproducibly associated loci we correlated the results from the replication study to results previously reported by us and others and included only those loci that showed strong and consistent replication in multiple populations for further evaluation. We then selected the genes at each locus and performed a literature-review to determine if any of the genes had a shared biological function. RESULTS: We found four genes (WNT4, CDC42, ID4 and VEZT) in the GWAS replication study that confirm our previously reported results and have consistent support in independent studies. A literature review of the four genes revealed that each gene is directly involved in the regulation of the actin-cytoskeleton and epithelial homeostasis. * rs12320196 is a proxy marker for rs3596 and included with calculations for rs3596 CONCLUSIONS: We find evidence that link four genes at the most strongly associated endometriosis GWAS regions, directly to the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton and homeostasis of the epithelial sheet. There is separate evidence for direct protein-to-protein interaction between CDC42 and VEZT, and that CDC42 can regulate the methylationstatus of ID4. We propose that the integrity of epithelial sheet covering the abdominal surfaces provides a barrier against endometriosis and that insults to the epithelial sheet triggers the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) repair mechanism. During this process the epithelial barrier is compromised and vulnerable to endometrial tissue implants from retrograde menstruation. We speculate that maintaining a healthy and intact epithelium by inhibiting EMT provides a new paradigm to the prevention and treatment of endometriosis. Dichloroacetate Induces Apoptosis of Uterine Leiomyoma Cells Through a Mechanism Involving Modulation of Oxidative Stress. Mohammed S Abusamaan, 1 Nicole M Fletcher, 1 Mohammed G Saed, 1 Ayman Al-Hendy, 2 Michael P Diamond, 2 Jay M Berman, 1 Ghassan M Saed. 1 1 Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA; 2 Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Uterine fibroids are characterized by an impaired antioxidant system suggesting a role for oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of fibroids. Myeloperoxidase (MPO) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) are key oxidant enzymes, which we have previously shown to modulate apoptosis through S-nitrosylation of caspase-3. Dichloroacetate (DCA) is known to shift anaerobic to aerobic metabolism and causes a subsequent decrease in oxidative stress. Our objective was to determine the effect of DCA on the expression MPO and iNOS as well as apoptosis in normal myometrial (USMC) and leiomyoma (DD) cells. Human fibroid DD and a matched UMSC cell lines were used. Cells were treated with DCA (20 µg/ml, 24 hours). Expression of MPO and iNOS, Bax, Bcl-2 and caspase-3, were determined by real-time RT-PCR. Data were analyzed by Student's t-test. RESULTS: MPO is expressed in DD cells with minimal expression in UMSC cells (0.27 ± 0.009 vs 0.088 ± 0.008 fg/µg RNA, p<0.05), respectively. Levels of iNOS were also higher in DD than in UMSC cells (100.1 ± 5.8 vs 44.0 ± 0.3 fg/µg RNA, p<0.05), respectively. DD cells manifested a higher Bcl-2/Bax ratio than UMSC cells (2.4 to 1.0), indicating lower apoptosis. Caspase-3 levels were lower in DD than UMSC cells (295.6 ± 10.6 vs 428.3 ± 7.0 fg/µg RNA, p<0.05). In DD cells, DCA was able to shut down the expression of MPO to undetectable levels. Similarly, in DD cells, DCA treatment decreased iNOS levels to 16.4 ± 2.0 fg/µg RNA, with no change in USMC cells (p<0.05). DCA decreased the Bcl-2/Bax ratio in leiomyoma cells to 0.4, with no significantly change in UMSC cells (p<0.05). DCA treatment increased caspase-3 levels in DD cells to 555.8 ± 5.2 fg/µg RNA while not effecting USMC cells (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of MPO expression in human leiomyoma cells, which emphasize the role of inflammation and subsequent oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of this disease. The fact that DCA treatment induces leiomyoma cells to undergo apoptosis mainly via reduction of MPO may serve as future targets for therapeutic intervention. The The pleiotropic cytokines interleukin (IL)-6 is produced by endometrium at the time of implantation and promote cellular responses through the signaling subunit glycoprotein (gp)-130. Adenomyosis, as a specific form of endometriosis, is a common disorder characterized by the ectopic growth of endometrial tissue within the myometrium. As IL-6 has been shown to switch the differentiation away from dendritic cells to macrophages, we hypothesized adenomyosis has an altered cytokine and inflammatory milieu to cause the declined pregnancy outcomes, and aimed to determine the relative expression of IL-6/IL-6 receptor (R) and the existence of macrophages in the endometrial tissue of adenomyosis patients during the window of implantation. The whole-layer endometrial tissues at the mid-secretory phase were obtained from patients undergoing hysterectomy due to myoma (control) or adenomyosis. RT-PCR analyzed extracted total RNA to compare IL-6/IL-6R, and gp-130 mRNA expression (n=4 in each group). Immunohistochemical (IHC)/immunofluorescent (IF) staining were performed to show the IL-6/IL-6R expression and measured by HSCORE (n=10 in each group). Localization of macrophages were also performed by the CD-68 staining in IHC/IF. RESULTS: During the window of implantation, the eutopic endometrium of adenomyosis has significantly higher mRNA expression of IL-6 (P<0.01) and gp130 (p<0.05) versus the control. In proliferative phase, the endometrial expression of IL-6 mRNA was also noted higher in the adenomyosis than the control. IHC staining demonstrated that the IL-6 protein expression was significantly higher in both the eutopic and the ectopic (adenomyotic) endometrium of adenomyosis than in the control (P<0.01), and more intense staining in the glandular versus the stromal cells (P<0.01). CD-68 staining-positive cells also showed significantly higher macrophage count in the eutopic endometrium of adenomyosis versus controls (P<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Significantly increased IL-6 expression suggests a causative relation with the increased number of macrophage during the implantation window of the endometrium of adenomyosis. The proinflammatory environment could contribute to the chronic painful status and declined pregnancy outcomes seen in this group of patients. Hepatic Metabolic Gene Dysregulation in a Mouse Model of Endometriosis. Laura G Goetz, 1 Ysabel Ilagan, 2 Ramanaiah Mamillapalli, 2 Hugh S Taylor. 2 1 Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA; 2 School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. INTRODUCTION: Endometriosis causes the dysregulation of gene expression in multiple signaling pathways, with implications beyond reproductive function. However, the impact of these global genetic changes is not fully understood. Interestingly, low BMI has been associated with endometriosis, however the relation of endometriosis to metabolism is unexplored. In particular, dysregulation in the liver of women with endometriosis has not been previously characterized. METHODS: Endometriosis was induced in 9 weeks old female C57BL/6 mice by suturing donor mouse endometrium into the peritoneal cavity. Sham surgeries were performed on control mice. Mice were euthanized at 21 weeks and livers were collected from both endometriosis and control groups. RNA and proteins were extracted from liver samples and subjected to microarray analysis, quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR), and western blot analysis to determine the differential expression of genes between the two groups. RESULTS: Microarray analysis identified 4 upregulated genes tied to weight loss and 2 downregulated obesogenic genes in mice with endometriosis compared to controls. These results were confirmed by qPCR. Expression of Cyp2r1, Fabp4 (regulates adiponectin and leptin), Mrc1 (associated with insulin sensitivity), and Rock2 were shown to be increased. Additionally, expression of Igfbp1 and Mmd2 (adiponectin receptor) were decreased. The above findings were confirmed by western blot. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest the existence of a novel metabolic component of endometriosis. These results suggest that endometriosis causes metabolic changes that decrease obesity and metabolic syndrome. These results not only elucidate a new facet of a complex and common disorder, but could have additional implications for understanding and treating obesity as well. Understanding the comparative efficacy and safety of these treatments is important. METHODS: Women in the FIRSTT (NCT00995878, clinicaltrials.gov) randomized controlled trial and in a parallel observational study were analyzed in a comprehensive cohort design. The treatment arms were similar with the exception that FUS women had higher pain scores at enrollment. Daily diaries were completed for 6 weeks post-operatively, and all women received the same instructions and prescriptions. Adverse Events (AEs) were recorded and categorized for severity. Data were analyzed using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, chi-square test, and multivariable regression. Eighty-three women underwent treatment and 75 completed the diaries. Women undergoing UAE were more likely to use outpatient pain medication and had a longer recovery. Increased pain at baseline was independently associated with opioid use and recovery time after adjusting for treatment arm (p<0.05). There was no difference in incidence or severity in AEs between arms. 86% of all AEs required only observation or nominal treatment. Results were similar when restricted to the RCT. (HMT) , and its resulting histone mark-H3K27me3-are epigenetic regulators of the transcriptional machinery by modulating chromatin state. Although EZH2 is well studied in cancer, little is known about the expression of EZH2 in endometriosis. We have previously reported that endometriotic lesions are characterized by high levels of H3K27me3; therefore, we aimed to assess the protein expression levels of EZH2 isoforms (α and β) and elucidate if H3K27me3 is enriched within or near promoter regions of candidate genes. We hypothesized that 1) endometriotic tissues will have characteristic profiles of EZH2 isoforms expression and 2) endometriotic cells and tissues will have high levels of H3K27me3 within promoter regions of candidate genes. METHODS: Bioinformatics analyses were performed to determine areas where high levels of H3K27me3 have been reported to be enriched within promoter regions of ESR1, PGR, CDH1, p21, SF1, and HOXA10 candidate genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-PCR) was conducted using an anti-H3K27me3 in endometrial and endometriotic cell lines. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of an endometriosis focused-TMA was used to assess EZH2 α and β protein levels. We described here for the first time the protein expression profile of EZH2 isoforms in endometriosis. IHC showed that endometriotic lesions tend to have high EZH2 α and β levels whereas eutopic endometrium from patients expressed low levels of both EZH2 isoforms. ChIP-PCR results suggest that there are differences in H3K27me3 levels in promoter regions of candidate genes in endometriotic and endometrial cells. CONCLUSIONS: These studies will help to understand the regulatory role that EZH2, the enzyme that sets the H3K27me3 mark, may exert on the transcription of candidate genes in endometriosis. Elucidating the expression profile and function of HMTs in endometriosis may support the use of novel histone methyltransferases inhibitors (HMTi) as a possible treatment for this incurable disease. R01HD050509, NCI1U56CA126379-01, R25GM082406. The INTRODUCTION: RPL is associated with repeated embryo loss and subsequent endometrial repair. The Notch signaling pathway regulates organ self-renewal and immune development. Uterine ablation of the Notch transcription factor, RBP-Jκ (Pgr cre/+ Rbpj f/f ; Rbpj d/d ), in mice results in sub-fertility followed by infertility due to abnormal postpartum endometrial repair and enhanced immune signaling. This study focused on the RBP-Jκ mediated transcriptomic mechanisms contributing to dysfunctional postpartum endometrial repair and characterization of RBP-J expression in the endometrium of women with RPL. METHODS: RNA-seq was performed on postpartum day (PPD) 3 endometrial repair sites (nodules) from Rbpj d/d and Rbpj f/f controls (n=3 mice/grp) and analyzed for differential gene expression and enrichment for GeneGo Processes. To determine the impact of endometrial repair on future fertility, unilateral oviduct ligation was performed in mice (n=6/ grp) with bilateral embryo transfer two weeks postpartum and sacrificed at 4.5 d post coitus. For comparison, mid-luteal biopsies obtained from women with unexplained RPL (n=8) and fertile controls (n=13) with IHC for RBP-Jκ. RESULTS: Immune pathways, including interferon and complement signaling were significantly upregulated in Rbpj d/d mice on PPD3. Bilateral embryo transfer in Rbpj f/f mice previously pregnant in one uterine horn resulted in no significant difference in implantation sites (IS) between horns (P=0.872). In contrast, no IS were present in either horn of Rbpj d/d mice, consistent with developed infertility postpartum. Floating embryos were present in the nulliparous but not the pregnant uterine horn of Rbpj d/d mice, suggesting global uterine impact of dysfunctional repair. Finally, RPL patients had significantly decreased RBP-Jκ expression in both endometrial stroma (P=0.002) and glands (P=0.045). CONCLUSIONS: RBP-Jκ is reduced in women with RPL. Rbpj d/d mice display features similar to women with RPL, particularly enhanced interferon and complement signaling. Further, failed postpartum repair disrupts future pregnancy potential, as a consequence of aberrant global endometrial inflammatory signaling. We propose that altered RBP-Jκ mediated endometrial repair may contribute to unexplained infertility in RPL patients. Aging Is Associated with Changes in Mitochondrial Dynamics, Function and mtDNA Quantity. We hypothesized that the decrease in oocyte quality associated with aging could be explained in part with abnormal mitochondria numbers, morphology and/or activity, and investigated the alterations in key parameters of mitochondrial function in aging mouse oocytes. METHODS: Oocytes from old (12 months) and young (9 weeks) C57BL/6J mice were compared for 1) Levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) under baseline conditions and following H 2 O 2 treatment using carboxy-H2DCFDA fluorescent staining; 2) Mitochondrial stress response by determining expression of mitochondrial unfolded protein response (mt-UPR) genes (Clpp, Dnaja3, Hspd1, Hspe1) via qRT-PCR; 3) Absolute mtDNA levels via cloning of mitochondria specific gene (Cox3) followed by qPCR; 4) Mitochondria morphology and dynamics (mitochondria density, coverage, size and shape) throughout folliculogenesis using electron microscopy (EM). RESULTS: 1) ROS levels in aged MII and GV oocytes were higher following pretreatment with H 2 O 2 (p<0.05); 2) The expression of mt-UPR gene Hspd1 was also elevated in aged GV oocytes (p<0.05); 3) MII oocytes from old mice had significantly less mtDNA compared to young ones (58,222 +/-15,429 copies/oocyte vs. 162,106 +/-19,302 copies/oocyte [mean +/-SEM; p<0.01]). 4) Oocyte mitochondria density (number/µm 2 cytosol area), mitochondria coverage (total mitochondria µm 2 /µm 2 cytosol area) and average mitochondria size decrease in both young and old mice oocytes with follicular development (p<0.05). In old mice, mitochondria of primary follicle-enclosed oocytes were smaller with lower mitochondria coverage (p<0.05). A trend of decreased mitochondria density and coverage in old mice oocytes at other stages of follicular development (primordial, preantral, antral) was observed, but did not reach statistical significance. CONCLUSIONS: Aging is associated with a significant increase in ROS levels in oocytes under stressful conditions and elevated expression of mitochondrial stress response gene Hspd1. Importantly, aged mouse oocytes have lower mtDNA levels and several of their mitochondrial morphological parameters seem to be altered. The success of fertility treatment is highly dependent on proper steroid hormone production and recruitment of ovarian follicles. However, the mechanisms of gene regulation underlying steroidogenesis and ovarian follicular development are still poorly understood. An intriguing candidate is the long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) H19. Prominent H19 expression has been observed in maturing and post-ovulatory human follicles, suggesting an association between H19 expression and ovarian follicular development. Despite these observations, the physiological significance of H19 on steroidogenesis, adult ovarian development, and fertility remains obscure. METHODS: Mouse H19 KO and WT ovaries were fixed in PFA 4% for four hours, sectioned, and stained with picric acid and evaluated for differences in follicle number and morphology. Additionally, we tested the hypothesis that altered expression of H19 leads to altered production of steroid hormones by performing estradiol (E2)-specific ELISA following siRNA-mediated H19 knockdown in a granulosa cell line. KGN cells were transfected with H19 silencing RNA or control. After 72 hours, media was collected and E2 ELISA performed per manufacturer's instructions. RESULTS: Notably, the H19 KO ovaries contained a larger number of secondary, preantral, and antral follicles and corpora lutea (p<0.01). H19 KO ovaries contained fewer primordial follicles, (p<.01) and strikingly, were also noted to contain multioocyte follicles, a feature that has also been demonstrated in mice exposed to the potent estrogen analogues diethylstilbestrol and geniestin, suggesting exposure to a hyperestrogenic state in H19 KO mice. Lastly, H19 siRNA knockdown in vitro leads to a nearly 25% increase in E2 production in cell culture (p<0.05). The increase in E2 production after H19 knockdown observed in vitro, taken together with abnormal ovarian morphology (including multioocyte follicles) seen in H19 KO mice, suggest that loss of H19 may lead to dysregulation of estradiol production and abnormal development of ovarian follicles. The impact of these findings on mouse ovulatory patterns, plasma steroid hormone levels, and overall fertility remain to be determined, but clearly, the H19 lncRNA adds an important layer to the repertoire of regulatory mechanisms used by the mammalian ovary to modulate gene expression. Live Birth Rates Improve with Expansion of T-Regulatory Cells Using Rapamycin in a Murine Model. Greene D Royster IV, 1 Amanda N Nelson, 1 Justine C Harris, 1 Matthew T Connell, 1 Ryan J Heitmann, 2 Erin F Wolff. 1 1 National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; 2 Madigan Army Medical Center, Tacoma, WA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Currently, there are few treatments for patients with recurrent pregnancy loss or implantation failure. Women with recurrent pregnancy loss have been shown to have lower T-Regulatory Cell (T reg ) expression when compared to fertile controls. A murine model has been developed with depletion of T regs (DEREG) after administration of diphtheria toxin (DT), resulting in smaller litter sizes, secondary to embryo implantation failure. We propose a novel treatment for implantation failure using an immune modulator (Rapamycin -Pregnancy Category C) to rapidly expand T regs and increase litter sizes back to normal. METHODS: Female DEREG mice were given DT to induce conditional knockdown of T regs then mated with wild type males and given either saline or Rapamycin to expand T reg production. To detect an increase in litter sizes of 30% after conditional knockdown of T regs using DT, then expansion of T regs using Rapamycin, power analysis revealed that at least 31 mice per arm would be needed to show statistical significance. RESULTS: T reg depletion was confirmed in whole blood samples after DT administration, going from 1.6% on Day 0 to 0.03% on day 3, then rising to 2.7% on day 10 after treatment with Rapamycin. DEREG mice treated with only DT, had smaller litter sizes (4.4 vs. 7.6 pups / litter) when compared with mice treated with saline (p < 0.0001). DEREG mice treated with DT then Rapamycin, had T reg levels that were 69% higher on day 10. Litter sizes were 30% larger for DEREG mice treated with Rapamycin than DEREG mice treated with DT alone [5.7 vs. 4 .4 pups/ litter (p = 0.02)]. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Live birth rates are lower in a murine model after conditional knockdown of T regs . However, reduced litter sizes are corrected and T regs increased after treatment with Rapamycin (mTOR inhibitor). This treatment approach should be considered for future human trials as a potential treatment for women with recurrent pregnancy loss or implantation failure with below normal T reg levels. Direct . However, whether any of these treatments have beneficial or detrimental effects on the fetus is completely unknown. The chick embryo is the only established animal model to isolate the effects of any therapy on the fetus independent of effects on the maternal or placental physiology. The model also provides a cost effective, high throughput strategy to compare several antioxidant strategies contemporaneously. METHODS: Fertilised eggs (n=7-10 per group) were incubated under normoxia (N) or hypoxia (H, 14%) from day 1 (term ~ 21 days). Melatonin (1 mg.kg -1 ), pravastatin (1 mg.kg -1 ), allopurinol (5 mg.kg -1 ) or vehicle were injected daily into the air cell from day 13 of incubation, which equates to 25 weeks of human pregnancy. At day 19, the embryo was euthanized and cardiac function determined in a Langendorff preparation. RESULTS: Chronic fetal hypoxia impaired systolic (reduced left ventricular developed pressure, LVDP) and diastolic (elevated LV end diastolic pressure, LVEDP) function ( Fig.1 ). While treatment with melatonin rescued only systolic function, pravastatin rescued only diastolic function and allopurinol rescued both systolic and diastolic function in hypoxic embryos. CONCLUSIONS: We show that human clinically-relevant doses of antioxidants currently on clinical trial to protect the fetus in high risk pregnancy also have direct beneficial effects on the developing heart of the hypoxic fetus. Supported by the British Heart Foundation *Figure(s) will be available online. Fetal Adrenal Cortex. Jeffery S Babischkin, 1 Graham W Aberdeen, 1 Gerald J Pepe, 2 Eugene D Albrecht. 1 1 Univ Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2 Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA, USA. We have shown that the volume of and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHAS) secretion by the fetal zone (FZ) were increased, whereas volumes of and cortisol secretion by the definitive and transitional zones (DZ/TZ) unaltered, in the fetal adrenal cortex of baboons in which estrogen levels were suppressed by administration of the aromatase inhibitor letrozole. The interaction of the melanocortin 2 receptor (MC2R) with its accessory protein (MRAP) is essential for trafficking MC2R to the adrenal cell surface for binding ACTH and signaling. The present study determined whether the estrogen-dependent regulation of fetal adrenocortical development is mediated by ACTH and/ or expression/interaction of MC2R and MRAP. METHODS: Fetal pituitary proopiomelanocortin (POMC) mRNA levels were quantified by in situ hybridization, fetal plasma ACTH levels by RIA and fetal adrenal MC2R-MRAP expression and interaction by proximity ligation assay, a novel PCR-based immunofluorescence assay, on day 165 of gestation (term = 184 days) in baboons untreated (n=8) or in which estrogen was suppressed by daily sc administration of letrozole (0.115 mg/kg bw; n=8) or restored by letrozole plus estradiol (each at 0.115 mg/ kg bw, n=5) on days 100-164. RESULTS: Fetal adrenal weight was 50% greater (P<0.01) in letrozoletreated (489 ± 37 mg) than in untreated (332 ± 28) baboons and restored by letrozole plus estradiol (377 ± 39). Although fetal pituitary POMC RNA (4.24 ± 0.68 units) and plasma ACTH (192.8 ± 36 .4 pg/ml) levels, and fetal adrenal DZ/TZ MC2R (3.32 ± 0.58 fluorescent signals/tissue area) and MRAP (9.69 ±2.11) protein levels in untreated animals were unaltered, MC2R-MRAP interactin was 2-fold greater (P<0.05) in the DZ/ TZ in letrozole-treated (2.98 ± 0.58 signals/tissue area) than in untreated (1.54 ± 0.45) baboons and restored by letrozole plus estradiol treatment (1.36 ± 0.04). CONCLUSIONS: We propose that increasing levels of estradiol with advancing pregnancy suppress interaction of MC2R with MRAP, thereby diminishing MC2R movement to the cell membrane and signaling in the DZ/TZ. This would be expected to reduce progenitor cell proliferation in the DZ and migration to the FZ, thereby curbing growth of and DHAS production by the FZ to maintain placental estradiol levels in a physiological range. Supported by NIH R01 DK93950. (MgSO 4 ) and a corticosteroid like betamethasone (BMTZ) have a lower incidence of neurodevelopmental disability. Our objective was to characterize the long term effects of MgSO 4 /BMTZ on the hippocampus; an area of the brain affected in children born preterm. Using a murine model, we examined the effects of these treatments on perinatal brain injury. METHODS: Eighty-eight CD1 timed-pregnant mice were randomized to receive an intrauterine injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or the control vehicle (PBS) on E17. Mice were further randomized to receive MgSO 4 /BMTZ or placebo 30 min post-injection. The neurodevelopment of surviving offspring was assessed on postnatal days (PND) 5, 9, periweaning, and 40, 50, and 60. On PND 60, brains were collected and stained for NeuN, a neuronal marker. Hippocampal area and neuronal densities were calculated using ImageJ software. Statistical significance was determined with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. RESULTS: Sixty-two percent of dams exposed to LPS produced surviving offspring compared to 100% of controls (p<0.05). Offspring from LPS dams demonstrated impaired performance in negative geotaxis on PND 5 and 9 (p<0.05). Animals treated prenatally with MgSO 4 / BMTZ had improved performance compared to the untreated LPS cohort (p<0.05). The deficits in neurodevelopmental testing among animals exposed to LPS correlated with a significant reduction in hippocampal neuronal density vs. controls and MgSO 4 /BMTZ treated mice (p<0.05). In contrast, animals treated with MgSO 4 /BMTZ following LPS exposure showed comparable neuronal density to the controls. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that prenatal treatment with MgSO 4 /BMTZ following exposure to intrauterine inflammation preserves normal neurodevelopment through its effects on hippocampal neurons. Maternal obesity increases the risk of offspring obesity, in part due to enhanced adipogenesis. Using a mouse model of maternal obesity/high fat diet (HF), we have shown that HF newborns are heavier at birth and demonstrate upregulated expression of adipogenic transcription factor (PPARγ). Among the two primary fat depots, white adipose tissue (WAT) stores excess energy, whereas brown adipose tissue (BAT) expends energy via thermogenesis. Transcriptional co-regulators, PRDM16 (PR domain containing 16) and TLE3 (transducin-like enhancer protein) promote the development of BAT and WAT, respectively. Importantly, over-expression of TLE3 in BAT transforms BAT to WAT. We hypothesized that TLE3-mediated effects in newborn BAT promotes development of WAT-obesity in the HF offspring. We explored the regulation of adipogenesis in newborn primary BAT cultures. METHODS: Female mice were fed either a control (10% k/cal) or high fat (HF; 45% k/cal) diet to create maternal obesity prior to mating, and diets continued throughout pregnancy and lactation. Newborns were delivered spontaneously, males sacrificed at day one of life, and interscapular BAT was collected.Isolated preadipocytes were cultured for 48h (time 0) and subsequently induced to differentiate with hormone inducer mixture. Protein was extracted at day 0, 2, 4 and 6 of induction and expression of TLE3, PRMD1 and UCP1 was determined. RESULTS: In HF preadipocytes from BAT, prior to induction at day 0, TLE3 expression was upregulated whereas that of PRMD1 and UCP1 was downregulated as compared to Control. With induction, both HF and Control cells showed progressively increased expression of TLE3 with concomitant decreased expression of PRMD1 and UCP1 genes, though HF cells maintained increased TLE3 and decreased PRMD1 and UCP1 as compared to Controls. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: In HF newborns, the increased TLE3 likely promotes WAT and suppresses BAT, contributing to obesity. Ex vivo culture results indicate an intrinsic programming of WAT adipogenesis in HF offspring, independent of the body hormonal milieu. Maternal Obesity ( Fetal livers were removed after exsanguination under general anesthesia at 0.9 gestation.We measured fetal liver mitochondrial DNA copy number (qRT-PCR) and mitochondrial proteins (Western) and mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes activity (colorimetric methods) in isolated fractions. RESULTS: An increase in hepatic mtDNA copy number was found in MO. Although Western blotting analyses did not show any alterations in content of selected respiratory chain subunits, a decrease in their activity was observed in MO ( Fig. 1 ). *Figure(s) will be available online. INTRODUCTION: Placental insufficiency causes fetal hypoglycemia and hypoxia, which increases plasma norepinephrine (NE) concentrations in late gestation, and collectively result in intrauterine growth restriction (PI-IUGR). These conditions lower plasma insulin concentrations and impair β-cell function. Thus, the objective of this study was to compare the effects of chronic adrenergic signaling to the IUGR pathology in order to determine the role of NE in the IUGR fetal pancreatic β-cell. METHODS: Transcriptome sequencing was performed on islets isolated from late gestation fetal sheep following two distinct experiments: 1) PI-IUGR and paired controls (n=4/trt) and 2) normal fetuses receiving a 7 day NE-infusion or vehicle control (n=4/trt). Differentially expressed genes were determined for each experiment. Genes that were identified in both experiments were modeled to canonical pathways and functions. In order to determine whether the NE effects were specific to β-cells, mRNA expression for a subset of candidate genes was measured with quantitative PCR in Min6 (insulinoma) cells, following 24h and 72h of adrenergic stimulation. RESULTS: There were 89 genes differentially expressed in both experiments. Functional analysis revealed these genes were involved in metabolism of lipids, proteolysis, response to nutrient, and proliferation. Candidate genes involved with proliferation/survival were significantly (P<0.05) increased in Min6 after 72hr adrenergic stimulation; death associated protein like-1 (DAPL1, 2-fold), aurora kinase B (AURKB, 1.5-fold), and chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 5 (CHD5, 2.7-fold). Interestingly, at 24hr AURKB and CHD5 were significantly decreased in treated Min6. CONCLUSIONS: These data identify transcriptome-wide effects from chronic NE in the IUGR fetal islet. We identified proliferation and survival genes as β-cell specific through establishing a model of chronic adrenergic stimulation. Also, differences in gene expression between 24hr and 72hr in Min6 cells demonstrate that regulation of two candidate genes is attributable only to persistent adrenergic stimulation, evidence that supports a programming role for chronic NE in IUGR pathology. Supported by NIH R01 DK084842. Effect Maternal hypoxia can lead to placental oxidative stress mainly derived from the mitochondria, which is associated with IUGR and abnormal fetal cardiomyocyte development. We hypothesized that maternal MitoQ, a mitochondrial antioxidant, treatment would prevent IUGR and abnormal development of fetal cardiomyocytes. METHODS: Pregnant rats were randomly injected with MitoQ loaded nanoparticles (125 µM) or saline via tail vein on gestational day (GD) 15 (nanoparticles were used to restrict treatment to the placenta and prevent its passage to the fetus). Rats were further subdivided into two groups exposed to either hypoxia (11% O 2 ) or normoxia (21% O 2 ) from GD 15-21 (term; 22 days). On GD 21, pregnant dams were sacrificed and pups were separated into males and females. Offspring body and heart weights were assessed. Placental oxidative stress was measured by performing DCF (dichlorofluorescein) staining. Area and binucleation of fixed cardiomyocytes were assessed. RESULTS: In male and female offspring, hypoxia led to IUGR, increased cardiac hypertrophy and placental oxidative stress (normoxia: 2.27±1.55 vs. hypoxia: 13.34±3.96 arbitrary units (a.u.), P<0.05). MitoQ treatment prevented oxidative stress (hypoxia+MitoQ: 2.48±1.06 a.u.), normalized the heart weight in both sexes and prevented IUGR in female fetuses. In male fetuses only, relative cardiomyocyte area (normalized to heart weight) was significantly increased in the hypoxic group (normoxia: 0.019±0.002 mm 2 /g vs. hypoxia: 0.026±0.002 mm 2 /g, P<0.05) and MitoQ treatment prevented this (hypoxia+MitoQ: 0.017±0.002 mm 2 /g). No differences in the percentage of binucleated cardiomyocytes were observed. CONCLUSIONS: We observed sex-specific effects of hypoxia and MitoQ treatment on fetal growth and cardiomyocyte development. Preventing placental oxidative stress using MitoQ may be a novel approach to improve fetal growth and attenuate cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in IUGR offspring. Selective Epigenetic Programming of Estrogen Response After In Utero Xenoestrogen (Bisphenol-A) Exposure. Myles H Alderman III, Elisa M Jorgensen, Hugh S Taylor. Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. INTRODUCTION: Bisphenol-A (BPA) is an environmentally ubiquitous estrogen-like endocrine-disrupting compound. Exposure to BPA in utero has been linked to female reproductive disorders including endometrial hyperplasia, endometriosis, infertility and breast cancer. Estrogens are an etiological factor in all of these conditions. We sought to determine if in utero exposure to BPA altered the global CpG methylation pattern of the uterine epigenome, subsequent gene expression and estrogen response. METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed to an environmentally relevant dose of BPA (5mg/kg/day) or DMSO control. At 8 weeks of life prenatally exposed offspring (N=22) were then oovariectomized and later given estradiol (600ng) or control. Uterine RNA and DNA were examined via MeDIP methylation microarray, expression microarray and qPCR. In utero exposure to BPA altered the global CpG methylation profile of the uterine epigenome and subsequent gene expression. BPA exposure preferentially altered expression of estrogen responsive genes and therefore the effect on gene expression was not apparent until sexual maturation. At 2 weeks of age, only 18 genes were differentially expressed, while at 8 weeks 316 genes were differentially expressed. Changes in estrogen response were accompanied by increased changes in methylation that selectively affected estrogen response elements. DNA methylation as measured by mean absolute log 2 fluorescence ratio change in animals exposed to BPA in utero compared to controls was 0.73 (95% CI: 0.72, 0.74), however in genes containing an ERE the mean ratio change was 0.985 (95% CI: 0.78, 1.18) (p=0.014), demonstrating selective methylation of estrogen target genes. The majority genes (65%) with altered expression also had altered promoter methylation. CONCLUSIONS: Prenatal BPA exposure programs adult estrogen response. BPA selectively altered the normal developmental programming of estrogen responsive genes by modification of the epigenome. BPA exposure led to preferential methylation of ERE containing genes and thereby determined subsequent response to estrogens. Gene-environment interactions driven by early life exposure to xenoestrogens likely contributes to the increased the risk of estrogen related disease in adults. Term and preterm labor are associated with an increased inflammatory response in myometrium; however, the underlying mechanisms remain incompletely defined. Our recent studies indicate that microRNAs (miR) serve important roles. Using miRNA array of myometrium from pregnant mice at 15.5 vs. 18.5 dpc, we found that the miR-200 family was significantly upregulated, while the miR-199a/214 cluster and miR-181a were significantly decreased near term. With the miR-200s and miR-199a/214 functions being revealed, thus far, the role(s) of miR-181a has not been elucidated. METHODS: Mouse and human myometrial cells and tissues were employed to study expression and functions of miR-181a during late gestation. We also mined GRO-seq and ChIP-seq datasets and confirmed transcriptional regulation of the miR-181a host genes. RESULTS: Expression of highly conserved miR-181a was significantly decreased in mouse myometrium during late gestation and in fundal myometrium of women in labor. The putative miR-181a target, TNF-α and known target, c-Fos, which are key cytokine/transcription factors involved in the inflammatory response, were coordinately upregulated. In human myometrial cells, overexpression of miR-181a repressed basal, as well as IL-1β-induced TNF-α, CCL-2 and CCL-8 expression, whereas, the anti-inflammatory cytokine, IL-10, was increased. Luciferase reporter assays revealed that the TNF-α 3'-UTR contains a bonafide miR-181a binding site, suggesting that TNF-α is a direct target of miR-181a. Overexpression of miR-181a dramatically attenuated spontaneous and IL-1β-induced contraction of myometrial cells. Interestingly, estradiol-17β (E 2 ) significantly inhibited expression of mature miR-181a and its host genes in human myometrial cells in an estrogen receptor (ERα)dependent manner. Moreover, miR181a was found to directly target ERα and decrease its expression, suggesting an important positive feedback loop between miR181a and E 2 /ERα that contributes to the downregulation of miR181a near term. CONCLUSIONS: Our novel findings indicate that increased E 2 levels during late pregnancy inhibit miR-181a expression, resulting in upregulation of its direct targets, TNF-α and c-Fos, which play important roles in inflammatory responses leading to labor. The The relatively high levels of circulating estrogens (E2) across gestation preclude E2 concentration as a viable direct modulator of the myometrial transition between quiescence and contractility at term. We hypothesize that changes in alternatively spliced Estrogen Receptor alpha (ERα) isoforms across gestation permit uterine specific temporal contractile responses to increasing E2 levels as term approaches. In this study we examined the role of alternately spliced myometrial ERα variants by identifying and ablating the relevant splice factors utilizing siRNA and examining the consequences on the expression profile of ERα isoform ratios and their downstream targets, the contractile associated proteins (CAPs). METHODS: Utilizing siRNA and lentiviral shRNAs we knocked down specific hnRNPs and SR proteins (splice factors). Uterine myocyte ERα isoform ratios and the CAPs were examined by western blot, qPCR analysis and RNase protection assays, as were extracts of pregnant non laboring human myometrial tissue (32 week versus 37 week n=3) in which we established the gestational profile of the major ERα isoforms. RESULTS: We demonstrate in the pregnant human myometrium three ERα isoforms, the full-length 66 kDa (ERα66), a N-terminally truncated 46 kDa (ERα46) and the C-terminally truncated 51 kDa (ER∆7), are gestationally regulated. ER∆7 proteins and mRNA decrease as term approaches. siRNA and lentiviral shRNA knockdown demonstrate that depletion of SRSF1 results in enhanced ERα66 isoform translation while the loss of hnRNPA1 leads to a predominance of ERα46. Knockdown of ERα66 and ERα46 lowers connexin 43 levels, while ERα46 alone is sufficient to maintain connexin 43 expression. CONCLUSIONS: We have created a powerful tool to understand the splice mechanisms, expression levels and subcellular localization of ERα isoforms utilizing lentiviral knockdown. Our survey of different splice factor knockdowns has revealed the function of SRSF1 and hnRNPA1 with respect to ERα66 and ERα46. We propose that the high levels of ER∆7 earlier in gestation antagonizes myometrial ERα46 and ERα66 function; as ER∆7 in other systems acts in functionally dominant negative role. In conclusion, we have determined the potential importance of myometrial splice factor function with regard to local ERα action during pregnancy. INTRODUCTION: Progesterone, acting through its nuclear receptor isoforms, progesterone receptor (PR)-A and PR-B, promotes uterine relaxation during pregnancy. Labor is, in part, triggered by PR-A-mediated functional progesterone withdrawal whereby PR-A represses the activity of PR-B. Furthermore, parturition also involves tissue-level inflammation. We hypothesized that inflammation triggers parturition by inducing PR-A-trans-repression of PR-B. To test this hypothesis, we determined the effects of proinflammatory stimuli in the form of interleukin-1ß(IL-1ß) on PR-A and PR-B transcriptional activity at an endogenous progesterone responsive gene, FK-501 binding protein (FKBP5), in a human myometrial cell line. An immortalized human myometrial cell line stably transfected with inducible PR-A and PR-B transgenes was utilized to experimentally alter levels of PR-A and PR-B. To elucidate the effects of inflammation on progesterone responsiveness, cells expressing varying relative levels of PR-A and PR-B were exposed to progesterone or the progesterone agonist R5020 and then challenged with IL-1ß. Effects on expression of the progesterone responsive gene, FKBP5, were then assessed by qRT-PCR. RESULTS: Progesterone, in a dose-responsive manner, increased FKBP5 expression through agonistic action on PR-B (EC50 approximately 1.7nM) but not through PR-A. PR-A alone did not inhibit progesterone/ PR-B induction of FKBP5 expression. However, when cells were exposed to IL-1ß, PR-A decreased progesterone/PR-B-induced FKBP5 expression. IL-1ß alone did not affect FKBP5 expression in the absence of progesterone and PRs. CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that in human myometrial cells, progesterone primarily acts through PR-B to modulate expression of genes driven by the canonical progesterone response element. This PR-B mediated effect of progesterone is inhibited by PR-A only in the presence of inflammatory stimuli. These findings suggest that inflammation activates PR-A trans-repression of PR-B, thereby triggering functional progesterone withdrawal and the parturition cascade in the human myometrium. This model presents a plausible explanation of how tissue-level inflammation induces human parturition. ]. The objective of this study was to determine the extent of STIM1 expression and function in the myometrium. METHODS: C57BL/6J (B6) mice underwent timed matings and myometrium was harvested at various time points during the pregnancy and processed for histology, western blot, and electron microscopy. Next, myometrial strips from non-pregnant and term pregnant B6 mice were suspended in a tissue organ bath and stimulated with increasing doses of oxytocin in the presence of a STIM1 inhibitor or vehicle control and the contraction responses measured. Lastly, myometrial strips from a STIM1-LacZ haploinsufficiency model were harvested for staining as well as contraction assays in a tissue organ bath. Contraction responses were compared using two-way repeated measures ANOVA with corrections for multiple comparisons. RESULTS: STIM1 is expressed in the murine myometrium and localizes to the SR and plasma membrane. STIM1 is upregulated during early pregnancy and remains elevated throughout gestation and immediately postpartum. Treatment of uterine muscle strips with a SOCE inhibitor results in decreased contraction force and frequency in response to oxytocin in both pregnant and non-pregnant mice. Similarly, myometrial strips isolated from a genetic model of STIM1 haploinsufficiency also demonstrated decreased uterine contraction force and frequency in response to oxytocin compared to controls. Finally, both STIM1 pharmacologic inhibition and STIM1 haploinsufficiency result in an inability to produce tetanic contractions in response to oxytocin. CONCLUSIONS: STIM1 is critical in tissues that undergo repetitive contraction. STIM1 is necessary for a normal contractile phenotype in the myometrium of both pregnant and non-pregnant mice. Variations in STIM1 genotype or expression within the myometrium of women may result in dysfunctional labor phenotypes. Loss of the Phosphate Transporter Slc20a2 Leads to Abnormal Placentation and Abundant Placental Calcification in the Mouse Placenta. Mary C Wallingford, Cecilia M Giachelli. University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Low placental expression of the phosphate transporter Slc20a2 is observed in preeclampsia, a life-threatening pregnancy-specific cardiovascular syndrome thought to be caused placental vascular dysfunction. Our work tests the overall hypothesis that maternal-fetal phosphate transport in the placenta is mediated by Slc20a2. In this study we sought to test the specific hypothesis that loss of Slc20a2 is required for normal placental function and support of embryonic development. We used several techniques to establish expression patterns of Slc20a2 placentation, including: qPCR, western blotting, immunohistochemistry with vascular and trophoblast lineage markers, and detection of beta-galactosidase expression driven by the Slc20a2. To test our specific hypothesis we first characterized a novel Slc20a2 deficient 'KO-first' mouse model. Reproductive trends, viability, frequency of gene transmission, and fetal growth was were assessed. Maternal health was monitored, and placental gene expression and anatomy were analyzed. Two-tailed Student's T-test with unequal variance or One-way ANOVA and Tukey's Post Hoc Test were used to compare means between groups. RESULTS: We found that Slc20a2 is localized specifically to the extraembryonic ectoderm, ectoplacental cone, chorion, allantois, pericytes, and a subset of cytokeratin7 positive trophoblast cells. Slc20a2 deficient mice were found to be subviable; 57% of global knockout mice are embryonic or neonatal lethal, and 31% of global knockout female breeders never produce pups. Neonates supported by a placenta with complete loss of Slc20a2 in either the fetal or maternal placental compartment resulted in significant fetal growth restriction. Abnormal vascular morphology and a remarkable level of placental calcification (deposition of phosphate and calcium-containing mineral) associated with poor maternal health was observed in the Slc20a2 deficient placentas and appeared at or near thickened laminin-positive basement membranes. CONCLUSIONS: The data presented herein provide the first molecular and histological insights into how Slc20a2 deficiency and dysfunctional phosphate transport may contribute to preeclampsia. These findings also establish the Slc20a2 deficient mouse as the first ever placental calcification animal model, and direct our attention to the need to understand the impact that placental calcification has on placental physiology and dysfunction in humans. We have previously shown that docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) inhibits mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling and amino acid (AA) uptake in cultured primary human trophoblast (PHT) cells, while monounsaturated oleic acid (OA) activates mTOR and stimulates AA transport. However, the mechanism underlying changes in mTOR signaling and amino acid transport in response to FA is largely unknown. Using untargeted lipidomics in PHT cells we identified lipid metabolites that may link FA exposure to mTOR signaling. We further tested the hypothesis that OA regulation of AA transport is dependent on mTOR signaling. METHODS: PHT were isolated (n=5 placentas), cultured for 66h, and treated with either DHA (50µM) or OA (100µM) bound to bovine serum albumin (BSA). Control cells were exposed to fatty acid-free BSA. After 24h, PHT were collected and underwent HPLC-MS to identify changes in lipid metabolites. We determined the role of mTOR in OA stimulated AA transport in PHT by silencing raptor (mTORC1) or rictor (mTORC2) using siRNA (raptor, n=3; rictor, n=4 placentas). It has been proposed that ovarian function can be improved using stem cells of various origins. Our lab has previously described the presence of endometrial mesenchymal stem cells and their potential for differentiation into multiple cell lines. Here, we outline our efforts to improve ovarian function using mouse uterine cells in a murine model of POI. METHODS: 32 female mice (C57BL/6, 8 weeks old) were administered cyclophosphamide and busulfan to induce POI. Mice were randomized into two groups. Untreated mice expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) were used as uterine tissue donors and a single-cell suspension of uterine cells (UCs) was administered to one group of treated animals via retroorbital injection. After seven days, 10 mice in each group were hyperstimulated with pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG) followed by human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), and ovarian function was assessed by oocyte count. The remaining females were caged with males in a 2:1 ratio to conduct a breeding trial. We assessed time to pregnancy, number of pups, and their health. RESULTS: Mice receiving UCs ovulated 4.4 times as many oocytes as those receiving placebo (7.4 vs 1.7 oocytes p<0.0001). Three weeks into the breeding trial, five of the mice that received UCs had become pregnant, compared to three of the mice in the placebo group (p=0.03). Comparison between both groups showed no difference in time to pregnancy, miscarriage rate, or number of pups. Exposure of the resulting pups of both groups to ultraviolet light showed no green fluorescence. CONCLUSIONS: We have demonstrated a significant increase in ovulation as a result of the administration of UCs, as well as a higher pregnancy rate in the treated animals when compared to placebo. The absence of fluorescence in the resulting offspring suggests that the transplanted cells did not contribute to the oocyte pool. Uterine stem cells have the potential to improve ovarian function and enhance fertility after chemotherapy. The INTRODUCTION: Adolescent and young women undergoing gonadotoxic chemotherapy treatment have fewer options for fertility preservation than older women. GnRH analogs are controversial and considered experimental for fertility preservation, but recent studies show supportive evidence for their use. It has been suggested that a combination GnRH antagonist and agonist may improve outcomes as the GnRH antagonist will prevent the gonadotropin "flare" effect seen with GnRH agonist alone. Here, we utilized a murine model to assess the effect of GnRH antagonists and agonists, alone and in combination, on fertility following gonadotoxic chemotherapy. METHODS: Thirty female Sprague Dawley rats were used in this study with five groups: Group 1-placebo (n=6), Group II-cyclophosphamide (CPA) alone (n=6), Group III-GnRH antagonist (GnRHantag) followed by GnRH agonist (GnRH-a) with CPA (n=6), Group IV-GnRH antagonist followed by GnRH agonist with placebo (n=6), and Group V-GnRH agonist with CPA (n=6). Rats were confirmed to be cycling and then treated at adolescent age (6 weeks) and mated at reproductive age (10wks). Live birth rate (LBR) was the primary outcome and the weight of the rats and ovarian volume were secondary measures. Statistical analysis was via Student T-test or Chi-square where appropriate. RESULTS: Group II had decreased LBR compared to I (p=0.02). Group III and V had LBR similar to Group I rates (p=0.008, p=0.02). There was no difference in LBR comparing Groups III and V. There was no statistically significant difference in the ovarian volume among any group after live birth was achieved. The weight of the rats decreased in all groups treated with CPA during and after treatment, but increased similar to other groups one week after treatment was completed. CONCLUSIONS: The combination of GnRH antagonist and agonist, and GnRH agonist alone preserved fertility in female adolescent rats following gonadotoxic chemotherapy treatment. The addition of a GnRH antagonist to an agonist does not confer a greater protective effect on reproductive success compared to GnRH agonist alone in this gonadotoxic chemotherapy murine model. Most significantly, the Coagulation Index (CI), an overall indicator of coagulation, which combines the relative contribution of each TEG value, showed significant hypercoagulopathy in women with severe OHSS. The results of TEG in women with severe OHSS serve as further proof for the risk of thrombosis in these patients and support the use of anticoagulant treatment. Furthermore, TEG can be used to monitor hemostasis during the acute phase of severe OHSS.  : None of the CpGs tested had a significantly altered methylation status despite the 80% power to detect differences larger than 15%. Assuming that ART effects could be stochastic and not localized, we developed a specific analysis aimed at identifying subject-specific epigenetic alterations that was conducted using as reference to detect outliers population, data from cord blood samples from an online database (n=44) and peripheral blood samples from a general population (n=167) in addition to our study population. No difference in the mean number of epimutations between cases and controls was detected and no localized epimutation enrichment (lesion) was found even in imprinted genes. CONCLUSIONS: We cannot exclude differences smaller than 15% or related to other techniques than ICSI. Ovarian stimulation, ICSI and embryo culture seem "epigenetically safe", supporting the idea that factors associated with the diagnosis of infertility itself might underlie the causes of the imprinting disease enrichment in ART. Influence Obesity has an adverse effect on conception and IVF success, but whether this is due to impact on the uterus or the oocyte is not well known. We evaluated the effect of BMI on oocyte characteristics, embryo quality and pregnancy outcomes in an IVF cohort. METHODS: Clinical/laboratory data were prospectively collected as part of the Physiologic Oxygen (PhOx) Study conducted by the Reproductive Medicine Network. Patients were stratified by BMI into underweight (<18.5), normal (18.5-24.9), overweight (25-29.9), obese (30-34.9) and morbidly obese (>35). Primary outcomes were rates of oocyte maturity, 2PN fertilization, triploidy, oocyte degradation and atresia/fracture. Secondary outcomes were cleavage embryo and blastocyst quality, and pregnancy rates. Logistic regression and ANCOVA were performed to compare the effect of BMI on these outcomes. RESULTS: 808 patients were included. After controlling for age, ethnicity, total gonadotropins and peak E2, BMI had a significant effect on rate of fractured/atretic oocytes (p=0.0009) and on 2PN fertilization rate (p=0.01). No differences were seen between BMI groups in number of oocytes retrieved, maturity rate, degradation rate, or triploid fertilization rate. No significant differences were found in measures of embryo quality or in pregnancy rates. Predictive tests in the form of cervical swabs (oncofetal fibronectin (ofFN) or insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1)) have good negative predictive values (NPV) that are valid for only a 3-week period. Previously, we have shown in a small series (n=51) that the endocannabinoid, anandamide (AEA), could be useful in predicting PTB in "high-risk" women and we could predict a "risk-free" period of 8-10 weeks before delivery; something that would facilitate the management of PTB for these women. Based on these results, it was important determine the accuracy of these observations in a larger cohort. Aim: To examine if a single measurement of plasma AEA concentrations after 24 gestational weeks can predict the risk of PTB and the timing of delivery. METHODS: Women at 'high-risk' seen in our prematurity prevention clinic (PPC) (n=62) or with 'threatened PTB' (n=133) were recruited and had their plasma AEA concentration measured by UHPLC-tandem mass spectrometry. RESULTS: Plasma AEA concentrations were significantly higher in women who delivered prematurely (univariate logistic regression, p=0.001). Linear regression analysis showed that gestational age at delivery was significantly associated with plasma AEA concentrations (p=0.004). Linear regression of the prediction of the time interval between the recruitment to delivery in days and plasma AEA concentrations showed a significant inverse relationship that could be used to accurately predict the recruitment to delivery interval (RTDI) (p=0.02). CONCLUSIONS: This second cohort study supports our previous conclusion that that PTL can be predicted by a single blood test, with higher plasma AEA concentrations predictive of PTL. Additionally, the gestational age at delivery and the RTDI could be predicted. Thus, this single test could revolutionise the management of PTL, because it accurately identifies individuals needing primary prevention of prematurity. (but p=0.14) . Combining the three tests also improved prediction in this cohort (AUC 0.88, p<0.001) . CONCLUSIONS: In our study, CL and fFN have demonstrated significant but limited ability to predict preterm birth in high risk asymptomatic women. Performance of all predictors was poorer in the low risk asymptomatic cohort. Test performance in symptomatic women was more promising, excluding pH estimation. There is significant scope to improve upon these techniques for PTB prediction, particularly when utilised for asymptomatic women. Studies to determine whether the addition of novel predictors to these current techniques will improve identification of women at greatest risk of PTB are ongoing.  A single rescue course of antenatal corticosteroids has been shown to decrease neonatal composite morbidity. Our objective was to evaluate the effect of a hospital process on uptake of, and fidelity to, a guideline for the administration of a rescue course of antenatal corticosteroids. In 2009, the MFM division at a tertiary care academic hospital developed a guideline for the administration of a rescue course of antenatal corticosteroids. Eligible patients must be less than 32 and 6/7 weeks with intact membranes, no evidence of chorioamnionitis, have a threat of preterm delivery within the next 7 days and the antecedent treatment given more than 14 days prior and at less than 30 weeks gestation. A stepwise approach to implement the guideline included a formal process within MFM division meetings, hospital-based practice guideline development and full faculty adoption of the guideline. Uptake and adherence to the guideline was reviewed before and after guideline implementation. Rates of rescue dose steroids administration over time was compared using Cochran-Armitage Trend Test. RESULTS: Of 2528 women who received a first course of antenatal corticosteroids from 2008-2013, 142 were eligible for a rescue course. The rate of administration of rescue steroids among eligible women steadily increased over the post-guideline period from 18.2% pre-guideline to 96.1% at the end of the study period (P<0.0001). There were no demographic characteristics associated with lack of administration of rescue steroids among those who were eligible and did not receive a rescue course. The latency period from time of administration of rescue course to delivery varied by indication: from 1.0 week for women with hypertension/ preeclampsia to 3.8 weeks for those with suspected abruption. PPROM, a condition considered to be an exclusion for the use of rescue steroids, was present in (44%) of ineligible women receiving rescue corticosteroids. There was no difference in guideline uptake among prenatal providers. CONCLUSIONS: Using a formal process to implement an MFM guideline on rescue course antenatal corticosteroids, hospital wide administration of rescue steroids increased markedly. The ECBs are the product of dietary fatty acids, and are comprised of the G-protein coupled cannabinoid receptors 1 and 2 (CB1 and CB2), the endogenous ligands, i.e. N-arachidonylethanolamide (AEA) and 2-arachdonoyl glycerol (2-AG), and the respective enzymes/ uptake systems for biosynthesis and degradation. The CB1 receptors are expressed in brain and peripheral tissues, while the CB2 receptor is expressed in microglia, immune and hematopoietic tissues. The recent data showed direct role of endocannabinoids in alcoholic and nonalcoholic (obesity-related) fatty liver diseases (NAFLD). Fatty liver has been documented already in fetuses of obese women and in healthy pregnant women as early as the first trimester of pregnancy. However, the markers to diagnose these conditions do not exist. Our objective was to use the baboon model of maternal obesity to evaluate the expression of CB1 and CB2 receptors in maternal and fetal liver and compare the expression to the placenta. METHODS: Archived baboon liver and placental tissues were used for quantification of CB1 and CB2 expression, which was evaluated using real-time polymerase chain reactions (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC). The cDNA was synthesized according manufacturer's instructions (Roche; Indianapolis, IN, USA). The CB1 monoclonal antibody (ImmunoGenes; Budakeszi, Hungary) was used for IHC in the liver and placenta to confirm expression of the receptor. These slides were then scanned and quantified using Aperio ® software. We found that the CB1 and CB2 receptors were present in the maternal and fetal liver as well as in the placenta. There was also a positive correlation with the concentrations of AEA in maternal serum and the weight of maternal liver. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report regarding presence of both ECBs receptors in fetal and maternal hepatic tissue. ECSs could be markers for NAFLD in pregnancy. Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) complicates 2-9% of pregnancies and is associated with increased maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. Late diagnosis of GDM was defined as women who had a single abnormal value on a 3 hour 100g glucose tolerance test (GTT) at 24-28 weeks but who met Carpenter-Coustan criteria for diagnosis when this test was repeated a month later. There is limited data on the utility of rescreening women with one abnormal value on a 3hr GTT, the incidence of late GDM in these women, and the differences in outcomes among pregnancies diagnosed with GDM late in pregnancy versus at the standard screening time. This was a retrospective review of all singleton pregnancies between 1/1/09-12/31/2013 at Kaiser Medical Center, San Diego. Inclusion criteria were age 18 years or greater and one abnormal value on the 3hr GTT performed at 24-28 weeks after failing the 1hr 50g GTT. Data abstracted included maternal demographics, pregnancy outcomes, and neonatal outcomes. RESULTS: A total of 6,057 women were screened with GTT and 476 met inclusion criteria. Among 476 women rescreened, there were 178 who later met criteria for GDM and 298 with subsequent negative testing. Women with a late diagnosis of GDM were more likely to report a history of GDM in a prior pregnancy than those with no GDM (p<0.0001). Women with a late diagnosis of GDM had a lower BMI at delivery (31.4 kg/m 2 vs. 32.8 kg/m 2 , p<0.01), lower total pregnancy weight gain (11.3 kg vs. 13.8 kg, p<0.0001) and earlier gestational age at delivery (38.4 vs. 38.9 wks, p=0.02). There were no differences in birth weight, 5 minute APGAR, mode of delivery, neonatal length of stay, or macrosomia between the two groups. There were no reported shoulder dystocias in either group. Seventeen (9.6%) of the late diagnosed GDM patients required medication for glycemic control. CONCLUSIONS: Late diagnosis of GDM resulted in small decreases in BMI and total weight gain at the time of delivery, as well as earlier gestational age at delivery and no differences in neonatal outcomes. Our data does not support repeat GTT screening for women with one abnormal value on a 3hr GTT as there were no clinically significant differences in maternal or neonatal outcomes with late diagnosis of GDM. completed weeks, respectively. NND was defined as a death within 28 days of birth. Low 5-minute Apgar scores of term infants were defined as 0-3. Multivariable logistic regression models stratified by gestational age at birth were used to assess the BMI-NDD association. RESULTS: There were 8683 neonatal deaths (2.6 per 1000 live births); most were early preterm (64%), while 14% were late preterm and 22% were term births. The unadjusted risk of NND among early preterm and term births tended to increase as BMI increased. After adjustment for race/ ethnicity, education, parity, and smoking, grade 1, 2, or 3 obese women were 1.2 to 1.4 times as likely as normal weight women to have a NND following an early preterm delivery. Following a term delivery, grade 2 and 3 obese women were 1.7 to 1.8 times as likely as normal weight women to have a NND. The adjusted odds ratios (95% CI) for NND at term were the strongest among the infants with 5-minute Apgar scores 0-3 (grade 2 obese: 2. There is a paucity of data on WC as a risk factor in pregnancy. C-reactive protein(CRP) is an acute phase reactant and marker of inflammation. It has shown potential to predict preeclampsia and gestational diabetes. We sought to evaluate first trimester CRP in overweight/obese women grouped by waist circumference <88cm versus >88cm compared to normal weight women. METHODS: This is a prospective cohort study to evaluate CRP levels in 3 groups of pregnant women: 1) BMI <25, 2) BMI 25-34.9 with WC <88cm and 3) BMI 25-34.9 with WC>88 cm. High sensitivity CRP was run on serum and waist circumference was measured prior to 14 weeks gestation in a convenience sample of eligible women seen by Wake Forest University obstetricians. Medical and obstetric data were abstracted. The hypothesis that first trimester CRP would differ between groups was tested by analysis of variance(ANOVA). Demographic and medical variables were evaluated with chi square for dichotomous variables and ANOVA for continous variables. Pearsons Correlation Coefficient was used to assess relationships between variables. RESULTS: Of 24 women, 9 were in group 1, 5 in group 2 and 10 in group 3. CRP values did not differ but trended toward being higher in group 3(p=0.09) *Figure(s) will be available online. Intake CRP was higher in women with intake BMI over 30(p<0.01) when controlling for chronic HTN, DM and smoking. First trimester WC had positive associations with CRP(R=0.39), age(R=0.39), parity(R=0.52) and BMI(R=0.85). There was no relationship between CRP and age(R= -0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Being obese leads to increased systemic inflammation as defined by elevated CRP in the first trimester. Waist circumference is closely related to obesity and is correlated with increasing CRP, age and parity. Increased incidence of second and third trimester complications in the obese population may be rooted in inflammatory insults to placental development early in gestation. Obesity is a major risk factor for surgical site infections (SSI) after cesarean and high rates persist despite current preventive measures. Culture-independent sequenced-based analysis of the skin at cesarean incision sites has the potential to provide new insights on the etiology and prevention of SSI. We sought to characterize the skin microbiome at the incision site in women undergoing cesarean delivery and compare microbial community structures in obese and non-obese women. This was a planned secondary analysis of a randomized trial in pregnant women undergoing cesarean. Skin swabs were obtained at the site of planned cesarean incision immediately prior to preoperative skin preparation and stored at -80C until DNA extraction. 16s rRNA V4 region was sequenced using Illumina MiSeq. Operational taxonomic units were assigned using the Greengenes reference database. Reads were clustered by QIIME at 97% similarity and specimens were rarefied to a read depth of 1200. Analysis including Shannon diversity and specific taxon abundance were compared between obese (BMI ≥30 Kg/m2) and non-obese (BMI <30 Kg/m2) women. RESULTS: Preoperative skin swabs were obtained from 144 patients; 21 were excluded for low DNA yield, and 123 were analyzed. In all, 91 (74.6%) patients were obese. The skin microbiome at cesarean incision site of pregnant women as a group was characterized predominantly by Corynebacteriaceae (32%), Staphylococcaceae (26%), Clostridales(10%), and Lactobacillaceae (9%). Microbial diversity was significantly higher in obese compared with non-obese women (Shanon diversity, P=0.03). Obese women had significantly higher abundance of Corynebacterium, Staphylococcus and Planococcaceae, and lower abundance of Lactobacillus and Methylobacterium compared with non-obese women. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Obese women have higher microbial diversity and specific taxa compositions compared with non-obese women. These differences may contribute to the higher risk of SSI after cesarean in obese women, and provide insight into newer SSI prevention strategies in obese women. The relationship between maternal body mass index (BMI) and the risks of preterm delivery (PTD) is debated. We explored the association between maternal BMI at the first antenatal visit and risk of spontaneous (sPTD) and elective preterm delivery (ePTD) in nulliparous and multiparous women. We analyzed the data for 42382 deliveries from 2009-13 from our hospital. Computerized hospital records were abstracted for sociodemographic, lifestyle and obstetrical information. BMI was calculated from the measurement of height and weight at the first prenatal visit and categorized as <18.5 (underweight); 18.5-24.9 (normal weight); 25.0 -29.9 (overweight); 30.0-34.9 (moderately obese); and ≥ 35.0 kg/ m 2 (severely obese). Sonographic confirmation of gestational age was standard. Univariate and multinomial logistic regression analyses assessed the association between type of PTD and maternal BMI, stratified by parity. The rate of PTD was 6.0 % (n=2160). Underweight and obese women were at increased risk of PTD (OR 1.4, 95% CI 1.1-1.9, and OR 1.3, 95 %CI 1.2-1.5, respectively). Nulliparas were more likely to deliver preterm than multiparas (OR 1.2, 95% CI 1.1-1.3). In nulliparas, the odds of sPTD were almost 3-fold higher in severely obese (aOR 2.8, 95% CI 1.7-4.4) and 1.5-fold higher in moderately obese women (aOR 1.5, 95% CI 1.08-2.3) than in normal weight women. The risk of ePTD was increased in underweight (aOR 1.8; 95% CI 1.04 -3.4) but not obese nulliparas. In contrast, although obese multiparas had a comparable risk of sPTD with normal weight women, the risk of ePTD was 40 % higher in severely obese multiparas (aOR 1.4, 95% CI 1.02-3.8) than in women with normal weight. Underweight multiparas had twice the risk of sPTD than normal weight women (aOR 2.2, 95% CI 1.3-3.8).The incidence of PTD was 50.4 % in multiples and 5.0 % in singleton pregnancies. Severe obesity increased the risk of both sPTD (aOR 1.4; 95% CI 1.01-2.1) and ePTD (aOR 1.4; 95% CI 1.1-1.8) in singleton pregnancies. Obesity did not influence the rate of either sPTD or ePTD in multifetal pregnancies. The risk of PTB is influenced by parity and maternal BMI early in pregnancy. Obese and underweight women are at increased risk of PTB. Obesity and nulliparity increase the risk of sPTD, whereas obesity and multiparity increase the risk of ePTB. Effect of Gestation on the 75g 2-Hour OGTT. and neonatal morbidity. We performed univariate and multiple logistic regression to determine the potential association between primary outcome and exposure. These associations are reported as adjusted odds ratios (aORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RESULTS: There were 3073 women included in the analysis: 243 with intercourse limited, 1029 who had intercourse that was not limited, and 1801 who did not have intercourse during pregnancy. There were statistically significant differences among groups in race, tobacco use, previous PTB, infection present during pregnancy, CL, FFN, and vaginal bleeding (VB) during the first or second trimester. There was a statistical difference in PTB < 37 weeks by exposure in univariate (p<.001) and multivariate analyses (p=.001); aOR 0.48 for intercourse vs advised to limit (CI 0.33, 0.70), 0.58 for no intercourse vs advised to limit (CI 0.41, 0.81). There was also a statistically significant difference in PTB < 34 weeks in both univariate (p<.001) and multivariate models (p=.001): aOR 1.89 for intercourse vs advised to limit (CI 1.11, 3.22), aOR 1.32 for no intercourse versus advised to limit (CI 0.82, 2.12). No significant differences were seen in maternal stress, anxiety, or depression scores; CL; serum inflammatory cytokine levels; or neonatal morbidity. This study showed significant differences in PTB < 37 and < 34 weeks by whether the patient had been advised to limit sexual intercourse. Further work is needed to examine pathophysiologic mechanisms. as ≥35years old at the time of delivery and suggests that these patients are high risk for maternal and fetal morbidities. There is a paucity of literature that focuses on the AMA patient who is without confounding medical issues in regard to outcomes. The objective was to determine if maternal age alone in healthy women at term was associated with increased complications in labor and delivery. METHODS: This is a retrospective cohort study of all women who delivered at our institution from July 2014 to June 2015. Data were collected from electronic medical records. Women with preexisting medical conditions, such as diabetes and hypertension were excluded to focus on a healthy subset of patients. Women with preterm delivery, intrauterine fetal demise, elective c-section, multifetal pregnancy, or any contraindication to vaginal delivery were excluded and analyzed separately. Subjects were grouped by age (<35, 35-39, 40-44, ≥45 years) and outcomes were compared between groups using Kruskal-Wallis test, Anova, and Chi-square, as appropriate. RESULTS: Of a total 5,917 deliveries, 1,404 were excluded, leaving 4,513 healthy women who delivered singleton term infants. Demographic and outcome data are presented in Figure 1 *Figure(s) will be available online. The rates of c-section and operative vaginal delivery (OVD) were significantly higher in the 40-44 and >45 age groups compared to the <35 group, but not in the 35-39 group *Figure(s) will be available online. There were no significant differences between groups with respect to gestational diabetes, hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, singleton preterm delivery, small for gestational age newborns (<2500 gm), or newborn Apgar scores. The age threshold for obstetric complications and adverse outcome of pregnancy appears to be 40 years. Based on our data, we propose to consider changing the threshold for AMA from 35 to 40 years. CONCLUSIONS: Gestation length is reduced in shorter and Aboriginal women. Neonatal morbidity is reduced at late preterm gestations in Aboriginal but not in short women. Stillbirth is more common in both groups after 40 weeks. We suggest that the shortened gestation in Aboriginal women is physiological but that in short women it is the result of maternal constraint of fetal growth, whereby the shorter woman delivers a fetus earlier when it is smaller and safer for the mother, albeit at increased risk to the neonate. CONCLUSIONS: Delivery between 35-36wks yields a relatively favorable ratio of demise to RDS. The outcome prior to 35wks is not improved by FLM testing due to the low incidence with poor negative predictive value. Further, the incidence of neonatal demise is such that it parallels that of ICP. Improvement with mature testing may be seen at 35wks, which is reflected in the demise to RDS ratio, however, delay in delivery results in doubling of the incidence of demise. Thus reasonable recommendation for delivery is 35wks with FLM, or delivery at 36wks without testing. Sibling However, the relationship between fetal growth, placental abnormalities and SB is not well characterized. The aim of this study was to identify associations between fetal growth and placental findings in SB that are not seen in live birth (LB). METHODS: US population-based case-control study conducted in five geographic areas defined by state and county lines. The study included a standardized placental examination protocol. Gestational age (GA) at death (SB) or delivery (LB) was estimated using a published algorithm. Birth weight percentiles were determined using birth weight and the estimate of GA. Small for gestational age (SGA) was defined as birth weight less than 10th percentile and large for gestational age (LGA) as birth weight above 90th percentile. Analysis was conducted in 319 stillbirths and 1119 live births ≥24 weeks GA at death or delivery with adequate placental examination. Data were weighted to account for the study design. RESULTS: An association between fetal growth abnormalities, specifically SGA, and circulatory disorders of the maternal compartment of the placenta was found in SB but not in LB (proportion of SGA, AGA, LGA with any maternal circulatory disorder in SB: 65.3%, 51.1%, 48.6%; and in LB: 27.3%, 31.8%, 23.0%, p=0.04). No significant differences in the association (SB vs LB) between fetal growth categories and the following placental findings were noted: developmental, inflammatory and fetal circulatory disorders. An association between birth weight to placenta weight ratio (BW/PLW) and fetal growth abnormalities was found in SB but not in LB, p=0.03. The median BW/PLW ratio in each growth group was lower for SB than for LB. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: There was association between fetal growth and placental maternal circulatory disorders in SB but not in LB. The low BW/PLW ratio in SB has potential for SB prediction using new placental volume estimation methods. Utility CONCLUSIONS: AC measured in the third trimester has poor sensitivity but good specificity and negative predictive value to predict abnormal birth weight. To predict SGA, a cutoff of AC <10 th percentile has better sensitivity and NPV but lower specificity than AC <5 th percentile. To predict LGA, the specificity of AC >95 th percentile is superior to AC >90 th percentile. Higher The objective was to determine the maternal and neonatal morbidity associated with higher order (>/=3) repeat Cesarean sections (CS), in the setting of a unique model requiring 24/7 availability of an OB Safety Officer, i.e., a senior clinician without any other clinical responsibilities who is assigned to oversee and assist Obstetricians in clinical managements on the Labor and Delivery floor. We performed a retrospective analysis of 826 women who underwent repeat CS from January 01, 2013 to September 30, 2015. The women were divided into 4 Groups: Group 1: secondary repeat CS after labor (n= 184); Group 2: secondary scheduled repeat CS, (n= 360); Group 3: tertiary or quaternary scheduled repeat CS, (n=186); Group 4: 5 or more scheduled repeat CS (n = 96) RESULTS: The incidence of intra-operative adhesions, placenta accreta, cystotomy, bowel injury, ileus, ICU admission, were not significantly increased in Groups 3 and 4. There was a significant increase in total blood loss, 1355 +/-186 cc in Groups 3 and 4, versus 818 +/-116 cc in Groups 1 and 2, even in the absence of any other complications. The patients in Groups 3 and 4 required transfusion of >/= 2 units in 21% of cases, versus 11% in Groups 1 and 2. This was statistically significant, as were the total operating times (135 +/-43mins versus 96+/-31 mins) and the rates of intraoperative and/or postoperative hysterectomies (9.8% in Groups 3 and 4, versus 4.1% in Groups 1 and 2). There were no significant differences between the Groups in postoperative maternal outcomes (postpartum endometritis, wound infection) nor in neonatal outcomes (Apgar scores, NICU admissions). CONCLUSIONS: (a) CS in Groups 3 and 4 resulted in greater blood loss even in the absence of other complications, suggesting that the previous standard of 1000cc for normal blood loss is an underestimation in these circumstances. (b) Groups 3 and 4 were also more likely to require blood transfusions and to undergo peripartum hysterectomies. (c) This unique model of the 24/7 presence of an OB Safety Officer, i.e. a senior clinician without any clinical responsibilities, other than to assist with patient management as needed, likely contributed to the lack of adjacent organ damage in the higher order(>/=3) CS patients. METHODS: This is a retrospective cohort study of all UI (cervical length <1.5cm) and EI (cervix dilated 0.5cm or more) rescue cerclages placed from January 2013 to June 2015 at a single institution, identified using our electronic medical records database. Only singleton pregnancies were included and were grouped based on the presence or absence of sludge. The primary outcome was gestational age (GA) at delivery. Manzel-Haenszel chi square, Fisher exact, and T-test were performed as indicated. RESULTS: Forty-three cerclages were identified. Ten were excluded: follow-up unavailable (5), revision (1), CL>1.5cm (3), and ongoing pregnancy (1). Thirty-three women underwent rescue cerclage. Of these, sludge was present in 18 and absent in 15 women. In each group, 76.5% had at least one risk factor for preterm delivery. There was no significant difference between groups with respect to preterm delivery before 24, 28, and 32 weeks. *Figure(s) will be available online. The presence of sludge is not predictive of preterm delivery in patients undergoing UI and EI rescue cerclage. The Impact of Birth Order on Neonatal Outcomes in Twins. The view that second twins have a higher risk of adverse perinatal outcomes when compared with first twins is generally accepted. We sought to examine this premise by investigating whether birth order is an important independent predictor of neonatal outcomes in a large, contemporary population database using unsupervised and supervised learning methodologies. This is a retrospective cohort study of twin pregnancies included in the 2011 CDC National Statistics Natality database. Twins with congenital anomalies or missing outcomes were excluded. Neonatal outcome variables were (1) 5-minute Apgar score <7, and (2) an a priori composite neonatal morbidity score (need for assisted ventilation, surfactant therapy, seizures, birth injury, suspicion for sepsis, and NICU admission). We applied a supervised learning algorithm for predictive modeling and Random Forest method to rank the importance of clinical features (i.e., GA at birth, birth order, mode of delivery) in prediction of adverse neonatal outcome. Analysis of matched twin pairs was performed to determine the frequency of adverse outcomes of the second twin relative to its co-twin. RESULTS: We identified 38,125 twin pairs. Random Forest method ranked birth weight and gestational age at birth as the features most predictive of adverse outcome in either twin ( Figure 1 ). Birth order was not identified as an independent predictor of adverse neonatal outcome. In the context of matched twin pairs, outcomes for the first and second twins differed in only 27% of deliveries, with the second twin faring worse in 56% of those cases (p=ns). Birth weight discordance and the difference in 5-min Apgars between the first and second twins showed normal distributions, consistent with a functional distribution of multiple variables being included within the prediction by birth weight discordance ( Figure 2 ). CONCLUSIONS: The majority of the time outcomes for the first and second twin are comparable. Birth weight and gestational age are more predictive of adverse outcomes for twins than birth order. *Figure(s) will be available online.  A retrospective study was conducted at a tertiary center between 2011 and 2014. PCT levels in the umbilical blood were measured using an immunoluminometric assay. Required clinical information was obtained from the patients' chart. Placental examination was conducted by one pathologist. RESULTS: One hundred seventy women with singleton gestations were included. Their median gestational age at delivery was 33 weeks of gestation (range, 22-41 weeks). There were 14 placental findings including those normal (n = 70). Of the women with normal placenta, one woman with meconium peritonitis showed high PCT level (6.7 ng/mL) in the umbilical blood. The main findings were chorioamnionitis (CAM; n = 43) and fetal vessel thrombosis (FVT; n = 14). PCT level in CAM (5.77 ± 15.3 ng/mL) and FVT (6.75 ± 16.6 ng/mL) were markedly higher compared with the normal pathological findings (0.23 ± 0.16 ng/mL). PCT level in CAM with stage ≥ 2 of fetal response was higher when compared with that in CAM with stage 0 or 1 of fetal response. Furthermore, among the stages of fetal response, PCT levels were highest in those with stage ≥ 2. CONCLUSIONS: FVT, but not CAM, influenced the PCT levels in the umbilical cord blood. When PCT is applied for the diagnosis of early-onset sepsis, the placental findings need to be considered. Reactive electrophiles originate from exogenous and endogenous sources, and can be found in the blood stream after inflammatory processes, ionizing radiation, pollutant exposure, and following the oxidation of natural molecules such as lipids. Their presence has been associated with various pregnancy complications. Measurement of reactive electrophiles in the blood stream could be a useful tool to characterise an individual's environmental exposures but their high reactivity and very short unbound life-span makes their detection difficult. Human serum albumin (HSA) is the major protein in blood with high nucleophilic properties. It has been reported that unbound reactive electrophiles in the circulation bind to the HSA's free sulfhydryl groups and form "adducts" on a specific residue. METHODS: Liquid Chromatography coupled with Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS; QExactive, Thermo) was used to investigate 14 potential adducts of the HSA cysteine (Cys 34 ). Serum was obtained from subjects at 20 weeks of gestation in Auckland, New Zealand. The subject groups comprised women that reported smoking before and during the pregnancy (n=20); women diagnosed with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) (n=20), and women identified as having a small for gestational age (SGA) foetus (n=20). The subjects were matched with controls according to age, body mass index and ethnicity. Data extraction and statistical analysis were performed using SIEVE version 2.2 SP2 and R version 3.2.2. We were able to detect 9 potential HSA adducts in the SGA cases and controls, and 8 in the GDM and Smokers cases and controls. The adducts detected had a molecular weight spanning from 32Da to 500Da. No significant differences between cases and controls were observed. CONCLUSIONS: While we did not identify any significant differences in HSA adducts between cases and controls, we successfully detected adducts of the Cys 34 HSA. This demonstrates that adductomics is a robust method for detection of potential reactive electrophiles in vivo and can be applied in future adductomics studies. There was no difference in the incidence of non-diagnostic US between obese and non-obese women, however, there was a trend towards fewer non diagnostic US in obese women [  The mean ± SD GWG was 10.5 ± 6.7 kg. Between delivery and 2 weeks postpartum, weight decreased 7.53 ± 2.3 kg, 84% of which was TBW (6.32 ± 3.3 kg). Greater GWG correlated inversely with postpartum TBW change (R 2 =0.15, P < 0.03). However, the change in postpartum TBW between visits was not associated with pre-pregnancy maternal BMI, third trimester maternal fat mass, or infant birth weight. Compared to women with NGWG, women with EGWG had less weight loss (6.82 ± 2.7 kg versus 8.06 ± 1.9 kg) and TBW loss (5.27 ± 2.7 kg versus 7.10 ± 3.6 kg) at 2 weeks postpartum *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to expectations, women with EGWG during pregnancy lost less weight and TBW (both in absolute amounts and proportionally to total weight loss) two weeks postpartum compared to their NGWG peers. This suggests that women with EGWG retain more weight immediately after delivery, which is proportionally higher in adipose content (vs. water) than NGWG, possibly contributing to increased risk of obesity in these women. INTRODUCTION: Prior to parturition, the cervix undergoes a ripening process allowing dilation necessary for delivery of the fetus at term. This process is complex and may involve a potential role for an inflammatory cascade. An increase in resident immune cells near term gestation has been observed in cervical stroma. The cervix is richly innervated, however the role of cervical innervation remains enigmatic. SP and CGRP are primary neuropeptides in sensory pain fibers and have been localized by immunocytochemistry in the cervix. Fibroblasts are the primary cell type in the cervical stroma and integral in regulating cervical integrity. In the present study we hypothesized that HCFs express receptors for CGRP and SP and that SP and/or CGRP stimulate chemokine expression in HCFs. HCFs were prepared and characterized. RNA was prepared from the HCFs and RT-PCR performed for the SP (NK-1) and CGRP receptors (CLR and its chaperone, RAMP-1). A positive RT-PCR product was observed for both NK-1 and CLR/RAMP-1, thus we examined the effect of SP and CGRP on expression of chemokines (IL-8, MCP-1, MCP-3) and select cytokines Our previous study demonstrated that in fed status, plasma levels of insulin in pregnant rats fed a low protein (LP) diet remain lower in mid-late pregnancy compared to controls, and in contrast, plasma levels of ghrelin, a hormone inhibiting insulin secretion, were highly elevated in LP rats. In this study we hypothesized that enhanced ghrelin signaling in beta cells inhibits insulin secretion in pregnant rat fed LP diet. METHODS: Pregnant SD rats were fed a diet with 20% (CT) or 6% casein (LP) from Day 1 of pregnancy until sacrificed on Day 21 (n=6-10 rats/diet) and plasma was collected for insulin measurement by ELISA. Pancreatic islets were isolated and mRNA levels of Proinsulin 2, Ghrl (ghrelin), Mboat4 (membrane bound O-acyltransferase domain containing 4), Bche (butyrylcholinesterase) and Ghsr (growth hormone secretagogue receptor) were measured by real-time PCR. Islets were also cultured in presence of 2.8 or 16.7 mM glucose (n=3-4 rats/diet) together with ghrelin (10nM), ghrelin antagonist (1µM) or their combination (COMB). Secreted insulin was measured by ELISA. RESULTS: Plasma insulin levels were reduced (P < 0.05) by 2.3-fold in LP compared to CT group; 2) mRNA levels of Proinsulin 2, Mboat4 and Bche was unchanged in LP rats; 3) mRNA levels of Ghrl and Ghsr were increased by 1.8-(P < 0.01) and 1.6 (P < 0.05)-fold in LP rats, respectively; 4) In presence of 2.8 and 16.7 mM glucose, insulin secretion was 1.6 (P < 0.01)-and 1.5 (P < 0.05)-fold higher in CT rats compared to LP rats, respectively. 5) In presence of 2.8 mM glucose, insulin secretion was not changed by ghrelin and its antagonist in both CT and LP rats, although insulin secretion was higher in CT rats for each treatment except COMB. 6) In presence of 16.7 mM glucose, in LP rats insulin secretion was unchanged by ghrelin and its antagonist; in CT rats insulin secretion with the treatment of ghrelin was reduced to 69.8 % of untreated group, but insulin secretion with the treatment of ghrelin antagonist and COMB was increased (P < 0.001) by 2.8-and 2.6 -fold, respectively. These results indicate that despite increase in both systemic and local production of ghrelin in pregnant rats fed LP diet, ghrelin signaling in pancreatic islets was blunted and failed to inhibit insulin secretion in late pregnancy. Pregnancy is associated with profound maternal metabolic changes that are necessary to sustain the growth and development of the fetus. These changes are mediated by the action of reproductive signals on the homeostatic controls of metabolically active organs. Adults have been shown to possess thermogenic brown adipose tissue (BAT). We hypothesize that BAT plays a role in the regulation of the gestational metabolic profile. METHODS: Pregnancy impact on BAT: BAT phenotype and thermogenic function were assessed in mice at gestational day (GD) 14. The role of gestationally altered BAT: Interscapular BAT (iBAT) was surgically ablated in female mice (or sham-operated) prior to mating; GD14 and GD18 maternal and fetal morphometry and lipid biochemistry were studied. Pregnancy signals that impact BAT: BAT phenotype was assessed in 1) GD0, 5, 7 (pre-placentation) and 11 (post-placentation) mice and 2) oophorectomised mice administered progesterone or prolactin via an osmotic pump for 14 days. Endocrine signaling mechanisms were investigated in BAT primary cultures. We show that day 14 of pregnancy is associated with a loss of BAT phenotype (e.g., Ucp1 expression), inducible thermogenic function and increased mitochondrial dysfunction, accompanied by increased levels of white adipose tissue markers and lipid droplet accumulation. Moreover, we demonstrate that gestationally altered BAT is necessary for regulating fetal growth, as surgically ablating iBAT resulted in maternal and fetal hyperlipidemia and consequently larger fetuses and placentas. We observe changes in BAT phenotype as early as day 5 of pregnancy implicating ovarian factors and show that oophorectamised mice administered progesterone (ovarian hormone) have reduced expression of thermogenic targets in BAT. Finally, using primary BAT cultures, we establish that progesterone mediates its gestational effects in a nuclear progesterone receptor-independent manner. CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate a reduction in classical BAT phenotype during pregnancy, which is mediated by progesterone, exerting its effects in a non-canonical nuclear progesterone receptor-independent manner. We propose that the progesterone-brown fat axis contributes to the gestational metabolic environment and is critical for regulating fetal growth. Inhibition The underlying mechanisms of de novo seizure during pregnancy and preeclampsia remain unclear, but may involve loss of integrity of the blood-brain barrier (BBB). We previously showed that tight junction permeability is unchanged in pregnancy, but little is known about the adaptation of BBB efflux transporters to pregnancy. We hypothesized that efflux transporter activity protects the maternal brain by preventing passage of seizure-provoking factors that circulate in pregnancy into the brain, and that decreased activity will result in seizure. Here we investigated the role of the BBB efflux transporters p-glycoprotein (Pgp) and breast cancer-resistant protein (Bcrp) in seizure prevention by inhibiting their activity in vivo during pregnancy and monitoring for spontaneous seizure. METHODS: Electroencephalography (EEG) was monitored in freely moving nonpregnant (NP, n=8) and pregnant (P, d19, n=8) Sprague Dawley rats via intracortical electrodes in the primary motor cortex and hippocampus. After baseline recordings, rats were treated with the Pgp inhibitor PSC833 (10mg/kg s.c.) and Bcrp inhibitor Probenecid (200mg/kg i.p.), and EEG and video recorded continuously for 2 hours. Time-synced video was used to assess physical manifestation of seizure associated with high frequency spikewave discharges indicative of epileptiform activity on EEG. RESULTS: Three NP rats were excluded due to technical issues and 1 P rat that had epileptiform activity on baseline EEG was excluded. Inhibition of Pgp and Bcrp caused hippocampal epileptiform activity in 100% (7 of 7) of P rats with a latency to onset of 1360±156 sec that was more prominent and faster than in NP rats, where only 40% (2 of 5) of rats had epileptiform activity with a latency of 2244±934 sec. Physical manifestations of seizure corresponding to epileptiform activity on EEG, including head nods, jaw jerks and clonic extension of limbs, were present in 2 rats per group. CONCLUSIONS: Efflux transporters appear critical in prevention of seizure in nonpregnant and pregnant states. Pregnancy appears to be more sensitive to seizure induced by efflux transporter inhibition, potentially due to greater seizure-provoking factors circulating in pregnancy and/or the brain being hyperexcitable during pregnancy. Regardless, decreased activity of efflux transporters at the BBB may be one mechanism by which de novo seizure occurs during pregnancy and preeclampsia. Influence INTRODUCTION: Expansive remodeling of the maternal uterine circulation during gestation is essential for maintaining uteroplacental perfusion and assuring healthy pregnancy outcome. Endothelial nitric oxide (NO) mediates this process, although the actual stimulus for increasing NO is not known. We hypothesized that an increase in shear stress secondary to hemochorial placentation, which reduces distal resistance, is the principal physiological stimulus for both NO and remodeling. Shear stress is normally difficult to assess in the uterine circulation due to its unique architecture in which inflow occurs from both the cervical and ovarian ends. To alter the pattern of shear stress in the vasculature of the rat (n=9), we used selective (ovarian vs. cervical end) unilateral ligation of main uterine artery and vein on day 10 of pregnancy to create a single, directional inflow. The opposite, sham-operated uterine horn served as an internal control. Another group of rats (n=4) was given L-NAME (0.5 g/L) in drinking water to inhibit NOS post-ligation. Following uterine excision on day 20, uterine artery and vein lumen diameters (and arterial wall thickness) were measured under unstressed conditions at three points along the vessel. Arteries were then cannulated and pressurized to evaluate distensibility. Fetal and placental weights were recorded, as well as fetal resorptions and number of pups. RESULTS: Cervical (but not ovarian) end ligation induced significant expansive remodeling of both arteries and veins at the ovarian end. Arterial and venous lumen diameters increased 51 ± 13.8 and 76 ± 26.9%, respectively, relative to the contralateral side. Arterial wall thickness increased 52 ± 10.5% (all p<0.05). Remodeled arteries were significantly (44 ± 12.0%) more compliant than controls. Arterial and venous enlargement was completely abrogated by NOS inhibition. Surprisingly, there were no effects of ligation on fetal or placental weights, fecundity, or incidence of resorption. CONCLUSIONS: Surgically altering uterine hemodynamics revealed the influence of shear stress on maternal uterine arterial and venous expansive remodeling, along with changes in matrix properties. Fetal and placental data attest to the ability of the uterine circulation to adapt to a significant hemodynamic challenge without compromising reproductive outcome. We previously showed that seizure threshold is lower during pregnancy; however, the mechanisms by which the brain adapts during gestation to alter excitability are unclear. Here we determined pregnancy-induced changes in hippocampal slice excitability and excitatory N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) subunit expression and activity that could contribute to network excitability. We hypothesized that adaptations occur during pregnancy to increase NMDAR activity in the hippocampus, a brain region central to seizure generation that enhances slice excitability. METHODS: Seizure activity and duration were determined electrophysiologically in hippocampal slices from nonpregnant (NP, n=4) and late-pregnant (LP, d19-20, n=8) rats by comparing evoked potentials in response to zero magnesium (Mg 2+ ), a seizure-provoking stimulus that is selective for NMDAR activation. Power spectrum analyses were used to compare activity in the seizure range of 200-400 Hz. Western blot was used to measure and compare total and phosphorylated NMDAR subunit protein expression as a measure of NMDAR activity in hippocampus from the same animals (n=10/group).  Our study suggests that cardiovascular adaptation during pregnancy is not fetal sex dependent. Surprisingly we found significant baseline differences in plasma volume, cardiac output, and uterine hemodynamics in women who went on to conceive male fetuses as compared to females. These findings suggest that fetal sex associated differences in maternal physiology detected during gestation could predate pregnancy and raises questions regarding intrinsic differences in uterine receptivity and/or early pregnancy success associated with embryonic/ fetal sex based on maternal physiology. This study aims to study the magnitude to which the different subtypes of PE relate to metabolic syndrome postpartum. In this crossectional study, we performed a cardiovascular screening in 1190 former preeclamptic women, at least six months postpartum. Women where subdivided in 4 subgroups based on onset of disease (early vs late), and whether or not SGA co-occurred. We analyzed our data with ANOVA after bonferonni correction. Odds ratios and adjusted odds ratios were calculated with logistic regression to analyze the association between the metabolic syndrome and the 4 subgroups. In the multivariate analysis, adjustments were made for maternal age, parity, smoking, interval between delivery and measurements and intra uterine fetal demise. Women were excluded if they were <18 years of age, non-English speaking, or received antibiotics within 28 days. We compared detection of bacterial organisms in the urinary microbiota using 3 complementary approaches: 16S rRNA gene sequencing, an enhanced quantitative urine culture (EQUC) technique and standard urine culture. Patients were assigned a specific "urotype" (distinct bacterial community) based on predominant organism or were classified as "diverse" when a single organism was not predominant. Results were compared to a non-pregnant control group of peri-menopausal women without symptoms of a urinary tract infection. : 51 pregnant women were enrolled and were compared to 52 non-pregnant control subjects. Mean age (30 vs. 60yrs), BMI (28 vs 34 Kg/ m2) and race were significantly different between the groups (p<0.001). 16S rRNA sequencing phenotyped bacteria in 68.6% of pregnant women compared to 61.7% of controls, while EQUC phenotyped bacteria in 66.7% of pregnant women compared to 63.5% of controls (Table 1) . Sequencing detected similar frequencies of Lactobacillus and Gardnerella urotypes between groups, but lower frequencies of Diverse urotypes in pregnant women (2.9% vs 21.6%, p=0.04). The EQUC protocol found similar results for Lactobacillus, but a higher frequency of Gardnerella urotypes in pregnant women (20.6% vs 6.1%, p=0.09). CONCLUSIONS: Asymptomatic pregnant and per-menopausal women have a urinary microbiome. Despite differences in the two groups, the maternal urinary microbiome has a similar composition to the urinary microbiome of older asymptomatic non-pregnant controls. *Figure(s) will be available online. Women with a prior spontaneous preterm birth (sPTB) are recommended to have serial cervical length (CL) screening defined as biweekly transvaginal ultrasound CL from 16 0/7-23 6/7 weeks with the recommendation of a cereclage for CL<25mm for prevention of recurrent sPTB. The objective is to evaluate the compliance to such a protocol and identify risk factors/barriers to non-adherence. METHODS: Retrospective cohort of singleton gestations with prior sPTB presenting for ultrasounds between 1/1/12-6/30/12 and 7/1/13-12/31/13. Women with a history-indicated cerclage were excluded. Adherence to screening was defined as having ≥2 TVUS CL exams. Demographic, obstetric and social history, cervical lengths, and pregnancy outcome data were collected. Risk factors and pregnancy outcomes for those who were and were not screened were compared. RESULTS: 104 women were included. Overall, 89% of women were offered serial TVUS CL screening with an acceptance rate of 90%. The rate of sPTB was 18%. Women who were screened had an mean of 2.5 ± 1.7 measurements, with mean gestational age (GA) at first scan to be 18.1 ± 2.4 weeks, and mean GA at delivery to be 36.3 ± 5.6 weeks. Women who underwent serial screening (≥2 TVU CL, N=67) versus those who did not (no TVU CL, N=10) were less likely to be Caucasian (27% vs 80%, p<0.01), had a higher mean number of prior sPTB (1.3±0.7, vs 0.9±0.3, p=0.045), and less likely to be on methadone maintenance therapy (3% vs 30%, p<0.01). There was a non-significant trend of women who received screening having an earlier GA of prior sPTB (28.2±6.1 vs 31.4±4.6, p=0.11) and having a later GA of delivery(36.7±5.2 vs 33.1±8.6, p=0.09). Of the 37 women inadequately screened, the most frequent reasons were screening not offered (29.7%) and declined in spite of recommendation (27.0%). CONCLUSIONS: Women who did not receive CL screening were more likely to be Caucasian, have fewer prior sPTB, and more likely to be on methadone maintenance therapy than those who were screened. A poorer obstetric history likely plays a role in increasing uptake of screening. Although there was not a statistically significant difference, likely due to limited sample size, screening appears to improve obstetric outcomes. is the cause of approximately one third of preterm deliveries. Oxidative stress is characterized by the imbalance between the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the rate of their consumption by antioxidants. ROS generated during pregnancy can oxidize proteins, lipids and nucleic acids and increased oxidative stress has been described in third trimester of normal pregnancies and labor. Moreover, early increase of oxidative stress is associated with premature senescence of amniochorion membranes which could lead to PPROM. The aim of this study was to evaluate oxidative stress markers, 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT) and malondialdehyde (MDA), in PPROM and term amniochorion membranes. Up to now in Literature only three papers were published on the utility of a preterm prevention clinic to reduce incidence of prematurity and neonatal morbidity in patients with a history of PTB. The first aim of our study was to verify the outcomes in patients with a history of PTB seen in our dedicated clinic versus patiens with the same risk factors treated with usual care between 2011 and 2012. We then compared the outcomes of patients controlled in our preterm prevention clinic in the following two-year period (2013) (2014) , in order to verify if the same results were obtained. METHODS: Retrospective study including singleton pregnancies with no fetal abnormalities and a history of at least one PTB seen in our dedicated clinic for PTB prevention between 2011 and 2012. This group was compared to women with the same risk factors (history of PTB or pPROM) not seen in PTB prevention clinic who delivered in the same period (controls). RESULTS: Between 2011 and 2012 PTB incidence was significantly different in the two groups (19,6% in patients attending PTB prevention clinic vs 32,9% in controls) and PTB < 32 wks were reduced by 9 times (0,98% vs 7,4 %); moreover in the first group we didn't record any delivery before 28 wks g.a versus 4, 2% in patients treated with usual care. The same good results of preterm prevention clinic were confirmed by the analysis of outcomes of the following two-year period. CONCLUSIONS: In our experience a clinic dedicated to preterm prevention modifies clinical outcomes of patients with a hitory of PTB, significantly reducing severe prematurity (<32 wks). sensitizing the uterus to stimulation and contraction. IL-1β is a key mediator of this process, inducing both pro-inflammatory and pro-labour genes. We have previously shown that IL-1β up-regulates expression of the PGF2α receptor FP and strongly induces IL-6 production in HMSMC. IL-6 knockout mice deliver 24h late due to a delayed rise in UAPs (Robertson et al. 2010) . As UAP levels do rise normally, albeit 24h late, IL-6 is not critical for UAP expression. We hypothesized that IL-6 may promote sensitization of the myometrium to contraction by stimulating UAPs and cytokines in the myometrium. After 24h serum starvation, HMSMC were treated with IL-6 (5 or 15 ng/mL) or IL-1β (5 ng/mL) for 12h and extracted for mRNA abundance by real-time RT-PCR. N=6-9 patients; paired t-test, or repeated measures ANOVA then Tukey's post hoc test (p≤0.05). RESULTS: IL-1β treatment strongly increases relative mRNA abundance for IL-6 (p<0.0001) and increases IL-6R (p>0.05). IL-1β also up-regulates COX-2 mRNA expression (p<0.001), and FP (Zaragoza et al. 2006 ) while down-regulating OTR mRNA expression (p<0.05). IL-6 treatment does not change expression of COX-2, FP, or OTR. Although not statistically significant in this patient set, IL-1β also increases expression levels of its receptor system IL-1R1, IL-1RAcP and IL-1RAcPb. IL-6 treatment induces a slight increase in IL-1R1 expression, but has no effect on IL-1RAcP, IL-1RAcPb, or IL-6R. Treating HMSMC with 15 ng/mL IL-6 however induces a 3.6-fold increase in IL-1β mRNA expression. CONCLUSIONS: IL-1β contributes to the process of uterine transformation by promoting expression of UAPs, cytokines and their receptors, including IL-6. IL-6 is not necessary for UAP induction, but a loss of IL-6 results in delayed UAP increases. From this study, we conclude that IL-6 does not stimulate UAP expression in HMSMC, but does stimulate IL-1β. These data suggest that the primary role of IL-6 is to regulate IL-1β levels in uterine stromal cells and leukocytes and not to activate the uterus directly. Acknowledgements: March of Dimes, CIHR, and GAPPS, an initiative of Seattle Children's. INTRODUCTION: Exposure to toxic metals during pregnancy has been linked to a variety of negative reproductive outcomes, such as preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and low birthweight. In contrast, trace elements play an important role in maternal health and fetal development where deficiencies in essential metals, such as selenium and zinc, have been correlated to miscarriage and preeclampsia. The exact etiologies of such outcomes and the effects of fetal exposure to these metals are largely unknown. Therefore, the ability to assess levels of these elements is critical to determining the underlying causes of such conditions and the effects that both essential and non-essential metals have in fetal development. We set out to examine the effects of toxic and essential metals on fetal gene expression using cell-free fetal RNA (cffRNA). METHODS: Leveraging a retrospective cohort examining spontaneous preterm birth (sPTB), metals were measured in amniotic fluid (AF) by Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry. ccfRNA was extracted from AF and fetal expression assessed using the Nanostring platform. The essential metals selenium, manganese, and zinc, and toxic metals arsenic, mercury, and lead were selected for regression analysis. RESULTS: Arsenic was associated with increased expression of three genes: Phospholipase C, Beta 1 (Phosphoinositide-Specific) (PLCB1), Progesterone Receptor (PGR), and Olfactory Receptor, Family 4, Subfamily S, Member 2 (OR4S2). Lead was associated with increased expression of Ribosomal Protein, Large, P0 (RPLP0). Selenium was associated with increased expression of Neurotensin Receptor 1 (High Affinity) (NTSR1). These genes encode proteins with functions that include progesterone signaling, neurotensin mediation, and regulation of myometrial contractility. CONCLUSIONS: Using a custom nanostring panel focused on pathways related to sPTB (HPA axis, inflammation, oxidative stress), we show there are differences in targeted expression as they relate to metals exposure. The results highlight the potential for detrimental health effects of prenatal metals exposure and the potential to identify biomarkers of environmental exposure during this critical developmental period. Genome wide association studies (GWAS) of preterm birth (PTB) reported to date have failed to identify replicable single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to explain genetically indicated preterm birth. The GWAS were underpowered to detect either high effect single SNPs or an effect driven by multiple, small-effect SNPs acting through common pathways. The objective of this study was to determine whether integration of GWAS with myometrial transcriptome data for PTB adds power to detect the combined influence of small genetic variants in causing PTB. METHODS: A list of candidate SNPs from the largest meta-analysis of PTB-GWAS was integrated with term and preterm laboring myometrial transcriptome data in a protein-protein interaction (PPI) network. The SNPs were mapped to their associated genes, and a PPI network enriched with the candidate SNPs and topologically related proteins was constructed and scored with myometrial expression data to identify subnetworks of coordinately expressed genes enriched with PTB-SNPs. RESULTS: Myocyte Enhancer Factor 2C (MEF2C) was central to 15/22 term myometrium subnetworks. MEF2C is a transcription factor co-regulated with 5 ion channel, 2 inflammation, and 4 muscle function associated genes. The MEF2C networks were enriched with 11 PTB-SNP genes in total. The transcription factor TWIST1 was most frequently altered in the preterm myometrium networks. TWIST1 carries a PTB associated SNP and is an essential regulator of NFkB signaling in the myometrium. The phospholipase, PLA2G4C, carries five PTB-SNPs and was found in both the term and preterm myometrium subnetworks associated with MEF2C. SNPs in PLA2G4C have been previously associated with preterm birth and shown to disrupt prostaglandin synthesis. CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis shows how several PTB associated SNPs that are statistically insignificant on their own may act through a common pathway to drive PTB. The combined SNP signature in this pathway may serve as a marker for PTB risk and/or a new set of therapeutic targets that may be effectively modulated to prevent PTB. We hypothesized that the antimicrobial capacity of cervical mucus may be related to DEFB4 CN, and that this may be altered in women who deliver preterm. METHODS: Cervical mucus was collected antenatally from white European women at increased risk of sPTB who attended a specialist PTB clinic and snap frozen (n=210). Upon thaw, samples were eluted in 10mM HEPES buffer and aliquots prepared for DNA extraction, protein quantification (total protein, Bradford assay; HBD2, ELISA) and standard antimicrobial assays using E coli. DEFB4 CN was determined by paralogue ratio test. All assays were performed blind to pregnancy outcome. RESULTS: DEFB4 CN correlates with cervical HBD2 expression in women at increased risk of sPTB who deliver at term (r=0.2206, p=0.0093), but not in women who spontaneously deliver preterm. Cervical mucus antimicrobial activity correlates with HBD2 expression in all women (term: r=0.6155, p<0.0001; preterm:, r=0.6015, p<0.0001). DEFB4 CN correlates with cervical mucus antimicrobial activity in women who deliver at term (r=0.1964, p=0.0200), but not those who deliver preterm. CONCLUSIONS: DEFB4 CN correlates with (1) cervical mucus HBD2 expression and (2) antimicrobial activity in normal pregnancy. This demonstrates a novel dose-dependent relationship between DEFB4 CN and mucosal antimicrobial activity. HBD2-related killing activity is similar in women who deliver preterm and at term. The Figure( s) will be available online. As gestation progresses, the number of differentially expressed genes between consecutive time-points decreases. Based upon the induction of Ptgs1 at E12.5 in our dataset, which is a crucial marker for timing of labor in mice, differential gene expression preceding 12.5 was studied in detail for the identification of upstream transcription factors. Ingenuity pathway analysis identifies Tbx2, Myc, Mycn as the top active upstream transcription factors based on the directional gene expression of their downstream targets in transition from E10.5 to E12.5. Additionally, RNAseq on human myometrium comparing the quiescent and contractile state substantiates the putative role of TBX2 as an upstream regulator for partition initiation. CONCLUSIONS: This dataset defines unique gestational age-specific gene expression profiles valuable for exploratory identification of triggers for the initiation of labor in mice. Furthermore, Tbx2 is a candidate transcriptional regulator of gene expression in the transition from myometrial quiescence to synchronized contractions from mid gestation to late gestation. is one of the strongest uterotonic agents known to stimulate uterine contractions and plays a key role in the initiation and regulation of both term and preterm labour (PTL). We have recently demonstrated an additional pro-inflammatory role of OT in human gestational tissues, thus suggesting that tocolytics that target OT/ OTR system to inhibit premature uterine contractions should ideally inhibit both uterine contractions and inflammatory activation. Oxytocin receptor (OTR) antagonists such as Atosiban have been used therapeutically for the treatment of PTL. We have previously shown that Atosiban not only fails to inhibit the pro-inflammatory effects of OT in human amnion, but Atosiban alone activates NF-κB and MAPKs as well as upregulating downstream pro-labour gene expression, such as COX-2, p-cPLA 2 , IL-6 and CCL5. In this study we treated prelabour amniocytes and myocytes with OT (10nM) and increasing doses of the orally active OTR antagonist, OBE001, in order to investigate its effect on the OT-driven activation of inflammatory response in human gestational tissues. RESULTS: In contrast to our findings with Atosiban, presence of OBE001 led to significant inhibition of OT-induced NF-κB and p38 kinase activation at the lowest dose of 1µM in both myometrial and amnion cells. This led to subsequent decreases in OT-induced expression of COX-2 and p-cPLA 2 , which was reflected in PGE 2 synthesis. Successful inhibition of NF-κB activation by OBE001 also translated to suppression of OT-induced NF-κB-regulated pro-labour gene expression including COX-2, IL-6, IL-8 and CCL2. Moderate reduction of OT-induced p-ERK activation was observed in both gestational tissues but it did not reach significance. Unlike Atosiban, OBE001 alone had no significant effect on the activation of NF-κB and p38 kinase, or downstream pro-labour gene expression. In conclusion, these data suggest that OBE001 is a promising candidate tocolytic, which ensures effective inhibition of myometrial contractility and suppresses the OT-driven pro-inflammatory effects. This raises the possibility that such an agent could be used not only in the acute clinical situation but for prophylactic or maintenance therapy. After rinsing the wells with media (without serum) x1, the cells were cultured in fresh media (without serum) with and without staurospirone (0.1 -1.0 uM) to induce apoptosis. Time zero aliquots of media were collected immediately; and then additional media was collected after 24 hours. After centrifugation at 8,000 x g to remove cells and debris, cell free DNA was extracted from the media using a DNA extraction kit (Roche). Subsequently the DNA was cleaned and concentrated (Zymo Research) and measured using NanoDrop (Thermo Sci), and visualized using a 1.5% agarose gel stained with GelRed. Cell viability was visually assessed by two blinded observes after Trypan blue staining. : Cell free DNA released by the cultured BeWo trophoblast cells increased 6 fold after incubation in serum-free media for 24 hours (cell free DNA at time zero = 6.5 vs. 24 hour value = 36.1 ng/uL, p < 0.05). Cells incubated with staurosporin demonstrated increased apoptosis with the trypan blue index increasing from 1.8 to 2.8 (about 50% positive cells in 1 uM staurosporine); interestingly the cell free DNA levels were similar to those in the untreated cells at 24 hours. The DNA gel confirmed a blush of fragmented DNA from < 500 bp to 10 kb. CONCLUSIONS: These studies have confirmed cell-free DNA release by human trophoblast cells in culture; thereby providing support for the premise that cffDNA in maternal plasma is derived from trophoblast cells in vivo. Future studies utilizing placental explants are anticipated to provide futher support for this premise. (  Honghai Zhang, Thomas J Lechuga, Dong-bao Chen. University of California Irvine, Irvineq, CA, USA. The uterine vasculature of a pregnant woman must make numerous changes adaptive to pregnancy for the substantially increased uterine blood flow to support fetal growth and survival, including increased vascular activity and reactivity to a number of agonists, such as estrogens and growth factors (FGF2 and VEGF). Animal studies have implicated that activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK1/2) and protein kinase B/AKT is important for uterine artery remodeling during pregnancy. However, suitable human uterine artery (UA) cell models are still lacking, impeding the understanding of the molecular mechanisms. The objective of this study is to develop a primary human uterine artery smooth muscle cell (hUASMC) model to investigate agonist-stimulated ERK1/2 and AKT activation adaptive to pregnancy. METHODS: Primary UAs were collected from hysterectomies of late pregnant (LP) and nonpregnant (NP) women. After endothelium removal by collagenase digestion, mechanically isolated smooth muscle were minced and digested with 0.1% collagenase. The hUASMC were collected and cultured in DMEM-10%FCS-1% antibiotics. The cells were characterized by the expression of endothelial vs. smooth muscle cell marker proteins. The LP and NP hUASMC were treated with 10 nM estradiol-17β (E2), 10ng/ml FGF2 or VEGF, or vehicle for 5 min. Cellular proteins were harvested for analyzing activation of ERK1/2 and AKT by immunoblotting with antibodies against phosphor-ERK1/2 and phosphor-AKT. RESULTS: hUASMC was positive of SM-α-actin (>99%), but negative of endothelial cell markers, and displayed typical spindle-like shape in culture. LP and NP hUASMC expressed comparable estrogen receptors (ERalpha and ERbeta) up to 5 passages in culture. Treatment with E2, FGF2 and VEGF stimulated ERK1/2 and Akt activation in both LP and NP UASMC; however, the responses of each agonist were significantly greater in LP vs. NP cells. A novel in vitro hUASMC model has been developed, suitable for investigating the cellular and molecular mechanisms for augmented uterine artery adaptations to pregnancy (supported by NIH HL70562 & HL98746). Neutrophil Extracellular Traps in the Amniotic Cavity of Women with Intra-Amniotic Infection. Nardhy Gomez-Lopez, 1,2,3 Roberto Romero, 1 Yi Xu, 1,2 Derek Miller, 1,2,3 Piya Chaemsaithong, 1,2 Ahmed Ahmed, 1,2 Ali Al-Housseini, 1,2 Hunter Gomez-Roberts, 1,2 Sonia S Hassan. Recently, considerable attention has been given to neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). These traps control microbial infections through their anti-microbial activities attributed to granules, histones, and some cytoplasmic proteins (e.g. elastase). Since intraamniotic infection (IAI) is characterized by the influx of neutrophils, the aim of this study was to determine whether NETs were present in the amniotic fluid of women with IAI. METHODS: Neutrophils from amniotic fluid of women with IAI (n=8) were purified using cell filters and differential centrifugation. As controls, neutrophils from maternal blood samples of healthy individuals (n=4) were isolated by density gradients. Isolated neutrophils were: (1) plated onto glass cover slips for culture with and without 100nM phorbol myristate acetate (PMA), followed by neutrophil elastase, histone 3 and nuclei staining; (2) plated on glass cover slips and fixed for scanning electron microscopy; and (3) stained for bacteria detection using fluorescence dyes. Images were acquired using fluorescence, confocal or scanning electron microscopy. Neutrophil cytokine production was also determined by flow cytometry in amniotic fluid samples. : 1) NETs were present in the amniotic fluid of women with IAI, and this was visualized by scanning electron and confocal microscopy *Figure(s) will be available online. ; 2) in contrast to neutrophils in maternal circulation, neutrophils in the amniotic fluid did not require PMA stimulation to form extracellular traps; and 3) amniotic fluid of women with IAI had neutrophils expressing IL-8 and IL-1β. CONCLUSIONS: NETs are detectable in the amniotic cavity of women with intra-amniotic infection.  A core set of genes changing across all murine models of labor was identified and included known and novel putative regulators of labor. While the trajectories of uterine transcriptome changes in the term and RU486 models were similar, LPS-induced PTL involved upregulation of a unique set of proinflammatory genes whose expression was not altered in term labor or RU486 induced PTL. We identified 357 human-mouse orthologs differentially expressed in human myometrium collected prior to and following spontaneous term labor (Chan Y.W. et al. 2014 ) and in the murine models datasets. Orthogonal partial least squares modeling of human transcriptome data against the murine datasets showed positive correlations between gene changes associated with both progesterone withdrawal (r=0.74, p=0.01) and inflammation (r=0.92, p=0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: While the acquisition of a laboring phenotype in the mouse can be achieved through activation of inflammatory genes these changes are not a requisite of labor itself. However, human labor exhibits myometrial gene changes associated with both progesterone withdrawal and inflammatory activation. (VECs) has been shown to involve NF-κB activation, the role of AP-1 in mediating NLR-driven inflammation in these cells has yet to be elucidated. METHODS: VECs derived from the VK E6/E7 cell line (ATCC © ) were grown to confluence as monolayers in keratinocyte-serum free medium (K-SFM) containing 5ng/ml recombinant epidermal growth factor and 50ug/ml bovine pituitary extract. Morphology and cell viability was confirmed through visual assessment at 100x magnification. Cells were serum starved with DMEM medium with 1% fetal calf serum for 12 h prior to stimulation with the NOD1 ligand, Ƴ-D-Glu-mDAP (iE-DAP) and the NOD2 ligand, Muramyl dipeptide (MDP) at concentrations of 1, 10 and 100 µg/ml. Cells were treated for 30min, 2h and 24h. Western blotting of protein extracts was performed using antibodies raised against the phosphorylated NF-κB and AP-1 subunits p-65 and c-Jun. RESULTS: Treatment of VECs with the NOD1 ligand (iE-DAP) and NOD2 ligand (MDP) resulted in a rapid, transient increase in phosphorylation of p-65 which peaked at 30min post treatment before decreasing at 2h and returning to basal levels at 24h. In contrast, NOD1 and NOD2 stimulation lead to a rapid increase (30 min) in phosphorylated c-Jun that persisted 24h post-treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicates that AP-1 is a critical modulator of NLR-induced inflammatory signalling in VECs. Transient NF-κB activation by NLR stimulation may indicate its involvement in early response inflammatory signalling. In contrast, persistent activation of AP-1 identifies its potential as a novel strategic target for the modulation of inflammatory pathways at the frontier of the innate immune system associated with infection/inflammatory associated preterm birth. CONCLUSIONS: 1) One-third to one half of all early sPTB have subclinical intra-amniotic inflammation; 2) The absence of inflammation has a higher specificity (94% to 86%); 3) Intra-amniotic inflammation precedes early sPTB; 4) It is unknown if intra-amniotic inflammation is due to infection or other causes; 5) The clinical significance of silent intraamniotic inflammation associated with delivery at term is not know. , CST II (L.gasseri) or CST IV (low levels of Lactobacillus spp. and high levels of BV-associated species) prevalence were identified between women with and without yeast infection. CONCLUSIONS: Yeast infection in pregnancy is not associated with major alteration of vaginal bacterial community structure. However, L.jensenii appears to be negatively associated with yeast infection in pregnancy indicating a possible protective role. Consistent with this notion, a strain of L.jensenii has been previously shown to produce a bacteriocin-like compound against C. albicans. Further studies will be required to elucidate if modulation of the vaginal microbiome to promote a bacterial community protective against yeast and microbial infections would improve neonatal outcomes.  Protein and RNA were extracted from the spontaneous and elective term placentas for proteomic and quantitative PCR (qPCR) analyses, respectively. For proteomics, two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis with fluorescence dyes and MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry were used. The significant associations with spontaneous births were determined using Student's t-test or Mann-Whitney U test, as appropriate. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in the vicinity of the genes regulated in spontaneous term delivery were assessed for association with gestation age (GA) in 342 infants at term. Two CPPED1 SNPs (rs11643593 and rs8048866) were analyzed for association with mRNA levels. RESULTS: From the proteomic analyses, we discovered that the quantity of nine proteins associated with spontaneous term birth. The quantitative changes were significant either in the basal-or the chorionic plates or in both. The identified proteins have known roles in immunity, blood coagulation, protease inhibition and regulation of cell cycle. For three genes selected the expression levels were analyzed using qRT-PCR. The mRNA levels of A2M (p = 0.014), B2M (p= 0.033) and CPPED1 (p = 0.00011) differed between spontaneous and elective term births. Furthermore, CPPED1 polymorphism (rs11643593, rs882908 and rs8048866) associated with the duration of term pregnancy (p < 0.0008). The quantitative and genetic analyses show that CPPED1 has a robust association with spontaneous term deliveries. CPPED1 is a phosphatase dephosphorylating AKT family kinase that has been shown to block the cell cycle, promote apoptosis and to influence the glucose uptake. Functions regulated by CPPED1 at chorio-decidual interphase may be critical in labor induction. This is the first randomized controlled study that evaluates also pregnancy outcomes and preterm delivery incidence in the two goups (lactobacilli vs placebo). METHODS: Randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled study to assess the efficacy of topical treatment of lactobacilli vaginal tablets for 10 days in addition to a standard antibiotic therapy (Clindamicin 600 mg daily for 5 days) in a population of pregnant women affected by BV. We enrolled in the study 95 BV carriers, identified between 12th and 32nd wks g.a, selected among a population of women at risk of PTB attending our PTB prevention clinic between 2009 and 2011. Patients were randomised in two arms: A-50 patients and B-45 patients. Only at the end of the trial was revealed that group A received placebo while group B received lactobacilli treatment. RESULTS: After 3-5 weeks from the end of the therapy a second vaginal swab showed a good lactobacilli colonization in 84,5% of cases (group B) compared to 62% in the placebo group and the difference is statistically significant (p=0,02). The second objective of our study was to verify if there was a reduction in PTB incidence with a good colonization. It's important to highlight that PTB incidence is increased by at least three times in absence of a good colonization, both in cases and in controls. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first randomized controlled study comparing a vaginal lactobacilli treatment to placebo and providing information on pregnancy outcomes as well. Lactobacilli administration significantly increases bacterial colonization over time, this representing a protecting factor aghainst prematurity. From our data we can conclude that the availability of a lactobacilli treatment, in addition to standard antibiotic therapy allows a good colonization, improving pregnancy outcomes and reducing preterm birth. An asymptomatic short cervix detected in midtrimester is a major risk factor for subsequent preterm birth (PTB), and progesterone supplementation by way of vaginal pessary has been shown to effectively reduce PTB rates in these high-risk pregnancies. The vaginal microbiome has previously been characterized in healthy pregnancy and shown to increase in Lactobacillus spp. dominance and stability, while vaginal dysbiosis is associated with adverse pregnancy outcome. This study aimed to investigate the impact of progesterone intervention on the vaginal microbiome in high-risk pregnancy with a short cervix. METHODS: Women with a prior PTB (<37weeks) attending cervical length (CL) screening before 18 weeks gestation were prospectively recruited. Serial high vaginal sampling (HVS) was performed at initial screening and longitudinally (22, 28 and 34 weeks follow up). Women with a CL of <25mm at initial screening before 18 weeks were prescribed vaginal progesterone 400mg/OD until 34 weeks. Characterization of the vaginal microbiome was performed using MiSeq sequencing of 16S rRNA gene amplicons (V1-V3). Ward hierarchical clustering analysis classified samples into community state types (CSTs). Microbial profiles were compared between short (<25mm) and non-short cervix groups, and the impact of progesterone supplementation on the microbiome was assessed. RESULTS: A total of 67 pregnant women with a prior PTB consented to recruitment and underwent CL screening. Of these 25 received progesterone for a CL <25mm before 18 weeks (mean CL = 21mm v 32mm control; n=42, P<0.01). PTB rates (<37weeks) were higher in women receiving progesterone (32%, 8/25 v Control: 5%, 2/42; P=0.004). Prior to progesterone intervention, a short cervix was associated with slightly higher prevalence of CST IV (deficient in Lactobacillus spp.) compared to controls (12% v 2%, P=0.14). Progesterone intervention was not associated with any significant modulation of vaginal bacterial communities during pregnancy. Similarly, no significant differences in vaginal microbiota were detected between women receiving progesterone who delivered at term versus preterm. CONCLUSIONS: Progesterone supplementation does not have any adverse impact upon the vaginal microbiome during pregnancy in those women at high risk of preterm birth with a short cervix. Our data indicates that the action of progesterone in the prevention of preterm birth is not via modulation of vaginal microbial communities.  The positive correlation of TNFa and IL6 with fetal MCAv, dependent on fetal sex, suggests maternal pro-inflammatory cytokines may be associated with increased fetal cerebral vasoconstriction and subsequent increased impedance to CBF. Coupled with increased RI, which is positively correlated to maternal BMI, this is counter to the concept of brain-sparing which suggests that inflammation-induced gestational hypoxia would lead to a decreased impedance to CBF. This finding indicates that increased MCAv and RI may be a gender-specific maladaptive fetal response to maternal inflammation compounded by maternal obesity. shown that DMA inhibits nuclear translocation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kB), and suppresses placental pro-inflammatory cytokines. The current study investigates how DMA produces its anti-inflammatory effect. METHODS: Using in vitro and ex vivo models, we tested whether DMA suppresses pro-inflammatory cytokines in LPS-induced RAW 264.7 cells and human placental explants from term Cesarean deliveries and TNFa-induced JEG-3 cells. We investigated if DMA's effect on cytokine expression involves inhibition of the NF-kB and MAPK pathways, using Western blotting. Finally, we co-transfected HEK 293 cells overexpressing TLR4 receptors with NF-kB-Luc, AP-1-Luc, and CEBP-Luc reporter plasmids with Renilla-Luc control plasmid to further distinguish the effect of DMA on these pathways. RESULTS: DMA suppressed pro-inflammatory cytokines in LPS-induced RAW 264.7 cells and human placental explants and TNFa-induced JEG-3 cells. Specifically, DMA abolished up-regulation of TNFa, IL-6, IL-10, and granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) seen in LPS-stimulated RAW 264.7 cells. Similarly, we found that DMA abrogated up-regulation of TNFa, IL-6, IL-10, GM-CSF, as well as IL-8 in LPS-stimulated human placental explants. In TNFa-stimulated JEG-3 cells, DMA attenuated IL-6. DMA inhibited IKBa degradation in RAW 264.7 cells, while there was no change found in the expression of phosphorylated and native forms of downstream proteins in the MAPK pathway p-38, ERK or JNK. Finally, DMA attenuated luciferase activity in cells co-transfected with the NF-kB-Luc and Renilla-luc plasmid, while no effect was observed in the AP-1-Luc and CEBP-Luc transfected cells. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our previous in vivo data and the new in-vitro and ex-vivo data presented here underscore the anti-inflammatory activity of DMA via its effect on the NF-kB pathway. INTRODUCTION: Exposure to prenatal inflammation is associated with poor neurobehavioral outcomes in offspring. A common route of exposure is intrauterine inflammation (IUI), which is often linked with preterm birth. Hippocampal development may be particularly vulnerable to an inflammatory insult as this region remains highly neurogenic in perinatal and postnatal life, a time when most neurogenesis is complete. These studies were performed to test the hypothesis that aberrant hippocampal development is a mechanism by which exposure to IUI may lead to adverse neurobehavioral outcomes. METHODS: CD-1 timed pregnant mice received intrauterine injections of Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) [50µg/100µL] or saline at embryonic day 15. Pups born at term were culled at postnatal day 3 (P3), injected with BrdU at P7 and P8, and transcardially perfused at either P14 (LPS n=10; saline n=8) or P28 (LPS n=6; saline n=6). One or two pups were analyzed per dam at each time-point. Brains were cryosectioned at 50µm and immunostained with antibodies against BrdU (proliferation), NeuN (neurons), GFAP (astrocytes), Iba1 (microglia), Prox1 (granule cells), and Cleaved Caspase-3 (apoptosis). RESULTS: IUI had no effect on hippocampal astrocyte or microglia density. However, pups exposed to IUI had significantly reduced neurogenesis at P7 (p=0.023) compared to controls. In addition, there were fewer granule cells in the dentate gyrus of LPS-exposed mice (6% reduction at P14, p=0.094; 19% reduction at P28, p=0.002) compared to controls. Exposure to IUI had no effect on apoptosis at P14 or P28. Ectopic migration of granule cells was observed in LPS-exposed mice at P14; however this phenotype was not present at P28. * Figure( It has been previously shown that there is an increased risk of cesarean section among multiparous women as interpregnancy interval increases. One possible explanation for the increased cesarean rate is that the progess of labor may vary with interbirth interval, such that with longer interbirth intervals, labor curves of multiparous women more closely resemble those of nulliparous women. We sought to define labor curves among a cohort of multiparous women who had successful vaginal deliveries after varying interbirth intervals. This was a retrospective cohort study of multiparous women aged 13-60, >37 weeks gestation, with known interval from last delivery, history of only vaginal deliveries, and successful vaginal delivery in the most recent pregnancy. Subjects were grouped according to interbirth interval: Group 0, 0-59 months; Group 1, 60-119 months, and Group 2, >120 months. Statistical analysis was performed using linear mixed effects model, in which dilation in centimeters was log-transformed and related to time in hours prior to attaining 10cm dilation. Group slopes and intercepts were compared using model t-tests for individual effects. RESULTS: Women in the three groups did not differ significantly in age, gestational age, or infant birthweight. Group 0 (n=100) Group 1 (n=111) Group 2 (n=39) .09 fold (p=0.043) lower in the NP murine cervix exposed to DHT. CONCLUSIONS: AR was greater but MMP3 was lower in the mouse term cervix compared with mid-gestation cervix and in the human cervix during labour compared with before labour. DHT inhibited murine MMP3 expression. Inhibition of MMP3 expression by androgen signalling maintains cervical resistance during pregnancy and could potentially be used to prevent premature cervical ripening. Biomechanical Computer Simulation of the Arabin Cervical Pessary. Fig 1A) is an emerging therapy for pregnancies complicated by cervical shortening. The mechanism of how it may prevent further cervical shortening remains unclear. We built an anatomically correct computer simulation of the gravid uterus and cervix to evaluate how the pessary influences mechanical stretch and stress in the cervix. We constructed a finite element (FE) computer model (Trelis 15) using a custom computer script ( Fig 1B) . Geometric parameters of cervical width, angle, uterine diameters, and myometrial thickness were measured from ultrasound (GE Voluson E8) of a 35 y/o normal P0 patient at 21 weeks. Cervical length was set to 25mm, and the pessary hole diameter was set to 32mm. Loading, material properties, and FE solving was done in FEBio 2.3.1. Models were constructed with and without a pessary. An intrauterine pressure of 1 kPa was applied inside the fetal membrane while the pessary was fixed. RESULTS: Application of a cervical pessary in the computer simulation results in the reduction of the high stretch zone (>10%) near the internal os ( Fig 1C) . This effect is coupled with increased stresses (1D) and accompanying stretch (1C) on the exterior of the cervix and lower uterine segment where there is contact with the pessary. * Figure( s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: We show that the pessary can reduce cervical stretch near the internal os, which is the first area to fail in premature cervical shortening. The biological response of the cervix to increased stresses near pessary contact, however, has not been determined. Our findings demonstrate the use of this model to investigate current and potential therapies. Future work will consider pessary size and position, which affect cervical stretch mediation and loading. (MOD Prematurity Research at PENN) The Role of PGRMC1 in Cytokine Induced MMP1, COX-2 and PGE 2 Expression in Amnion Mesenchymal Cells. T Allen, 1 M Nazzal, 1,2 L Feng, 2 I Buhimschi, 3 A Murtha. Epidural analgesia with levobupivacaine hydrochloride is a common and effective method of labor pain relief. The object of this study was to determine the effect of levobupivacaine hydrochloride on the contractility of isolated human term myometrium in vitro. Myometrial specimens were excised from 4 pregnant women undergoing elective cesarean section at term. Longitudinal muscle strips (2×2×10 mm) were prepared and mounted vertically in tissue baths to measure contractility. The tissue baths were aerated with a gas mixture of 95% oxygen and 5% CO2. The pH was kept at 7.4 and the temperature was maintained at 37 °C. A resting tension of 2g was initially applied. After establishment of rhythmic contractions in 10 ml Kreb's solution, levobupivacaine hydrochloride (1.5 ug/ ml and 15 ug/ml) was added to the baths. Changes in the amplitude (peak force) of contractions and area under contractions curves (AUC) were recorded for 20 minutes and changes in amplitude and AUC calculated as % change from recordings made prior to addition of levobupivacaine. RESULTS: It took 1-2 hours for uterine strips to achieve spontaneous phasic contractions. Levobupivacaine hydrochloride at concentration of 1.5 ug/ml had no effect (P>0.05) on the contractions of isolated human term myometrium, while levobupivacaine hydrochloride at concentration of 15 ug/ml significantly reduced (P<0.05) the amplitude (peak force) of contractions (11.09±0.93% decrease) and AUC (8.55±2.09 % decrease) compared with the control value. CONCLUSIONS: 1. Levobupivacaine hydrochloride dose-dependently suppresses myometrial contractions immediately after treatment in vitro but the concentration required for the inhibition is much higher (15 fold) than the clinically relevant plasma concentration after low-dose epidural administration. 2. The inhibitory action of high concentration levobupivacaine hydrochloride on uterine contractility is unlikely to be significant in the setting of low-dose epidural analgesia in labor. In the pregnant uterus CASP3 activation is accompanied by increased non-apoptotic signaling, allowing the uterine myocyte to avoid CASP3 mediated apoptotic cell death. In other systems it has been demonstrated that preconditioning cells with small insults of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress prior to a major insult acts paradoxically to enhance cell viability through an up-regulation of anti-apoptotic signaling. Therefore we speculate that pregnancy associated preconditioning events, such as implantation, hypertrophy and hypoxia may allow the pregnant myometrium to harness the tocolytic potential of CASP2 while avoiding apoptosis. METHODS: Immortalized human myometrial cells (hTERT-HM) were exposed to a major ER stress induced insult, tunicamycin (TM) (5µg/ ml, 24hr), in the absence or presence of ER stress preconditioning (TM, 0.1µg/ml, 24hr). Cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins were extracted, the ERSR, CASP3 activation, PARP cleavage and anti-apoptotic signaling associated markers were analyzed utilizing western blotting and Proteome profiler antibody arrays. TUNEL and cell viability assays were performed to examine apoptotic indices. RESULTS: Preconditioned and non-preconditioned hTERT-HM cells both exhibited a significant increase in CASP3 activation in comparison to controls. Markers of apoptosis, PARP cleavage and TUNEL staining, were elevated in the non-preconditioned cells while similar between the preconditioned and control cells. The anti-apoptotic markers Mcl-1, XIAP, and TNRF1 were significantly upregulated in preconditioned cells. Conclusively, cell viability assays exhibited increased cell survival in preconditioned cells versus non-preconditioned treated cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrates that preconditioning-induced anti-apoptotic signaling capacitates the human uterine myocyte to avoid CASP3 mediated apoptotic cell death. We speculate that pregnant uteri that fail to precondition appropriately or experience an exaggerated insult in the absence of proper preconditioning, may be at increased risk for premature uterine contractions and pregnancy loss. Bipedalism in humans has required regionalization of myometrial function with a contracted lower uterine segment (LUS) and a relaxed fundus (FUN) during pregnancy to prevent fetal pressure on the cervix and reversal of this phenotype during labour. Using RNAsequencing technology, we have identified that the HoxA13 gene is highly expressed in LUS prior to term labour and plays a key role in contributing to the regionalization of myometrium phenotype. However, the mechanism by which HoxA13 controls myometrium contractility remains unclear. METHODS: Human myometrial cell line (hTERT) and monocyte cell line (THP-1) were used in this study. Gene microarray analyses, real-time PCR, immunoblotting, cell migration and invasion assays were performed to characterize the signaling that controls the expression of contraction associated proteins (CAPs) in myometrial cells. RESULTS: Gene microarray analyses revealed that HoxA13 transcriptome in myometrial cells contains immune response genes including IL-1b, IL-6 and IL-8 as well as two CAPs (Cox2 and Connexin43). We showed that IL-1b was responsible for the upregulation of IL-6, IL-8, Cox-2 and Cx43 expression by HoxA13 and that blocking IL-1b with its inhibitor abolished these HoxA13 actions. HoxA13-induced IL-1b can stimulate recruitment of monocytes to myometrial cells, which in turn amplified secretion of IL-1b, IL-6 and IL-8 through a mutual feed-forward loop between theses cell types. As a result, Cox-2 expression was dramatically boosted in myometrial cells. CONCLUSIONS: HoxA13 enhances myometrial cell contractility through stimulating myometrial cells to secrete IL-1beta, resulting in increased CAP expression. HoxA13-induced IL-1beta also prompts monocyte recruitment to myometrial cells and further amplifies CAP expression. A Human myometrial research to understand parturition is obstructed by not knowing when labor starts or ends for each woman sampled at C-section. This lack of time references prevents the identification of causal pathways of labor. We propose a novel method to plot the progress of the myometrium across the transition from quiescence to labor that generates a surrogate for time. We hypothesize that each myometrium sampled at C-section gives a snapshot of the molecular flux within the labor trajectory that can be used to rank women on the pathway to birth. METHODS: QRTPCR measured the mRNA levels of 30 genes found to be differentially expressed in term laboring (n=30) and non-laboring (n=30) myometrial samples. Mothers were first ranked by each mRNA level. Her 30 individual ranks were averaged to give an overall rank. This order is used to infer labor progression from the earliest to the latest and to estimate the inflexion point of each mRNA using the cusum method by plotting the mothers' ranked order (x-axis) against the mRNA level (y-axis). The mRNAs, in the order set by the inflexion points, were connected by radar plots for each woman [Fig1] that were assembled by maternal ranks in a 3-D plot [Fig2] . *Figure(s) will be available online. The maternal ranks for inferring labor progression were used to determine the inflexion point of each mRNA. We propose that the inflexion order indicates the sequence of mRNA contribution to labor. RELA rose first before enzymes and receptors for PGs and P4. Fig2 shows a band of non-laboring women flaring into a mix of laboring and non-laboring, and only laboring women. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: These data are consistent with an inflammatory aetiology for labor, with NFkB and TPI1 fuelling the transformation. This approach can help to identify causal pathways that can be tested in vitro and guide the interventions to target early events of labor. We have previously shown that human labor is associated with increased myometrial expression of hsa-miR-146b-3p and reduced expression of hsa-miR-146a-5p. Considering their recognised role as immune/inflammatory mediators, we aimed to establish the functional roles of these microRNAs within human myocytes. METHODS: Primary cultured myocytes were treated with IL1β and TNFα to assess the effect on hsa-miR-146b-3p and hsa-miR-146a-5p expression. Electroporation transfection was used to knockdown and overexpress the p65 subunit of nuclear factor kappa-B (NFκB) to ascertain the impact on IL1β mediated specific microRNA expression. Hsa-miR-146b-3p and hsa-miR-146a-5p expression within myocytes was also manipulated with specific microRNA inhibitors and mimics and the resultant downstream expression of p65 and NFκB regulated genes was assessed (n=7, all experiments). Myocytes treated with IL1β demonstrated increased expression of hsa-miR-146b-3p, but hsa-miR-146a-5p levels were unaltered. Treatment with TNFα did not affect expression of either microRNA. Expression of hsa-miR-146b-3p in response to IL1β was suppressed in cells with p65 targeted knockdown, whilst expression was potentiated in cells with p65 overexpression. Translation of p-p65 and COX2 proteins was increased in cells transfected with hsa-miR-146b-3p mimics, however this effect was not observed with respect to hsa-miR-146a-5p. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest hsa-miR-146b-3p is regulated by NFκB in human myocytes and that this microRNA, in turn, regulates NFκB dependent genes. Hsa-miR-146b-3p has recently been implicated in regulating mRNA levels of TRAF6 and IRAKI, key modulatory proteins of NFκB activation. Understanding the biological pathways underlying human parturition is key to the development of novel therapeutics to better prevent preterm, or induce post-mature, labor. Obese parturients are at significant risk of prolonged and dysfunctional labour and emergency caesarean delivery. As the mechanism is currently unknown a translational animal model of maternal obesity is warranted. Our group recently identified that dietary HFHC induced-adiposity leads to dysfunctional uterine contractions ex-vivo and decreased uterine contractile-associated protein expression during labour in the rat. The aim of this study was to determine the effects of HFHC induced adiposity on uterine contractile activity in vivo and the effects it has on timing and length of labour. METHODS: 12 female Wistar rats were fed either a control chow (CON n=6) or HFHC (n=6) diet ad libitum for 6 weeks. Animals were then mated, and maintained on their respective diet throughout pregnancy and labour. On day 9 of gestation a pressure sensitive telemetry probe was surgically inserted between the 3rd and 4th pup in the uterine horn of highest gravidity using aseptic techniques. Following 5 days recovery, intrauterine pressure (IUP) and contraction frequency (FC) were recorded continuously until established labour (birth of the 5 th pup). Statistical analysis was by ANOVA (mixed between-within subject analysis) at the P<0.05 significance level. RESULTS: HFHC fed rats exhibited earlier and significant increases in IUP and CF compared to CON rats (P= 0.026 and P=0.013 respectively); illustrated in Figures 1A & 1B. The duration of increased contractile activity at term was approximately 12 hours longer in HFHC compared to CON rats, indicating prolonged labour with adiposity. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: These in vivo findings provide evidence to suggest we have a good translational model of maternal obesity that can help elucidate the mechanism(s) governing prolonged and dysfunctional labour and possible diet and or drug therapy to improve contractile activity in obese women. In TNF-α is decreased in vCTB treated with melatonin in normoxia and H/R (50%) (P≤0.05). *Figure(s) will be available online. IL-10 is increased of 3-fold (P≤0.01) in vCTB treated with melatonin compared with siAANAT in normoxia and IL-6 is increased 3-fold (P≤0.01). CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that melatonin protects trophoblast by the modulation of inflammation pathway, which is highly implicated in preeclampsia and fetal development. With the current clinical-trials to treat preeclampsia with melatonin, deeper comprehension of its effect on trophoblasts is required. Placental Glucose Transporter (GLUT)-1 Is Down-Regulated in Preeclampsia. INTRODUCTION: Transplacental fetal glucose supply is predominantly regulated by glucose transporter-1 (GLUT1). Altered expression and/or function of GLUT1 may affect the intrauterine environment, which could compromise fetal development and potentially lead to fetal programming with its long-term consequences. Until now it is unknown if placental GLUT1 is affected by pre-eclampsia (PE). We therefore aimed to address the hypothesis that PE leads to altered expression and function of placental GLUT1. METHODS: Placentae were obtained after elective caesarean sections following normal pregnancy and from pregnancies affected by preeclampsia. Syncytial basal membrane (BM) and apical microvillus membrane (MVM) fractions were prepared from syncytiotrophoblast. GLUT1 protein expression was assessed by Western blot analysis and mRNA levels were quantified by qPCR. Radio-labeled glucose up-take assay using placental-derived syncytial microvesicles was established to analyze GLUT1 function. RESULTS: GLUT1 protein expression was significantly down-regulated in PE placentae compared to controls, while the mRNA expression was unchanged. The functional assay in syncytial microvesicles showed a significantly decreased glucose transport activity in pre-eclampsia compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows for the first time that in pre-eclampsia, placental GLUT1 is down-regulated on protein level and that placental GLUT1-mediated glucose transport activity is decreased. Further, these data show that in pre-eclampsia GLUT1-mediated transplacental glucose transport is regulated on the apical side of the syncytiotrophoblast. This altered expression pattern may have an impact on maternofetal glucose supply, which in turn may affect long-term outcome of both the mother and her child. Our aim was to determine if inter-pregnancy interval (IPI) contributes to birth weight in pregnancies subsequent to a pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia. We performed a retrospective chart review of 178 women with an index singleton primiparous pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia and a subsequent second singleton pregnancy at our institution between February 2004 and December 2014. Demographic and clinical data were collected including maternal age, BMI, gestational age at delivery, birth weight, infant sex, tobacco use and the presence of hypertensive disorders. A stepwise regression analysis was performed to evaluate the independent contribution of these variables and IPI on the change in birth weight between pregnancies. Birth weight was characterized by z-score and statistical significance was accepted at p< .10 for stepwise regression inclusion. RESULTS: Birth weight corrected for gestational age was significantly larger in second pregnancies compared with first pregnancies. (1 st pregnancy z-score -.49 , 2 nd pregnancy z-score .04, p<.001). The mean IPI (months) was 33+14 (mean + s.d.). Stepwise regression identified first pregnancy z-score, (r 2 = .19; P<.0001), change in smoking status (r 2 = .03; P=.006), IPI (r 2 = .02; P=.068) and change in maternal BMI (r 2 =.02; P=.069) as contributors to z-score in second pregnancies (cumulative model R 2 of 0.25). The strongest predictive factors affecting birth weight z-score in second pregnancies in this population of women with previous preeclampsia were prior birth weight z-score and change in tobacco usage. Our data showed that there were strong trends towards higher birth weight z-scores in association with shorter IPI and greater increase in prepregnancy BMI between pregnancies. These findings support the argument that there are time limited beneficial influences of prior pregnancy on fetal growth even after preeclamptic pregnancies. Mitochondrial- Targeted .The expression profile of markers of inflammation and endothelial dysfunction were determined by realtime PCR. RESULTS: This research showed for the first time that the magnitude of plasma-induced mitochondrial-specific superoxide production was significantly increased in endothelial cells incubated with plasma from women with pre-eclampsia(191.82%±25%, n=10, P< 0.05) compared with matched controls(127.65%±24%, n=10). Pre-eclampsia plasma mediators significantly increased TNF-α gene expression (2.67±0.26 fold, n=8, P<0.01)and ICAM-1 gene expression (1.76±0.17 fold, n=8, P<0.01) in HUVECs respectively, compared to uncomplicated pregnancy. Pre-treatment with MitoTempo significantly reduced mROS generation compared to untreated cells (61.23%±15.42% vs 100%±0%, n=9, P<0.01) and with a greater proficiency than non-targeted antioxidant (NAC) treatment. MitoTempo administration also reduced the expression of inflammatory markers in treated cells. CONCLUSIONS: Mitochondrial superoxide regulates plasma mediatorinduced endothelial dysfunction in pre-eclampsia. Mitochondrial-targeted antioxidants modulate the aberrant regulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species and consequently ameliorate the pathogenic vascular dysfunction in pre-eclampsia. Maternal Corin and NT-Pro-ANP Levels Are Increased in Women with Preeclampsia. Yuping Wang, Yang Gu, Xiuyue Jia, Jie Xu, Donna Thompson, Danielle Cooper, Lynn J Groome. LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Corin is a serine protease that converts pro-atrial natriuretic peptide (pro-ANP) to ANP, a cardiac hormone that regulates salt-water balance and reduces blood pressure. Increased maternal corin levels were found in women with preeclampsia (PE). However, whether altered corin levels associated with altered ANP receptor expression occur in PE is not known. In this study, we determined maternal plasma corin and pro-ANP levels in normal and PE pregnancies. ANP receptor expression in maternal vessels was evaluated in normotensive and PE pregnant women. METHODS: Maternal plasma concentrations of corin and pro-ANP were measured by ELISA in 197 pregnant women (84 normotensive, 16 pregnancy complicated with chronic hypertension (CHT), 11 mild PE and 86 severe PE). Maternal vessel expression of ANP receptors NPRA and NPRC was examined by immunostaining of paraffin embedded subcutaneous fat tissue sections. Data are analyzed by ANOVA or unpaired t-test and a p level <0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: Maternal plasma corin concentrations were significantly higher in mild PE (2.78±0.67ng/ml) and severe PE (2.53±0.18ng/ml) than in normotensive (1.58±0.08ng/ml) and CHT (1.55±0.20ng/ml) pregnant groups, p<0.001. Corin levels were not different between normotensive and CHT groups. Maternal pro-ANP concentrations were significantly increased in CHT (1.59±0.53ng/ml) and severe PE (1.42±0.24ng/ml) than in normotensive (0.48±0.06ng/ml) and mild PE (0.52±0.09ng/ml) groups, p<0.01. NPRA expression was not different in maternal vessels between normal and PE, but NPRC expression was markedly increased in maternal vessel endothelium in PE compared to that from normal pregnant controls. CONCLUSIONS: NPRC is a clearance receptor for ANP. Increased maternal corin and pro-ANP levels together with up-regulation of NPRC expression in maternal vessel endothelium in severe PE indicate that aberrant ANP pathway signaling might result in increased maternal corin and pro-ANP levels and contribute to vascular dysfunction in PE. The differences in maternal pro-ANP and corin levels between CHT and PE may represent different regulatory mechanism related to the pathophysiology in CHT and PE. The ability to identify women at increased risk of developing preeclampsia may lead to the reduction of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality through the administration of early interventions. The objective of this study is to determine if women that develop preeclampsia during the second half of pregnancy demonstrate distinct first-trimester serum lipid profiles as compared to controls. The identification of unique lipid profiles may reveal novel biomarkers with the potential to predict the development of this pregnancy disorder. This is a nested-case control study within a prospective cohort of pregnant women that were monitored from the first trimester to delivery. Women that developed preeclampsia at any gestational age were compared to unaffected controls. Serum samples from patients in the control and preeclamptic groups were matched within 3 days of gestational age. Maternal serum samples obtained between 11-14 weeks of gestation were analyzed for ninety distinct lipid species. Sample analysis was performed using liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry. Logistic regression analysis was used to identify associations between lipid species and the development of preeclampsia. RESULTS: Serum of 41 patients with preeclampsia was compared with 41 controls. Data was adjusted for maternal BMI, pre-gestational diabetes and African American race. First trimester serum from women that developed preeclampsia demonstrated increased levels of arachidonic acid (p=0.033) and three distinct lysophosphatidylcholine species (LPC 16:0, p=0.005, LPC 18:0, p=0.002 and LPC 20:4, p=0.034). Furthermore, serum from women that developed early preeclampsia demonstrated decreased levels of lauric acid (p=0.029) and myristic acid (p=0.036) but increased amounts of arachidonic acid (p=0.005) and two species of lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC 14:1, p=0.024 and LPC 20:4, p=0.027). CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that first-trimester serum lipid profiles are distinct in women that develop preeclampsia in the second half of pregnancy and may be useful in screening for this disorder. The lipid species identified in this study may provide insight into the pathogenesis of preeclampsia and will be used in future prospective studies aimed at the early identification of women that develop this disorder. INTRODUCTION: Syndecan-1 (Sdc1) is a transmembrane proteoglycan and part of the endothelial glycocalyx. It aids in the regulation of inflammatory cytokines, angiogenesis and anticoagulation. A prior study reported increased serum Sdc1 during normal pregnancy, although a normal range has not been established. We hypothesized that serum Sdc1 increases in gestational weeks (wks) 11-13 due to the physiologic endothelial changes of pregnancy. METHODS: We analyzed dried blood samples from 300 randomly selected women (n=300 total, 100 each from gestational wks 11, 12, and 13) who delivered in the NSLIJ Health System. Blood spots were obtained from PerkinElmer/NTD. Eluted blood was assessed for Sdc1 levels by ELISA (R&D Systems). Subjects were segregated by gestational age in days (GA) and maternal weight in 20lb increments (wt) at the time the blood was obtained. GA-specific medians were determined by linear regression of median Sdc1 values vs. GA. Multiples of the median (MoMs)=Sdc1/respective GA-specific regressed median. To assess Sdc1 association with maternal wt, a log-log regression of median MoM vs. mean maternal wt values for each wt group was determined. Results were weighted based on the number of patients in each group. RESULTS: A progressive and significant increase in median circulating Sdc1 levels was observed from GA 77-97 days (p<0.001). *Figure(s) will be available online. A decrease in Sdc1 MoM was found with increasing maternal wt, and it was statistically significant (p=0.028). Based on the regression formulas, the expected median Sdc1 values rose from 63 to 119pg/ml between GA 77-97 days, while MoM values decreased from 1.22MoMs at 100lbs to 0.86MoMs at 200lbs (p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Serum syndecan-1 has a significant increase during wks 11-13 of pregnancy. Elucidating the range of serum syndecan-1 at the time of the first trimester screen will enable future studies to evaluate its association with adverse pregnancy outcomes. Khurshid, Dinesh Shah, Ian Bird, Derek Boeldt. Univ Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA. INTRODUCTION: Increases in circulating VEGF and TNF have been linked to preeclampsia-related endothelial dysfunction. While most studies seek to understand the effect of each of these factors on endothelial cell function individually and at single arbitrary doses, and this may be necessary to study associated cell signaling, it fails to recognize the complex interplay between multiple circulating factors activating their respective signaling cascades at the same time. In this study, we use ATP-stimulated sustained Ca2+ signaling to assay endothelial cell function following exposure to combinations of VEGF and TNF using a high-throughput plate reader platform. Based on data from VEGF and TNF treatments in isolation, we hypothesize that at physiologic doses VEGF will attempt to promote ATP-stimulated Ca2+ signaling, but TNF will counteract it to produce a neutral effect. At pathophysiologic doses, we hypothesize that the combination will be a potent inhibitor or sustained Ca2+. METHODS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were grown on 96 well plates to >90% confluence. HUVEC were loaded with Fura-2 AM dye (for Ca2+) and treated with VEGF-165 and TNFa at 0, 0. INTRODUCTION: An imbalance between pro-and anti-angiogenic factors has been associated with the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Progesterone regulates the production of pro-angiogenic factors, including VEGF. We seek to characterize the effects of progesterone and its major metabolites, 16α-hydroxyprogesterone (16α-OHP) and 6β-hydroxyprogesterone (6β-OHP), on angiogenesis. METHODS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were used to model angiogenesis in a matrigel tube formation assay. HUVECs were grown in full media to establish stable cultures. Cells were pretreated with 1uM progesterone, 16α-OHP, 6β-OHP, or left untreated (control) for 24 hours to induce genomic-level effects. Cells were then transferred to matrigel with charcoal-stripped media supplemented with 10nM estradiol and the respective progestin treatment. Tube formation was quantified at 6 and 24 hours by light microscopy and normalized to controls to assess degree of angiogenesis. Replicates of the matrigel tube formation assay were performed (n=9) to allow comparison between treatments using a two-tailed t-test. RESULTS: HUVEC cells in the control group demonstrated formation of 53 tubes at 6 hours and 27 tubes at 24 hours (mean values). Relative to the control group at 6 hours, progesterone treated cells demonstrated 163% tube formation, 16α-OHP treated cells demonstrated 431% tube formation, and 6β-OHP treated cells demonstrated 227% tube formation *Figure(s) will be available online. HUVEC tube formation declined by 24 hours to 77% (relative to control) in the progesterone group, 198% in the 16α-OHP, and 100% in the 6β-OHP group. At 6 hours, 16α-OHP treatment resulted in a significant increase in tube formation compared to progesterone treatment (p=0.0017), while 6β-OHP treatment was not significantly different (p=0.10). Matrigel tube formation remained significantly elevated at 24 hours in the 16α-OHP treatment group when compared to progesterone (p=0.0007). CONCLUSIONS: The major progesterone metabolites 16α-OHP and 6β-OHP have divergent effects on angiogenesis. Inter-individual variability in progesterone metabolism may affect the relative levels of metabolites and, hence, the propensity for angiogenesis. The Vascular Glycocalyx, a Protective Coating of the Endothelium, Is Structurally Impaired in Preeclamptic Pregnancies. The vasoprotective glycocalyx acts as a selective barrier between the blood and the endothelium. The breakdown of this hydrated matrix of glycoproteins, proteoglycans and plasma proteins contributes to endothelial dysfunction. Damage can be detected by greater penetration of red blood cells into the glycocalyx. We hypothesized that glycocalyx damage would be present in women with preeclampsia. METHODS: Women with preeclampsia (n=9) or a normotensive pregnancy (n=17) were examined prior to delivery. Red blood cells flowing through sublingual vessels were imaged using sidestream darkfield imaging. The width of the portion of the glycocalyx that was permeable to red blood cells (perfused boundary region) and the percentage of vessels that were filled with red blood cells were calculated by Glycocheck software. Repeated measures ANOVA was performed to examine the effects of preeclampsia after adjusting for vessel diameter. RESULTS: Glycocalyx health was worse in women with preeclampsia, when compared to normotensive pregnant women. The width of the perfused boundary region was greater in women with preeclampsia (2.48 vs. 2.29 microns, p=0.005), while the percentage of vessel segments that were filled with red blood cells was lower (55% vs. 60%, p=0.005). These effects were observed in vessels with a median red blood cell column width of 6 to 22 microns ( Figure 1 ). *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Damage to the vascular glycocalyx may play an important role in preeclampsia by contributing to endothelial activation, microvascular injury and reduced perfusion. Dennis K Lee, Ori Nevo. Sunnybrook HSC, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia (PE) is a severe complication of pregnancy. The underlying pathophysiology involves maternal systemic vascular and endothelial dysfunction associated with circulating antiangiogenic factors, though the specific etiology of the disease remains elusive. Our objectives were to investigate the maternal endothelium in preeclampsia by exploring the expression of genes involved with endothelial function in a novel platform of maternal primary endothelial cells and to investigate whether soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1) and tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) can mimic the preeclamptic phenotype. METHODS: Adipose tissue was sampled at the time of caesarean section from both normal and PE patients. Maternal microvascular endothelial cells (MVEC) were isolated by tissue digestion and CD31 magnetic Dynabeads. Cell purity was confirmed by immunofluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry for CD31 and von Willebrand factor detection. qPCR and Western analyses were used to determine relative gene and protein expression. RESULTS: Flow cytometry and immunofluorescence confirmed the isolated MVEC were homogeneous endothelial cell populations. Western analyses revealed vascular endothelial growth factor activation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2) and ERK in primary MVEC. qPCR and western analyses were performed for 30 targets and revealed significantly altered mRNA levels of various genes involved with angiogenesis and blood pressure control in PE MVEC (including sFlt1, endoglin, VEGFR2, placental growth factor, endocan, angiotensin AT1 receptor, apelin, endothelin and its receptors and prostacyclin synthase) as compared to MVEC from normal pregnancies. MVEC from normal pregnancies were treated with sFlt1 and TNFα to explore if they could mimic/create the PE phenotype. Treated MVEC exhibited altered gene expression compared to untreated cells, notably in sFlt1, prostacyclin synthase, AT1 receptor and endothelin. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we have successfully isolated endothelial cells from maternal tissue as a novel tool to investigate the pathophysiology of PE. MVEC from PE patients exhibit upregulation of vasoconstriction factors and downregulation of factors associated with vasodilatation, which likely contributes to hypertension and other manifestations of PE. Interestingly, the differences in gene expression persist in culture and may explain the long term endothelial dysfunction observed in patients with severe PE. Madhu Chauhan, Uma Yallampalli, Meena Balakrishnan, Chandra Yallampalli. Baylor College of Medicine/Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. TNFα is associated with pathological pregnancies such as preeclampsia with corresponding loss in endothelial function and abnormal vascular remodeling. An angiogenic peptide Adrenomedullin2 (ADM2) is shown to support rat feto-placental vasculature and promote trophoblast invasion in early human pregnancy; and lower levels of ADM2 are associated with 1 st trimester spontaneous abortion. In majority of the tissues ADM2 functions through GPCR calcitonin receptor like receptor (CRLR) in association with receptor activity modifying protein (RAMP1, 2 or3). CRLR and RAMP2 but not RAMP1 or 3 are abundantly expressed in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Current study was designed to assess the effect of TNFα on the expression of CRLR and RAMPs in HUVECs, effect of ADM2 on the anti-angiogenic effects of TNFα in HUVECs and identify if ADM2 interacts with the CRLR to exhibit its function in endothelial cells. METHODS: HUVECs were cultured in standard growth medium at 37 0 C incubator (5% CO 2 ). Cells were seeded in 6-well plates and treated with TNFα (0.1 -10 ng/ml) for 24hrs for mRNA isolation; in 96-well Matrigel coated plates for tube formation in presence of TNFα (1ng/ ml) with or without ADM2 (10 -7 M); or in 16-well lab-tek chambers and treated with ADM2 for 2 min for proximity ligation assay (PLA). Tube lengths were quantified under phase contrast microscope in 4 random 4x power fields per well with Image J software. PLA was used to identify the associations between ADM2 and CRLR, and CRLR and RAMP2 in HUVECs. Expression of mRNA was assessed by real time PCR. RESULTS: 1) TNFα decreases the expression of CRLR and RAMP2 in HUVECs (P<0.05), 2) TNFα inhibits the tube formation and ADM2 reverses this effect of TNF-α in HUVECs (P<0.05), 3) ADM2 interacts with CRLR in HUVEC cells, 4) Treatment with ADM2 (10 -7 M) increases cell surface association of ADM2 with CRLR and CRLR with RAMP2 in HUVECs. CONCLUSIONS: ADM2 supports endothelial cell functions via associating with its receptor components CRLR and RAMP2 and inhibiting the anti-angiogenic effect of TNFα in endothelial cells. Model. Megumi Ueno, Keiichi Matsubara, Yuko Matsubara, Yuka Uchikura, Takashi Sugiyama. Ehime University School of Medicine, Toon, Japan. INTRODUCTION: Implantation is known to be a critical period for human preeclampsia (PE) pathogenesis. We have already established a new breed of PE model mouse using CD40L gene-transfection at implantation. Soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) and soluble endoglin (sEng) are important humoral factors for the human PE pathogenesis. On the other hand, renin-angiotensin system is reportedly activated in PE. Angiotensin II receptor subtype 1 (AT1) is involved in the pathogenesis and the subtype 2 (AT2) can antagonize the effect of AT1. Then, we evaluated the effect of AT2 agonist (C21) on the humoral factors in PE model mouse. METHODS: Blastocysts collected from pregnant ICR mice were incubated with adenovirus including CD40L gene and transferred into the uterine horns of pseudopregnant ICR mice. An osmotic pump was placed subcutaneously on the dorsal side with C21 or saline. Blood pressure was measured using the tail cuff method and urine samples were collected using metabolism cage for measuring albumin concentration. On e17.5, uterus and placenta was retrieved from the mice and the weight was measured. Peripheral blood was collected by cardiopuncture. Plasma concentration of sFlt and sEng was measured using ELISA. RESULTS: In CD40L mice, blood pressure was significantly increased (125 ± 1 mmHg vs. 108 ± 4 mmHg) and the concentration of albuminuria was significantly increased (4135.01 ± 724.69 mg/g vs. 1251.39 ± 230.21 mg/g). The increase was improved by treatment with C21. The weight of neonates and placentas was increased by treatment with C21. Plasma concentration of sFlt and sEng was significantly increased in CD40L mice and decreased by treatment with C21. CONCLUSIONS: C21 had a favorable influence on the phenotype of PE model mouse suggesting, it is thought that AT1 and AT2 play a critical role on the pathogenesis of PE. Prospective Cross-Sectional Study of Placental Growth Factor (PIGF) in Women with Multiple Pregnancy. Deirdre Hayes-Ryan, Eve O'Mahony, Keelin O'Donoghue, Louise C Kenny. University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia (PET) complicates 3% of pregnancies and is associated with significant maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality (1). Placental Growth Factor (PlGF) has previously been reported to be highly sensitive diagnostic biomarker of PET in singleton pregnancies (2). Women with multiple pregnancy have a 2 to 3 fold increased risk for the development of PET (3). In multiple pregnancies there is a larger placental mass and normal reference ranges do not apply. The aim of this on-going study is to define reference values for PlGF in twin pregnancies. METHODS: This is a prospective cross sectional study of multiple pregnancies from 12 to 36+6 weeks' gestation. A 4ml EDTA blood sample is taken from women attending the multiple pregnancy clinic. Blood is centrifuged and plasma stored at -82 C. Maternal demographic and pregnancy outcome data is recorded. PlGF is assessed using the ALERE Triage platform. Mean values were calculated and plotted against gestational age at sampling. *Figure(s) will be available online. RESULTS: The mean PlGF value in those pregnancies affected by hypertensive complications was 46.6 pg/ml while the mean PlGF value in those not affected was 432pg/ml (p<0.05). Recruitment is ongoing and we aim to sample 150 women at multiple time points. CONCLUSIONS: PlGF concentrations are higher in twin pregnancies than in singletons. Low PlGF in a multiple pregnancy has a high correlation with adverse outcomes maternal hypertensive disorders and IUGR.  Complement Activation in HELLP. AJ Vaught, 1 E Gavriilaki, 2 N Hueppchen, 1 K Blakemore, 1 SM Seifert, 1 S York, 2 RA Brodsky. 2 1 JHUSOM, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2 JHUSOM, Baltimore, MD, USA. INTRODUCTION: While the pathogenesis of HELLP syndrome is unclear, its clinical features suggest a link to atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS), a disease of excessive alternative complement pathway (APC) activation. To test the hypothesis that these conditions are similar due to complement activation, we utilized a functional complement assay, the modified Ham test recently described for aHUS diagnosis. METHODS: Women (>23 weeks) with classic HELLP, atypical HELLP, preeclampsia with severe features, women with normal pregnancies and non-pregnant controls were recruited. Sera were collected and sent blinded to the laboratory. Furthermore, we tested the in vitro ability of eculizumab (ECU) to inhibit APC activation as it does in aHUS. Statistical analysis was performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) 20.0 for Windows (SPSS, Chicago, IL). Student t-test and oneway ANOVA with Bonferroni's correction or nonparametric tests were used when appropriate. RESULTS: 14 women with classic or atypical HELLP, 7 women with severe preeclampsia, 11 pregnant controls, and 8 non pregnant controls provided sera. There was increased APC activation in the modified Ham test, represented as significantly higher percentage of non-viable cells/ cell death in classic and atypical HELLP compared to healthy pregnancies (34.3+24.6% and 26.0+14.8% versus 4.1±7.3%, p=0.001 and p=0.002, respectively), with no difference between healthy pregnant and non pregnant controls (4.1±7.3% versus 3.3±3.36%, p=0.100). Although there was no difference between classic HELLP and severe preeclampsia (34.3±24.6% versus 13.0±11.7% p=0.074) there is a trend towards less cell killing. In the ROC analysis, cell death above 20.5% was determined as the diagnostic threshold for classic or atypical HELLP with 78.6% sensitivity and 92.9% specificity. Mixing HELLP sera with ECU resulted in a significant decrease of cell death (p=0.007), suggesting successful complement inhibition similar to that in aHUS. CONCLUSIONS: HELLP can be considered a disease of excessive APC comparable to aHUS. The clinical implications of the proposed similarities in the underlying pathophysiology are significant, as aHUS management has progressed to a treatable condition via C5 monoclonal antibody inhibition. The modified Ham test is a promising tool to identify such pregnant women with HELLP characterized by upregulation in APC whom may benefit from complement inhibition. We aimed to determine the association of prepregnancy cardiovascular measures with the risk of fetal growth restriction in subsequent pregnancy. METHODS: 80 women underwent detailed cardiovascular assessment prior to planned pregnancy. Blood pressure was measured with continuous non-invasive tonometric radial artery monitoring. Plasma volume (PV) was determined using the Evans blue dye method. Cardiac output (CO), VO 2 max, body fat %, uterine blood flow (UBF), pulse wave velocity (PWV) and αand β-adrenergic responsiveness were also examined. Birth outcomes were obtained via chart review. Small for gestational age (SGA) infants were defined as weighing less than the 10 th percentile for gestational age (GA) at delivery. Univariate and stepwise multivariate regressions were used to determine associations of cardiovascular variables with having an SGA infant in subsequent pregnancy. RESULTS: The mean age of participants was 30.8 ± 4.3 years, with mean BMI of 25.5 ± 6.0 kg/m 2 . 51 women (64%) were nulliparous at study entry. 29 (36%) had a history of preterm preeclampsia in a prior pregnancy. All pregnancies were singletons. Mean GA at delivery was 39.0 ± 2.2 weeks with mean birth weight of 3253 ± 666 g. 11 infants were SGA. In univariate analysis, lower PV corrected for BMI and higher mean arterial pressure (MAP) were associated with delivery of an SGA infant (p=.019, p<.001). Women with a history of preeclampsia were more likely to deliver an SGA infant (LR 3.97, p=.046). With multivariate stepwise regression, SGA was predicted by MAP (OR per mm Hg 1.14; 95% CI 1.04-1.24) and β-adrenergic responsiveness (OR per mm Hg 0.92; 95% CI 0.85-0.995, p=.038). PV was no longer an independent contributor in the stepwise model. Prepregnancy CO, VO 2 max, body fat %, UBF, PWV and α-adrenergic responsiveness were not found to be independent contributors to SGA. CONCLUSIONS: We found that low prepregnancy plasma volume and decreased β-adrenergic responsiveness are associated with future risk of fetal growth restriction. This is mediated, in part, through effects on maternal blood pressure. This underscores the importance of maternal vascular health for placental perfusion and optimal fetal growth. Fetal Inflammatory But Not HPA Axis Gene Expression Is Negatively Associated with Gestational Age at Birth. Neeta L Vora, 1 Lisa Smeester, 2 Laura Carlson, 1 Kim Boggess, 1 Rebecca Fry. 2 1 University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2 UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. INTRODUCTION: Second trimester amniotic fluid supernatant (AFS) contains cell free fetal RNA (cffRNA) transcripts that can provide realtime information about fetal gene expression. The purpose of the study was to measure 2nd trimester fetal HPA axis, inflammatory, and oxidative stress gene expression using cff RNA extracted from AFS in women who had spontaneous preterm birth (sPTB) and in women who delivered at term. We performed a retrospective case control study to compare fetal gene expression via cffRNA. We extracted cffRNA from AFS of women with singletons who had 2 nd trimester genetic amniocenteses. Twenty one gravidas who had sPTB (<34 weeks) and 21 term controls (>37 weeks) were matched for fetal sex, BMI, race, and medication exposure. Exclusion criteria included abnormal chromosomes or structural anomalies. cffRNA was extracted and hybridized to an 82 gene Nanostring platform. Pathways related to sPTB (HPA axis, inflammation, oxidative stress) and 18 housekeeping genes were included. Differentially regulated genes in fetuses who had sPTB were normalized prior to regression. Two regression models were run, one examining sPTB in relation to case/ control status and one examining sPTB in relation to gestational age (GA) as a continuous variable. RESULTS: Beta-2-microglobulin (B2M) gene expression was significantly negatively associated with GA at delivery (p=0.03, β=-0.20). NOS1 was marginally significant in an analysis with sPTB compared to controls (p=0.057, β=-0.25).  Of the cases reviewed, NIPS was performed secondary to advanced maternal age, abnormal previous screening test, abnormal ultrasound findings, or history of aneuploidy. The rate of nonreportable NIPS results was significantly higher in obese patients when compared to nonobese patients, 3.5% verses 0.4% respectively (p = 0.018). The quantitative level of cell-free fetal DNA was increased in pregnancies complicated by fetal anomalies (p=0.11) and intrauterine fetal demise (p=0.32) when compared to controls. In addition, the quantitative level of cell-free fetal DNA was decreased in pregnancies complicated by spontaneous preterm delivery (p=0.28) and gestational Hypertension (p=0.013) when compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: Non-Invasive Prenatal Screening may prove to be a useful tool in predicting certain pregnancy-related complications. However, our study suggests there is a limitation to its usefulness in the obese patient. INTRODUCTION: While prenatal 3D ultrasonography results in improved diagnostic accuracy, no data are available on biometric assessment of the fetal frontal lobe. This study was designed to assess feasibility of a standardized approach to biometric measurement of the fetal frontal lobe and to construct frontal lobe growth trajectories throughout gestation. METHODS: A sonographic 3D volume set was obtained and the frontal lobe measured in 101 patients between 16.1 and 33.7 gestational weeks (figure 1). Measurements were obtained by two independent raters. To model the relationship between gestational age and each frontal lobe measurement, flexible linear regression models were fit using penalized regression splines. *Figure(s) will be available online. The sample contained an ethnically diverse population (7.9% Native Americans, 45.5% Hispanic/Latina). There was high interrater reliability (correlation coefficients: 0.95, 1.0, and 0.87 for frontal lobe length, width, and height; p-values < 0.001). Graphs of the growth trajectories and corresponding percentiles were estimated as a function of gestational age. The estimated rates of frontal lobe growth were 0.096 cm/week, 0.247 cm/week, and 0.111 cm/week for length, width, and height (figure 2). *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine fetal frontal lobe growth trajectories through 3D prenatal ultrasound examination. Such normative data will allow for future prenatal evaluation of a particular disease state by 3D ultrasound imaging. Performance Presence of extra-cardiac abnormality (ECA) was recorded. A theoretical variable is generated since direct-CMA is able to diagnose the majority of G-band abnormalities (anticipated-CMA). Yield of G-banding, reflex-CMA and anticipated-CMA for each structural abnormality were calculated in presence of ECA and isolated CHD. RESULTS: A total of 215 CHDs were diagnosed and confirmed. Genetic testing was completed for 67% of patients. ECA were identified in 33% of cases. Detection rate of reflex-CMA and anticipated-CMA were significantly higher than G-banding (23% and 34% vs 14% respectively, p<0.001 for both). Performance of anticipated-CMA was superior to the reflex-CMA (p=0.001). Detection rate of anticipated-CMA was higher than G-banding in presence of ECA and isolated cases (p<0.01 for both). In the Type 1 diabetic fetuses glucagon concentrations were greater (P=0.037) than in controls. Visfatin concentrations were lower (P=0.036) in the fetuses of Type I diabetic patients compared to controls. No differences were detected for the other hormones measured. CONCLUSIONS: Fetuses of Type I diabetic patients exhibited altered diabetes and obesity hormone profiles. Elevated glucagon concentrations may reflect rapidly fluctuating fetal blood glucose concentrations and a stress response. Insulin antagonizes the release of visfatin and the low concentrations noted in this cohort may reflect a mechanism for fetal lung immaturity in the newborns of diabetic patients. How ). The distinction between fetuses who are truly growth restricted from those who aren't is essential. We investigated differences in clinical outcome between the two definitions. METHODS: From a large prospective cohort study we included live singleton births with data available on 2 nd trimester estimated fetal weight (EFW) and birth weight (n=7959). Fetuses were classified as growth restricted if the difference between 2 nd trimester EFW and birth weight was at least 40 percentiles. Fetuses born with a birth weight below the 10 th percentile were classified as SGA. As outcome measurements accelerated growth at 2 years (increase in weight of ≥ 0.67 SD) and cardiovascular health at 6 years were assessed. Ultrasound is a valuable, non-invasive tool used to monitor growth of the human fetus and diagnose pathologies such as intrauterine growth restriction. Murine models have emerged as a valuable tool for fetal and perinatal studies, as genetic and environmental manipulations are simple to perform. Development of a normal sonographic murine fetal growth pattern is necessary to determine abnormalities in mouse models of growth restriction. Our objective is to use non-invasive ultrasound methods to develop a standardized fetal viability and grow curve that allows for comparison and study of abnormal growth patterns. METHODS: Using high-frequency ultrasound (HFUS), we quantified embryonic and placental morphometry in pregnant C57/129 mice from embryonic day 0.5 (E0.5) through E18.5 using VisualSonics Vevo 2100 (MS550S transducer). Measurements included fetal biometry, placental volume and amniotic fluid index. Fetal size and placental weight were obtained to correlate the ultrasound measurements. RESULTS: On each gestational day a total of 12 dams were monitored with HFUS, with an average of 90-100 embryos examined per embryonic day. Measurements included non-pregnant endometrial thickness (ET), early pregnancy ET (E0.5-5.5), early implantation site volume (E6.5-9.5), cardiac activity (E9.5-18.5), umbilical cord flow (E10.5-18.5), crown-rump length (E10.5-14.5), placental volume, amniotic fluid, and abdominal circumference (E14.5-E18.5). Normal fetal growth patterns from implantation until parturition were defined and used as a standard to determine the presence/severity of abnormal murine fetal growth phenotypes. CONCLUSIONS: Non-invasive ultrasound methods can be utilized to develop standardized fetal growth curves for comparison and study of murine fetal growth patterns. This permits accurate evaluation of abnormal physiological fetal and placental growth in murine models of disease. As murine models continue as a tool for human fetal and perinatal studies, identifying reliable and non-invasive methods of fetal growth measurements will allow for improved models of fetal growth pathologies. The Effect of Maternal Obesity on Fetal Growth. Understanding how maternal obesity affects fetal growth may help explain the negative perinatal outcomes seen in obese women. We examined differences in fetal growth pattern between obesity categories using a single unit database. This retrospective cohort analysis of singleton nonanomalous pregnancies with ultrasound exams at 24-41w gestational age (GA) excluded women with hypertension or diabetes. Analysis was stratified by BMI range for non-obese 18.5 -29.9, obese 30-39.9 and morbidly obese ≥40.0 kg/m2. Sonographic estimated fetal weight (EFW) and actual birth weight both contribute to weight assignment in this model. For each GA week, the total number of weight estimations included fetuses scanned occasionally and fetuses scanned weekly for abnormality -the overall contribution in an uncorrected model would be disproportionate to those scanned frequently -resolving this problem by inverse frequency weighting balances the impact of each individual without arbitrarily using single measures from each participant. Generalized linear mixed model(GLMM) was used to analyze the longitudinal relationship between maternal obesity and EFW using 4 week intervals to assess growth. The model was adjusted for parity and race. RESULTS: Among 10,459 women, 62% were non-obese, 27% obese and 11% morbidly obese. Figure shows weighted mean EFW for each obesity category. Compared to non-obese women, the peak deviation was +120 gm at 37w for obese women and +221 gm at 37w for morbidly obese. Growth differential between obese and non-obese narrows thereafter, intersecting (i.e. no difference) at 40-41w. GLMM analysis confirmed all iterations of interaction between obesity categories and GA on EFW were statistically significant with p <0.001. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: With non-obese pregnancy as standard, fetal growth rate among obese and morbidly obese slows significantly >37w. This may be due to reduced substrate for fetal growth, or other serious deficit late in pregnancy. This model justifies substantial effort in prospective antenatal surveillance of obese women. Feasibility The increased rate of high BMI in pregnant women is associated with an elevated risk of negative fetal outcomes, including macrosomia, growth restriction, stillbirth and future metabolic health. Fetal fat volume and changes in fat distribution may indicate growth and metabolic abnormalities. Improved assessment of fetal size and body composition has the potential to aid physicians in evaluating fetal risk in high BMI patients that have proven to be challenging for routine ultrasound. This study develops a reliable MRI method to assess fetal size and fat distribution. METHODS: Women with singleton pregnancies were recruited from specialized obstetrical clinics and underwent a fetal MRI in a 1.5T MRI. Fat-only and water-only images oriented axial to the fetal abdomen were acquired using a LAVA-Flex sequence during a maternal breath hold. Subcutaneous fat was manually segmented by two readers from fat signal fraction images (fat/(water+fat)). RESULTS: 18 patients with a BMI between 19-53kg/m 2 and gestational age 29-34 weeks were scanned. The intraclass correlation coefficient for 12 image sets segmented by two readers was 0.950 (P<0.001) indicating excellent agreement. *Figure(s) will be available online. Fetal subcutaneous volume did not correlate with maternal prepregnancy BMI (R 2 =0.002) but was correlated with fetal abdominal volume (R 2 =0.95). *Figure(s) will be available online. . This interaction provides another layer of fetal health information, but it has not yet been well explored. HRV is non-stationary in nature, and a new technique with solid mathematical backup is needed to study this kind of non-stationarity. We deployed ConceFT (concentration of frequency and time), a recently proposed nonlinear time-frequency (TF) analysis technique designed for this purpose, to quantify the interaction between maternal and fetal HR and HRV, and obtain a new marker of the fetal health status. METHODS: T-a fECG was acquired in 50 labouring women (doi:10.1088/0967-3334/35/12/L1). 60 min segments of MHR and FHR immediately prior to the second stage of pushing were analyzed. The time varying coupling index was defined as the strength and concentration of the coupled TF representation. Bootstrapping was carried out to evaluate the threshold for 95% confidence interval. Traditional coupling detection techniques, like mutual information and synchrogram were carried out to define features for the coupling effect from different aspects. All features were integrated together to define a high dimensional index for each mother-fetus pair. Clustering algorithm like kernel K-mean was carried out to identify the pairs with high coupling effect. Gap statistics was applied to confirm if there is more than one cluster. A functional linear regression was carried out to study if the time varying coupling index is decreasing as time approached the second pushing stage. We found no significant clustering effect, which indicates that all pairs of mother and fetus HR and HRV behave similarly. The functional linear regression indicated that the interactions between maternal and fetus HR and HRV are consistently lower than the determined threshold and do not change significantly as the time approached the second stage of pushing, which indicates that the interaction between mother and fetus HR and HRV does not exist during this period of active labour. CONCLUSIONS: The interaction between maternal and fetal HR is not significantly strong prior to the second stage of pushing during delivery process. Maternal diabetes is a risk factor for abnormal heart development. We have observed impaired long term cardiac function (restrictive cardiomyopathy) in middle age female mice born to hyperglycemic mothers (unpublished data). We seek to investigate the mechanism of long term cardiac dysfunction in these female mice. Hyperglycemia was induced in wild type 8-week old CD-1 female mice with a one time intraperitoneal injection of 150 mg/kg of streptozotocin (STZ) prior to mating. Left ventricular echocardiograms were performed on the progeny of both experimental(DF1) and control (CF1) groups at 8 months of age and stratified by gender. Impaired cardiac function was seen only in the adult female progeny of diabetic dams consistent with restrictive cardiomyopathy. Therefore, three adult female hearts in each group were fixed, mounted, sectioned and stained with picrosirius red staining which identifies collagen in tissue. The left ventricle (LV), right ventricle (RV) and interventricular septum (IVS) were imaged with a high resolution microscope at 20 X magnification. Fibrotic deposits (DF1) were counted, averaged and compared with (CF1 CONCLUSIONS: Diabetes exposed adult female progeny exhibited higher degree of cardiac fibrosis and may account for the observed echocardiographic phenotype of restrictive cardiomyopathy seen in female progeny of diabetic mothers. Global Metabolomics Reveals Metabolic Changes in Heart at Birth. Jacquelyn Walejko, 1 Andrew Antolic, 2 Maureen Keller-Wood, 2 Arthur Edison. 3 1 Univ of FL, Gainesville, FL, USA; 2 Univ of FL, Gainesville, FL, USA; 3 Univ of GA, Athens, GA, USA. INTRODUCTION: During late gestation, the fetal heart relies primarily on glucose and lactate to support rapid growth and development. The Keller-Wood laboratory has shown in the ovine model that maternal elevations in cortisol lead to fetal mortality during the peripartum period. Hyperplasia of the fetal heart was observed in fetuses exposed to excess cortisol and transcriptomic analysis revealed alterations in fetal cardiac metabolism. Although it is known that the fetal heart undergoes a metabolic switch to utilizing fatty acids as a neonate, little else is known about metabolic changes of the heart during this period. Therefore, I proposed to utilize the sheep model of pregnancy to investigate metabolic differences of the fetal heart at labor onset compared to the neonatal heart immediately following birth. METHODS: 70 heart samples were collected from the left and right ventricles and intraventricular septum in 14 fetuses following labor onset and 10 neonatal lambs immediately following birth. HR-MAS proton nuclear magnetic resonance ( 1 H-NMR) spectroscopy was conducted on a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer to gain metabolic profiles of heart samples. Principal component analysis (PCA) was used to determine differences in metabolites between groups. Significance of metabolites was determined using a student's t-test of the area under the metabolite peak(s) of probabilistic quotient normalized spectra. RESULTS: PCA reveals separation of heart tissue samples between neonates and fetuses at labor onset. A t-test of normalized spectra revealed that lactate, glutamine, myo-inositol and alanine are significantly increased (p<0.05) in fetal heart tissue while 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB) is significantly increased (p<0.05) in neonatal heart tissue. CONCLUSIONS: Elevations of lactate and myo-inositol (produced from glucose-6-phosphate), along with glutamine and alanine, suggest that glycolysis and gluconeogenic pathways are active in the term fetal heart. Increased levels of 3HB in the neonatal heart suggests that the onset of the switch in substrate utilization occurs during labor and delivery. This provides evidence that labor onset marks a time of rapid metabolic changes in the fetal heart, suggesting that perturbations in this metabolism may contribute to stillbirth during the peripartum period, or later life cardiomyopathies. . Several obstetrical events have been associated with HIE requiring HT. We aim to identify obstetrical characteristics associated with adverse outcomes (perinatal death or severe neurologic injury) compared with infants with normal outcome at pediatric follow up. METHODS: Using a neonatal database infants diagnosed with HIE that underwent HT from 2009 to 2014 were identified. We reviewed the cases with available pediatric follow up. Maternal characteristics associated with adverse outcomes were compared to those with normal neurologic outcome. Statistical analysis was done with t-test and chi-square. RESULTS: A total of 45 babies had HT for HIE, of these 32 had follow up after birth (6 months-5 years of age). 15 patients had adverse outcomes and 17 had normal neurologic outcome at pediatric follow up. Parity, gestational age, demographics and other maternal characteristics were similar between groups. Birth weight, cord pH and Apgar score at 10 minutes were also similar. Rates of hypertensive disorders and diabetes were not different. Obstetric events such as abruption, cord prolapse and non-reassuring fetal heart tones were not more frequently seen in either group. A composite data of acute sentinel events included abruption, cord prolapse, maternal cardio-respiratory arrest, and severe abdominal trauma was compared between groups. Although these events were seen more frequently in the group with severe injury, the difference was not statistically significant (p=0.14). CONCLUSIONS: Based on our findings, obstetrical characteristics of neonates with HIE treated with HT at our institution do not appear to be different in infants with normal or abnormal outcomes at pediatric follow up. However, we recognize the limitations of our sample size and our propensity for type 2 error. Further studies with larger sample size are warranted. INTRODUCTION: Triclosan (TCS: 5-chloro-2-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)phenol) is a synthetic antibacterial compound that inhibits bacterial fatty acid (FA) synthesis by enoyl reductase. Although this enzyme is not expressed in humans, TCS has been linked to reduced fetal growth in humans and rodents. The structural similarity of TCS to estrogen has suggested it might disrupt estrogen signaling; however transcriptomic analysis of TCS actions in ovine fetal tissues indicated little overlap with the differential expression of genes by either estradiol (25 of 1313 DEG) or estrogen antagonist ICI181,782 (67 of 187 DEG). We investigated the DEG in placenta and hypothalamus after maternal TCS. Ewes were infused with TCS (0.1 mg/kg/d) or saline for 2 days. Placentomes and fetal hypothalami were dissected at necropsy, RNA extracted, and transcriptomic data obtained using Agilent ovine array. The data were analyzed with R with modeling in Webgestalt and Cytoscape. P<0.05 was accepted as significant with adjustment for multiple testing in the transcriptomic analyses. RESULTS: In placenta, maternal TCS exposure for 2 days downregulated metabolic pathways, notably those involved in oxidoreductase activity, mitochondrial activity, and cholesterol (8 genes including the ratelimiting step HMG-COA), steroid (STAR, CYP17B12, CYP19A1) and prostaglandin synthesis (PTGS) and increased pathways associated with T cell activation and hemopoiesis. FA elongation enzyme genes were also reduced, as was FAT/CD36, which is a membrane transporter for PUFAs. Transcriptomics in the fetal hypothalamus indicated increased expression of both the orexigenic (AGRP and NPY) and anorexic (POMC) neuropeptides; this upregulation was validated using qPCR. Expression of other hypothalamic neurohormones or neuropeptides, were also increased: GHRH, GNRH, PRLH and somatostatin (SST) as was expression of genes associated with mitosis, cell cycle and ribosomes (53, 17, 30 DEG). The transcriptomic analysis suggests that TCS may alter critical pathways for FA transport and metabolism in the placenta, and proliferation and maturation of growth and feeding pathways in hypothalamus. The PUFA DHA is known to be critical for neuronal maturation, and normally may reduce NPY and POMC expression in the developing brain. Thus, effects of TCS on placental metabolism may alter fetal or neonatal growth via effects in the hypothalamus. Unlocking Pathways to Fetal Brain Injury from Intrauterine Inflammation: Metabolomic Profiling of the Fetal Brain and Amniotic Fluid. Michal A Elovitz, Guillermo Barila, Michael Hester, Natalia Tulina, Amy G Brown. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Exposure to prenatal inflammation is associated with adverse neurobehavioral outcomes. We have previously demonstrated that low dose intrauterine inflammation leads to fetal brain injury (FBI). These studies tested the hypothesis that intrauterine inflammation alters the metabolomic profile in the fetal brain (FB) and amniotic fluid (AF) of exposed fetuses as mechanism by which FBI occurs. METHODS: Timed-pregnant CD-1 mice received an intrauterine injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (50 µg/dam,n=8) or saline (n=8) on E15. 6 & 48 hours post-injection, FB and AF were harvested. Samples were extracted and prepared for analyses using a standard extraction solvent method (Metabolon). Global biochemical profiles were determined using GC/MS and UPLC MS/MS. ANOVA was used to detect differences in biochemicals between the groups. Euclidean clustering, Principal Component Analyses, and Random Forrest plotting were performed. Levels of xanthine were assessed by an enzymatic assay to confirm findings from the metabolic profiling and to investigate if these changes persisted at 48 hours. RESULTS: A significant number of biochemicals in FB and AF were altered in LPS exposed fetuses ( Figure 1 ). *Figure(s) will be available online. Analyses revealed that several pathways were disrupted in the FB (glucose utilization, amino-acid metabolism, polyunsaturated fatty acids and oxidized lipids, purine and pyrimidine metabolism) and in the AF (glucose utilization, amino-acid catabolism, accumulation of acylcarnitines, & nucleotide breakdown) in response to LPS. Hypoxanthine and xanthine were 22-and 10-fold increased in the AF of LPS-exposed fetuses. ELISA confirmed the increase in xanthine in AF at 6 hrs and found that it persisted at 48 hours (P=0.03). CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to low dose intrauterine inflammation creates a catabolic state in the FB and a failure of appropriate energy utilization. These changes begin to ascribe mechanisms by which exposure to inflammation leads to FBI. These changes are evident in the AF and may provide new tools to predict fetuses at risk for FBI. (R01HD076032) INTRODUCTION: Impact of subclinical fetal inflammation on brain development remains unclear. In adults, vagus nerve mediates the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway (CAP) and Vx raises the setpoint for inflammatory response to LPS, thus increasing production of proinflammatory cytokines by macrophages. We studied the function of vagus nerve in fetal neuroinflammation hypothesizing that fetal and adult CAP behave similarly. METHODS: Ovine fetuses were surgically instrumented with vascular catheters w/o or w/ Vx. Shams received NaCl and no Vx (n=10); controls received LPS (400 ng IV to the fetus) and no Vx (n=10); 4 fetuses were subjected to Vx followed by LPS. Brains were collected 54h post LPS. Iba1+ immunofluorescence intensity was quantified in 8 high power fields per animal using ImagePro in the following brain regions: convexial cortical grey matter layers 1-3, 4-6 (CGM46); thalamus; periventricular white matter (PVWM); hippocampal subregions CA1, CA234 and dentate gyrus. Next, we evaluated microglia cells of which size contribute to the Iba1 signal depending on the treatment: we set a cell size threshold at 36 uM 2 based on the empirical observation of a size at which a qualitative change in cell morphology occurred. RESULTS: LPS resulted in no change of Iba1+ signal (DOI: 10.3389/ fncel.2015.00294); Vx+LPS resulted in a surprising reduction of Iba1+ signal intensity in thalamus (p=0.05), PVWM (p=0.01) and CA234 (p=0.05). Notably, in CA1, CA234 and CGM46 number and length of dendrites were also decreased in the Vx+LPS group animals (p=0.001, p=0.02 and p=0.04, respectively). In CA1, fractal dimension was decreased (p=0.01). In all brain regions, this decrease of Iba1 signal due to Vx was entirely mediated by microglia with cell size smaller than 36 uM 2 . CONCLUSIONS: Our findings emphasize an important phenotypical feature of microglia that needs to be accounted for quantitatively: their morphometry. Unlike in adults, fetal microglia appear to down-regulate in response to withdrawal of cholinergic input despite the exposure to low-dose endotoxin. The function of cholinergic signalling in the developing brain, in particular in microglial cells as major players in the brain inflammatory response warrants further study. Effect The mechanism by which MgSO4 exerts its neuroprotective effect is unknown but may be due in part to preventing neuronal excitatory injury. The objective of this study was to assess the differences in fetal brain activity pre and post-MgSO4 administration. METHODS: Eight women in spontaneous preterm labor were enrolled with gestational ages of 27-32 weeks. A baseline 30 min fetal magnetoencephalography (MEG) recording was obtained for each patient. A 4 gram MgSO4 bolus was administered via intravenous infusion followed by a second fetal recording of MEG about 60 min later. The MEG activity was quantified using spectral power analysis and the relative power was obtained in each of the frequency bands: delta (0.5-4Hz); theta (4-8Hz); alpha (8-13Hz)and beta (13-25Hz). The power in these frequency bands were compared for pre and post MgSO4 administration. RESULTS: Fetal MEG activity was successfully recorded in seven of the eight subjects. The maximum power (~ 1 pT/sqrt Hz) was observed in the lower frequency band. Figure 1 shows that the normalized relative power was concentrated in the delta band in both pre and post recordings. Further, the figure also shows the overall comparison in relative power averaged over all subjects. In four of the seven cases there was decrease in delta activity with reduction of relative power reaching as high as 50% in the post measurement. In the remaining cases the delta activity was unchanged or showed a slight increase. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: MEG analysis demonstrates a decrease in overall power in fetal brain activity in the majority of the subjects following administration of MgSO4 compared to baseline. The relative power measure indicates the suppression of brain activity especially in the lowest frequency delta band. This is the first study that quantifies the fetal neurologic response to MgSO4 for neuroprotection in humans. INTRODUCTION: Low-dose LPS triggers an increase in Iba1 intensity in the terminal ileum in near-term fetal sheep and that increase is correlated to a subset of HRV measures suggesting a potential to detect incipient gut inflammation non-invasively in utero using FHR monitoring to predict NEC. Here we address the questions 1) are these macrophages of M1 (pro-inflammatory, CD11c) or M2 (anti-inflammatory, CD206) phenotype; 2) does this exposure lead to increase in gut leakiness (occludin) and 3) do HRV measures correlate uniquely to gut's and not another organ's inflammation. We hypothesized that LPS will recruit M1, but not M2, macrophages and a gut M1 macrophages-specific subset of HRV measures will be identified. Chronically instrumented fetal sheep were exposed to 400ng LPS or NaCl q.d. for 2 days and sacrificed at 54h. Terminal ileum was studied for M1, M2 and occludin changes and Iba1+ microglia in the brain were quantified. All signals were correlated to the HRV measures determined at selected time points during fetal monitoring (cf. doi: 10.1088/0967-3334/36/10/2089). Results are presented for p<0.05 after adjustment for multiple comparisons. In the terminal ileum, M1 and Iba1, but not M2, macrophages were increased and occludin signal was diminished vs. controls. In the brain, there was no significant difference between LPS and control animals ( Fig. 1) . We identified unique subsets of HRV measures correlating to changes in M1 macrophages and occludin signal 48h in advance. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Low-dose endotoxin disrupts the integrity of the ileum's epitheleal tight junctions and recruits M1 macrophages. Both effects can be detected early by HRV monitoring. This needs to be validated in clinical trials. Additive Otherwise, the anti-inflammatory interleukine-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) has a well-proved neuroprotective effect in preclinical models of perinatal inflammation and/or HI. We hypothesize that the combination of hypothermia plus IL-1ra results in additive or synergistic neuroprotection. We characterized neuroprotective effects of hypothermia on rat pups exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)+HI in term of expression of cerebral inflammatory markers and prevention of cerebral damage. Then, we tested the added value of IL-1Ra administration to the neuroprotective effect of hypothermia in NE. We used a rat model of LPS+HI-induced NE at postnatal (P) day 12. Inflammation was induced by injecting intraperitonealy (ip) with 200 µg/kg of LPS from E.coli. Four hours (h) later, the right common carotid artery was ligated, then hypoxia was induced (8% O 2 , 1 h 30 min). Finally, rat pups were submitted to hypothermia (32° +/-0.5°C, 4 h). IL-1Ra (12.5 -200 mg/kg q12 h) was injected ip from P12 to P14. Hypothermia alleviated brain injury in the brain areas affected by ischemic penumbra (neocortex and hippocampus), but not core injury. This neuroprotective effect did not result from a down-regulation of the neuroinflammatory response mediated by IL-1β or TNF-α. Hypothermia reversed the apoptosis/necroptosis ratio from negativity in LPS+HI to positivity in LPS+HI+Hypothermia condition in the caudate-putamen and hippocampus. In the same brain areas, hypothermia increased neuronal SOD-1 expression, which is responsible for clearing free superoxide radicals. IL-1Ra (50 mg/kg) reduced core injury of pups exposed to LPS+HI. Maternal obesity (MO) negatively impacts development of many fetal systems with adverses outcomescardiovascular, metabolism and endocrine outcomes . There is evidence for programming of the brain and behavior by MO. There is a need for nonhuman primate information on programming mechanisms. We and others have shown increased OS in several tissues of offspring of MO rodents. We hypothesized that MO would increase OS in the fetal FC of our baboon MO model. Healthy female baboons of similar body weight(10-15 kg) were fed normal chow (CTR, n=24;12% energy from fat with 0.29% glucose and 0.32% fructose) or a high energy diet (MO, n=19; 45% energy from fat with 4.62% glucose and 5.64% fructose) plus ad lib fructose sodas for at least 18 months prior to pregnancy. Fetuses were removed by C-Section at 0.9G under general anesthesia, fixed FC section stained for Nitrotyrosine (NT), superoxide dismutase 1 and 2 (SOD1 and SOD2) (Santa Cruz, 32757,11407,133254) . Data M + SEM, Student's t-test, p set < 0.05 RESULTS: NT protein expression was increased (P < 0.05) in MO fetal FC gray matter. SOD1 and SOD2 were decreased in both gray matter and white matter of MO fetal FC (P < 0.05). The SOD2 fall and NT rise were greater in males than females; SOD1 changes were similar. *Figure(s) will be available online. Figure 1 . NT, SOD1 and SOD2 images and protein expressed as fraction in brain FC of 0.9 gestation (G) control fetuses -mothers fed normal diet (CTR, n=24,F=13;M=11) or maternal obese fetuses, mother fed a high energy diet (MO, n=19,F=9;M=10) Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. * p < 0.05. CONCLUSIONS: NT was increased, SOD1 and SOD2 decreased (more in males than females) in astroglia and neurons We conclude that these changes may alter FC neuronal function which plays a major role in executive function. And behavior predisposing to adult neuropsychiatric disease. Race/Ethnicity. Darios Getahun, Vicki Chiu, Fassett J Michael. Kaiser Permanente, Pasadena, CA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Hyperemesis gravidarum (HG) is associated with adverse perinatal outcomes. It may deprive the fetus of necessary nutrients and thereby impair fetal brain development. As little is known about the association between HG and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), we examined these associations and whether the risk varies by gestational age and maternal race/ethnicity. A retrospective cohort study of singleton born children age 3-17 years delivered at ≥28 weeks of gestation (n=393,535) in Kaiser Permanente Southern California (KPSC) hospitals (1991) (1992) (1993) (1994) (1995) (1996) (1997) (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) was performed using the Perinatal Service System, Hospital Inpatient, Outpatient physician encounter, and Pharmacy records. ICD-9 codes from hospitalizations during pregnancy and infant birth certificates as well as pharmacy records on medication specific for ADHD were used to ascertain the exposure and outcomes of interest. Adjusted hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were used to quantify the associations. RESULTS: Two percent of pregnancies were complicated by HG. Compared with exposed children, unexposed children were more likely to be male and of White or African-American race/ethnicity. Exposed children were more likely than unexposed children to be diagnosed with ADHD (HR 1.25, 95%CI 1.11-1.41). A stratified analysis by gestational age revealed that exposure during first, second, and third trimester were associated with significantly increased risk; 1.18-fold (95%CI 1.02, 1.36), 1.42-fold (95%CI 1.10, 1.84), and 1.84-fold (95%CI 1.07-3.17), respectively. PSD was associated with increased risk of ADHD for African American and White racial/ethnic groups. The results suggest that HG is associated with increased risk of childhood ADHD. Identification of at-risk children may provide the opportunity for early diagnosis and initiate treatment when it is more effective. In utero nutrient excess resulting in large for gestational age (LGA), alters cellular metabolism and leads to accumulation of key intermediates capable of interfering with epigenetic regulators. However, clear evidence of nutrient sensitive epigenetic mechanisms and their long-term consequences are missing. We hypothesize that nutrient availability drives cell fate decisions through activation of nutrient-sensitive epigenetic modifications of transcriptional regulators. We tested DNA methylation in CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) from cord blood in LGA and control neonates (n=20/group) using a multi-omics approach including a cell specific genome annotation. Multi-lineage differentiation potential and self-renewal capacity were assessed using In vitro colony forming unit assay (CFU, n=4/group). We identified methylation alterations in several genes involved in stem cell properties. Among these, we found genes from Hox family ( Fig.1) , a transcription factors family influencing aging of stem cells and sensitive to cellular metabolism. *Figure(s) will be available online. Further evidence from CFU data suggest that exposure to excessive nutrients (LGA) diminishes progenitor cells compared to controls ( Fig.2A ) and affect colony growth (Fig.2B ). *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Excess nutrients in utero leads to phenotypic alterations in HSPCs and methylation changes in genes relevant to cellular metabolism and regenerative capacity of these cells. These findings bring first evidence for a new paradigm for fetal programming where nutrient sensing epigenetics modifications serve as mediator for long term consequences of in utero exposure by affecting key stem cells properties. Intergenerational Transmission of Protection Against Heart Disease via the Maternal Mitochondria. Y Niu, 1 A D Kane, 1 S Allen, 1 T Ashmore, 1 E J Camm, 1 A J Murray, 1 S E Ozanne, 2 A C Ferguson-Smith, 3 D A Giussani. 14% O 2 ) from days 6-20 of gestation. At 12 weeks, F1 offspring were mated with partners outside the colony to produce an F2 generation which did not experience hypoxia. In F1 and F2 males, cardiac recovery from ischemia/reperfusion (I/R, Langendorff) at 4 months was assessed. Protein kinase C epsilon (PKC-ε) is cardio-protective against I/R via established mitochondrial mechanisms. Therefore, its expression was determined in hearts of F1 and F2 offspring of normoxic and hypoxic F0 pregnancies with and without the I/R challenge in adulthood. RESULTS: F1 and F2 paternal lineage offspring of F0 hypoxic pregnancy showed impaired cardiac recovery from I/R ( Fig. 1a and 1b) . In contrast, F2 maternal lineage offspring of hypoxic pregnancy showed normal recovery to I/R (Fig. 1c) . Hearts of offspring from hypoxic pregnancy showed a reduced fall in PKCε protein expression following I/R (Fig.  1d ). This cardio-protective trait was present in F2 male offspring via the maternal but not the paternal line ( Fig. 1e and f). We show the heritability of an advantageous trait transmitted from mother to offspring via the maternal mitochondria in a major organ system in a mammal for the first time. Support: British Heart Foundation * Figure We have shown that prenatal T exposure leads to cardiovascular dysfunction in adult females. However, the underlying mechanisms that contributes for blood pressure increase is not known. To evaluate whether prenatal T exposure leads to alterations in angiotensin-aldosterone and vasopressin systems in adult females. Pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were injected with vehicle or T propionate (TP) (0.5 mg/kg/day from gestation day 15-19) to increase plasma T levels twofold, similar to that observed in clinical conditions like preeclampsia. In the offspring, at 6 months of age, mean arterial pressure was recorded using telemetry system; plasma levels of aldosterone, angiotensin-II and vasopressin levels were measured by ELISA; serum and urine Na + , K + levels were measured; small resistance arteries were isolated to determine vascular response to angiotensin II (in a wire myograph) and vasopressin and adrenals were used to determine expression of mRNA transcripts of steroidogenic genes. RESULTS: T exposure during prenatal life significantly increased arterial pressure in female adult offspring. Aldosterone levels were lower (70.27 ± 10.22 vs 172.07±23.87 pg/mL in controls) whereas plasma angiotensin II levels were higher in T females (1.05±0.05 vs 0.65±0.07 ng/mL in controls). Plasma arg 8 -vasopressin levels were increased in T females (28.2±0.7 vs 21.3±0.5 pg/mL in controls). The mRNA levels of CYP11B2 (aldosterone synthase) was decreased in the adrenals of T females. Despite decrease in plasma aldosterone levels in T females, serum and urine Na + and K + levels were similar to that in controls. Vascular contractile response to vasopressin was unaffected but responses to angiotensin II in mesenteric arteries were enhanced in T offspring (logEC 50 = -9.04±0.10; E max = 60.9±6.93) compared with control (logEC 50 = -8.56±0.08; E max = 33.3±7.95). These results suggest that prenatal T exposure down regulates adrenal CYP11B2 expression leading to decreased plasma aldosterone levels. Elevated angiotensin II and vasopressin levels along with enhanced responsiveness to angiotensin II may serve as an underlying mechanism to maintain plasma Na + and K + levels and mediate hypertension in adult T females. Preterm birth is an important cause of perinatal death and the risk is inversely related to gestational age at birth. We investigated the epigenetic modification in peripheral blood and amnion of preterm birth and to search for the possibility of epigenetic marker for preterm birth. We collected the peripheral blood and amnion samples with term and preterm birth. DNA was extracted from maternal blood and amnion of term (n=5) and preterm (n=5) deliveries using the Quiagen mini kit. To analyze DNA methylation, ~700 ng of genomic DNAs were bisulfite converted using Zymo EZ DNA Methylation Kit (Zymoresearch Inc.), amplified, fragmented and hybridized into Illumina HumanMethylation 450 BeadChip (Illumina) as manufacturer's protocol. T-test were used to calculate statistical significance of CpG sites between cases and controls. We identified genes exhibiting differential methylation (DM) in maternal blood and amnion with term and preterm deliveries. Among 485,577 CpG sites, 2,569 sites and 14,215 sites showed significant DM (p<0.05) in blood and amnion between term and preterm birth, respectively. Of those DM sites, 172 sites were positive correlated between methylation status of blood and amnion, while 61 sites were negative correlated (p<0.05). Notably, ARL9, NUDT19, F2R, GAD2, BCOR, MEGF10, SRRM3 genes were significantly hypomethylated 2-fold more in preterm and MIF, IQCC, MEIL3 were significantly hypermethylated 1.5-fold more (p<0.05). BCOR gene and MIF gene of them is associated with regulation of transcription pathway (p<0.05) and unsaturated fatty acid biosynthetic process ((p=0.05), respectively. CONCLUSIONS: This work provides a preliminary evidence that DNA methylation changes in maternal blood and amnion are associated with preterm birth. These finding suggest that methylation profiles may provide valuable insight for the candidate marker predicting the risk of preterm birth in pregnant woman, suggesting further studies related to the mechanisms underlying preterm birth. We hypothesized that increased stiffness in maternal and offspring hearts is due to an increase in the N2B:N2BA ratio. METHODS: Ewes ate an obesogenic diet (150% requirements; MO; n=7), or 100% requirements (CTR, n=7) from 60 days prior to conception. Maternal and fetal hearts were removed following exsanguination under general anesthesia at 0.9 gestation and LV submitted to western blot. The titin isoform ratio was calculated. The stiffer N2B titin isoform was increased in LV of maternal and fetal hearts vs. controls. (Fig 1) . Since the titin isoform transition from N2BA to N2B is positively regulated by the splicing factor, RNA binding motif 20 (RBM20), we evaluated RBM20 protein with western blot. RBM20 was increased in LV of maternal and fetal hearts vs. controls. *Figure(s) will be available online. Fig 1 N2B :N2BA Titin ratio and RBM20 are greater in LV of OB vs. CON maternal (A) and fetal (B) hearts. M-CON, control mothers; M-OB, obese mother; F-CON, fetus of control mothers; F-OB, fetus of obese mothers.* p < 0.05 vs. CON CONCLUSIONS: Titin is responsible for ventricular wall stiffness and studies have shown that, in diastolic dysfunction, hearts have a stiffer ventricular wall and N2B is increased. Our findings suggest that the altered titin isoform ratio could play a role in increasing stiffmess in the maternal and fetal hearts in OB. We have also shown that in the adult offspring insulin resistant develops in females but not in males. Adipose tissue-derived inflammatory mediators and components of the RAS are thought to participate in the regulation of blood pressure and glucose tolerance in obese and diabetic humans. Our working hypothesis states that GC alters the development of white adipose tissue (WAT) in a sex-dependent manner favoring the male sex. The aim of this study was to investigate the factors responsible for the sex-dependent effects of antenatal GC on WAT. METHODS: Pregnant sheep were treated with two IM doses of betamethasone (Beta, 0.17 mg/kg) or vehicle (V) 24-h apart at 80 days gestation and allowed to deliver at term. At 1 y of age omental WAT was harvested from adult sheep offspring; Beta (males n=6; females n=6) and V (males n=6; females n=6). We measured protein abundance for PPARγ, UCP-1, TLR4, ACE1 and ACE2 using Western blot and data analyzed by ANOVA (Mean±SEM). We found a significantly different sex-dependent adipose tissue distribution independent of body weight and glucocorticoid exposure. Females sheep had a higher percent of omental fat compared to males (1.7±0.2 vs. 1.1±0.1 for V and 2.3±0.2 vs 1.1±0.1 for B; % body weight, p<0.05). B significantly decreased ACE 2 protein expression only in females (p<0.05). Although not affected by B, TLR4 expression was significantly higher in males. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that prenatal exposure to a single course of GC at 0.55 gestation has long-term effects on adipose tissue function. A significant alteration in the expression of component of the RAS in WAT may be an important contributor for the development of insulin resistance in offspring exposed antenatally to GC. Further studies are required to establish if these abnormalities are causally associated with the cardiometabolic alterations present in Beta exposed sheep. HL 68728 and HD 04784. Our hypothesis was that HFD introduced postnatally to those offspring will further worsen their metabolic and vascular programming later in life. Hypertensive eNOS+/-and normotensive wild type (WT) male mice were placed on HFD or control diet (CD) at weaning for 6 weeks to obtained 4 groups of offspring: HFD-eNOS+/-, CD-eNOS+/-, HFD-WT, and CD-WT. At 10 weeks, systolic blood pressure (SBP) was measured; mice were sacrificed and carotid arteries isolated for in vitro vascular reactivity. Contractile responses to phenylephrine (PE) in the presence and absence of the NOS-inhibitor L-NAME, and the vasodilatory responses to acetylcholine (Ach) were assessed. Serum levels of metabolic biomarkers (ghrelin, GIP, GLP-1, glucagon, insulin, leptin, PAI-1, resistin) were measured by multiplex assay. RESULTS: WT and eNOS+/-male offspring on HFD and CD-eNOS+/had higher SBP than CD-WT offspring (160±7.2, 161±5.5, 157±7.6, vs. 123±11.1, p<0.03). PE contractile responses was higher in CD-eNOS+/offspring compared to all groups. Indeed eNOS+/-and WT offspring on HFD showed decreased contractile response to PE ( fig. 1 ). Incubation with L-NAME enhanced the response to PE in all offspring except the HFD-eNOS+/-(not shown). Ach induced vasorelaxation was decreased in eNOS+/-offspring on CD, HFD and in HFD-WT compared to CD-WT (P<0.02). GIP, was the only metabolites shown to be higher in HFD-eNOS+/-offspring compared to CD-WT male (P<0.02). *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: We found that postnatal HFD altered SBP and vascular responses in heterozygous eNOS+/-and WT male offspring. Those responses seem independent of the offspring genotype, although worse in the eNOS+/-offspring on HFD. This suggests that the adverse effects of a HFD is stronger with a susceptible genotype and that the nitric oxide pathway might be further negatively affected by HFD.  We evaluated transcriptional markers of ER stress in human umbilical vein endothelial cells isolated from normal (N-HUVEC) and MO pregnancies (Ob-HUVEC), through lentiviral transduction of reporter gene constructs and qPCR. Relative luciferase expression was measured to assess activation of amino acid deprivation response element (AARE), transcriptional response to ER stress (ERSE) and activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6), in presence of tunicamycin (ER stress activator) or TUDCA (ER stress inhibitor). We also evaluated phosphorylated and total protein levels of PERK, eIF2α, IRE-1α and ATF6 using western blot. Values are Mean±S.E.M. We found increased levels of AARE (1,51±0,37 vs 1,12±0,04; p<0,01) and ERSE-dependent (2,39±0,55 vs 0,77±0,01; p<0,001) luciferase detection in Ob-HUVEC compared to N-HUVEC, without a significant effect of TUDCA exposure. ATF6-dependent luciferase activity was no different between normal and MO derived cells. Tunicamycin activated all lentiviral constructs. We observed reduced mRNA levels of GADD34 (0,18±0,02 vs 0,51±0,12; p<0,01) and increased mRNA levels of BiP (0,78±0,08 vs 0,36±0,04; p<0,001) in Ob-HUVEC, which are related to AARE signaling. We also observed activation of PERK (1,25±0,07 vs 0,42±0,02; p<0,001) and eIF2α (2,0±0,38 vs 1,02±0,02; p<0,01) in cells derived from MO. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that MO increases the activation of AARE and ERSE response pathways of ER stress in HUVEC, which could generate transcriptional changes potentially relevant to development of MO-dependent pathologies in the offspring's umbilical endothelium. FONDECYT (1121145, 1110977, 1150377, 1150344) . We found that total eNOS and the activating phosphorylation on Ser1177 was reduced (0,98±0,03 vs 5,45±0,85; p<0,01) in HUVEC-OB compared to HUVEC-N. Conversely, the inhibitory phosphorylation on Thr495 was increased (1,88±0,08 vs 1,51±0,14; p<0,01) in HUVEC-OB. Also, HUVEC-N exposed to insulin (1nM) showed increased levels of NO at 5, 15 and 30 min of incubation, an effect blocked by the inhibitor of NOS L-NAME. In contrast, insulin did not increase NO production in HUVEC-OB. Finally, vein rings from MO showed abolished relaxation in response to insulin, meanwhile rings from normal pregnancies showed a 20% of insulin dilator effect, which was blocked by L-NAME. We have shown evidence that MO promotes less vasodilation of umbilical vein in response to insulin, due to an inhibitory state of insulin signaling and eNOS activation, with the consequent absence of insulin-dependent NO production by HUVEC affected by MO. FONDECYT (1121145, 1110977, 1150377, 1150344) . Sex-Specific Activation of Fibrosis Pathways in the IUGR Fetal Baboon Heart and Skeletal Muscle at 0.9 of Gestation (G). Junfei Li, 1,2 Shanshan Yang, 1,3 Dongbin Xie, 1,3 Geoffrey D Clarke, 2 Peter W Nathanielsz, 1,3 Cun Li. Mitochondrial respiration affects energy balance, and therefore weight gain and loss. The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that mitochondrial respiration plays a role in the developmental programming of metabolic syndrome. METHODS: Virgin CD1 mice were fed either high fat diet (34.9% fat, HF group) or regular chow (5.8% fat, SF group) for 3 months before breeding. After weaning, pups in both groups were placed on a regular chow. At 6 months of age, tissues associated with metabolic function were collected (brown (BAT), subcutaneous (SAT) and visceral (VAT) adipose tissues, as well as liver and muscle) . Mitochondrial respiration was assessed using high-resolution respirometry. Total respiration (TR) and UCP1-dependent respiration (UCP1-R) were determined in adipose tissues, while ATP-producing respiration (ATPR) and respiratory control ratio (RCR) were calculated for liver and muscle. Student's t-test and Mann-Whitney test were used as appropriate (significance: P<0.05) RESULTS: TR and UCP1-R were significantly higher in BAT from HF males (P=0.005 and 0.02, respectively) and HF females (P=0.02 and 0.01, respectively) when compared to SF. UCP1-R was significantly lower in SAT (P=0.04) from HF males and in VAT (P=0.04) from HF females. In HF males livers, ATPR and RCR was significantly higher (P=0.04 and 0.007, respectively), while in HF females both parameters were significantly lower (P=0.03 and 0.0001) when compared to SF groups ( Figure) . In muscle ATPR was significantly higher in HF males (P=0.02), no differences were determined in females. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support a gender-specific role for altered mitochondrial respiration in developmental programming of metabolic syndrome. *Figure(s) will be available online. Human epidemiological studies have shown positive associations between urinary BPA levels and the prevalence of obesity and metabolic disease in adults. However, little is known about the effects of maternal exposure to BPA on offspring fatty acid metabolism or lipid synthesis pathways. Using a metabolomics approach, we determined the effects of maternal exposure to BPA during pregnancy and lactation on offspring plasma and liver fatty acid profiles, and on chain elongation pathways that promote energy storage. We hypothesized that maternal BPA alters offspring lipogenesis in favor of increased triglyceride synthesis. METHODS: Female rats had access to drinking water (control group) or drinking water containing BPA (5mg/L; BPA group) two weeks prior to mating and throughout pregnancy and lactation. Standardized litters were nursed by the same dam. At end of the nursing period (3 weeks), plasma and liver tissue were collected from male and female offspring for fatty acid extraction and analysis by gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC/MS). GC/MS peaks were used to calculate the desaturation index (DI: oleate/stearate) and the elongation index (EI: stearate/palmitate). Protein abundance of the liver enzymes stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD-1) and elongation of very long chain fatty acid-like family member 6 (ELOVL6) were determined by Western Blotting. Data were compared by Student's T-test. RESULTS: Compared with controls, female BPA offspring demonstrated increased plasma (33±3 vs 14±3 mg/dL; P<0.05) and liver (0.83±0.05 vs 0.56±0.04 mg/dL/mg tissue; P<0.05) triglycerides, along with an increased DI in plasma (0.44±0.07 vs 0.22±0.05; P<0.05) and an increased EI in liver (1.37±0.07 vs 1.14±0.05; P<0.05). In contrast, male BPA offspring did not exhibit any differences in triglyceride concentrations or fatty acid indices compared to controls. There were no differences in the liver protein abundance of SCD-1 or ELOVL6. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that maternal BPA has sex-specific effects on offspring liver fatty acid metabolism. Increased elongation and desaturation of fatty acids may promote energy storage in the form of increased triglyceride synthesis in female offspring exposed to BPA perinatally. (2011) INTRODUCTION: FGR is a risk factor for later adverse health outcomes including heart disease, diabetes, and neurodevelopmental disorders, with greater risk in those with postnatal catch-up growth. MNR in guinea pigs results in asymmetric FGR with less restriction in brain size than that of the liver as often observed in human FGR. We sought to determine whether MNR in guinea pigs leading to FGR results in neonatal catch-up growth and the extent to which it is organ-specific with implications for later life disease risk. METHODS: Guinea pig sows were fed ad libitum (Control=13) or 70% of the control diet pre-pregnancy, increased to 90% at mid-pregnancy (MNR=14). Animals continued on their respective diets until weaning at ~14 days postnatal when MNR sows/neonates were switched to the control diet. Birth weights and weekly neonatal weights were obtained on all liveborn offspring (Control=38, MNR=35). At 23-27 days, full necropsy was undertaken in representative appropriate for gestational age (AGA)-Control neonates (N=18) and FGR-MNR neonates (N=17) using birth weights of >95gm or <85gm, respectively, which ~ the 20 th and 10 th percentiles for the weight distribution of all Control fetuses. Data are presented as means±SEM. RESULTS: FGR-MNR neonates were 35% smaller at birth than the AGA-Control neonates, 71±2 vs 110±2 gm*, while at necropsy FGR-MNR neonates were only 15% smaller, 263±10 vs 310±7 gm*. FGR-MNR organ weights at necropsy were also smaller than that of the AGA-Controls, but less so for the brain -5%* and liver -10%*, similar for the kidneys -15%*, and greater for the heart -22%*, gonads -23%*, and pancreas -28%*. As such, organ/body weight ratios for the FGR-MNR neonates were increased for the brain 12%* and liver 7%*, unchanged for the kidneys, and decreased for the heart 8%, gonads 10%, and pancreas 12%*(*p<.05, nonpaired t test). CONCLUSIONS: MNR in guinea pigs leads to FGR offspring with catch-up growth in the early neonate period. Despite a degree of "brain sparing" the brain is still at risk for neurodevelopmental disorders. The livers catch-up from those with FGR-MNR in utero which may increase glucose output and increase susceptibility to metabolic disorders. Conversely FGR-MNR neonatal hearts, pancreases and gonads, appear to have reduced growth which could increase vulnerability for later life disease. In Maternal dietary protein source is under-investigated as a factor in programming of offspring outcomes. We addressed effects of vegetal (V) or animal protein casein (C) maternal diet on offspring phenotype. We evaluated effects of maternal animal or vegetable diets on maternal serum parameters, adipose tissue (AT) weight and fat content in liver and mammary gland (MG), and milk components at 21 day of lactation (dL) and offspring phenotype. METHODS: Rats ate Chow (V=vegetal-protein, n=5) or Control (C=casein-protein, n=5) diet during pregnancy and lactation. At 20 dL mothers and pups were separated for 4h. Then mothers received 0.8U oxytocin (ip) and milk expressed 15 min later for analysis of water and fat. At 21 dL milk production, serum insulin and glucose, triglyceride (TG) and cholesterol, AT, liver and MG weight and total fat measured and histological analysis performed. After weaning offspring ate chow diet. Body weight and leptin were measured at 110 postnatal days (PND). M±SE, t-student, *p <0.05. RESULTS: Maternal insulin and TG were higher in C vs. V and glucose and cholesterol similar between groups. Maternal body weight was similar between groups. C body fat, MG weight and percentage MG and milk were higher vs. V. Maternal liver weight was lower with more fat in C vs V. Milk production and percentage humidity was lower in C vs V. Fig1A-C. Pup body weight were similar in groups for both sexes. Leptin was higher in male and female C vs V. Fig 1D. CONCLUSIONS: Mothers fed animal-protein diet in gestation and lactation had more fat in AT, liver, MG and milk. These changes affect maternal organs during pregnancy and lactation and programs male and female offspring leptin phenotype. *Figure(s) will be available online. Placental insufficiency causes intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) due to reduced amino acid (AA), glucose and oxygen supply. These deficiencies decrease glucose stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) and lower beta-cell mass and pancreatic vascularity. We have shown that AA supplementation to IUGR fetuses increases GSIS, but improvements in pancreas morphology have not been tested. Our hypothesis was that chronically increasing fetal AA supply in experimental IUGR fetal sheep will increase islet size, beta-cell mass, and pancreatic vascularity. METHODS: Singleton, IUGR sheep fetuses were intravenously infused with a complete AA mixture (IUGR-AA, n=9) for 10±1 days; targeted to increase fetal branched chain AA concentrations by ~50%. Fetal arterial oxygen, and plasma AA, insulin, glucose, glucagon, cortisol, norepinephrine (NE), and IGF-1 were measured. At the end of the infusion on 135±1 days gestational age (term=148 days) the fetal pancreas was collected for morphological analysis. Results were compared to saline-infused IUGR (IUGR-SAL, n=6) and control (CON, n=7) fetuses. Almost all essential, including all branched chain AA, and some non-essential AA concentrations increased in IUGR-AA fetuses (P<0.05). Fetal weight, insulin, glucose, oxygen, and IGF-1 were lower, and cortisol and NE higher, in both IUGR groups compared to CON (P<0.05), but were not different from each other. Glucagon increased in the IUGR-AA group only (375%, P<0.01). Islets and beta-cell mass were smaller in IUGR-SAL (P<0.05; 1706±230 µm 2 and 43.3±5.5 gm, respectively) compared to CON (2876±295 µm 2 and 108.1±7.5 gm). In IUGR-AA, islet size and beta-cell mass were larger than in IUGR-SAL, and islet size was not different from CON (P<0.05; 2878±280 µm 2 and 77.6±12.4 gm). Pancreatic vessel density was 35% lower in IUGR-SAL fetuses compared to IUGR-AA and CON (P<0.05). Islet vessel density was not different between IUGR groups. CONCLUSIONS: AA supplementation to IUGR fetuses increased betacell mass and islet size, while maintaining islet vascularity and likely contributed to increased GSIS. Therapeutic use of AAs in IUGR has the potential to improve short and long-term complications related to defects in islet development. Behaviors. Maternally derived vitamin D is critical for optimal fetal neurodevelopment, yet vitamin D deficiency is apparent in a growing proportion of pregnant women. The aim of this study was to determine whether a rat model of vitamin D-deficiency alters maternalpup interactions and affective, cognitive and social behaviors in the adult offspring. METHODS: Female Sprague-Dawley rats were placed on either a vitamin D control (2,195 IU/kg) or deficient (0 IU/kg) diet for five weeks prior to and during pregnancy and lactation. Offspring were subsequently weaned on to the control diet. Quality of maternal care (licking and grooming) was video monitored from postnatal days (PND) 3-8 and pup ultrasonic vocalizations recorded at PND12. At ~PND120 male offspring were run through a battery of behavioral tests to assess anxiety, depression and social-like behaviors as well as cognitive function. RESULTS: Vitamin D deficiency elicited poorer quality maternal care in comparison to controls with a 52% reduction (p<0.05) in licking and grooming of the pups at PND3. Pup ultrasonic vocalizations, which are crucial for maternal-pup interactions, were increased dramatically (3.5-fold, p<0.001) due to vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D deficiency in early life caused no apparent alteration in adult anxiety or depressive-like behaviors while adult social-like behaviors (assessed by social interaction test) were impaired. While no differences in learning were apparent in the object recognition test, the more cognitively demanding object-inplace test revealed decreased discrimination in adult offspring exposed to vitamin D deficiency in early life in comparison to controls. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal vitamin D deficiency profoundly alters rat maternal-pup interactions which, in conjunction with the well-known effects of vitamin D on neurodevelopment, alters future neuropsychiatric health outcomes. Indeed, vitamin D deficiency in early life resulted in altered social and impaired cognitive behaviors. This work highlights the importance of understanding adequate levels of maternal vitamin D for offspring neurodevelopment and later neuropsychiatric outcomes. INTRODUCTION: Current evidence suggest that prenatal exposure to a number of factors such as inflammation, valproic acid, oxidative stress, pollution or gestational diabetes increase the risk of autism spectrum disorder. Thyroid hormones are critical to neurodevelopment and many regulate many of the genes implicated in autism, however, the association of maternal hypothyroidism in pregnancy with autism is poorly understood. METHODS: Medical records from 594,638 women and their children who delivered at 14 KPSC hospitals between 1991 and 2013 were abstracted, of which 406,465 met the inclusion and exclusion criteria to form a retrospective cohort. Screening for hypothyroidism in pregnancy and autism in the offspring is standard in the KPSC system and the association of maternal hypothyroidism with development of ASD in the offspring was evaluated using Cox proportional hazards models. RESULTS: Women diagnosed with hypothyroidism during pregnancy were at increased risk for having a child with ASD before and after adjusting for confounders, however, results did not reach statistical significance when the hypothyroidism was diagnosed in the 2 nd trimester. Stratified analyses revealed that hypothyroidism in pregnancy increased the risk of ASD for both boys and girls. However, diagnosis in only in the 3 rd trimester increased the risk for boys and diagnosis in the 1 st trimester increased the risk of ASD for girls. Timing of maternal hypothyroidism also showed significant heterogeneity by race with white and Asian offspring being at highest risk for ASD when hypothyroidism was diagnosed in the 3 rd trimester, other/multiple race children when hypothyroidism was diagnosed in the 1 st trimester, and Hispanic children when the hypothyroidism was diagnosed in the 2 nd trimester. No association between maternal hypothyroidism and development of ASD in the offspring was detected for African-Americans. CONCLUSIONS: Hypothyroidism in pregnancy significantly increases the risk of ASD in the offspring. Timing of diagnosis in pregnancy also affects the risk for ASD in a gender and race-dependent manner. Correlates. Catherine Nevin, Kevin Sinclair, Brad Matushewski, Charlie McKenzie, Bryan Richardson. Western University, London, ON, Canada. INTRODUCTION: FGR is a risk factor for developmental brain disorders including ADHD, schizophrenia and autism with risk directly proportional to the severity of FGR. Studies in FGR guinea pigs show brain morphology and neuronal connectivity are altered, but there is no information on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) correlates as a potential screening test to predict which FGR newborns will develop adverse cognitive outcomes. We hypothesize that MRI will be able to identify developmental abnormalities in brain structure to predict the presence and extent of brain injury in FGR guinea pig offspring. METHODS: Guinea pig sows were fed ad libitum (Control) or 70% of the control diet pre-pregnancy, increasing to 90% at mid-pregnancy (MNR). Animals delivered near/at term with one male and/or female selected from each litter to undergo anatomical MRI at 21-25 days and necropsy 48hrs later for growth measures and brain morphology. Whole brain, hippocampal (HC), and lateral ventricle (LV) volumes were imaged using a 9.4T magnet and scored by manual segmentation or connected threshold grower tool on ImageJ. Significance was assumed for p<0.05. RESULTS: FGR-MNR neonates (N=17) were 35% smaller at birth than the appropriate for gestational age (AGA)-Control neonates (N=18), 71±1.8 vs 110±2.3gm; however, at necropsy FGR-MNR neonates were only 17% smaller. FGR-MNR brain weights at necropsy were 5% smaller than AGA-Control values as were MRI brain volumes with both of these measurements well correlated, r=0.6. FGR-MNR neonates showed a decrease in HC volume by 15% and LV volume by 33%, with both positively correlated to birth weight, r=0.5 and 0.36, respectively. As such, HC/brain volume ratios were decreased by 8% (p<0.01), while LV/brain volume ratios were decreased by 20% (p=0.06). CONCLUSIONS: MNR in guinea pigs leads to FGR neonates with rapid "catch-up growth", but brains continue to be smaller despite a degree of "brain sparing". These neonates have decreased HC/brain volume ratios on MRI indicating selective hippocampal vulnerability as a possible biomarker for later cognitive impairment. LV volumes were also variably decreased relative to brain volumes suggesting that other brain areas might be undergoing reactive increases in growth as additional markers for aberrant brain development in these FGR neonates. Epigenetic In hypothalamic tissue (appetite regulatory site), SGA newborns exhibit an increase in appetite (AgRP; agouti-related protein) vs satiety (POMC; pro-opiomelanocortin) neuropeptides. In culture, SGA hypothalamic neural stem cells (NSCs) demonstrate reduced proliferation and neuronal differentiation, and consistent with tissue expression, the neuronal differentiation is preferentially biased towards AgRP versus POMC neurons. DNA methylation (DNA methyltransferase; DNMT1) regulates neurogenesis by maintaining NSC proliferation and suppressing premature differentiation. Once differentiation ensues, DNMT1 preferentially inhibits neuronal and promotes astroglial fate. We hypothesized that the programmed dysfunction of NSC proliferation and differentiation in SGA offspring is epigenetically mediated via DNMT1. METHODS: Control dams received ad libitum food, whereas study dams were 50% food-restricted from pregnancy day 10 to term to create SGA newborns. Primary hypothalamic NSCs from 1 day old SGA and Controls newborns were cultured in complete or differentiation media and transfected with nonspecific or DNMT1-specific siRNA (20 nM). At day 5 of siRNA transfection, NSC proliferation and protein expression of specific markers of NSC (nestin), neuroproliferative factor (Hes1), neurons (Tuj1) and astrocytes (GFAP) were determined. RESULTS: Under basal conditions, SGA NSCs exhibited decreased DNMT1 and reduced proliferation and neurogenesis, but increased GFAP, as compared to controls. DNMT1 siRNA markedly decreased protein expression of DNMT1, confirming silencing. In both SGA and controls in complete media, DNMT1 siRNA inhibited NPC proliferation (0.5-fold), consistent with reduced expression of nestin (0.5-fold) and Hes1 (0.4fold). In differentiation media, DNMT1 siRNA decreased expression of Tuj1 (0.6-fold) but increased GFAP (1.4-fold). CONCLUSIONS: In SGA newborns, impaired neurogenesis is epigenetically mediated via reduction in DNMT1 expression, via suppression of the neuroproliferative factor Hes1. Premature NSC differentiation to astrocytes limits neuronal differentiation, though with a preferential expression to appetite vs satiety neurons. INTRODUCTION: Ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectroscopy (UPLC-MS) and proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy ( 1 H NMR) offer powerful and complimentary approaches to metabolic profiling. We developed methods for analysis of placental tissue in laboring and non-laboring placentas together with those from patients with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP). Organic and aqueous extracts were prepared separately from placental samples (50mg) using two-step liquid-liquid extraction (water:methanol and methanol:dichloromethane). Aqueous samples were analysed on an HSS column and organic samples on a C18 column using a UPLC system coupled to a XEVO Q-ToF Synapt mass spectrometer; . Data were processed (Markerlynx, XCMS) and principal components analysis (PCA) performed using SIMCA-P software. 1 H NMR spectra 1H NMR spectra from aqueous extracts were acquired on a Bruker Avance III 700 spectrometer at 700 MHz (1H frequency). RESULTS: Quality control samples showed tight clustering indicating the data were of good quality. Clear metabolite differences were seen between groups. There was a significant difference in the lipid profiles between the control, treated and untreated groups as well as the labor and non-labor sub groups. In the labor vs non labor analysis, lipid classes and fatty acids showed alterations, with elevations in the intensity of many glycerophospholipids and triacylglycerides being observed in the nonlabor groups. ICP placentas had a different metabolic profile to controls; patients on drug treatment (ursodeoxycholic acid, UDCA) exhibited a different profile to those untreated. Fatty acids, glycerophospholipids and triacylglycerides were found to differ in intensity between these three groups. Alterations indicated differences in lipid regulation, structure and signaling pathways. Spectra were successfully acquired on the NMR platform. We have identified differences between labor and nonlabor groups, and disease vs non disease groups using UPLC-MS. 1 H NMR can be used to analyze placental extracts successfully. Metabolic profiling techniques represent new approaches to the analysis of physiological and pathophysiological changes in the placenta. INTRODUCTION: An increase in intrauterine prostaglandin production is critical for the onset and progression of labour in women and indeed all mammalian species studied. Endocannabinoids can act as substrates for enzymes of the prostaglandin biosynthetic pathways and can be utilized to generate other related compounds such as prostamides and prostanoids. The end products are indistinguishable by radioimmunoassay. Aim: To use mass spectrometry to identify unequivocally, products of endocannabinoid and eicosanoid biosynthetic pathways that are formed upon exposure to inflammatory stimuli, on human chorio-decidua. METHODS: Human chorio-decidual explants from term placentae (delivery by elective caesarean section due to cephalopelvic disproportion) were treated with either lipopolysaccharide derived from Escherichia coli (LPS; 0, 0.1, 1, or 10 µg/mL), interleukin 1beta (IL-1β;0, 0.1, 1, or 10 ng/mL) or tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α; 0, 1, 10, or 100 ng/ mL). The concentrations of eicosanoids (PGF2α-EA, PGE2-EA, PGF2α, PGE2, PGFM, AEA, 2-AG) generated by chorio-decidual explants (in explant culture media) were measured by LC-MS/MS in positive and negative modes. We now show that inflammatory stimuli such as LPS and pro-inflammatory cytokines act differentially on human chorio-decidua and preferentially result in syntheses of prostaglandin end products. Statistical analyses: Statistical differences were determined using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. CONCLUSIONS: These findings create doubt about the interpretation of data on prostaglandin biosynthesis in intrauterine tissues from pregnant women especially in the presence of an infection. The possibility is raised that separation of these products might reduce variability in results and lead to potential uses for their measurement in the diagnosis of preterm labour. This study focussed on chorio-decidual productions of endocannabinoid and eicosanoid biosynthetic pathways further research is required to determine productions following treatments with the base substrates (e.g. arachidonic acid) and production by amniotic membranes. INTRODUCTION: Several studies have implicated increased levels of placental and decidual endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress with the onset of preeclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction, disrupted placental morphogenesis and defective placenta invasion. The onset of term labor has also been associated with an increased ER stress response (ERSR) in the placental, decidual and uterine compartments. Preliminary data from our laboratory has shown that the pregnant uterus experiences and adapts to ER stress across gestation. Moreover, this demonstrates that modulating the uterine ERSR plays a critical role in regulating gestational length in a uterine myocyte caspase 3 (CASP3), dependent manner. However to date the function of placental and decidual ER stress remains undetermined. METHODS: Placental tissues were obtained from CD1 mice at gestation days (E) 8-19 and those undergoing an ER stress induced preterm birth at E17 as a result of administration of Tunicamycin (1.0mg/kg) (1). Cellular fractions were prepared and expression of ER stress markers BiP, CHOP and cleaved (CL) CASP3, the apoptotic markers CL PARP and mitochondrial cytochrome c (CYCS) release were assessed by Western blot. Immunohistochemical analysis and TUNEL assays were also performed on OCT and 4% formaldehyde fixed placental tissues. The ER stress markers BiP and CHOP were elevated towards term and after TM treatment. In contrast CLCASP3 levels, which increased early-mid gestation, declined to undetectable levels as term approached. Indeed CASP3 activation in the placenta was found to be apoptotic in nature, and indicated by increased TUNEL activity, isolated to the trophoblast giant cells. However with the onset of preterm labor at E16.5 apoptotic cells in response to TM reappear in the decidual compartment. CONCLUSIONS: Based on our preliminary data we propose that the spatial and temporal nature of the placental/decidual ERSR and CASP3 activation during pregnancy and preterm birth suggests that placental trophoblast and/or decidual cells may also have the capacity to secrete factors such as DAMPs that propagate an ER stress response in a local and a systemic manner. These data also demonstrate that the uterine and placental ERSR and CASP activation profiles are distinct and regulated independently of each other.  Placental micro-and nano-EVs were isolated from cultured human first trimester placentae by sequential ultracentrifugation (20,000g and 100,000g, respectively). Vesicles were fluorescently labelled and injected into groups of 4-6 female CD1 mice via the tail vein. After 2 minutes, 30 minutes or 24 hours, fluorescence in the brain, thymus, lungs, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys was quantified using an IVIS Kinetic Imager at 605/640nm. Mesenteric resistance artery function was assessed using wire myography. Statistical significance was assessed by the Fisher Exact test and two-way ANOVA. A p value<0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS: Placental micro-EVs were detected in the lungs, while nano-EVs were detected in the lungs, liver and kidneys two minutes post-injection (p=0.026). At 30 minutes, the distribution of nano-EVs was unchanged whereas, micro-EVs remained in the lungs but had also spread to the liver and kidneys. By 24 hours, micro-EVs remained only in the liver and kidneys while nano-EVs were cleared from the kidneys but remained in the lungs and liver (p=0.005). There was no significant effect of nano-EVs (either 30 minutes or 24 hour post-injection) on the ability of mesenteric arteries to vasoconstrict or undergo endothelium-dependent and -independent relaxation, in response to U46619, acetylcholine or sodium nitroprusside respectively (n=5). CONCLUSIONS: While the existence of placental EVs has been known for over 120 years, the cells/organs that these EVs interact with in vivo are still unclear. For the first time, this study shows distinctive distribution patterns of placental micro-and nano-EVs in vivo. Preliminary work indicates that nano-EVs from normal placentae do not affect resistance artery function, at least in non-pregnant animals. HSD3β1 is a key enzyme in the placental steroidogenesis. LIFR plays an important role in trophoblast proliferation and differentiation. Initial invasion and plugging of uterine arteries by trophoblast cells generates hypoxic condition in the utero-placental unit with a pO 2 about 2%. As gestation advances unplugging of the uterine arteries increases blood flow and oxygen levels with a pO 2 about 8%. Pregnancy complications such as preeclampsia and gestational diabetes are known to be associated with chronic hypoxia. If variations in O 2 levels modulate the expression of HSD3β1 and LIFR essential for steroidogenesis and trophoblast development respectively is not known. We hypothesized that priming with hypoxia followed by oxygenation alters the expression of HSD3β1 and LIFR. We examined the role of O 2 on the expression of these genes using first trimester derived trophoblast cell line HTR-8/SV neo. METHODS: HTR-8/SV neo cells were cultured at ambient O 2 , 5% CO 2 in a humidified chamber for 48 hours to obtain 50% confluency in 6-well plates and divided in to two sets. One group of cells was allowed to grow at 2% or 8% O 2 levels for 48 and 72 hours. Other group of cells was allowed to grow at 2% O 2 for 24 hours followed by at 8% O 2 for an additional 48 and 72 hours.Cells were harvested and lysed for total RNA and proteins. Expression of HSD3β1 and LIFR were assessed by qPCR and Western blot. All the experiments were done in triplicates. The student t-Test or one way ANOVA was used for statistical analysis and a p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. RESULTS: Priming with hypoxia (2% O 2 ) followed by oxygenation (8% O 2 ) significantly downregulated the HSD3β1 mRNA and protein expressions. Prolonged exposure (72h) to 2% and 8% O 2 or priming followed by prolonged oxygenation significantly downregulated HSD3β1 mRNA whereas only prolonged hypoxia decreased HSD3β1protein levels. Exposure to 8% O 2 or priming with hypoxia followed by oxygenation significantly upregulated the expression of LIFR mRNA and protein expressions. Prolonged oxygenation or priming with hypoxia followed by prolonged oxygenation significantly decreased the expression of LIFR mRNA and protein. Chronic hypoxia reduced HSD3β1 expression whereas priming with hypoxia induced and sustained oxygenation decreased LIFR expression. O 2 may directly regulate trophoblast cell lineage and its endocrine function. with placental insufficiency leading to fetal growth restriction. We recently reported fractal dimension, a mathematical measure of complexity, as a quantitative measure of villous complexity and observed strong correlation between severe DVH and low fractal dimension score (Mukherjee, 2015) . In this study, we investigated the correlation between fractal dimension and clinical parameters in pregnancies with small for gestational age (SGA) fetuses. We postulate that a lower fractal dimension score (less complexity) would be associated with adverse outcomes of growth restriction. METHODS: Placentas were collected from pregnancies with SGA fetuses (fetal abdominal circumference <10 th percentile for gestational age on ultrasound after 20 weeks gestation; n=50). Wax-embedded tissue blocks were sectioned (5 µm Collagen-gel contraction assay was performed to determine effect of VD on Ang II-mediated PVSMC contractility. Ang II receptor blocker losartan was used as a comparison. Protein expression for VD receptor (VDR), Ang II receptors (AT-1 and AT-2) and RhoA pathway molecules (RhoA -myosin phosphatase regulatory targeting unit 1 (MYPT1)) was determined by Western blot. Data were analyzed by ANOVA and paired t-test. A p level < 0.05 was set as statistically significant. Losartan alone could increase PVSMC relaxation by 23% (p<0.01), VD alone by 12% (p<0.05), and further increased with VD+losartan by 34% (p<0.01) vs. control cells. PVSMC relaxation was significantly increased in cells treated with VD+losartan vs. losartan alone (p<0.05). VDR expression was increased in PVSMC treated with VD. VD and losartan had no effect on AT-1 and AT-2 expression, nor for RhoA and MYPT1 expression in PVSMC. However, pMYPT1 Ser507 , but not pMYPT1 Thr853/696 , expression was significantly upregulated in losartan+Ang II, VD+Ang II, or losartan+VD+Ang II treated cells vs. untreated control or Ang II treated alone, p<0.05 and p<0.01 respectively. CONCLUSIONS: VD could reduce PVSMC contraction-induced by Ang II and potentiate relaxation effect mediated by losartan. Because MYPT1 is the major subunit involved in myosin light chain phosphatase in VSMC and also essential for vasodilation caused by NO, phosphorylation of MYPT1 Ser507 induced by losartan or VD could be a cellular mechanism of VD mediated PVSMC relaxation. (PNMS) is associated with reduced type 2 11β-hydroxysteroid deshydrogenase (11β-HSD2) and type 1 glucose transporter (GLUT1). Cortisol exerts its action by binding to glucocorticoid receptor alpha (GR-α) that acts as a transcription factor. The enzyme 11β-HSD2 protects the fetus from adverse cortisol levels from the mother by converting cortisol to inactive cortisone. This study aims to determine if the placenta mediates the effects of disaster-related PNMS (i.e., 2011 Queensland Flooding, Australia) on placental endocrine function. We hypothesize that: (i) Increased PNMS will be associated with lower placental 11β-HSD2 gene expression which will be moderated by fetal sex; and (ii) Increased PNMS will be associated with a lower placental index (fetal weight to placental weight) which will be moderated by placental 11β-HSD2, GLUT-1 and/or GR-α gene expression. We assessed the women's level of objective hardship (i.e., events they experienced) and subjective distress (i.e., their psychological reaction to the flooding) shortly after the flooding. Placental villi (trophoblastic tissues) from 96 placentas were processed and samples flash frozen immediately after delivery. Gene expression was evaluated by RT-qPCR. Regression and moderation were used for statistical analyses. RESULTS: Results indicate that a higher level of subjective distress is associated with greater 11β-HSD2 gene expression in male fetuses and lower 11β-HSD2 gene expression in female fetuses (∆R 2 =0.074). Results also indicate that high levels of objective hardship coupled with high levels of 11β-HSD2 gene expression (R 2 =0.092), low levels of GLUT-1 gene expression (R 2 =0,126), or low levels of GR-α gene expression (R 2 =0.117) is associated with higher placental index. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that disaster-related PNMS influences placental gene expression in a sex dependent manner. These changes in placental gene/protein expression demonstrate the different survival strategies of the feto-placental unit in case of PNMS depending on fetal sex. Decidual invasion usually is controlled by placental microenvironment, although invasive disorders might arise due to different causes. These pathologies have minimal data regarding biomarkers, treatment or their physiopathology, most of them resulting in high morbidity and mortality. One potential invasive-related molecule in the placental microenvironment is versican, which is a proteoglycan with four different isoforms, known to participate on healthy and neoplastic cells migration and invasion. Hence, it was aimed to disclose the expression and localization of versican in healthy and pathological placentas and associate to probable functions. METHODS: Samples from first trimester, premature and term placenta, as well as from placenta accreta, invasive mole, choriocarcinoma and preeclampsia were characterized and immunolocalized for versican with two different antibodies, one for total versican and other to V0/V1 isoforms. RT-PCR assay was performed to further isoforms expression within the different samples. The V0/V1 versican antibody showed positivity in decidual cells and their ECM in first trimester placenta. In term, premature and preeclamptic placentae, only decidual cells were positive. Invasive moles and choriocarcinoma were negative, whereas EVT cells from placenta accreta showed moderate staining. The antibody for total versican presented similar patterns of staining, with the addition of myometrial and ECM positivity, as well as choriocarcinoma cells staining. RT-PCR confirmed the immunolocalization findings and added differential isoforms expression amid the studied pathologies. CONCLUSIONS: The versican V1 isoform localization only in invasive EVT cells from placenta accreta indicates a possible role on this pathology, representing the first report of a specific molecule expressed only during placenta accreta EVT invasion. Furthermore, versican V1 isoform could be used as specific biomarker for placenta accreta, which could help in predictive and final diagnosis, applied to all invasive grades of the disease. (TMIGD1) is a newly identified cell adhesion molecule that mediates cell-cell interactions, and is mainly expressed in the kidney and colon. In renal epithelial cells, TMIGD1 regulates cell proliferation and migration. TMIGD1 expression was also found to be downregulated in human colon tumors. Given previous evidence that placental invasion shares certain characteristics with the process of tumor metastasis, we elected to study the role of TMIGD1 during placentation. We hypothesize that TMIGD1 is expressed in trophoblast cells and regulates cell migration during placental invasion. METHODS: Placental samples were collected at the time of elective pregnancy terminations. TMIGD1 localization in trophoblast was visualized using immunofluorescence (IF). The immortalized trophoblast cell line HTR8/SVneo was cultured and processed for quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) to detect TMIGD1 gene expression using GAPDH as an internal control. cDNA obtained through reverse transcription of RNA from kidney tubular epithelial cells served as an external control. We overexpressed TMIGD1 in HTR8/SVneo cells using a retroviral vector. RESULTS: TMIGD1 mRNA expression in HTR8/SVneo cells was 3.5% of that in kidney tubular epithelium, which expresses the highest TMIGD1 levels of all tissues tested. IF results showed TMIGD1 protein expression in trophoblast cells of first and second trimester placental tissue. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings showed for the first time that TMIGD1 is expressed in trophoblast cells and provide a basis for studying the potential role of TMIGD1 in cell migration. Our modified human trophoblast cell line overexpressing TMIGD1 may be used to investigate TMIGD1 effects on trophoblast activity. Further studies are necessary to determine expression patterns at different developmental stages and to define the purpose of this novel protein during placental invasion. The found in the point of contact between the mother and the baby: the decidua. These decidual NK (dNK) cells possess unique phenotypical and functional properties and are considered regulators of remodeling of the maternal fetal interface. Here we investigate if the dNK cells have the ability to "remember" pregnancy. METHODS: FACS analysis was performed on dNK cells for NK cell receptors, among other factors. We performed RNAseq analysis on the NKG2C+ dNK cells for various genes related to angiogenesis, immune modulation and growth factors production. For the most highly expressed genes, results were also validated by real-time PCR. RESULTS: Among the factors examined, we observed in particular expansion of NKG2C+ dNK population in parous women. dNK cells from parous women express NKG2C in significantly higher percentages as compared with NK cells from nulliparous women. In NKG2C+ cells we observed an upregulation of various genes related to angiogenesis, immune modulation and growth factors production, validated by real-time PCR. These results were independent of maternal CMV immunity status. CONCLUSIONS: We report for the first time that dNK cells display a memory response and that this specific subpopulation of NK cells is expanded upon a second encounter with a semi-allogeneic fetus. This finding may give insight to the etiology of preeclampsia with increased risk in first pregnancy. The result of this process impacts not only placental defense against viral pathogens but also likely impacts implantation as well as the placenta's capacity to systemically regulate maternal physiology through direct interactions and the production of proteins and shedding of exosomes We have previously shown that tetraspanins regulate HIV-induced cellcell fusion, as ablation of CD9, CD81, and CD63 enhances the formation of multinucleate syncytium. Others have shown that trophoblast and choriocarcinoma cell lines express CD9 and CD81. Further, evidence exists suggesting that CD9 may regulate the expression of syncytin-1, which is implicated in cytotrophoblast fusion and is a membrane protein originating from the co-opted envelope gene of human endogenous retrovirus-W (HERV-W). Our objective was to examine further the role that tetraspanins CD9, CD63, and CD81 play in regulating cell fusion in a model of syncytiotrophoblast formation. METHODS: BeWo choriocarcinoma cells were transfected with either the N-terminal or C-terminal half of a split GFP-luciferase chimeric protein and either empty vector, or vector driving tetraspanin overexpression. GFP and luciferase signal was only detectable upon fusion between the two cell populations and complementation of the split chimeric protein. Cells were stimulated with forskolin for 48 hours to induce syncytium formation, and were then lysed to measure luciferase activity by standard methods. Differences in fusion activity across 3-5 biological replicates were statistically evaluated by one-way ANOVA. RESULTS: Upon tetraspanin over-expression, up to five-fold inhibition of forskolin-induced cell-cell fusion was observed as compared to control. Over-expression of CD81 produced the greatest level of inhibition (C19MC) is the biggest human miRNA gene cluster and is mainly expressed in trophoblast cells. In this study we compare the effect of oxygen, glucose and insulin on the relative expression of C19MC miRNAs in trophoblast cells and in exosomes released by these cells. BeWo cells were used as trophoblast cell model. Cells were incubated with D-glucose (5 or 25 mM) and/or insulin (1nM) under 1%, 3% or 8% O 2 for 48 h. Exosomes were isolated from cell-conditioned media by differential and buoyant density centrifugation. Total cellular RNA was purified from cells and exosomes using miRNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). The expression of miR-512-5p, miR-517a, miR-518a-5p, miR-518b, miR-518c, miR-518e, miR-519d, miR-520c-3p, miR-525-5p and RNU6B was determined by RT-qPCR. C19MC miRNAs expression was normalised (∆CT) to RNU6B and the data are presented as 2 -∆CT . The effect of microenvironment on C19MC miRNas was assessed by two-way ANOVA. RESULTS: Two-way ANOVA with variance partitioned between oxygen tension and glucose identified a significantly effect (p<0.05) of oxygen on: miR-525-5p, miR-518a-5p and miR-518b; and a significantly effect of glucose on: miR-525-5p, miR-518a-5p, miR-518b and miR-520c-3p. When the variance was partitioned between oxygen and insulin a significantly effect of oxygen was identified only for miR-517a, however, a significantly effect (p<0.05) of insulin was identified on: miR-525-5p, miR-518c, miR-519d, miR-518b, miR-518e and miR-520c-3p. Finally, two-way ANOVA with variance partitioned between glucose and insulin did not identify a significantly effect (p>0.05) of glucose and insulin on the relative expression of C19MC miRNAs studied. Interestingly, correlation analysis established a positive correlation between the relative expression of C19MC miRNAs in cells compared with cell-derived exosomes under 8% oxygen and 5mM D-glucose, however, high glucose, insulin and hypoxia abolished the positive correlation between cells and exosomes. CONCLUSIONS: This study establishes that the relative expression of C19MC miRNAs is regulated by the microenvironmental milieu in trophoblast cells and in exosomes released by these cells. We, therefore, hypothesize that in response to metabolic challenges, trophoblast cells specifically package C19MC miRNA into the exosomes they release. Maternal vitamin D deficiency during pregnancy is associated with adverse perinatal outcomes including small-forgestational-age infants. Placental amino acid transport activity is pivotal for fetal growth and recent studies show that maternal serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D and vitamin D binding protein levels were positively associated with placental expression of certain amino acid transporter genes, suggesting that placental amino acid transport may be regulated by maternal vitamin D and vitamin D-binding protein. We hypothesized that 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 increases the gene expression of amino acid transporters and stimulates placental amino acid transport activity in cultured primary human trophoblast (PHT) cells. METHODS: Term placental tissue was collected from healthy pregnant women undergoing elective Cesarean section. PHT cells were isolated and at 66 hour in culture, cells were treated with increasing concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 . At 90 hours of culture, System A and system L amino acid transport activities were assessed by measuring uptake of 14 C-methyl-aminoisobutyric acid and 3 H-leucine respectively. RNA was isolated from cell lysates and mRNA expression of system A and system L isoforms was determined by Q-PCR. Data are presented as mean + SEM. Statistical significance was determined either by Student's t-test or by repeated measures ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post-hoc test. RESULTS: 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 at 1.0 nM increased System A (+23%, P<0.001) and System L activity (+26%, P<0.05). Treatment with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 significantly increased SNAT2 mRNA expression, but not SNAT1 and SNAT4. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 did not influence the expression of LAT1 or LAT2 mRNA. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that physiological concentrations of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D 3 promote amino acid transport in cultured PHT cells. Given that fetal growth is linked to amino acid availability, these observations implicate effects on placental amino acid transport as one possible mechanism underlying the association between maternal vitamin D status and fetal growth. Global Metabolomics of the Placenta Over 24 Hours. Anushka Chelliah, 1 Jacquelyn Walejko, 1 Charles Wood, 1 Maureen Keller-Wood, 1 Arthur Edison, 2 Anthony Gregg. 1 1 Univ. Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; 2 Univ. Georgia, Athens, GA, USA. The current data for optimization of placental specimen collection for metabolomics studies suggest immediate processing of specimens. This poses a significant challenge during specimen collection and the lack of timely processing may result in loss of useful metabolic data. We aim to evaluate changes in metabolites of placental tissue at various time points up to 24hrs post-delivery. METHODS: Five gravid full-term, non-labored patients were identified at UF Health, and consented for participation in an IRB approved study. Placentas were collected immediately following cesarean delivery, and stored at 4°C within 1hr. Tissue specimens were frozen in liquid nitrogen at 4 time points:15min, 30min, 1hr and 24hrs. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy was conducted on a 600 MHz spectrometer to gain global metabolic profiles of placental samples. Significance of metabolites was determined using a student's t-test of the area under the metabolite peak(s) of probabilistic quotient normalized spectra. A persistent profile of 19 identified metabolites was not significantly changed at 30min, and were still measurable across all time points independent of maternal subject variability [Fig1] . The profile of metabolites significantly increased at 24hrs, including amino acids, lactate and choline, while Glycerophosphocholine(GPC), glucose and taurine were significantly decreased(p<0.05). Acidic amino acids, creatine, acetate, histidine, trimethylamine N-oxide(TMAO), formate, and 3-hydroxybutyrate(3HB) did not significantly differ over 24hrs. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: In our analysis, several metabolites persisted in placental tissue through all time points, up to 24hrs while lactate and glucose displayed variability reflecting anaerobic glycolysis. Our study challenges the current notion of immediate specimen processing, suggesting there may be valuable metabolic data present in tissue up to 24hrs post-delivery. To date, there is limited data on metabolic transport in the placenta, and the persistence of metabolites may be used to gain information on altered metabolism in this tissue. Acylcarnitine Maternal BMI was also negatively associated with 22 cord AC. Maternal AC were not related to BMI. Placental CPT1 was positively correlated with placental AC (total AC: R=0.52, P=0.03). Neonatal body fat was negatively correlated with AC of long-chain essential fatty acids in the placenta, linoleate (R= -0.51, P=0.03) and alpha-linolenate (R= -0.50, P=0.03), but was not related to AC in the cord blood. CONCLUSIONS: As fatty acid oxidation in the fetus is low, cord plasma AC likely reflect spillover from the placenta. Placental AC correlated positively with CPT1, reflecting the role of this mitochondrial enzyme in AC synthesis. Maternal obesity was associated with lower placental CPT1 and AC, suggesting that placental fatty acid oxidation is impaired in these women. Placental oxidation of long-chain essential fatty acids was low in neonates with high fat accrual. We propose that mitochondrial dysfunction impairs fatty acid oxidation in placentas of obese women, leading to high neonatal fat deposition. and early-onset preeclampsia. The ER plays a central role in synthesis and folding of secretory and membrane proteins. We demonstrated in a transgenic murine model with high basal protein synthesis that ER stress is induced specifically in the endocrine region of the placenta, and associated with FGR. As the mutation is present in the fetus as well as the placenta, we are unable to conclude whether the FGR outcome arose from placental ER stress. Therefore, a new transgenic model was generated in which ER stress is specifically activated in the junctional zone of the murine placenta. METHODS: Perk is one of three proximity sensors in the ER stress response pathway and on activation phosphorylates eIF2α, attenuating protein translation upon stress. Spongiotrophoblast-specific Perk knockout (Sp-Perk-/-) animals were generated by crossing Tpbpa-Cre and Perk fl/fl mice. As the degree of ER stress is minimal in the placenta of Sp-Perk -/mice under normal conditions, hypoxia was used to exacerbate ER stress in the junctional zone. Mice were housed at 13% O 2 from E0.5 to E18.5in accordance with the UK Home Office Animals Act 1986. Animals were culled and placental and fetal weights measured. Placental tissue was snapfrozen for western blotting or fixed in either glutaraldehyde for electron microscopy or paraformaldehyde for lectin staining and stereology. RESULTS: Reduced eIF2a phosphorylation in the junctional zone confirmed successful knockout of Perk. Electron microscopy showed ER stress induced by the mutation was confined to the spongiotrophoblast. Lectin staining revealed accumulation of anomalous glycoproteins aggregates in the mutant junctional zone. Placental efficiency was reduced in the mutants (a heavier placenta without change in fetal weight). Stereological analysis revealed the junctional zone of the mutant was enlarged, suggesting a compensatory response. Finally, the incidence of embryonic loss was doubled in females carrying mutant litters. CONCLUSIONS: Perturbation of placental endocrine function diminishes placental efficiency. Although there was no change in fetal weight, the incidence of embryonic loss was enhanced indicating a potential adverse effect on fetal development. Supported by The Wellcome Trust (084804/2/08/Z). Streptococcus-Induced Chorioamnionitis. Julie L Bergeron, 1 Clemence Guiraut, 2 Djordje Grbic, 1 Louis-Charles Fortier, 3 Guillaume Sebire. INTRODUCTION: Chorioamnionitis (CA) increases the risk of the newborn to suffer from long term sequelae, including brain injury. CA is assumed to mostly arise from ascending genitourinary tract infections caused by pathogens such as group B streptococcus (GBS), one of the most common bacteria colonizing pregnant women. We previously showed a key role of interleukine (IL)-1 β in the induction of CA in a rat model of maternal immune activation induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from E. coli. Since LPS and GBS share some toll-like receptor's signaling pathways, we hypothesized that IL-1β is a key player in the development of GBS-induced CA. The goal of this study is to uncover the IL-1β driven inflammatory mediators underlying GBS-induced CA. METHODS: Dams were injected intraperitoneally with inactivated GBS (10 9 CFU/100 µL/12 h, n=3-5) or sterile saline (control group, n=2-3) from gestational day 19 to 21. Cesareans were performed at different time points (from 1 h to 72 h) after the first injection to collect placentas, maternal blood, and fetal blood. To assess cells and molecules involved in inflammatory response to GBS, proteins titration (ELISA) and histological analysis (immunohistochemistry and cell count) were performed. The t test with Welch correction was used for statistical analysis. Resveratrol is a nutritional supplement with antiinflammatory properties that may be useful for preventing inflammationmediated pregnancy complications. However, its effects on placental cytokine production are unclear. Therefore, we evaluated the effects of resveratrol on basal and bacteria-stimulated production on biomarkers with known or suspected roles in adverse pregnancy outcomes. METHODS: Placental explant cultures were established from women, not in labor, undergoing term elective Cesarean sections. Cultures were treated with 0, 5, 10, 25, 50 or 100 µM resveratrol in the presence or absence of 10 7 CFU/ml heat-killed E. coli overnight. Conditioned medium was harvested and concentrations of pro-(IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α) and anti-inflammatory (IL-10, HO-1, and sgp130) cytokines were quantified by immunoassay. No effects of resveratrol were observed on basal production of IL-1β or TNF-α where concentrations were at, or near, the sensitivity of the assay. IL-6 production was reduced by resveratrol with results being significant at 50 and 100 µM (P < 0.005). IL-10 production was reduced by 5 uM (P = 0.032), and enhanced by, 25 µM (P = 0.005) resveritrol. Basal HO-1 production was reduced at 10 (P = 0.005) or 25 (P < 0.001) µM resveratrol. Basal production of sgp130 was enhanced by 25 µM (P < 0.001) resveratrol. For E. coli-stimulated cultues, resveratrol at 50 or 100 µM, increased IL-1β production (P < 0.001 for both). IL-6 production was increased by resveratrol at 10 µM (P = 0.001), but reduced at, 100 µM (P < 0.001). Resveratrol also reduced E. coli-stimulated TNF-α production at 100 µM (P < 0.001) concentration. IL-10 production by E. coli-stimulated placenta cultures was reduced by 25 (P < 0.001), 50 (P = 0.008), or 100 (P < 0.001) µM resveratrol. E. coli-induced HO-1 production, however, was increased by 100 µM (P < 0.001) resveratrol. Resveratrol reduced sgp-130 production at all concentrations tested (P < 0.001 each). CONCLUSIONS: Resveratrol does not possess exclusively antiinflammatory or pro-inflammatory properties in our culture system and results are highly dose-dependent. These results suggest that resveratrol may have limited use for preventing adverse pregnancy associated with placental inflammation. Maternal malarial infection leads to poor perinatal outcomes including low birth weight from preterm delivery and intrauterine growth restriction. Primigravidas are more susceptible to these complications. In placental malaria (PM), Plasmodium falciparum infected red blood cells cause an inflammatory response in the placenta that may interfere with maternal-fetal interchange, leading to poor growth. In viral and bacterial infections, the type I interferon (IFN) pathway plays an immunomodulatory role, controlling the inflammatory response. However, its role in PM is unknown. METHODS: This is a prospective cohort study to investigate the role of the type I IFN response in PM. We obtained 40 whole placental biopsies from a cohort of women delivering at Tororo District Hospital, Uganda, an area of high malaria endemicity with 40% prevalence of PM at the time of delivery. Quantitative PCR analysis was performed to explore the expression profile of genes in the anti-inflammatory type I (IFN-b, MX-1, and IL-10) and the proinflammatory type II (IFN-g, TNF-a, and IL-6) IFN pathways. We also investigated the relationship between the expression of these cytokines and clinical outcomes. RESULTS: Of the 40 patients, 18 had PM and 22 were uninfected. We found a 4-fold increase in IFN-b and IL-10 expression in multigravidas with PM, when compared to gravidity-matched, uninfected controls. This effect was not observed in primigravidas. The expression of MX-1, IFN-g, TNF-a, and IL-6 did not change. Linear regression analysis showed a positive association between IFN-b levels and higher birth weights (p=0.006). There was no association between the expression of these genes and gestational age. CONCLUSIONS: In PM, the type I IFN pathway is differentially regulated in primigravidas as compared to multigravidas. Upregulation of the type I IFN pathway in multigravidas suggested a gravidity-dependent anti-inflammatory response to infection. The association between IFN-b expression and higher birth weight implicated a protective role for type I IFNs in the pathogenesis of intrauterine growth restriction. (GBS) infection is one of the major causes of chorioamnionitis, which is associated with preterm births and perinatal brain injuries leading to cognitive impairments such as autism spectrum disorder. Our hypothesis is that end-gestational GBS infection of the dams has a deleterious neurodevelopmental impact on uninfected offspring through a maternofetal inflammatory response. Our goal was to study, with a rat model, the impact of maternal GBS infection on the placental and neurodevelopmental features in the offspring. METHODS: Dams were inoculated on gestational day (G)19 with live serotype Ia GBS (10 8 CFU). C-sections were performed at G21 and G22 to collect placentas, maternal and fetal blood. The maternofetal inflammatory response was studied by ELISA and immunohistochemistry. Behavioral tests were performed from P7 to P40 to assess autistic-like behavior. Brains were collected at postnatal (P)40 for histological studies. Magnetic resonance imaging and diffusion tensor imaging were executed on young adult rats. RESULTS: GBS-infection of placentas resulted in sex dichotomic developmental impairments manifested as autistic-like behavior in males: impairments in communication, social interactions, and sensory integration. GBS-infected dams displayed chorioamnionitis characterized by a higher infiltration of polymorphonuclear cells in males. Increased titers of interleukine-1β were detected in the maternal blood, the placentas, and in the male fetuses' blood following GBS infection. GBS-exposed males showed a reduced thickness of periventricular white matter. Trend toward a decreased mean fractional anisotropy, estimating alterations of white matter organization, was observed in the corpus callosum of GBS-exposed males. CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to live GBS induces maternofetal immune activation resulting in neurodevelopmental and behavioral abnormalities recapitulating those of human ASD, including sex dichotomy and neurobehavioral phenotype. Placental inflammation and white matter injuries will be further characterized by ongoing studies. Little is known about the challenges that women experience while seeking care for their fibroids. The purpose of this study was to assess women's perceptions of the care they received during evaluation of their fibroids. METHODS: Women with symptomatic uterine fibroids were recruited from an academic medical center and the larger community. Women completed one-on-one, semi-structured interviews, a demographic survey and a health literacy assessment. Interviews were recorded and transcribed verbatim. Data were analyzed using a grounded theory approach and uploaded to NVivo for thematic coding. Three coders independently identified major themes and sub-themes. RESULTS: Sixty women completed the study. The mean age of participants was 43 ± 6.8 years. 61.7% self-identified as Black, 25% as White, 8.3% as Hispanic and 5% as Asian. The kappa amongst coders was 0.94. Most of our study participants reported negative health care interactions during their fibroid evaluation. A minority of women (28%) reported a lack of pressure to obtain any treatment despite this being a cohort of women with symptomatic fibroids. Disparities in two major subthemes were identified: pressure to obtain surgery and poor interactions with medical providers. Of the women who reported pressure to obtain surgery, black women (72%) experienced disproportionately higher rates of pressure to obtain hysterectomies and perceived this pressure as negative. The majority of them sought second opinions, most were nulliparous, and all self-identified as single. Finally, black and Hispanic women (74%) reported higher rates of poor interactions with medical providers in comparison to 21% of white women. CONCLUSIONS: A significant proportion of women reported negative health care experiences during their fibroid evaluation. Although women predominately expressed displeasure with feeling forced to pursue surgery, a significant minority also expressed displeasure with being encouraged to not pursue any treatment. The experiences of our study participants highlight the critical role of physician-patient shared decision making during medical evaluation. Our findings support the need for initiatives that foster trust between physicians and patients and research aimed at understanding the health seeking behaviors of women with fibroids. Early Women are over-represented in chronic pain disorders and even non-pelvic pain can show cyclical exacerbations, usually when sex hormones are low. Most early phase analgesic trials, however, only investigate men and increasingly employ sensitive measures of the pain experience such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of the brain. Here we used fMRI to investigate whether the cerebral response to pain depends on the sex of the participants and hormonal status of female volunteers. METHODS: Non-hormone using, pain-free subjects were recruited (12 women; 14 men). 3T fMRI brain scans were performed using noxious thermal stimulation of the left arm, individually calibrated to a pain intensity of 5/10. Blood was drawn post-scan and batch analysed for a steroid hormone profile. Women underwent 3 scans, on days 1-2, 10-12, 20-22 of their menstrual cycle (order randomized); men had a single scan. Data from the women were subdivided dependent on their hormonal state at the time of the scan: low estradiol, low progesterone (LELP); high estradiol, low progesterone (HELP); high estradiol, high progesterone (HEHP). Men were compared to women in each state. Data were analysed with FSL (FMRIB Software Library) using a general linear modeling approach, thresholded at Z>2.3, p<0.05. RESULTS: There were no behavioural or imaging differences between men and HELP women. Both LELP and HEHP women rated the stimuli significantly less unpleasant than men (p=0.037 and p=0.027 respectively). Men activated a number of key pain processing regions more than LELP women, including posterior insula, mid-anterior cingulate cortex and primary and secondary somatosensory cortices. Comparing men to HEHP women greater activation was seen in the insula, caudate, putamen and inferior frontal gyrus of men and in the left amygdala and hippocampus of women. CONCLUSIONS: Despite no difference in noxious input, sex differences in the affective component of pain (unpleasantness) and the cerebral response were seen when estradiol and progesterone were either both low or both high. These findings suggest that central mechanisms generating the experience of pain differ dependent on hormonal state. To optimize the identification of effective analgesics for women, we propose that early stage clinical trials include women, particularly those in a low estradiol low progesterone state. INTRODUCTION: Laparoscopy is a major procedure for treating endometriosis but is not curative. We compared the risk of subsequent surgery among women receiving surgery plus LA, surgery plus other approved endometriosis therapies (OTH) and surgery alone. We identified women 18-49 who underwent laparoscopy (index) with an endometriosis diagnosis (ICD-9-CM: 617.xx) from 2005-2011 and had 12 months continuous health plan coverage pre and post index in MarketScan Commercial Database. Cohorts were based on use of therapies on or after index: surgery plus LA, surgery plus OTH, and surgery alone. The surgery plus LA cohort was divided in adherent LA vs. non-adherent LA groups based on medication possession ratio >0.80 measured 6 months post-index. Risk of subsequent endometriosis-related surgery over 6 or 12 months post-index was compared using multivariable Cox proportional hazards models. RESULTS: 10,808 women were identified (mean age 37 years). Compared to surgery alone, adherent LA cohort had significantly lower risk of subsequent surgery within 6 months whereas risk for non-adherent LA patients was not significantly different. *Figure(s) will be available online. At 12 months, the risk of subsequent surgery was not lower for either group compared to surgery alone. Women receiving surgery plus OTH had significantly higher risk of subsequent surgery at 6 and 12 months. The study did not track adverse events but it must be expected that safety profile of LA labels applies. Most frequent ones are hot flashes, headache, vaginitis, depression/emotional lability, general pain, nausea/ vomiting, weight gain/ loss, decreased libido, dizziness, acne and impact on bone health.Patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery could experience complications like intestinal, urinary tract and nerve injuries. CONCLUSIONS: Therapy with LA after laparoscopy for endometriosis is associated with lower risk of subsequent surgery at 6 months in adherent women. Assessing negatively. This study aimed to assess the differential effect of EM symptoms on HRQL using the endometriosis health profile (EHP-30). METHODS: An online cross-sectional survey of US women was conducted in the US. All women completed a prevalence screener; women who reported EM diagnosis or EM-related symptoms were eligible to complete the full survey. This analysis focused on HRQL (measured by EHP-30; a disease specific instrument that assess five domains of HRQL) among women who reported EM diagnosis aged 18-49. Women who had uterine fibroids or hysterectomy were excluded. Univariate comparisons were completed using T-tests and multivariate regression was used to assess the differential impact of EM symptoms on HRQL. All analyses were weighted to be nationally representative. Endometriosis affects 10% of women of reproductive age and often goes undiagnosed for years. We sought to develop noninvasive biomarkers of endometriosis to aid in the early diagnosis and treatment of the disease. miRNAs (non-coding RNAs of ~22 nucleotides in length) are candidates for non-invasive diagnosis of a wide range of diseases. We have previously identified several miRNAs involved in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Here we use a mouse model to identify members of the let-7 miRNA family that may serve as serum biomarkers of endometriosis. METHODS: Murine experimental endometriosis was surgically induced in C57/Bl6 mice, while controls received sham surgery. Total RNA was extracted from the serum of endometriosis (n=17) and sham (n=11) mice and evaluated for relative expression of let-7a,b,c,d, e, f and g via RT-qPCR. miR-23a was measured as an internal control. The Mann-Whitney U test was used to determine differences in miRNA expression between animals with and without endometriosis and multiple markers were evaluated using a linear regression model and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. We identified a difference in the serum levels of let-7a between endometriosis and sham mice (fold change of -1.51; p<0.05). Additionally, let-7b, c, and e were able to improve the performance of a biomarker in identification of endometriosis mice when combined with let-7a in a logistic regression model. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve showed an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.727 and 0.802 for let-7a and the regression model respectively. A cutoff point was chosen for each ROC curve that minimized the sum of false positives and false negatives. The cutoff point for let-7a displayed a sensitivity and specificity of 94.1% and 45.5%, respectively. The cutoff point for the logistic regression model displayed a sensitivity and specificity of 88.2% and 63.6%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Four let-7 miRNAs (a, b, c and e) can be used to distinguish between mice with surgically-induced endometriosis and sham surgery. The identification of let-7 family miRNAs as serum biomarkers in both humans and the mouse model described here indicates that this group of miRNAs has as high potential as clinical biomarkers of endometriosis. Our goal was to compare the ability of two administration methods (silastic and polyethylene capsule) to release estrogen (E2) at a physiological steady state level for up to three months. METHODS: 28 female C57Bl/6J mice were subjected to a daily vaginal smear and a weekly blood sample. Animals were divided into 3 groups and followed during 3 months: 1. Natural cycling (NC) animals (n = 10) were exposed to male bedding material (NC group) 2. Ovariectomized animals (n = 10) were implanted with a silastic capsule (36 µg/ml E2), which was replaced every 28 days, due to a known decline in E2 levels (SC group) 3. Ovariectomized animals (n = 8) were implanted with a PE capsule (  The NC and SC groups behaved similarly with respect to estradiol levels and relative bladder weight, although relative uterine weight was lower in the SC group. In contrast, the mice with the remaining PE capsules had higher relative uterine and bladder weights, and higher serum E2 levels compared to the NC group. These data support that silastic capsules are superior to PE capsules in releasing E2 at physiological levels over a 3 month period. Characterization of NK Cells in Endometriosis Associated Pain. Although natural killer (NK) cells are quickly mobilized upon painful stimuli and can control neurite outgrowth and innervation in vivo, the link between NK cells and pain is still a largely unexplored area. NK cell subsets are abundant constituents of the endometrium and they infiltrate many inflamed tissue sites, including the peritoneum of women with endometriosis (EM). Here our aim is to study the role for NK cells in EM and their potential link with pain. METHODS: NK cell subsets in peritoneal fluid (PF) and endometrium are studied by multicolour flow cytometry (FACS), single cell mass-cytometry (CyTOF), and quadruple immunohistochemistry (IHC) to understand how these cells differ between healthy and endometriosis affected women. Major NK cell subsets are sorted from tissues of healthy and endometriosis affected women and their transcriptome profile is analysed by RNAseq. Furthermore, we study the effect of Substance P (SP) on NK cells in various human ex vivo models, as this neuropeptide is elevated in EM and involved in pain perception. Finally, we study the link between NK cells and inflammatory pain in various experimental models including an endometrial explant model using multicolour flow cytometry, CyTOF, and multiparametric analysis of soluble pain-associated mediators. RESULTS: Our preliminary results indicate that unique NK cells are present in PF of women with EM and that blockade of checkpoint inhibitory receptors allows such NK cells to clear autologous endometrial stromal cells ex vivo. Furthermore, elevated numbers of activated NK cells are found in the PF of experimental models of inflammatory pain. Human NK cells express SP receptors and SP stimulation enhances NK cell cytotoxicity against certain target cells, but has a marginal effect on cytokine release. CONCLUSIONS: We hypothesize that a better understanding of the various phenotypes and functions of NK cells in endometriosis associated pain will help to identify new therapeutic strategies to treat not only endometriosis itself, but also to reveal new targets/pathways addressing pain and novel means to enhance pregnancy success. Endometriosis is a non-malignant disorder which affects 10-15% of women and is associated with debilitating pelvic pain and impaired fertility. Progesterone (P) resistance is commonly observed in women with endometriosis. Expression of PR particularly PR-B is significantly lower in the ectopic endometrium in patients with endometriosis due to hypermethylation of the PR-B promoter. We have previously reported that mice overexpressing the intracellular domain of Notch1 (N1ICD) display impaired Pgr expression due to hypermethylation of exon1 of the Pgr gene, which is mediated by the complex of Notch1 target transcriptional factor PU.1 and Dnmt3b. METHODS: IHC and qPCR were used to detect the expression level of members of the Notch signaling pathway in endometriotic and endometrial tissue of women and baboons with or without disease. Endometrial Epithelial Cells (EEC) were used for in vitro determination of mechanisms. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza) was used to inhibit DNA methyltransferase activation. RESULTS: Expression of NOTCH1 and JAG2, but not other Notch receptors or ligands, are significantly increased in the ectopic lesions compared to the eutopic endometrium in both women and baboons with endometriosis. The increase was most evident on the epithelium. Expression of PU.1 was also increased in endometriotic tissues in same set of samples. Expression levels of PU.1 and NOTCH1 were significantly correlated (R=0.9353, p<0.0001). Overexpression of N1ICD in EEC cells results in a decrease of PR-B and an increase in PU.1 which correlates with the decrease in PR-B expression in endometriotic tissues as a consequence of hyper-methylation. Furthermore, inhibition of methylation by 5-Aza treatment in N1ICD overexpressing cells reversed the suppression of PR-B expression but had no effect on PU.1 expression. CONCLUSIONS: NOTCH1 and its ligand JAG2 are significantly upregulated in endometriotic lesions, specifically in epithelial cells which is associated with an increase in PU.1 expression. We propose that the N1ICD regulated increase in PU.1 expression enriches the recruitment of DNMT3B on the PGR promoter, resulting in a decrease in PR-B expression which may contribute to P-resistance in endometriosis.  We have successfully adapted the RRBS technology for analysis of less than 10 ng input DNA, obtained from LCM samples. The use of LCM allowed a proper and reproducible separation of target cell populations as indicated by the evidence of cell type-specific hypermethylation (transcriptional silencing) of stromal cell markers in the epithelial cell fraction and vice versa. We are currently expanding our systematic methylation profiling in these distinct cell populations, collected from patients with endometriosis and control individuals, and will present resulting data. CONCLUSIONS: These findings are expected to improve our knowledge about the pathogenesis of endometriosis and may contribute to the identification of new therapeutic targets or potential biomarkers for early stage diagnosis in endometriosis. There is emerging evidence that interactions between MCs and nerves may play a role in activation of pain pathways in women with endometriosis. The aim of this study was to investigate the phenotype of tissue resident peritoneal MCs in women with chronic pelvic pain with and without endometriosis. METHODS: Tissue biopsies (endometriotic lesions and peritoneum) and peritoneal fluid (PF) were collected from 20 women attending a pelvic pain clinic (n=10 with endometriosis and n=10 with no obvious underlying pathology). Concentrations of tryptase, chymase and histamine in PF were measured by ELISA. The phenotype of the MCs was investigated by immunofluorescent colocalization of tryptase and chymase. RESULTS: Histamine, tryptase and chymase were detected in PF and MCs were identified on cytospins. Concentrations of histamine were higher in women with pain without endometriosis and concentrations of chymase were higher in women with stage II/IV endometriosis. MCs were present in both the peritoneum and in endometriotic lesions of women with and without endometriosis, and appeared highly activated. The predominant protease in MCs in these tissue sites was chymase (MCs were immunonegative for typtase); chymase staining was detected inside and surrounding MCs. CONCLUSIONS: This study has revealed the presence of numerous chymase positive MCs in the peritoneal wall of women suffering from pelvic pain irrespective of a diagnosis of endometriosis. MC-derived proteases were readily detected in PF. This study highlights a potential role for MCs in activation of nerves and suggests inhibitors of chymase could offer potential as a therapy for chronic pelvic pain. Endometriosis is a chronic inflammatory disease, characterized by the presence and growth of endometrial tissue outside the uterine cavity. It is associated with moderate to severe pelvic and abdominal pain symptoms, subfertility and a marked reduction in health-related quality of life. In many endometriosis patients relevant co-morbidity with affective disorders like depression or anxiety are described. It is well known that these conditions have a worsening effect on pain perception on chronic pain patients and might explain the strong negative impact on quality of life observed in endometriosis-pain patients. In the last decades CNS research provided for identification and development of drugs for treatment of affective disorders various robust animal models. Whereas several studies are demonstrating biological and histopathological similarities of endometriosis rodent models with the human situation, the behavioral characterization of these models was never performed. The aim of the present study was to investigate the anxiety/depression-related behaviors in an endometriosis mouse model. We used a mouse model of surgically-induced endometriosis by syngeneic transplantation of uterine tissue on the intestinal mesentery and the abdominal wall. We used a battery of anxiety/depression, locomotor activity and pain assays to characterize the behavioral phenotype resulting from surgically-induced endometriosis in mice. Using the elevate plus maze (EPM) and the novel environment induced feeding suppression (NEIFS) assays we demonstrated the presence of increased anxious behaviors. An increased percentage of time spent in the closed arm in the EPM and an increased latency to take up food in the NEIFS in comparison to sham operated control animals are indicative of an increased anxiety in mice with endometriosis. No effects were observed on locomotion or pain assays either in sham or endometriosis animals. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, an increase in anxiety-like behaviors was observed in a mouse model of endometriosis, suggesting that the presence of endometriosis lesions in the abdominal cavity could, similarly to patients, induce profound psychopathological changes/impairments in mice. These readouts might provide additional tools for preclinical identification of mechanisms relevant for development of endometriosis related symptoms. has recently identified 9 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) significantly associated with endometriosis. Seven of the identified variants, distributed in six loci, are located in or near (within 50 kb) the following genes: WNT4, GREB1, FN1, ID4, CDKN2B-AS1 (that is part of a locus comprising CDKN2A and CDKN2B) and VEZT. The aim of our study was to investigate potential differences in endometrial RNA expression of target genes residing in loci found to be associated with endometriosis through GWA studies. METHODS: Eutopic endometrial samples from 12 endometriosis patients and 11 controls were collected, excluding subjects under estroprogestins. Samples were dissected and cultured for 5 days to obtain only stromal cell-derived RNA. Gene expression analysis was perfomed by Nanostring nCounter System that allows to quantify the exact number of RNA copies without any additional step of reverse transcription or amplification. Sixteen different transcripts from genes located near the identified SNPs were analyzed in each sample at the same time. Results for the Mann-Whitney test showed significant differences in the expression of GREB1 (p=0.02) and WNT4 (p=0.04) in eutopic endometrium of patients with endometriosis compared to controls. A stepwise regression analysis was used in order to correct for gene interaction. The results indicates that expression levels of CDKN2A gene were also significantly associated with endometriosis (p=0.04) after correction for GREB1 transcript levels. The model obtained allows to correctly classify endometriosis cases with a sensitivity and specificity equal to 92% and 82%, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed for the first time that genes found to be associated with endometriosis through GWAS have different transcription levels in the endometrium of affected women. In-vitro studies will be needed in order to clarify the role of this transcripts in endometriosis pathogenesis. Estradiol  RNAseq analysis of leiomyoma surgical samples from ulipristal-or placebo-treated patients demonstrated a decrease in many highly expressed [100-10,000 copies] contractile proteins (γ2-actin, αand β-actin, transgelin, filamin Aα, myosin heavy chain 9, myosin light chain 9, myosin IC and IXB, calponin 1, actinin α1 and α4, tensin 1, and tropomyosin-α). A small number of contractile proteins with very low expression [0.0001-99] genes (Myosins VI, VC, IXA, XVA, and heavy chain 3) were increased with ulipristal treatment. When compared to patient-matched myometrium, placebo-treated leiomyomas demonstrated elevated expression of highly expressed contractile proteins, while ulipristal-treated leiomyomas demonstrated decreased expression of these contractile proteins. The alterations identified by RNAseq were confirmed by qRT-PCR to be statistically significant (p<0.05). Immortalized human leiomyoma cultures treated with ulipristal were used for further confirmation, both by quantitative RT-PCR and by western blot to confirm that alterations in template translated to altered protein expression. CONCLUSIONS: Ulipristal alters intracellular contractile smooth muscle protein expression, decreasing the excessive production of these components. These findings provide further insight into the mechanism of leiomyoma development, as the extracellular and intracellular environment share aberrant characteristics. In addition, improvement with ulipristal suggests that the alterations are regulated by a common pathway. Vitamin D Receptor Plays Role in the Transformation of Uterine Myometrial to Fibroid Cell Phenotype. Ayman Al-Hendy, Elam A Lelyand, Michael P Diamond, Sunil K Halder. Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Uterine fibroids or leiomyoma affect millions of reproductive age women worldwide. We and others have recently found that vitamin D deficiency is a risk factor for uterine fibroids. Additionally, reduced or loss of vitamin D receptor (VDR) protein expression was observed in uterine fibroids as compared to normal myometrium. However, a direct role of VDR in uterine fibroid development is yet to be determined. The objective is to study the role of VDR in the regulation of human uterine smooth muscle cell proliferation in vitro. METHODS: VDR gene expression was knocked down in immortalized human uterine smooth muscle cells (UtSMC) using a lentivirus-based VDR-gene-specific RNA interference (RNAi) strategy. Lentiviruses harboring VDR-specific short shRNA sequences or non-functional scrambled control shRNA, generated in human embryonic kidney cells (293T), were used to infect UtSMC cells. Infected cells were selected with 0.5 µg/ml puromycin and then resistant cell populations were further characterized. RESULTS: Western blot analysis showed that VDR knockdown cells expressed markedly reduced levels of VDR (approximately 60% reduction) as compared to scrambled control cells. VDR knockdown cells concurrently expressed higher levels of estrogen receptor alpha (ER-α), and progesterone receptors (PR-A and PR-B) as compared to scrambled control cells. Similarly, VDR knockdown cells showed induced levels of TGFβRII while compared with scrambled control cells. The levels of phospho-Smad2 and Smad2 were also induced in VDR knockdown cells. VDR knockdown cells also showed increased levels of extracellular matrix production of fibronectin and collagen type 1, as well as elevated levels of cell growth-related proliferating cells nuclear antigen (PCNA). Furthermore, VDR knockdown cells showed higher levels of proliferation when compared with scrambled control cells. These findings suggest that silencing VDR expression in myometrial smooth muscle cells elicits a fibrotic process including an increase in myometrial cell proliferation, induction of sex steroid receptors, activation of TGF-β/Smad signaling, and promotion of ECM production. CONCLUSIONS: VDR may play an important role in maintaining the normal uterine smooth muscle cell phenotype, and thus destruction of this gene expression (by silencing) induces the proliferation of human uterine smooth muscle cells. Support: Georgia Regents University (GRU) startup package, and NIH/NICHD R01 HD046228. . Urine, feces, whole blood, and plasma were collected at intervals up to 21 days post-dose for determination of mass balance, pharmacokinetic evaluation of vilaprisan, and metabolite profiling. Total radioactivity was determined by liquid scintillation counting. Vilaprisan plasma concentrations and metabolite profiling of plasma, urine, and feces were assessed by chromatographic and mass spectrometric methods. Safety assessments included adverse events (AEs), laboratory parameters and vital signs (including electrocardiography and blood pressure). RESULTS: Vilaprisan was rapidly absorbed, reaching a mean maximum plasma concentration of 24.9 µg/L at 1-2 hours post-dose. The geometric mean terminal half-life was 31.6 hours. In total, 86.6% of administered radioactivity was recovered in urine and feces in the 21 days after dosing. After day 17, less than 0.1% of the total administered radioactivity dose was excreted in urine and feces per day, indicating excretion was almost complete. Excretion mainly occurred via feces (73.5% ± 3.70 of administered dose); 13.1% ± 1.70 was excreted via urine. Based on geometric mean area under the plasma concentration time curve, 28.0% of [ 14 C]-vilaprisan-associated total radioactivity in plasma was attributed to unchanged vilaprisan and 72.0% to its metabolites. The most frequent drug-related AEs were headache (50.0%) and constipation (33.3%); no clinically relevant treatment-related changes in laboratory values or vital signs were reported. CONCLUSIONS: Vilaprisan was rapidly absorbed after oral administration in women; 28.0% of total radioactivity in plasma was associated with unchanged compound. Excretion, predominantly via the fecal route, was largely complete after 17 days. INTRODUCTION: S100A8 is a calcium binding protein present in the circulation. Its concentration is increased during inflammation and/or infection. Early pregnancy loss and recurrent miscarriage in spontaneous conceptions have been associated with elevated S100A8 levels. We evaluated the potential of S100A8 as a predictive biomarker of IVF outcome prior to cycle initiation. METHODS: Sera from 139 women who underwent an IVF cycle -27 with a term delivery, 20 with a preterm birth, 22 with a biochemical pregnancy, 30 with a spontaneous abortion, 32 who did not become pregnant and 30 with an ectopic pregnancy -were retrospectively assayed for S100A8 and other mediators of inflammation by ELISA. Patient selection was random and solely based on the availability of sera obtained prior to cycle initiation. Associations between outcome and S100A8 level were analyzed by the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney tests. Associations between S100A8 and other compounds were evaluated by the Spearman rank correlation test. The median S100A8 level varied between the six outcome groups (p<0.0001), with the lowest level in women with a term birth. In single comparisons, S100A8 levels were lower in women with a term birth than in women with a biochemical pregnancy (p=0.0020), spontaneous abortion (p=0.0002) or ectopic pregnancy (p=0.0008). S100A8 levels were lower in women with a live birth (term + preterm) than in women with a pregnancy failure (biochemical + spontaneous abortion) (p<0.0001, AUC=0.75) and lower in women with an intrauterine than an extra-uterine gestation (p=0.0136, AUC=0.79). The S100A8 level was positively correlated with the concentration of the inducible 70kDa heat shock protein (p<0.0001) and negatively correlated with the insulin-like growth factor-1 level (p<0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: An elevated serum S100A8 concentration is predictive of subsequent IVF failure. Protocols to reduce S100A8 levels or to determine and correct the cause of this elevation may lead to improved IVF outcomes. Fetal Microchimerism in Pregnancies Complicated by Multiple Sclerosis. Raj Swati Shree, 1 J L Nelson, 2 James Bowen, 3 Hilary S Gammill. The human uterus is a dynamic organ of the female reproductive tract that is extensively remodeled in response to the ovarian steroid hormones; estrogen and progesterone. Limitations to current model systems attenuate progress to understanding mechanisms associated with these changes. Tissue explants are complex and short-lived in culture while rodent models have limited translatability to the human condition. The goal of this study was to create a novel 3D model of the human endometrium that will lead to a better understanding of physiologic and pathophysiologic processes. METHODS: Uterine tissues from hysterectomy cases were subjected to an increasing concentration (0.01% -0.1%) of SDS at 4 0 C over the course of 72 hours followed by another 24 hours in 1% Triton x 100 to decellularize the tissue. DNase1 and RNase were used to further digest nuclear contents and the scaffolds were extensively rinsed in PBS. For recellularization, endometrial cells were obtained by collagenase digestion of endometrial tissue and further expanded on 2D plates in DMEM/F12 containing 10%FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Expanded cells were seeded onto the decellularized scaffolds in a transwell insert and allowed to reconstitute over time. H&E and IHC staining were performed to confirm viability, cell type, proliferation and steroid hormone receptor expression. The final decellularized scaffold was devoid of cellular material as confirmed by H&E and DAPI staining. Elastin staining of blood vessels revealed that the 3D architecture of the uterine scaffold was maintained. Primary human endometrial cells infiltrated the uterine scaffold in a time dependent manner and Ki-67 staining showed active proliferation even after 2 months in culture. These reconstituted endometrial cells expressed estrogen and progesterone receptors. CONCLUSIONS: A novel 3D human endometrial culture system using primary endometrial cells and decellularized endometrial tissues with long term survival has been established. This model will significantly aid in the understanding of hormonal regulation of the human endometrium and provide opportunities for uterine disease modeling. Migration and invasion of the embryo require an interaction between trophoblast and receptive endometrium via SDF-1and FGF-2 expressions. In our study we aimed to investigate the effect of smoking on endometrial SDF-1 and FGF-2 expression in vivo and in vitro. A human endometrial stromal cell line (HESC) and primary stromal cells were treated for 48 hours in medium with 0.2 mg/ml cigarette smoke extract (CSE) or with vehicle alone. Total RNA was obtained and converted to cDNA for analysis of SDF1 and FGF2 by qRT-PCR. Human Samples Endometrial samples were obtained from both non-smokers (n=20) and smokers (n=14) by pipelle biopsy in the midluteal phase, coincident with putative window of implantation (cycle days 19-21). All women were 24-40 years old, fertile and had regular cyclic menses. SDF1 and FGF2 expression were evaluated by qRT-PCR. RESULTS: Compared to controls, SDF-1 and FGF-2 mRNA expressions were significantly decreased in HESC (p<0.001 and p=0.009) and Primary cells (p<0.001 and p=0.026). Similarly endometrial SDF-1 and FGF-2 expressions were significantly decreased in smokers (p=0.017 and p=0.021) *Figure(s) will be available online. Smoking likely contributes to impaired endometrial receptivity. This mechanism contrasts with the accepted paradigm that the negative effects of smoking on infertility are secondary to ovarian alterations rather than direct effects on endometrium. Smoking is also associated with decreased rates of endometrial cancer and endometriosis. SDF-1 expression in endometrial cells is a stem cell-attractant in endometriosis and FGF-2 has potent influences implicated in malignant tumor development. Therefore isolation and characterization of cigarette smoke compounds may lead to the development of novel therapeutic agents. Stromal Endometrial dysfunction has been documented in polycystic ovarian syndrome and obesity. It is unclear if these changes are due to insulin resistance (IR), unopposed estrogen or both. In vitro studies have shown that insulin can interfere with decidualization in response to estrogen and progesterone. However, the endometrial impact of IR in vivo has not been well studied. We hypothesize that gene expression in the endometrium may be altered in women with evidence of IR or glucose intolerance. METHODS: Endometrial receptivity was examined in a hormone replacement cycle with oral estrogen & vaginal progesterone. Endometrial biopsy was performed day 6 of progesterone and sent for analysis using the endometrial receptivity array (ERA®). Insulin resistance (IR) was defined as fasting insulin > 9.0 mIU/L, fasting glucose > 100 mg/dL, HgA1c > 5.6%, or HOMA-IR > 2.4. The ERA is a customized array of 238 genes shown to be associated with endometrial receptivity. The ERA provides an assessment of the endometrium as "receptive" or "non-receptive" using a computational predictor. The frequency of non-receptive endometrium in IR patients was compared to women with normal metabolic testing using chi square. RESULTS: 67 infertile women completed endometrial sampling with a median age of 37.1 years in both groups. During the establishment of pregnancy, the endometrium undergoes dynamic remodelling in order to establish a 'receptive' microenvironment. Decidualization, a key part of this process, is characterised by differentiation of endometrial stromal fibroblasts (ESF) which secrete factors that regulate implantation and placental development. We recently discovered that during decidualization ESF synthesise androgens which modulate the expression of endometrial receptivity and decidualization markers. Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is abundant in the circulation and can act as a precursor to bioactive androgens but whether changes in the bioavailability of DHEA can affect endometrial function is not known. Circulating concentrations of DHEA decline precipitously with age which may contribute to reduced fertility in older women. Utilisation of circulating DHEA within target tissues requires local action of the enzyme 3βHSD which we have previously reported is expressed in ESF. We hypothesised that modulating the bioavailability of DHEA could alter local tissue androgen concentrations and impact on decidualization and endometrial receptivity. METHODS: Primary human endometrial stromal cells were isolated from endometrial biopsies collected from women during the proliferative phase of the cycle (n=18). In vitro decidualization was induced by treatment with progesterone and cAMP; some cells were co-treated with a physiological dose of DHEA (10nM) or with the 3βHSD inhibitor Trilostane. The expression of decidualization markers and putative androgen-regulated receptivity genes was assessed by qPCR and ELISA. RESULTS: Inhibition of 3βHSD by Trilostane significantly reduced secretion of the decidualization marker IGFBP-1 (p<0.001) and expression of the receptivity marker osteopontin (SPP1; p<0.01). Addition of DHEA to decidualised ESF increased testosterone biosynthesis (p<0.001) and was associated with increased expression of IGFBP1 and SPP1 (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that changes in the bioavailability of DHEA impact on the expression of decidualization and endometrial receptivity markers. These findings suggest a previously unrecognised role for tissue androgen bioavailability in the regulation of the endometrium which may impact on the establishment of pregnancy in women. Menstruation, an inflammatory process characterised by tissue breakdown and bleeding, is triggered by falling progesterone (P 4 ) concentrations. Resolution of inflammation post-menses is critical to appropriate endometrial repair. We hypothesise this is partly mediated by the local action of glucocorticoids and will be reflected in altered expression of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) target genes. Here we test this hypothesis in a mouse model of induced menstruation and subsequent endometrial repair. METHODS: Ovariectomised C57Bl/6 mice underwent induced menstruation, with P 4 withdrawal effecting menstrual-like endometrial changes. RNA was extracted from uteri (n=24) at 0h, 8h, 16h and 24h after P 4 withdrawal. Differential mRNA levels of 84 known GR target genes were investigated using a customised PCR array. Data were normalised to 6 housekeeping controls and analysed by 2-way ANOVA with Dunnett's multiple comparisons tests to 0h samples. Differentially-expressed mRNAs were validated by qPCR in larger time-point cohorts (n=36). Matched uterine tissue sections from C57Bl/6 (n=17) and Hsd11b1 -/-(n=11) mice (lacking the glucocorticoid-activating enzyme, 11β-HSD-1) were immunostained for the product of one of the above genes, Fkbp5 (FKBP51), a glucocorticoid-inducible GR target and co-chaperone protein. Four GR target genes were significantly up-regulated at late P 4 withdrawal (p<0.001-0.05) and 6 down-regulated (p<0.0001-0.05). Of these 10, 5 were successfully validated by qPCR (p<0.01-0.05): Ehd3, Fkpb5, Glul, Mt1 and Rgs2. All showed up/down expression patterns consistent with PCR array. FKBP51 immunoreactivity was decreased 8h and 24h after P 4 withdrawal in C57Bl/6 mice relative to 0h, and was decreased in Hsd11b1 -/mice at 8h and 24h relative to C57Bl/6 controls at the same time-points. CONCLUSIONS: Decreased FKBP51 expression is consistent with reduced glucocorticoid action, which, while expected in Hsd11b1 -/mice, is surprising in early menstrual remodelling (24h) in C57Bl/6 controls. Whilst these data provide evidence for glucocorticoid-mediated mRNA changes during endometrial remodelling at menses, further work is warranted to elucidate the relationship. The correct acquisition of the endometrial receptive status is a key factor limiting the success of assisted reproductive technologies. The aim of this study was to identify the differential protein expression patterns of endometrial receptivity using the iTRAQ technology comparing three different models: receptive endometrium from fertile donors, refractory endometrium induced by the presence of an intrauterine device (IUD), and patients with recurrent implantation failure (RIF). METHODS: Human endometrial samples (n=28) were collected from fertile donors (n=10), IUD carriers (n=10), and RIF patients with at least 3 previous IVF failures (n=8) at the same day during the window of implantation (WOI) (Hormonal Replacement Therapy; P+5). Protein identification and quantification were performed using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification analysis (iTRAQ) and mass spectrometry (MS). Statistical analyses were carried using an ANOVA and T-test (pairwise comparisons) analyses. Validation by Western blot (WB) was performed for the plastin 2 (PLSL) and ribosomal protein S4, X-linked (RS4X) proteins. RESULTS: iTRAQ analysis identified 1,873 differentially expressed proteins among the three conditions. ANOVA analysis revealed 188 significant proteins, while t-test showed 133 statistically significant proteins between control vs. IUD endometria. RIF vs. IUD comparison revealed 158 significant proteins and 54 differentially expressed were shared between the two comparisons. Surprisingly, no differential expressed protein was found between control vs. RIF groups. Validation by WB for PLSL and RS4X confirmed our iTRAQ results. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrate a clear differential proteomic profile between receptive endometria compared with IUD endometria, showing the key proteins to achieve the endometrial receptivity status. No proteomic differences were detected between RIF patients and fertile donors, suggesting that the endometrium in RIF is not pathologic by itself, reinforcing the hypothesis of a WOI displacement. Previous studies have reported the successful in vitro secondary follicle growth (IVFG) of rhesus monkey ovaries using low dose FSH (0.3 or 3 ng/mL) and long-term culture (up to 5 weeks). However, it is still uncertain in regard to the optimal culture duration and effective dose of treated gonadotropins applicable to the IVFG of rhesus pre-antral follicles. Recently, we have reported that FSH to LH ratios affect the in vitro growth of murine ovarian follicles. We aimed to investigate whether gonadotropin ratios affect the efficiency of rhesus follicular growth in vitro. METHODS: Ovaries were collected from six necropsied rhesus macaques (4-9 years) and pre-antral follicles were retrieved and cultured for 14 days using 200 mIU/mL FSH. The characteristics of follicular growth was compared between FSH:LH=1:1 (n=24) and FSH:LH=2:1 (n=24) groups. The FSH:LH=2:1 group showed a faster follicular growth and enabled to acquire mature oocytes although the expression of GDF-9 and AMH did not differ significantly between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Conclusively, high dose gonadotropin treatment can shorten the duration of IVFG and the gonadotropin ratio is important in the IVFG of rhesus monkey ovaries (HI14C2289 and HI14C2259). Pregnancy Previously we described the involvement of miR-210 with the hypoxia pathway and its up regulation in response to Hypoxia-inducible factor in transformed human granulosa lutein cells (SVOG). Succinate dehydrogenase subunit-D (SDHD) is part of the mitochondrial respiratory chain that plays a role in the mitochondrial electron transport chain and leads to the stabilization of HIF-1α. Here we studied the effect of miR-210 on the expression of SDHD and other hypoxia related genes in primary human granulosa cells (hGLC). METHODS: Primary hGLC were isolated from follicular fluid aspirates collected during IVF cycle. Cells were transfected with either synthetic miR 210 precursors or specific inhibitor. 72 hours post transfection the mRNA expression levels of several hypoxia induced genes (EDN-2, VEGF, SDHD and GPD1L) were assayed using real time PCR with the specific primers under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. RESULTS: Hypoxia increased (up to 4 folds) endogenous miR-210 levels in time-dependent manner. Elevated miR-210 correlated with stabilized HIF-1α protein. The dependency of miR-210 expression on HIF-1α protein was proven by the successful knockdown (90% less then scrambled siRNA) of HIF-1α. These siRNA molecules significantly reduced miR-210 down to undetectable levels in hypoxic conditions. miR-210 overexpression (700 fold increase compared to controls) significantly augmented EDN-2 and VEGF mRNA in SVOG and EDN-2 in hGLC. A mirror image response was observed with miR-210 inhibition. Transfection of hGLC with miR-210 inhibitor reduced its levels 50 folds and the mRNA levels of EDN-2. We found that miR-210 overexpression suppresses SDHD, while the antagoMir elevated its mRNA levels in both SVOG and hGLC, suggesting that SDHD is indeed a target of miR-210 in hGLCs. Our study pointed to a relationship between miR-210 and HIF-1α and the manner these compounds affect EDN-2 and mitochondrial electron transport gene expression in hGLCs. Regulation of these genes is expected to affect ovulation patterns in women as well as angiogenesis and adequate CL development. Transgenic Increase in n-3/n- We have previously shown that 10-week exposure to high-fat diet (HFD) causes significant reduction in primordial follicles, higher pro-inflammatory cytokine levels, and increased ovarian macrophage infiltration, independent of obesity (Skaznik-Wikiel, et al. Fertility and Sterility 104.3 (2015) : e104.). The aim of this study was to assess if transgenic increase in n-3/n-6 fatty acid (FA) ratio is protective of oocyte reserve when exposed to HFD. This was a prospective laboratory study. 5wk old wild-type (WT; n=4) or hemizygous Fat-1 C57BL/6J female mice (n=5) were placed on HFD with 60% of calories coming from fat. Ovaries were collected after 10 weeks of dietary exposure for assessment of resting (primordial) and growing (primary, secondary, antral) follicle numbers. Animal weights and percentage of body fat were recorded at the time of ovary collection. The mean body weight (29.2 ± 2.7g vs 27.2 ± 1.9g) and percentage of body fat (31.1 ± 4.7% vs 34.3 ± 5.8%) were not statistically different between WT and hemizygous Fat-1 C57BL/6J mice (p=0.31; p=0.68)). Exposure to HFD resulted in decreased primordial follicle pool in WT, but not in Fat-1 C57BL/6J female mice. * Figure(s) will be available online. The numbers of primordial follicles were 1050 ± 277 in WT mice and 2318±393 in Fat-1animals (p=0.02). Numbers of growing follicles were 777 ± 105 in WT mice and 951±139 in Fat-1animals and did not differ significantly between the two groups (p=0.18). CONCLUSIONS: HFD results in diminished ovarian reserve, as demonstrated by depleted primordial follicle numbers. Transgenic increase in n-3/n-6 FA ratio results in protective effect on primordial follicle pool after exposure to HFD. This may imply that either increased omega-3 FA or decreased omega-6 FA are protective of ovarian reserve. Further studies are needed to elucidate these findings. Alteration Since anti-inflammatory properties of CD83 have previously been described, we investigated the role of CD83 in murine pregnancy. The expression of CD83 molecule was studied in different immune cells in the course of pregnancy. C57Bl/6 female mice were paired allogenically to BALB/c males and then sacrificed on days 7, 14 or 18 of pregnancy. Non pregnant C57Bl/6 females were used as control. Lymphocytes from Spleen, Thymus and Lymph nodes were isolated, and the CD83 expression was measured using flow-cytometry. Additionally, the CD83 expression was measured after stimulation of the lymphocytes with LPS, PMA and Ionomycin for 48h. The supernatants were collected and the amount of sCD83 was examined by ELISA. RESULTS: No significant changes in CD83 expression in B-and T-cells from Thymus, Inguinal-or Paraaortal lymph nodes were observed. We were able to detect an upregulation of CD83 molecule on splenic B and T-cells in the middle of pregnancy. However, the highest percentage of CD83 positive splenic B-cells as well as their subtypes (Marginal and Follicular Zone B cells) was observed at the end of pregnancy (day 18). Remarkably, lymphocytes from day 18 of pregnancy showed a significantly higher release of sCD83 after in-vitro stimulation with LPS, PMA and Ionomycin compared to non-pregnant mice. Additionally, stimulated B cells from day 18 of pregnancy revealed the strongest upregulation of the membrane-bound form of CD83. CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrates an alteration of CD83 expression during pregnancy, supporting our thesis of the involvement of CD83 in immunological adaptions to pregnancy. We hypothesize that the higher sCD83 release after lymphocyte stimulation might protect the fetus from an inadequate immune response to different pathogens. Influence of Human Chorionic Gonadotropin (hCG) on the Naive Immune System. Olivia J Heidecke, Damian O Muzzio, Anne Tungler, Katrin RH Packhauser, Carolin Weinhold, Marek Zygmunt. Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany. INTRODUCTION: Since gender differences in susceptibility to bacterial infections in newborns have been previously described, gender-specific hormonal modulation of the immune response was postulated. hCG, an early pregnancy hormone produced by the syncytiotrophoblastand a potent immune-modulator was shown to be differently expressed in male and female pregnancies. Therefore, we hypothesised that hCG might be responsible for these differences. METHODS: Cord blood samples from 21 male and 18 female newborns were used in the initial study. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated and stained for multiple extra-and intracellular markers. The relative numbers of lymphocyte subpopulations were measured by flow cytometry and analysed by FlowJo software. Isolated cord blood PBMCs also were cultivated for 48h either with or in the absence of hCG and/or LPS. Different activation marker of immune cells were examined by ELISA. RESULTS: B-and T-cell populations of newborn males and females were subjected to initial comparison whereby significant gender differences were found in follicular T-helper cells, hematopoietic stem cells and B1-cells. The pathogenesis of endometriosis is not only rooted on estrogen dependence for growth, but also maintained by local and systemic inflammation. It is well established that endometriosis patients have higher proinflammatory cytokines in peritoneal fluid and aberrantly behaving macrophages, dendritic and NK cells isolated from lesions and peripheral blood. Research indicates that disturbed immune regulation in patients fails to mount a proper immune response to self-tissue in the peritoneal cavity. Here, we profiled 594 immune-related genes in endometrium (eutopic) and endometriosis (ectopic) samples from patients and compared it to normal endometrium to identify gene-signatures unique to endometriosis. METHODS: Matched eutopic and ectopic tissue from endometriosis patients (n=8), and normal endometrium from control women (n=8) were obtained at Greenville Hospital and University of North Carolina (USA) respectively. Tissues were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and total RNA was isolated. After normalizing to 100ng/sample, the nCounter GX Human Immunology Kit (Nanostring) was used to profile 594 immunerelated genes. Multiple comparison t-test (GraphPad Prism) generated 397 genes (ectopic vs. normal), 91 genes (eutopic vs. normal), and 323 genes (eutopic vs. ectopic) that were differentially expressed in each comparison. We also conducted marker selection analysis on the 594 genes using GENE-E program correction for multiple hypotheses testing by computing false discovery rate (FDR). We found that genes associated with T cell activation, cell adhesion, inflammation, and complement activation including IL18R1, IL18, SELL, PTGER4, ICAM1, and C7 were significantly increased in ectopic tissue compared to eutopic and normal tissues. CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary analyses indicate that ectopic lesions display unique profile of genes that regulate inflammation and immunity compared to matched eutopic and normal samples. Unique gene expression is also observed in eutopic endometrium compared to normal endometrium samples. Further analyses are needed to understand the intricate relationship between genes that will uniquely identify endometriosis as a disease. We speculate that macrophage polarization might be associated to the ovarian response to controlled ovarian stimulation (COS). The aim of this study is to investigate the macrophage subsets in the follicular fluid of women undergoing COS and its association with ovarian response. We carried out a prospective case-control study using pooled follicular fluid of 40 women who underwent oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilization. After the isolation of mononuclear cells, flow cytometric analysis was performed to define macrophage subpopulations using monoclonal antibodies. According to the number of eggs retrieved, patients were divided in three groups: low response (0-4 eggs), normal response (5-16 eggs) and high response (≥17 eggs). The statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software package. The proportion of CD14 + macrophages in follicular fluid CD45 + leukocytes was 6.7%±6.8 (mean ± SD were compared for women embryo transfer (ET) after controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) in the 2 weeks before the day of interest (control, n=185) to outcomes for women undergoing ET after COH initiated in the 2 weeks after (chronodisrupted, n=181). Women who had undergone IVF previously, who were using donor oocytes, frozen embryos or who were undergoing fertility preservation were excluded. Appropriate parametric and non-parametric tests were used in the SPSS statistical package. No associations were noted between chronodisruption and duration of ovarian stimulation, amount of gonadotropin administered, # of oocytes retrieved, implantation rate or pregnancy outcome. However, chronodisruption was negatively associated with the # of excess embryos cryopreserved (3.7±3.1 vs. 2.3±1.5, p=0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Chronodisruption may negatively impact IVF outcomes as evidenced by fewer excess embryos cryopreserved among women defined as chronodisrupted in this study. The impact of longstanding chronodisruption on pregnancy outcomes is unknown, but having fewer excess embryos to cryopreserve can impact cumulative pregnancy rates with IVF. live birth. The highest pregnancy rates were in the control group followed by the tubal, and ovulatory respectively, while the unexplained group failed to become pregnant. CONCLUSIONS: The serum E2 level was within normal follicular phase for normal unstimulated women, while the FF level was 6 times serum level, but differs between the control and infertile group, where the control had a higher response than infertile one. The ovulatory group response to ovarian stimulation was the highest. The high P level in the infertile group may indicate an increased activity of LH before ovulation that may hinder IVF Success. The control group had the lowest level and a better response. The unexplained group responded better than tubal or ovulatory groups. This study confirms the presence of special mechanisms concentrating the steroid hormones, which might work within the granulosa cells, and that hormone levels differ based on the etiology of infertility with controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. Inadequate receptivity of the endometrium is a major cause of unexplained infertility and implantation failure. Microarrays has been widely used to determine the genes involved in uterine receptivity generating a wide gene lists with known and unknown potential roles in this critical process. Recently, novel biomarkers, which were not previously linked to endometrial physiology, have been identified using RNA-Seq approach. METHODS: In order to investigate their potential role in endometrial receptivity we evaluated OVGP1, MRAP2, ZCCHC12, and HAP1 gene expression in human endometrial biopsies (EB) from patients undergoing IVF treatment using real-time PCR analysis. GAPDH and Actin B were used as housekeeping genes. All patients had a history of regular menstrual cycles and did not receive any hormonal preparation in the 3 months prior to the IVF cycle. Women with endometrial pathology or with any hormonal alteration were not included. EB were collected on the day 21 of the cycle preceding ovarian stimulation from women with unexplained fertility (study group n=4) and women with male infertility (control group n 4). RESULTS: Interestingly, a significant increased expression of MRAP2 was found in women with unexplained infertility when compared to the control group (fold change >1.4 and p value <0.005). CONCLUSIONS: MRAP2 encodes for a small transmembrane protein that modulates melanocortin receptors signaling reduced receptors responsiveness to alpha melanocyte stimulating hormone. Among these receptors MC5R is expressed in uterus and its interaction with its binding hormone results in immune-mediated inflammation modulation, thus reducing NF-Kb activation and inhibiting the antigen stimulated lymphocytes proliferation. Our preliminary finding of the overexpression of MRAP2, resulting in a reduced response of MC5R and therefore in a reduced anti-inflammatory activity of melanocortin system, suggests an involvement of this system in impaired endometrial receptivity of women with unexplained infertility. Moreover, this methodology is usually associated to serum anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) levels, which in fact reflects the amount of small antral follicles (2-8mm). Therefore, some papers tried to evaluate the efficacy of both 2-D and 3-D technologies regarding antral follicle count. However, none utilized an appropriated study design and also did not compared both 2 and 3-D to AMH. We aimed to perform for the first time a prospective study comparing both methodologies and its association to AMH as a standard method for ovarian aging evaluation. We enrolled 42 infertile patients with both ovaries, excluding ovarian cysts, endocrine disease and irregular menses. All patients were evaluated using the same ultra-sound equipment (Voluson, General electric, USA) and performed by the same investigator (PF) using SonoAVC for 3-D AFC. Furthermore, all patients were submitted to 2-D AFC using the same ultrasound machine in the same day (day-3 of regular cycle), only follicles from 2 to 8mm were considered for AFC. Serum AMH was collected also during day-3 and using a DSL Gen II kit. The potential immunological effect of GnRH and its analogues has been studied. We aim to investigate the effect of GnRH analogues to peripheral blood lymphocytes. METHODS: PBMCs were treated with different doses of GnRH agonist (Buserelin acetate) and antagonist (Cetrorelix acetate) of 0.1, 1, 5 and 10µM for 4 hour culture. TH1, TH2 and TH17 cell levels were analyzed by flow cytometry. The results were compared between GnRH agonist and antagonist, among different doses. And the effect of GnRH agonist were compared according to IVF histories (Group I;women who underwent IVF-ET cycles within 6 months, Group II;women who underwent FET cycles within 6 months, Group III;women who had no IVF-ET or FET cycles within 6 months). RESULTS: TNF-a/IL-10 TH cell ratios were significantly increased in PBMCs treated with 1, 5 and 10 µM GnRH agonist for 4 hour culture when compared to controls (p=0.006, 0.014 and 0.030). GnRH antagonist increased IFN-g/IL-10 TH cell ratios as compared with controls (p=0.005). TH17 cell levels in PBMCs treated with 1 and 5 µM were significantly lower than those of 10 µM GnRH antagonist . When the effects of GnRH-agonist and -antagonist were compared, TNF-a, IFN-g and IL-10 producing TH cell levels, and IFN-g/IL-10 TH cell ratios were significantly different. When the effect of GnRH agonist in 4 hour culture were compared according to patients' IVF histories, TNF-a producing TH cell levels were different between those of Group II and those of Group III (p=0.008). TH17 cell levels were significantly different among the Groups (p=.000), those of Group I were significantly lower than those of Group II and III. CONCLUSIONS: GnRH analogues led to pro-inflammatory changes in T helper cell subpopulations. The pro-inflammatory effect was different between GnRH agonist and antagonist. Following diagnostic testing and counseling, 22 couples proceeded to Assisted Reproduction. In the remaining 144 couples pursuing natural conception, treatable associated factors were managed and reproductive outcomes monitored for at least 12 months. The incidence of uterine, thyroid and phospholipid abnormalities did not differ from the general population. Ovulatory abnormalities were seen in 28% and 5%, all nulliparous women, demonstrated balanced translocations. 70% women had AMH values below the 95 th percentile for their age adjusted expectations. The incidence of associated factors did not differ between nulliparous (n=77) and multiparous (n=67) women. Reproductive outcomes were similar, independent of chronological age and parity. A third of women successfully conceived and achieved a live birth. 17% of couples next conception ended in another pregnancy loss. Surprisingly, the major outcome was not another pregnancy loss, but an inability to conceive in almost 50% of couples (Table 1) . CONCLUSIONS: RPL may not be a distinct clinical diagnosis, but a continuum, sometimes prematurely, of progressively decreased fecundity and DOR resulting in increased aneuploidy, pregnancy loss and ultimately an inability to conceive. The prognosis of RPL is often optimistic, provided conception occurs. AMH assessment is important in evaluation, diagnosis and counseling in RPL. In the adjusted continuous analysis, there was no association between repeat length and development of good quality blastocyst, or reaching blastocyst transfer. Furthermore, cycles with low-low repeats showed no difference in good quality blastocyst development, achieving blastocyst transfer, vitrification of excess embryos, or live birth, relative to cycles associated with normal-normal repeat numbers (table 1) . Repeated measures linear regression models of log-transformed cortisol evaluated group differences, adjusting for covariates. RESULTS: Participants were predominantly White (67%) and African American (24%); they had a mean of 7.6 (SD 3.9) hot flashes per day. Salivary cortisol geometric means (nmol/L) among all women were: 71.5 (SD 41.4) total, 8.6 (SD 5.6) wake, 10.0 (SD 7.5) wake +30 minutes, 3.8 (SD 3.1) 1200 hours, and 1.6 (SD 1.7) 2100 hours. Wake + 30 minute values showed a 18% median rise from wake values (interquartile range -24 to 96%), and varied by hot flash frequency tertile, from lowest to highest: 11.4(SD 7.3), 10.3 (SD 6.5) and 8.6 (SD 7.8), respectively, p=0.003. The mean 2100 hour value was highest among women with the highest frequency of hot flashes (p=0.03). Other cortisol values did not vary by hot flash frequency. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that high frequency of moderate to severe hot flashes may be associated with subtle abnormalities in cortisol concentrations -a pattern consistent with chronic sleep disturbance. Fertility A patient with GATA2 deficiency with a PICC line developed a PE and gonadotropins were withheld. At the request of her primary team, she underwent Lupron trigger and three mature eggs were retrieved without further complications. The patient with DOCK8 deficiency had high HCG levels post-trigger due to worsening liver function. Two received IVIG mid-cycle, which did not affect hormone levels. Two are post-transplant and doing well. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of FP in women with DOCK8, GATA2, and PI3K related immunodeficiencies performed through a multidisciplinary approach without infectious complications. The importance of FP for long-term health and wellbeing is increasingly recognized; FP should not be considered an elective procedure in women facing gonadotoxic therapies. Support: Intramural NIH We hypothesize that resistance to PARP inhibition is linked to OvCA CSC function. Our objective was to analyze the effect of PARP inhibition on the OvCa CSC population. METHODS: OVCAR4 and CaOV4 cell lines and cell lines derived from primary human serous carcinomas obtained with IRB approval were treated in vitro with olaparib. The CSC phenotype was then assessed 72 hours post treatment by flow cytometric analysis of CD133, CD44 and CD117 marker expression, RT-PCR analysis of stemness gene expression, extreme limiting dilution assay (ELDA) to determine sphere formation frequency and cell cycle analysis and PKH26 staining to evaluate proliferation and viability. RESULTS: Treatment with olaparib increased CD133 and CD117 expression relative to expression in untreated cells (p <0.001) and similarly led to upregulation of genes involved in stem cell function (Nanog, Oct4 and Sox2) and multidrug efflux (ABCG2). ELDA revealed an increase in the frequency of sphere formation following olaparib treatment relative to that observed with vehicle treated cells. An increase in CSC number was observed following olaparib treatment with no effect on the viability of non-CSCs. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a mechanism associated with PARP inhibitor resistance in OvCa and highlight the possibility that inhibition of PARP will lead to increased CSC proliferation and subsequent tumor resurgence. Dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPPIV)/CD26 is a cell surface aminopeptidase with multiple functions, including serine protease activity, adhesion to extracellular matrix components, and the ability to bind adenosine deaminase (ADA). We have previously described that DPPIV is expressed in endometrial glandular epithelial cells with variations along the cycle (being maximal in the secretory phase) and with menopause (Aliagas et al, Purinergic Signal., 9: 227-237, 2013) . Its expression in endometrial adenocarcinoma is down-regulated with increasing tumor grade. In the present work we have studied the effect of TAM on DPPIV expression in human endometrial epithelial cells.  Obesity and Gynaecological Cancer -An Umbrella Review and Meta-Analysis. In order to estimate the strength of current evidence and existence of potential biases in the literature, we performed an umbrella review of meta-analyses studying the association between obesity and gynaecological cancer incidence and mortality. METHODS: After systematic search of PubMed, Embase, and the Cochrane database, 12 publications containing altogether 47 metaanalyses of incidence or mortality from breast, cervical, endometrial, or ovarian cancer were eligible for analysis. For each meta-analysis, we: calculated both fixed and random effect summary estimates; 95% prediction intervals (PI) for the random effects estimates; used the Cochran Q test and the I2 metric of inconsistency with 95% CI to asses heterogeneity; used the Egger's test and an estimate of a theoretical study of infinite sample size by extrapolating the Egger's regression line to study small study effect; tested for excess significance by comparing the number of studies that had the power to have significant results to the number of studies that showed significant results RESULTS: In 18 of the 47 meta-analyses obesity or weight gain showed strong association (P<0.001) in both fixed and random effects models. Most studied associations, however, showed hints of significant heterogeneity, excess significance, small study effects, or the 95% PI did not exclude the null value. Only 2 meta-analyses, between excess weight gain and increased incidence of postmenopausal breast cancer, met all these criteria. CONCLUSIONS: Most summary meta-analytic estimates showed nominally significant results (p<0.05) for the association between obesity and the risk of developing gynaecological cancer. Only two associations, however, had highly significant results and no hints of biases. These results underline the substantial uncertainty around nominally significant associations, but do not necessarily mean that only these two associations are true. The large observed heterogeneity and biases in many of the included studies do, however, suggest that some of these observed associations could well be inflated or false positives. Expansion of hematopoietic progenitors is important for transplantation, particularly for autologous in utero approaches, as engraftment success is related to the cell number delivered. Maintenance of potency is the aim of expansion cultures, but success has been limited by rapid differentiation. We studied multipotency after expansion of fetal and adult stem cell sources, and efficiency of gene transfer. Adult and fetal hematopoietic progenitors were isolated from adult mice (bone marrow,BM,n=6) and time-mated embryos (fetal liver,FL and amniotic fluid,AF,E13.5,n=6) using lineage depletion and positive selection using FACS for CD117(fetal) and CD117+/ SCA1+(adult). Cells were cultured in a pretreated 24 well plate containing inactivated mouse embryonic fibroblasts, with a modified embryonic stem cell medium. Separately, freshly isolated cells were transduced overnight using a GFP lentiviral vector(MOI:50) in a cytokine cocktail with or without rapamycin, and then cultured as above. Cells were analyzed after 7 days in culture using flow cytometry, PCR array or differentiated in a semi solid medium. RESULTS: All freshly isolated progenitors were positive for hematopoietic stem cell markers (CD117,Sca1,CD45,n=6). After 7 days in culture there was an average 5.1-6.2 fold increase in the progenitor numbers with no difference between the groups, (p=0.64,ANOVA). Their multipotency was maintained. Transduction efficiency was significantly higher in FL and AF progenitors using cytokines alone compared to cytokines and rapamycin (37.4%vs 9%,p<0.05); there was no difference in transduction efficiency in the adult BM progenitors(p=0.36). All semi solid cultures had hematopoietic colonies from the three hematopoietic lineages. PCR array analysis of each group demonstrated up-regulated hematopoietic genes compared to control fresh FL progenitors(n=3 in each array group,p<0.05). Transduction did not affect cell proliferation, multipotency nor hematopoietic gene expression. CONCLUSIONS: Culturing fetal and adult hematopoietic stem cells with and without gene transfer in embryonic stem cell conditions maintains a high expansion fold, multipotency and allows efficient gene transfer. This is a promising approach for autologous stem cell/gene therapy in utero and postnatally. Exposure We determined whether AMH could regulate the ovarian follicular recruitment mechanism by regulating the granulosa and oocyte "stemness" potential in fresh and previously vitrified/thawed ovarian cortex fragments. Experimental study with ovarian cortex obtained from 10 patients. Ovarian cortex specimens were treated fresh or vitrified immediately after explant, thawed after 12 months, and treated. Each specimen was divided into 5 fragments: one was flash-frozen (untreated) and four were incubated for 48 hours 37ºC in a pH-adjusted gamete buffer media with increasing AMH concentrations of 0-5-25-50 ng/ml. After incubation, all specimens were flash-frozen for PCR analyses, executed in triplicates. We utilized real-time RT-PCR to determine mRNA levels for GDF9, Oct-4, Sox2, and NANOG in ovarian cortex tissue. We performed ANOVA with Tukey post hoc tests to evaluate changes in mRNA levels among the five different fragments (significance=p<0.05). In both, fresh and vitrified/thawed ovarian cortex, stemness markers and GDF9 expression were lowest soon after explant or thawing * Figure(s)  A primary function of the placenta is to provide an extensive epithelial surface that facilitates the exchange of nutrients and gases between maternal and fetal circulations. In human placenta, this function is provided by a unique, multinucleated lineage called syncytiotrophoblast. Like other epithelial barrier systems, syncytiotrophoblast is continuously sloughed throughout pregnancy and needs to be replenished. This is accomplished by an underlying progenitor population of cytotrophoblast cells that stop propagating, and fuse into the overlying syncytiotrophoblast. Exactly how cytotrophoblast cells leave their progenitor state and commence cell fusion is not well understood. We have identified that the transcription factor OVO-like 1 (OVOL1), a homolog of the Drosophila ovo/Shavenbaby gene, regulates the transition from progenitor to differentiated trophoblast cells. METHODS: Expression of OVOL1 was analyzed in human placenta at four gestational ages (6, 8, 12, and 39 weeks) by a combination of RT-PCR and two-plex in situ hybridization. Analysis of in vitro trophoblast differentiation was conducted in BeWo trophoblast cells stimulated with 8-bromo cyclic adenosine monophosphate, human embryonic stem cells treated with bone morphogenetic protein 4, and primary cytotrophoblast cells. To modulate OVOL1 expression, lentiviral vectors encoding shRNAs that target OVOL1 were used. RESULTS: OVOL1 expression was identified in a defined subset of cytotrophoblast cells in human placenta. When trophoblast cells were exposed to differentiation conditions, OVOL1 was robustly induced in several models of human trophoblast differentiation. Disruption of OVOL1 inhibited the capacity of trophoblast cells to differentiate. OVOL1 expression inversely correlated with expression of MYC, ID1, TP63, and ASCL2, which are factors associated with maintenance of cytotrophoblast progenitor traits, and specifically bound to hexametric sequences (CCGTTA) upstream of each of MYC, ID1, TP63, and ASCL2. CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal an important function of OVOL1 as a regulator of genes that maintain cytotrophoblast progenitor traits. This work was supported by NIH HD020676 and HD079850.  We used a mouse containing a GFP reporter under the control of the telomerase reverse transciptase promoter (mTert-GFP) to identify potential stem/progenitor cells in endometrium. We found that mTert-GFP is expressed by rare luminal and glandular epithelial cells (~0.3% of epithelial cells by flow cytometry), rare non-leukocytes (CD45 -) in the stromal compartment (0.03 ±SEM 0.01% of stromal cells by microscopy). However the majority of mTert-GFP + cells in the endometrium were CD45 + leukocytes (0.36 ± 0.07% of total cells in the stromal compartment by microscopy). mTert-GFP + epithelial cells and leukocytes were depleted in the absence of ovarian hormones, however non-leukocytic (CD45 -) mTert-GFP + cells in the stromal compartment were maintained. The CD45 -mTert-GFP + population is largely composed of cells expressing the endothelial markers CD31 and von Willebrand factor. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the endometrial epithelium and vasculature are foci of stem/progenitor activity and provide a system to investigate molecular mechanisms involved in endometrial regeneration and repair. We also note that measures of total endometrial telomerase activity are likely to reflect immune cell infiltration rather than telomerase activity due to much rarer progenitor populations. Eight percent of childhood cancer survivors will undergo premature menopause by age 40. An intervention to restore normal hormonal and even reproductive function to women who have suffered chemotherapy induced ovarian failure would be a tremendous step in treating these patients. The aims of this study were to establish and validate a mouse model of chemotherapy induced ovarian failure and to test the ability of murine granulosa cell-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (mGriPSCs) to serve as a treatment to preserve hormonal function. METHODS: Baseline serum estrogen (E2) levels were measured from five week old female nude mice by ELISA (Day 0). Two weeks later, mice were injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) with either sterile PBS (n=5) or a mixture of busulfan (12 mg/kg) and cyclophosphamide (120 mg/kg) (n=10). Repeat serum E2 levels were measured on Day 28 and Day 42. On Day 52, mice in the chemotherapy arm were injected into the mammary fat pad with either PBS (n=3), unsorted embryonic bodies (n=3), or sorted mGriPSCs (n=3). Estrogen levels were measured again 3 weeks later. Mice were then euthanized, and the ovaries were examined histologically. RESULTS: By day 28, chemotherapy treated mice had an accelerated drop in estrogen production compared to untreated controls (75% decrease vs. 47% decrease, p=0.004). By day 63, estrogen levels were undetectable in mice treated with chemotherapy followed by unsorted embryonic bodies or PBS, and the ovaries showed reduced follicle numbers. In contrast, mice injected with mGriPSCs had serum estrogen levels and ovaries comparable to age-matched mice that had not seen chemotherapy. Due to the advance of uterine transplantation, bioengineering could provide a solution for patients with severe uterine factor infertility. To bioengineer organs we could build them up from scratch using biomaterials or replace the cells of the organs to avoid rejection using the technique of decellularization(DC) and recellularization(RC). The aim of this study is to investigate two different protocols of DC assessing the viability of the remaining biological uterine scaffolds for RC. METHODS: Two DC assays based on fresh or freeze/thawed (n=3) pig uteri using chemical and/or physical agents were compared. To determine the efficiency of both protocols H&E and DAPI staining, DNA quantification and fragment size by electrophoresis were used. The integrity of the extracellular matrix (ECM) architecture was assessed by Masson's Trichrome, Alcian blue, TEM, SEM and IF for col-I, col-IV, fibronectin, elastin and laminin. Quantification of these 5 proteins were performed by WB. The integrity of the 3D vascular tree was assessed with a corrosion casting assay using resin. RC experiments were done using human endometrium SP cell lines in the scaffold material generated by both protocols. RESULTS: Both protocols successfully achieved efficient DC assessed by histological analysis that revealed the absence of cellular components, and no visible staining of cellular DNA. The original amount of DNA dropped to 9.06% and 2.65% for the fresh and freeze/thaw protocol, respectively. ECM showed a retention of the signal for GAGs and collagens in both protocols, which was further corroborated by the IF results. There was a decrease in total protein amount to 3.19% and 1.09%, respectively. After assessment of the ultrastructure (TEM and SEM), and the general morphology we concluded that the fresh protocol produced a more uniform scaffold. Further studies concerning recellularization and the integrity of the 3D vascular tree are still being performed CONCLUSIONS: We have established a robust protocol for the successful DC of the pig uterus. The resulting scaffold material created by the fresh protocol is useful for subsequent recellularization.  The METHODS: This is a mixed method study with 32 Tajik migrant women and their non-migrant peers. Qualitative interviews were conducted using a minimally structured approach; quantitative surveys completed prior to the interviews will aid in comparative analysis. Analysis will follow initial coding themes and will continue as new themes emerge. Deceptive statistical analysis will be applied to the survey data. RESULTS: Of 32 women interviewed, 17 have migrated for work. 25 were currently married. Of those, 19 women were using no contraceptive method, 2 were using highly effective methods, 1 was currently pregnant. The remainder of women were using either a lower efficacy, or a traditional contraceptive method. More than half reported having at least one abortion as a method of contraception. Women's narratives reveal low contraceptive knowledge and utilization, high healthcare illiteracy, and struggles with fertility and family planning. CONCLUSIONS: To date, little is known about family planning needs of the Tajik migrant population, or how labor migration changes family planning and reproductive health needs of women in the region. Given the large number of Tajik migrants, this will serve to build intervention strategies and improve access to reproductive healthcare, which can further be applied to other migrant populations around the world.  We report the design aspects of a prospective observational study of postpartum haemorrhage 1 . Over a 1-year period, the electronic hospital notes of women delivering at two maternity services were classified where possible by estimated blood loss (EBL) as 25-499ml; 500-999ml and ≥ 1,000ml. Random samples were selected of the first two groups (1/12 and 1/6 respectively), and all women with EBL ≥ 1,000, as well as all those with EBL missing or < 25ml (seen as implausible) or receiving blood transfusions within 24 hours of birth. Handheld notes for the selected women were examined in detail, and they were reclassified as appropriate. Rates of PPH and the role of risk factors were estimated using standard techniques for survey designs, using Stata version 11.2. RESULTS: 10,123 deliveries were considered. 1,895 were randomly selected according to the sampling strategy for detailed consideration. Due to the weighted design, similar numbers of women were included in each outcome group. *Figure(s) will be available online. Incidences of PPH ≥1,500 and ≥ 2,500 were estimated as 3.9% (95% CI 3.3-4.6) and 0.8% (95% CI 0.6-1.0). Using a standard cohort design, several times as many women would have been needed for the same accuracy: 1.9 and 4.6 times respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Weighted random sampling is an under-used design option that has potential for any situation where a case-control study would otherwise be considered. Greater accuracy can be obtained without bias for the same sample size compared to a cohort study. Standard packages can be used for data analysis. 2.9-3.1), chorioamnionitis (OR 1.9 95% CI 1.8-2.0), and fetal intolerance of labor (OR 5.2 95% CI 5.1-5.3), but were less common among Hispanic compared to non-Hispanic white women (OR 0.7 95% CI 0.7-0.7). The probability for vacuum was similarly increased for women with a prior cesarean (OR 2.8 95% CI 2.7-2.8), chorioamnionitis (OR 1.5 95% CI 1.5-1.5), and fetal intolerance of labor (OR 3.9 95% CI 3.9-4.0). CONCLUSIONS: While operative delivery is still relatively common in the setting of specific diagnoses, the overall use of forceps and vacuum decreased during the study period both absolutely and in the adjusted model. These trends may have implications for medical education and for offering women expedited delivery apart from cesarean delivery in emergency situations. pregnancies. The rate of smoking declined from 12.4% to 8.5% during the study period (Figure) . Risk factors associated with smoking included non-Hispanic white race, Medicaid insurance, being single, and low educational attainment. While 41.2% of non-Hispanic white women with 9th through 12th grade education smoked, only 1.2% of all women with a bachelor's or advanced degree smoked. Factors associated with heavy smoking compared to light smoking included non-Hispanic white race and low educational attainment. The proportion of heavy smokers decreased during the study period. Smoking is a modifiable risk factor for adverse obstetric and neonatal outcomes. While smoking decreased during the study period, certain social and demographic features were associated with high likelihood of tobacco use. That (i) tobacco use is very uncommon among certain groups, and (ii) there was a significant temporal decline in the prevalence rate of smoking during study period, suggests that interventions may be successful in decrease tobacco use during pregnancy further. *Figure(s) will be available online. (Figure) . CONCLUSIONS: Successful TOLAC may be associated with significant potential downstream health benefits that outweigh risks for some women. Significant demographic variation was present in the decision to attempt TOLAC, suggesting that these factors may affect how women view their decision about delivery. After years of decreasing TOLAC rates, TOLAC may be increasing. * Figure( s) will be available online. In these body systems many specific procedures were significantly increased in the H-OC group (p<0.001), of which particularly knee surgeries, colonoscopic procedures and carpal tunnel procedures may be related to the index surgery. CONCLUSIONS: H-OC is associated with higher risk of surgical morbidity and specific types of surgeries when compared to referent women confirming prior literature. Understanding the causes of these relationships is important to better treat benign uterine diseases and select appropriate surgical alternatives to hysterectomy. Hospitals were characterized based on annualized volume: low (<1,000 deliveries/year), moderate (1,000-<2,000), and high volume (≥2000). The incidence of hysterectomy following vaginal delivery was calculated for each hospital volume category. Risk for severe maternal morbidity and/ or death associated with hysterectomy was determined. RESULTS: Of 4,067,694 women who had a vaginal delivery 1,665 women also underwent hysterectomy. At low volume hospitals, the incidence of hysterectomy was 3.0 per 10,000 vaginal deliveries. For moderate and high volume hospitals the incidences were 3.8 and 4.6 per 10,000 vaginal deliveries, respectively. Risk for major morbidity associated with hysterectomy was common and similar across hospital volume categories (Table) . Disseminated intravascular coagulation was the most prevalent major morbidity. Other commonly encountered morbidity included acute respiratory failure, shock and acute renal failure. In-hospital maternal death occurred at a rate of 1.4%, 2.3% and 1.6% % at low, moderate, and high volume hospitals respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Despite differing delivery volumes the rates of major maternal complications with hysterectomy following vaginal delivery was similar. The frequency with which hysterectomy after vaginal delivery is performed, even at low volume centers, necessitates that all hospitals providing obstetrical care be prepared to perform and manage complications from this clinical scenario. *Figure(s) will be available online. Higher educational attainment was associated with increased cessation rates. These factors retained significance in the adjusted log linear model. Similar factors were associated with cessation in the second and third trimester for women who smoked during the first trimester. Smoking cessation is achieved at higher rates in certain demographic groups. Given that smoking is a modifiable risk factor for adverse obstetric and neonatal outcomes, validation of interventions to reduce tobacco use in groups with low cessation rates are an urgent public health priority. In particular, early presentation to prenatal care was associated with cessation, and may represent the best opportunity to change smoking behavior. . While vitamin C and beta-carotene intakes were slightly lower in those who did not have a LB, results did not reach statistical significance. Among those with F2αisoprostanes in the highest tertile (≥14.0 ng/mg Cr), only 46.5% conceived a CP, compared to the first (<9.1 ng/mg Cr) and second (9.1-13.9 ng/ mg Cr) tertiles, 63.6% and 71.1%, respectively (p=0.05). No significant differences were found for CP and LB for 8-OHdG. CONCLUSIONS: Vitamin E intake was statistically significantly higher among those who conceived a LB. F2α-isoprostanes, a biomarker for oxidative stress, showed a borderline significant difference for CP with lower conception among the highest tertile group. A higher percentage of women who did not conceive had lower vitamin E intake and did not meet the EAR, indicating that they might benefit from supplementation.  There was no difference in immediate neonatal outcomes whether the infant experienced spontaneous labor prior to CD, or underwent a pre-labor CD. However, with only two-thirds of our patients meeting the goal of a pre-labor CD and the rest going into spontaneous labor at 37.5wks on average, it is worth considering whether scheduled delivery of NTD fetuses should occur at 37-38wks gestational age. (table) . Neonates were more likely to experience NICU admission (6.8% vs 3.9%, p=0.01) but there were no differences in 5-minute Apgar or cord umbilical artery pH *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: While physicians working on a night float call system were significantly more likely to have patients with a prior cesarean undergo TOLAC and achieve VBAC, their patients also were also more likely to experience maternal and neonatal morbidity. Chronic fetal hypoxemia is a common pregnancy complication that is associated with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and respiratory distress syndrome at birth, the extent of which likely depends on the duration, severity and timing of the hypoxic insult. Here, we compared effects on molecular pathways regulating lung maturation following fetal exposure to chronic hypoxemia throughout gestation in the placentally restricted (PR) fetus (early hypoxemia) versus maternal chronic hypoxia (MCH) for the last third of gestation (late hypoxemia). METHODS: Control (C, n=11) and PR (n=8; induced by carunclectomy) sheep fetuses were evaluated at 133d gestation (term ~145d) in cohort 1 (early hypoxemia). In cohort 2, pregnant sheep were exposed to normoxia (N, n=8) or MCH (n=7; 10% O 2 ) from 105-138d gestation and fetuses were studied at 138d (late hypoxemia). Fetal lung expression of genes regulating hypoxia signalling, oxidative stress, lung liquid reabsorption and surfactant maturation were quantified by qRT-PCR. Data are the normalised mRNA expression ratio (Log2 fold change) from respective control for each cohort. RESULTS: Early and late hypoxemia promoted similar IUGR (Fig. 1) . While early hypoxemia decreased the fold change expression of genes regulating surfactant maturation, late hypoxia increased the fold change expression of genes regulating hypoxia signalling, antioxidants, lung liquid reabsorption and surfactant maturation (Fig. 1) . We provide evidence for the heterogeneity in respiratory outcome in IUGR infants following exposure to hypoxemia in utero dependent on the timing and duration of the insult. The goal of this study was to identify clinical characteristics associated with a short latency period in women at risk for preterm delivery. We conducted a secondary analysis of data from the MFMU Network trial: "A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trial of Antenatal Corticosteroid Regimens (BEARs)." Women at risk for spontaneous preterm delivery between 21 5/7 and 31 6/7 weeks gestation were randomized following an initial course of steroids to repeat weekly steroids or placebo until 34 weeks gestation or delivery. For our analysis, we determined the first and fourth quartile for length of latency, with latency defined as time from initial steroid dose to delivery. We then constructed a multivariate logistic regression model to determine the association of short latency with demographic and clinical characteristics present at the time of randomization among women with a singleton gestation. System we identified 98 women with singletons and a prior preterm delivery who were received either IM or vaginal progesterone. There were no differences in age, race and ethnicity between the two groups. The cohort that received vaginal progesterone had a statistically significantly greater BMI (p=0.007). Risk factors for preterm birth, including history of cervical surgery, smoking, vaginal bleeding, UTI, STD, and periodontal disease were not significantly different between the groups. Alcohol and drug use was greater in the IM group. The percentage of preterm deliveries and the average gestational age at delivery was not different between the two groups *Figure(s) will be available online. There was also no difference in neonatal outcomes including birthweight, APGARs, umbilical artery pH, NICU admissions, and death. A linear regression model accounting for the risk factors noted above and presence of cerclage showed no difference in the trends of the above outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: The number of preterm births and the average gestational age at delivery were not statistically significantly different between the treatment groups. A small sample size was a limitation of this study. A larger sample will be needed to assess any potential clinical differences between the two treatments. The We aimed to evaluate the incidence of retained placenta before and after the implementation of an institutional protocol mandating active management of the third stage of labor, including initiation of oxytocin infusion immediately following the second stage of labor. METHODS: Women who required manual placental removal following vaginal delivery from 9/1/2005 to 10/31/2008 (pre-protocol) and from 11/1/2008 to 6/1/2014 (post-protocol) were identified. Women who had a cesarean delivery, multiple gestations, or delivery prior to 24 weeks gestation were excluded. Demographic and clinical characteristics were compared between the two epochs. Rates of manual removal of the placenta pre-protocol were compared those post-protocol. RESULTS: There were a total of 70,619 vaginal deliveries over the study period. Of these, 265 (0.38%) had a retained placenta. There were no differences between the pre-and post-protocol groups in maternal age ( In adjusted analyses at <20 weeks, higher LP concentrations and large particle size were associated with lower odds of PTB (LDL-total, HDLlarge, LDL-large) and SPTB (LDL-large). At 24-29 weeks, high VLDL concentrations and large particle size were associated with lower odds of PTB and SPTB; high HDL concentrations and medium particle size were associated with higher odds of PTB. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Women with PTB have different LP profiles in early pregnancy and mid-gestation compared to those delivering at term. These differences can be further refined by NMR, suggesting particle size is a component of LP characterization in assessing risk for prematurity. . Early diagnosis of women at high-risk of subsequent PTB would facilitate targeted, personalised monitoring and treatment strategies. Assessment of cervical length by ultrasound sonography can be used to triage patients into PTB risk categories but is expensive, time consuming and lacks the discriminatory power to be used for low risk population screening. Metabolic phenotyping of easily accessible biofluids such as urine may allow objective biochemical classification of pathophysiological states associated with PTB risk. METHODS: 1 H-Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) was used to profile urine samples collected longitudinally at three different time points of gestation (12, 16, and 20 weeks) from women who experienced uncomplicated, term delivery (n=138) or preterm delivery (n=23). Cervical length was measured using transvaginal ultrasound at each time of collection. Spectra were analysed using a combination of multivariate modelling approaches including Knowledge Discovery by Accuracy Maximization (KODAMA) and partial least squares (PLS). Metabolites were identified and quantified by in-house software. RESULTS: Identification and quantitation of >60 urinary metabolites were performed across the patient cohort. Using KODAMA three distinct urine metabolic phenotypes were identified *Figure(s) will be available online. , one of which exhibited a significantly higher risk of subsequent PTB (P<0.05, Wald test). Using supervised modelling, urine metabolic signatures predictive of cervical shortening could also be identified. CONCLUSIONS: Metabolic profiling of urine collected in the early 2 nd trimester permits stratification of patients at risk of cervical shortening and preterm birth. Early identification of high-risk patients would permit improved patient triaging and facilitate personalised treatment approaches. Despite life-saving benefits on fetal lung maturation, there is concern that antenatal glucocorticoid therapy (AGT) may have adverse side-effects on fetal growth and the developing cardiovascular system. However, most of these studies including our own have been in animal models of control pregnancy, leaving a paucity of information on possible adverse effects of AGT in animal models of complicated pregnancy (de Vries et al. JCI 117:1058 , 2007 Herrera et al. PLoS ONE 5:e.9250, 2010) . Chronic fetal hypoxia is a common consequence of complicated pregnancy, and therefore will affect many fetuses who receive AGT. Here, we investigated effects on fetal growth and cardiac function of human clinically-relevant AGT following normoxic or hypoxic development in the chick embryo, the only model to isolate the direct effects of therapy on the fetus independent of effects on the mother and placenta. METHODS: Fertilized chicken eggs were divided into 4 groups: normoxia (N), hypoxia (H, 14% O 2 from d1 ; term~21d), normoxia dexamethasone (ND) and hypoxia dexamethasone (HD). In D groups, 0.1mg/kg dexamethasone was injected into the air cell on d14 (0.67 gestation). At d19, following euthanasia and biometry, cardiac function was established in a Langendorff preparation. A separate cohort was perfusion fixed (4% paraformaldehyde at 2.66kPa) at d19 for stereological analysis of cardiac structure. In hypoxic relative to normoxic embryos, dexamethasone led to a further reduction in embryo weight, an enhanced decrease in myocardial contractility (dP/dt max) and a pronounced increase in the isovolumetric relaxation constant Tau, a measure of diastolic dysfunction. However, dexamethasone resulted in similar dilated cardiomyopathy in normoxic and hypoxic embryos (Fig. 1D) . CONCLUSIONS: Hypoxic development exacerbates some of the adverse direct effects of AGT on fetal growth and cardiac function. MicroRNAs are small, single-stranded molecules that control gene expression by regulating mRNA stability and transcription. Upon excretion into plasma, they remain in a stable, cell-free state where they can be assayed and used as potential bio-markers. We aimed to identify and characterize circulating maternal plasma microRNAs in healthy pregnancy from 12 to 22 weeks, and then evaluate if specific microRNAs were altered in women who experienced subsequent cervical shortening and preterm delivery. METHODS: Maternal plasma samples and cervical length measurements were collected from women at three time-points in mid-pregnancy: 12-14+6, 15-17+6 and 19-21+6 weeks gestation. Samples were categorised into those from women who experienced: 1) Uncomplicated pregnancies without cervical shortening (n=48 samples); 2) cervical shortening followed by term delivery (n=30 samples) and 3) cervical shortening and preterm delivery <34 weeks gestation (n=25 samples). nCounter microRNA plasma profiling was used to compare expression of specific microRNAs between the phenotypic groups at each time point. Candidate miRNAs were validated using real-time polymerase chain reaction in the original and a second independent cohort (n=96 samples). RESULTS: Fifty-six miRNAs were expressed in more than half of the plasma samples at any time point and the profile was stable across gestation in uncomplicated pregnancies. Levels of nine microRNAs were significantly higher in plasma from women who went on to exhibit cervical shortening, regardless of gestation at delivery: hsa-let-7a-5p, hsa-miR-374a-5p, hsa-miR-93-5p, hsa-miR-150-5p, hsa-miR-15b-5p, hsa-miR-185-5p, hsa-miR-191-5p, hsa-miR-19b-3p and hsa-miR-23a-3p. This effect was observed from 12-22 weeks gestation. Our findings were validated in an independent cohort of women. We have identified a panel of circulating microRNAs associated with cervical shortening and preterm birth secondary to cervical weakness. The second trimester is a key period in pregnancy when pathological changes can be identified, but time remains to deliver outcome-modifying interventions. Such a panel of biomarkers may also allow early exclusion of women from unnecessary cervical surveillance. Further work is being undertaken to establish if these microRNA biomarkers can be used within the general pregnant population to identify those at increased risk of cervical weakness. Neonatal complications included light-for-dates (n=8), heavy-for-dates (n=4), hypoglycemia (n=8), hyperbilirubinemia (n=5), and congenital anomalies (n=3). Placental pathology could be obtained in 21 cases, in which 18 had GDM, 2 had type 1 DM, and 1 had type 2 DM. Eleven of them had a preterm delivery and the rest of them were term. Neonatal complications included respiratory distress syndrome (n=2), transient tachypnea of the newborn (n=1), light-for-dates (n=3), hypoglycemia (n=3), and congenital anomaly (n=2). The pathologies were villitis of unknown etiology (n=4), inflammation (n=3), maternal vessel thrombosis (n=4), fetal vessel thrombosis (n=2), peripheral infarction (n=2), single umbilical artery (n=2), chorangiosis (n=2), intervillous fibrin deposition (n=1), hemorrhagic endovasculitis (n=1), and intervillositis (n=1); normal histology was also noted (n=5). CONCLUSIONS: About three-quarters of women with glucose intolerance during pregnancy exhibited placental pathology, even with live births. Placental dysfunction might lead to fetal compromise in women with glucose intolerance. (GDM) is associated with disturbances in maternal lipid metabolism, and hypertriacylglycerolemia in GDM has been related to a significant risk of having neonate that are large for gestational age, and been considered a stronger predictor of overgrowth than glucose levels. We recently discovered that both adrenomedullin (AM) and its receptors expression in omental adipose tissues from GDM were greater than from normal pregnant women at term. However the role of AM in pathophysiology of GDM and the mechanisms involved remains to be established. Thus, the aim of this study was to determine the role of AM in the transition from lipid storage to lipolysis and gene expressions involved in fatty acid uptake and intracellular transport. METHODS: Human preadipocyte cultures were used to assess the influence of AM and its antagonist AM22-52 on glycerol production and relative gene expressions. RESULTS: Analysis of lipolysis indicates that glycerol release into the medium was significantly increased by exposure of the adipocytes to AM in a time-and dose-dependent manner. This anti-adipogenic property of AM was accompanied by substantial suppression of metabolic markers and key transcription factors, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) and diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1). Further, the enhancement of AM on lipolysis was blocked by Erk inhibitor (PD98059), but not by Akt inhibitor (LY294002) and PKA inhibitor (H-89). Moreover, insulin (100 nM), a known suppressor of lipolysis, is able to inhibit AM-induced lipolysis up to 1 hour of AM incubation but this effect was lost with prolonged AM treatment. In addition, treatment with AM antagonist AM 22-52 (1µM) not only attenuates AM-mediated lipolysis by suppressing Erk signaling pathways, but also inhibits TNFα-stimulated lipolysis. CONCLUSIONS: These studies show that AM increases lipolysis through inhibition of PPAR and DGAT1 in the human preadipocytes. These effects are mediated by Erk, but not by Akt and PKA pathways. Both AM-and TNF-α-induced lipolysis are inhibited by AM antagonist AM 22-52. We therefore suggest that elevated AM and or TNF-α in GDM would increase lipolysis resulting infetal excess adiposity and overgrowth, and use of AM antagonist may be beneficial. (GDM) is defined as any degree of glucose intolerance with first recognition or onset during pregnancy. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is known for its regulatory role in cellular energy metabolism and AMPK activators have been used to manage diabetes. Therefore, we hypothesized that AMPK may also beneficial in GDM. METHODS: 50 full term pregnancies (25 GDM and 25 normal) who selected non-labored caesarean delivery at the department of Obstetrics, the first affiliated hospital of Chongqing Medical University were recruited in this study. The expression of mRNA and protein were determined by q-PCR and western blotting respectively. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) in placenta were assessed by measuring GSH and GSSG. RESULTS: q-PCR identified no differences in AMPK transcription in placentas from normal and GDM pregnancies. However, Western blots indicated that AMPK phosphorylation decreased 23% in GDM placentas (n=6, p<0.001), and downstream ACC phosphorylation was reduced 35% in the GDM group (n=4, p<0.05), suggesting that AMPK-ACC signaling (associated with lipid metabolism and glucose uptake) is compromised in GDM placentas. Phosphor-PPARγ was reduced 24% in GDM vs. normal (n=6, p<0.001), which implies that lipogenesis is also disturbed. In addition, Akt phosphorylation was decreased 65% in GDM placentas (n=6, p<0.01), whilst mTOR phosphorylation was reduced by 47% (n=6, p<0.001); impaired Akt-mTOR signaling suggests inhibition of protein synthesis. Moreover, ERK phosphorylation was enhanced 58% in GDM compared to normal placentas (n=6, p<0.001). In addition, the ratio of GSH/GSSG was significantly reduced in GDM placentas (1.63±0.36 vs 3.72±0.43, n=6, p<0.005),indicating elevated ROS level and oxidative stress. CONCLUSIONS: Placental AMPK activation is suppressed in GDM, and thus its related metabolic activities are likely to be compromised. The disturbance of AMPK mediated glucose and lipid metabolism could be the reason for oxidative stress in placenta, which will further lead to inflammation. Modulation of glucose and metabolism by targeting AMPK could be a promising therapeutic strategy for GDM. Declining Insulin Requirements During the Third Trimester of Pregnancy and Obstetrical Outcome. Larissa Feinmesser, Maya Ram, Sharon Maslovitz. Lis maternity Hospital, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. INTRODUCTION: Decreasing insulin requirements in late gestation have been associated in earlier studies with placental dysfunction and consequential poor obstetrical outcome. We aimed to assess whether decreasing insulin demands are related to adverse perinatal outcome. METHODS: This retrospective cohort study included healthy pregnant women with singleton gestation, diagnosed with GDM requiring insulin to maintain proper glucose control. The study population was divided into group A -characterized by insulin dosage reduction of at least 30 % during a 2 weeks period in the third trimester and a control group (B) with steady or increasing insulin dose to maintain a euglycemic state. The primary outcome was a composite of clinical situations that imply feto-placental dysfunction which included one or more of the following: 1. Fetal growth restriction 2. Oligohydramnios 3. Emergent cs due to category 2-3 monitor. The secondary outcome measures were: NICU admission, Apgar score ≤7 at 5', arterial cord blood pH ≤ 7.1, macrosomia, neonatal hypoglycemia and a composite of adverse neonatal outcomes (one or more of : respiratory morbidity, cerebral morbidity, phototherapy, need for blood transfusion, NEC , or death). RESULTS: Group A was composed of 101 women and group B was composed of 203 women . Maternal demographic characteristics were similar between groups. The groups did not differ in any aspect of GDM diagnostic characteristics (GCT results, OGTT results, or HbA1C). Both groups consumed similar daily doses of insulin; 28.3±17.1 IU for group A and 27.9±14.2 IU in group B (p=0.26). A significant decline of 45.5 % in insulin consumption was noted among women from group A. Total cessation on insulin treatment was reported in 17% of women in group A compared with none in group B (P<0.001). The primary outcome (composite placental dysfunction) did not differ between the groups (8.3% vs. 8.4%, p=0.61). There were no between-group differences in any of the secondary outcomes including gestational age at delivery, labor induction rate, mean birth weight, CS rate, FGR<10% or in any of the immediate neonatal outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Diminished insulin requirements during the last trimester of pregnancy was not associated with adverse obstetrical or neonatal outcome and its significance as a warning sign for placental dysfunction should be reconsidered. In humans, most of the progesterone required for the maintenance of pregnancy is generated in the placenta. Progesterone receptor knock out mice indicated that progesterone negatively regulates pancreatic β-cell proliferation and glucose homeostasis. It has been reported that women with GDM have elevated serum progesterone levels compared to normal pregnant women. However, if the expression of placental steroidogenic enzymes are also altered in GDM patients is not known. In the present study we analyzed the expression levels of steroidogenic enzymes in term placentas obtained from normal and GDM patients. The protocol for this study was approved by Baylor College of Medicine Institutional Review Board and was conducted according to Declaration of Helsinki Principles. Placental villous tissues were collected from a total of 43 patients (26 GDM and 17 normal pregnancies) within 30 minutes of cesarean delivery. The GDM was diagnosed as per the American Diabetes Association criteria. Pregnant patients with pre-gestational type 1 diabetes, fetal anomalies, multifetal pregnancy, hypertension, preeclampsia or clinical evidence of maternal or fetal infection were excluded from the study. Expression of steroidogenic pathway enzymes was assessed by qPCR and Western blot and normalized to cytokeratin 7 expressions in each tissue. The results were analyzed by t-Test and a difference between two groups with a p < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. The villi from GDM patients showed a significantly higher (2 fold) protein expression of Adrenodoxin reductase (ADXR) which is a rate limiting enzyme during the electron transfer reaction for the cholesterol side chain cleavage enzyme cytochrome P450scc (CYP11A1). On the other hand, GDM villi had significantly less protein expression (2 fold) of CYP11A1 which catalyzes the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenelone. The GDM villi also showed a significantly lower (1.5 fold) expression of HSD3β1 that converts pregnenelone to progesterone. However, the expression of CYP17A1 which catalyzes the synthesis of androgen and estrogen precursors from pregnenelone was not different in the villi from GDM and normal term placentas. The placental progesterone biosynthesis pathway is altered in GDM. Higher expression of rate limiting enzyme ADXR may have a role in elevated progesterone levels and development of GDM. Hopkins, Brain Antczak, Chad A Grotegut, Geeta K Swamy. Duke, Durham, NC, USA. INTRODUCTION: Both race and body mass index (BMI) affect the balance of inflammatory cytokines. Vaccines stimulate a pro-inflammatory immune response to produce pathogen-specific antibodies to prevent infection. However it is unknown whether vaccine-induced inflammation is altered in states of baseline inflammation such as black race and elevated BMI and how that might impact pregnancy. METHODS: 36 pregnant women who received inactivated influenza vaccination during the 2012-2014 influenza seasons were recruited. Plasma was collected prior to vaccination (baseline), 1-3 days (visit 2), 4-6 days (visit 3) and 7-9 days (visit 4) post-vaccination. Plasma concentrations of IL-4, IL-6 and TNF-α were measured using ELISA and compared by race (black, white) and BMI (less than 30, greater than or equal to 30) at each time point. Wilcoxon rank sum was used to compare groups. RESULTS: IL-6 was significantly higher in women with BMI of 30 or greater when compared to women with BMI less than 30 at baseline and all post-vaccination time points (p=0.004, 0.05, 0.02, 0.006 for baseline through visit 4 respectively) *Figure(s) will be available online. However, there were no differences in IL-4 or TNF -α at baseline or any post vaccination visits by BMI. Regarding race, there was no statistically significant difference in IL-4, IL-6 or TNF-α by race at baseline. However, black women had a significantly higher post-vaccination rise in IL-6 than Caucasians (p=0.02) *Figure(s) will be available online. There was no statistically significant difference in IL-4 and TNF -α by race at any time point. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that the obligatory vaccineinduced IL-6 inflammatory response is altered by race and BMI. Further research is needed to characterize differences in cytokine response to vaccination and correlate this response to pregnancy outcomes. Given the growing burden of diabetes in underserved communities and the complexity of diabetes self-management during pregnancy, the objective was to develop and pilot test a theory-driven curriculum of text messaging for diabetes support and education during pregnancy. METHODS: Mixed methods, prospective study of pregnant women with pregestational or gestational diabetes receiving prenatal care at a public-funded academic clinic. Prior work yielded a model of diabetes self-management barriers and support factors. Cognitive Load Theory, the Health Belief Model and Theory of Self-Efficacy served as framework for a 30-week curriculum addressing these barriers. Participants received three one-way text messages per week during pregnancy. Self-efficacy was measured at baseline and completion using the Perceived Diabetes Self-Management Scale and Diabetes Empowerment Scale. Semi-structured, in-depth interviews were performed at enrollment to identify diabetes barriers and at study exit to provide program feedback. Self-efficacy scores were analyzed using paired t-tests and interview data using qualitative theme generation. RESULTS: Of 30 enrolled pregnant women with diabetes, 29 have completed the pilot study to date. Self-efficacy scores were not statistically significantly different between baseline and exit testing. Qualitative analysis of interview data yielded several critical themes. Participants confirmed the model of barriers developed in prior work with a different population. Regarding the intervention, participants consistently reported the text messaging program provided enhanced motivation for diabetes self-care, reduced diabetes-related social isolation, increased perceived diabetes-associated knowledge, enhanced comfort with the health care team, and reduced the logistical burdens of diabetes during pregnancy. Participants requested enhanced interactive and customizable features in future tool iterations. CONCLUSIONS: Pregnant women with diabetes who were enrolled in a pilot study of a text messaging curriculum for diabetes support described enhanced motivation, knowledge, and comfort with diabetes self-care activities as a result of the health education intervention. Next steps include enhancing the interactive features of the tool, scaling up to a "high tech" replicable mobile health application, and investigating the effect of the tool on perinatal outcomes.  Factorial trial (2 x 2 x 2) with eight cells, in which pregnant women received randomly assigned online referrals to all combinations of either text messaging, Quitline counseling, and/or online motivational video. Patients were referred to the study website either in-person by a physician, or using a flier promising an e-gift card incentive for enrollment. Outcomes included visiting the study website, clicking to begin an online intervention, and smoking status at a four-week follow-up. RESULTS: Participant enrollment was higher following direct vs. flier recruitment (95% vs 16.7%, p < .001). A total of 113 participants enrolled in the study. Of the 100 participants referred to one or more interventions, 84 (84%) clicked to pursue at least one of them, and actual participation in at least one evidence-based approach was high (37.2% signed up for and received smoking cessation text messages, and 61.5% watched an online motivational video). However, participants referred to ≥ 1 intervention were less likely to proceed with any intervention referral (but this difference did not reach significance; 90.5% vs 76.7%, OR = 2.9, p= .088). Quit attempts (88.4% vs. 66.7%, OR = 3.8) and 7-day point-prevalence abstinence, confirmed with cotinine (24.6% vs 11.1%, OR = 2.6) were higher in participants referred to an intervention, but these differences also did not reach significance, probably in relation to small n, limited power, despite large ORs. CONCLUSIONS: In-person physician referral to an online resource is more effective than flier-based referral, even with incentives. Most patients who visited the website chose to pursue at least one intervention; they were more likely to do so when offered only a single option. Although intervention effects in this study were not significant, their magnitude is highly encouraging. Wound morbidity is an expensive and inconvenient complication, occurring in up to 10% of high risk patients undergoing cesarean delivery. It is of importance to determine the most effective, safest closure method to decrease patient morbidity. Although use of staples decreases closure time, a meta-analysis demonstrated a significant 2-fold increase in wound separation. Absorbable subcuticular staples may combine the advantage of reduced closure time with decreased incidence of wound separation. The only published study of cesarean deliveries utilizing subcuticular staples found a significant reduction in wound morbidity and closure time compared to traditional staples. However, there was significant group heterogeneity. Therefore the purpose of the current study was to determine if there was a significant difference in wound complications among traditional closure techniques versus subcuticular staple closure. The current study is a retrospective cohort study of cesarean sections performed from January through September of 2014. Medical records were reviewed and data including the patient demographics, comorbidities, closure type and wound complications were recorded. Patients with incomplete data were excluded. Data were analyzed with ANOVA or Fisher Exact test, according to data type. RESULTS: Of the 186 patients identified, 176 patients were included in the data analysis (n=83 suture, n=49 traditional staple, n=44 subcuticular staple). The groups were similar in all demographic categories, labor prior to delivery, blood loss, and medical and pregnancy related comorbidities. The incidence of complications among the suture and subcuticular staple closure was not significantly different (3.6% vs 0%, p=0.3), however there were significantly less complications in the suture and subcuticular suture closure groups when compared to traditional staple closure (14.3%) (p=0.03 and p=0.01, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Herein we report the first study in patients undergoing cesarean section demonstrating a decreased incidence of composite wound complications in subcuticular staple closure versus traditional staple closure in a homogenous group of patients. Absorbable subcuticular staple closure represents a convenient, safe and cost-effective closure technique for cesarean section. The majority of patients (94%) had thermal burns. Mean body surface area burned (for 2 nd and 3 rd degree burns) was 4%. The median systolic blood pressure on admission was 130mmHg and median heart rate was 102 (both elevated as compared to pregnancy normals). A majority of patients were not screened at admission for alcohol consumption (73%), but were screened for drug use (91%). Of those screened, 1 out of 18 patients was positive for alcohol and 6 out of 60 were positive for drug use. Only 61% of patients were asked whether the burn was the result of abuse, and of those, 100% stated it was not. Fifteen percent were intubated. Median hospital stay was 2 days. Four patients (6%) required delivery during admission, of which 3 delivered vaginally. One maternal death was reported. CONCLUSIONS: Fortunately, the incidence of burns is rare during pregnancy and most patients burned less than five percent of their body surface area. The need for delivery and maternal mortality were rare. A more thorough evaluation of etiology would identify preventable causes of burn injury such as alcohol and abuse. There is no consensus on the optimal treatment in women with low-risk thrombophilias (LRT) and many are treated with anticoagulation prophylaxis. Few studies exist evaluating maternal (MAT) and neonatal (NEO) outcomes of patients with LRT on prophylaxis. Our objective was to compare rates of MAT and NEO outcomes in women with LRT on different prophylactic anticoagulation regimens. We hypothesized that MAT and NEO outcomes will be superior with the traditional prophylactic LMWH therapy when compared to other regimens. METHODS: Retrospective cohort comparing 3 groups with LRT on prophylactic anticoagulation at two medical centers: low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), LMWH + low dose aspirin (ASA), and ASA only. Baseline characteristics were compared using the Chi-square test or ANOVA F-test. Composite maternal outcome: mode of delivery, venous thromboembolism, bleeding complications, ICU admission, death, heparin induced thrombocytopenia, preeclampsia, abruption, or number of postpartum hospital days. Neonatal composite outcome: NICU admission, IUFD, SGA, RDS, or 1 or 5-min Apgar < 7. Univariate analyses using a simple logistic regression and multivariate analyses using logistic regression with a backward elimination models were performed. Adjusted odds ratios were then calculated along with corresponding confidence intervals. RESULTS: 106 patients on LMWH, 289 on LMWH + ASA, and 97 on ASA only were analyzed. Maternal characteristics were similar among groups except indication for anticoagulation and gestational age (GA) at delivery. Univariate analysis: composite maternal outcomes were not different among groups (p=0.7). ASA cohort had greater rate of preeclampsia. Composite neonatal outcomes were not different among groups (p=0.7). Infants in ASA cohort were delivered at later GA and weighed more at delivery. Multivariate regression analyses were adjusted for treatment, factor V Leiden heterozygosity, and GA at delivery (comparisons are to the ASA group). Adverse maternal outcomes were not associated with anticoagulation regimens (LMWH aOR 1.3; 95% CI 0.3-4.7; p=0.7; LMWH + ASA aOR 0.9; 95% CI 0.3-3.0, p=0.9) nor were adverse neonatal outcomes (LMWH aOR 0.7; 95% CI 0.4-1.8; p=0.6; LMWH plus ASA aOR 0.7; 95% CI 0.4-1.5; p=0.4). CONCLUSIONS: Prophylactic anticoagulation regimens in low risk thrombophilias did not impact adverse maternal or neonatal outcomes. Handwashing Practices in the Labor and Delivery Unit: Effect on Maternal and Neonatal Infectious Outcomes. Ashley Salazar. Our objective was to evaluate the effect of handwashing practices in labor and delivery on maternal and neonatal infectious morbidity. METHODS: Data from a prospective cohort of women delivering at 13 academically affiliated U.S. hospitals over a 3-year period was used. All data were abstracted by trained research personnel. Postpartum maternal infection and proven early onset neonatal sepsis (EOS) were determined according to previously validated criteria. The hospitals were categorized according to whether they monitored handwashing during the study period, and according to their compliance rates. The association between handwashing monitoring and infectious morbidity was determined using univariate and multivariable analysis. RESULTS: 23,430 women delivered in hospitals that monitored handwashing compliance, and 30,224 delivered in hospitals that did not. Women delivering in hospitals that did not monitor were younger, delivered at a slightly later gestational age, had longer second stage, were less likely to be nulliparous, have gestational diabetes and PROM, and more likely to be non-Hispanic white and Hispanic, and smokers. On univariate analysis, EOS was significantly more frequent in hospitals that monitored versus those that did not (0.3% vs 0.2%, p=.04), but maternal postpartum infectious morbidity was not different. No differences were found on multivariable analysis (Table 1) . Maternal and neonatal infectious outcomes were not different for those with <90% or >90% compliance when compared with the no monitoring group (Table 2) . To determine whether administration of prophylactic antibiotics is associated with a reduced risk of endometritis in women who undergo prolonged intrauterine balloon tamponade for management of postpartum hemorrhage (PPH). METHODS: All women who had a PPH and underwent placement of an intrauterine balloon between 2007 and 2014 were identified. Women were excluded if the intrauterine balloon was removed in <8 hours or if they ultimately required a peripartum hysterectomy. Prophylactic antibiotics were considered to have been given if at least one dose of antibiotics was given post-balloon placement with no other indication. The primary outcome was endometritis, which was defined as documented uterine tenderness with a postpartum temperature >100.4°F. Univariable analyses were performed and multivariable logistic regression was used to control for potential confounding. RESULTS: 263 women who underwent placement of an intrauterine balloon for management of PPH were included in the cohort. 233 (88.6%) received prophylactic antibiotics. Characteristics of women stratified by receipt of antibiotics are shown in the The rate of endometritis was similar in the group who received prophylactic antibiotics compared to the group who did not receive prophylactic antibiotics. This finding persisted (aOR 1.08, 95% CI 0.29-4.00) after adjusting for administration of misoprostol as an uterotonic agent and the total time the intrauterine balloon remained in situ. This study had 80% power to detect a relative risk for endometritis of 3.2 associated with prophylactic antibiotic use. CONCLUSIONS: Prophylactic antibiotics did not change the rate of endometritis in women who underwent prolonged placement of an intrauterine balloon for management of PPH. Although overt thyroid dysfunction is known to lead to fertility issues, subclinical hypothyroidism or thyroid autoimmunity and their relationship to time to pregnancy has not been examined. Thus, our objective was to examine the association between pre-pregnancy antithyroid antibodies and subclinical hypothyroidism and time to conception in a cohort of women. METHODS: Prospective cohort study from a multi-center randomized, placebo-controlled trial of preconception low-dose aspirin to prevent pregnancy loss among healthy fertile women, ages 18-40 years old (n=1228). Measurements for TSH, fT4, anti-thyroglubulin antibody (anti-TG) and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (anti-TPO) were taken at baseline. Cox proportional hazard regression models were used to assess fecundability odds ratios (FOR), adjusting for age and BMI and accounting for both left truncation and right censoring. RESULTS: Women with a TSH > 2.5 mIU/L were not more likely to have a longer time to conceive when compared to women whose TSH was < 2.5 mIU/L (HR 0.94, 95% CI 0.76, 1.16). Similarly, women with thyroid autoimmunity did not have a significant delay in pregnancy compared to those without (HR 1.04; 95% CI 0.80, 1.35). CONCLUSIONS: Women with a history of 1 or 2 prior pregnancy losses with subclinical hypothyroidism, did not have a longer time to pregnancy. Additionally, women with thyroid autoimmunity did not have an increase in time to pregnancy. Figure 1 shows the PTB rate over time, revealing no significant difference, despite evolving progesterone treatment practices. *Figure(s) will be available online. There were 2,068 deliveries to women with a prior history of PTB, of whom 27.8% had a recurrent PTB. The rate of subsequent spontaneous PTB (29.6%, vs. 28.6%), and of gestational age (GA) at subsequent PTB (34+1wks vs. 34+3wks) was similar in the years before and after progesterone therapy became standard. Women who recieved progesterone in a subsequent pregnancy had earlier PTB in their prior pregnancy than women who were not treated (average GA of 30+5 weeks, vs. 35 weeks). There was no significant difference in recurrent PTB rate between women who recieved progesterone and those who did not, even when the analysis was limited to women with prior PTB ≤ 34 weeks. CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal the absence of a significant effect of progesterone treament on reduction of PTB rates in the setting of an already low baseline rate. A progesterone effect on recurrent spontaneous PTB may have been obscured by the higher risk for earlier delivery in the treated population, and by the fact that 2/3 of our PTBs occur >34 weeks, when progesterone therapy may not be of benefit. The The most common mental health complications experienced by pregnant and post partum women are depression, stress and anxiety with a prevalence of 15-25%. If untreated, 70% of women with prenatal depression continue to experience symptoms postpartum. Only a few women seek help or engage in treatment. Perinatal mental health problems can occur at any time from conception through to the first year after delivery and can contribute to adverse outcomes for women and infants as well as partners and other family members. The purpose of this population based study, was to identify women, who screened positive for perinatal mental health issues and to assess the ability of the medical personnel to manage such patients. METHODS: An enhanced, screening questionnaire was used, which included questions regarding previous mental health illness, mental health professional involvement, inpatients stays, attempted self harm and family history. A total of 1066 women were screened at booking over a period of three months. For the medical and midwifery personnel an online questionnaire was sent out and the responses were collected and analyzed 6 weeks later. Lactobacilli produce lactic acid to kill bacteria associated with bacterial vaginosis (BV) and other potential pathogens. NGAL release from epithelial cells inhibits growth of BV-related bacteria by iron sequestration. Greater estrogen production in multiparous women may account for the higher levels of most mediators in these women as compared to primiparous women. Higher D-lactic acid levels in vaginal fluid from primiparous women indicate the preferential presence of Lactobacilli that produce this isomer -L. crispatus, L. jensenii, L. gasseri. In contrast, L. iners only produces L-lactic acid. The elevated level of hyaluronan PP probably promotes cervical and uterine remodeling. On the other hand, obesity is also characterized by elevated adenosine plasma levels. However, there are no data regarding adenosine levels in overweight/obese pregnant women. METHODS: Normal weight and overweight/obese non-pregnant and pregnant women were included in this study. After written nformed consent, record of clinical data, self-reported food ingestion during the last 24 hours (3 days other than weekend with at least one week apart) and blood samples were taken from each patient. Plasma adenosine levels were measured by high-performance liquid chromatography, whereas biochemical parameters including glucose, total proteins and lipid profile by using standard colorimetric assays. RESULTS: Adenosine plasma levels were 1.8 fold higher in pregnant women (n=30) than non-pregnant women (n=30) (p<0.0001). Overweight/ obese pregnant women (n=18) exhibited higher value than pregnant (n=12, p=0.04) or non-pregnant women with normal weight (n=23, p=0.0005). When weight-gain during pregnancy was considered, pregnant women with elevated weight-gain exhibited significantly higher (1.7 fold, p=0.03) adenosine levels than those with appropriated weight-gain; whereas differences were not statistically significant with those women with low weight-gain. Correlative analysis showed significant association between body mass index and adenosine only in pregnant women (r=0.39, 95%IC 0.03 to 0.67, p=0.02). On the other hand, estimated polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) consumption was negatively correlated to adenosine plasma levels only in non-pregnant women (r=-0.33, 95%IC -0.61 to 0.03, p=0.03). CONCLUSIONS: Normal pregnancy is associated with high adenosine plasma levels, which are further elevated in pregnant women with overweight/obesity. Relevance of this finding for adenosine-mediated cardiovascular and metabolic adaptions during pregnancy require further investigation. Fondecyt 1140586 financed this study. Obesity and Periodontal Diseases in Pregnancy: Inflammation and Antioxidant Levels in Saliva. C Mando, 1 GM Anelli, 1 C Novielli, 1 V Clivio, 1 A Lissoni, 2 P Castellarin, 2 C Garlanda, 3 S Abati, 2 I Cetin. 1 1 Univ Milan, Milan, Italy; 2 Univ Milan, Milan, Italy; 3 Humanitas, Milan, Italy. INTRODUCTION: Obesity is associated with chronic mild inflammation and higher gestational risks. Periodontal diseases (PD), i.e gingivitis (G) and periodontitis (P) may also represent a source of low-grade systemic inflammation potentially impairing pregnancy outcomes. We showed increased oral inflammation in obese (OB) vs normal weight (NW) pregnant women. Few studies investigated saliva (S) biomarkers in pregnant women. Here we analyzed C-reactive protein (CRP) concentrations and total antioxidant capacity (TAC) in S of pregnant women with different pre-pregnancy BMI, investigating their association with plasma CRP and with PD METHODS: 53 singleton pregnancies (13 NW, BMI 18-24.9; 40 OB, BMI≥30) were studied at 3rd trimester. Periodontal status was assessed by oral clinical examination in 21 OB and 13 NW. P: at least 4 teeth with pockets ≥4 mm. G: soft and/or calcified bacterial plaque and/ or gingival bleeding in 4 or more teeth. In 28 women (13NW,15OB) unstimulated S-samples were collected for analysis of CRP (ELISA) and TAC (AntiOxidant Assay). CRP was also measured in 44 (10NW,34OB) plasma samples (ELISA) RESULTS: S-CRP levels were significantly related with BMI (p=0.04;R=0.42). TAC was significantly higher in OB vs NW (p=0.01) and significantly correlated with S-CRP (p=0.00;R=0.70). Plasma CRP levels were significantly increased in OBvsNW (p=0.00), correlating with both S-CRP (p=0.00;R=0.85) and TAC (p=0.01;R=0.52).90% OB and 38% NW had PD (P/G). PD in healthy-NW did not enhance molecular values, while in OB tended to increase CRP/TAC vs healthy NW, reaching significance for plasma CRP (p=0.017) CONCLUSIONS: Chronic mild inflammation was reported in many OB tissues, but nothing is known about markers in S of OB pregnant women, which might represent an effective non-invasive diagnostic tool. Here, CRP increase in OB plasma, marker of systemic inflammation, was confirmed in S, with CRP significantly correlated with BMI. OB is also associated with oxidative stress. Here, both S/plasma CRP correlated with S-TAC, which was significantly increased in OB. This suggests the induction of a systemic antioxidant response detectable in OB-S. and methoxyestradiols (2-ME 2 , 4ME 2 ) activate uterine artery endothelium function during pregnancy by increasing endothelial cell proliferation and stimulating production of PGI 2 . During late pregnancy the potent vasodilator nitric oxide (NO) plays a significant role in mediating increases in uterine blood flow. Moreover, E 2 increases NO production in uterine artery endothelial cells (UAECs); however it is unknown whether the E 2 metabolites, 2-OHE 2 , 4-OHE 2 , 2-ME 2 , and 4ME 2 also increase NO production in these cells. We hypothesize that the E 2 metabolites will induce NO production in UAECs derived from pregnant (P-), but not from nonpregnant (NP-) sheep and that these responses are mediated via estrogen receptors or adrenergic receptors. METHODS: UAECs were obtained from NP (Luteal; n=4) and late P (120-130d, term=147d; n=4) sheep. P-UAECs and NP-UAECs were treated with vehicle, E 2 [10nM] or 2-OHE 2 , 4-OHE 2 , 2-ME 2 , or 4ME 2 [0.1, 1, 10, or 100nM] for 0, 5, 10, or 20 min. To determine if adrenergic or estrogen receptors mediate the production of NOx induced by the E 2 metabolites, P-UAECs were pre-treated with [10µm] phentolamine, propranolol, or ICI182,780 followed by agonist treatments. Media were collected and analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Total NOx production was determined as the sum of nitrites and nitrates detected. RESULTS: E 2 and its metabolites induced pregnancy specific stimulation of NOx production since enhanced NO production was observed only in PUAECs, but not in NP-UAECs. E 2 [10nM], 2-OHE 2 and 4-OHE 2 [0.1 and10nM] significantly increased (P<0.05) total NOx production 1.5-1.8 fold of control. However, 2-ME 2 and 4-ME 2 did not significantly altered NOx production except at the highest dose of [100nM]. The E 2 , 2-OHE 2 and 4-OHE 2 -induced NOx increases were abrogated by ICI182,780 (P<0.05), but not with either alpha or beta adrenergic receptor antagonist. CONCLUSIONS: These data support the hypothesis that E 2 and its metabolites are important for regulation of uterine blood flow and vasodilatation during pregnancy by stimulating NO production. Funding: HL49210, HD38843, HL87144, HL117341, R25GM083252. Sheibani, Hong-hai Zhang, Afshan Hameed, Deborah A Wing, Dong-bao Chen. University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Uterine myometrium vasculature undergoes massive expansion via angiogenesis during the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle and pregnancy in association with endogenous estrogens. Hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S), biosynthesized from L-cysteine by cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) and cystathionine γ-lyase (CSE), has been recently accepted as a new gasotransmitter that stimulates angiogenesis. However, it is unknown if H 2 S biosynthesis is associated with human myometrial angiogenesis and correlates with endogenous estrogens during the menstrual cycle and pregnancy. METHODS: Myometrium tissues were obtained from hysterectomies from women with different endogenous estrogens (5-7/per group), including late pregnant (very high estrogens), premenopausal in the proliferative (high estrogens) and secretory (low estrogens) phases of the menstrual cycle, and postmenopausal (very low estrogens) women. Myometrium sections were stained with specific antibodies against CBS, CSE, pericyte marker NG2 and PDGFRβ, and co-labeled with endothelial marker CD31, followed by Alexa 568 and Alexa 488 -labeled secondary antibodies. Sections were examined by fluorescence microscopy and images were analyzed for cellular CBS and CSE proteins, angiogenesis, and vessel maturation. Tissue levels of CBS and CSE mRNA and protein were analyzed by real-time PCR and immunoblotting and H 2 S was measured by methylene blue assay. RESULTS: The average number, length, diameter, and cross-sectional area of myometrial vessels displayed greatest in pregnancy, high in proliferative, low in secretory and lowest in postmenopausal women. Pregnant myometrial vessels were also positively associated with the greatest number of NG2 + /PDGFRβ + pericytes. CBS mRNA and protein were highly expressed in myometrial myocytes and blood vessels; their levels and H 2 S production in the myometrium displayed similar patterns to angiogenesis. CSE expression was unaltered during the menstrual cycle and pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: Human myometrial angiogenesis and vessel maturation (pericyte recruitment) in pregnancy are associated with endogenous estrogens and enhanced H 2 S biosynthesis via upregulating CBS but not CSE expression in myocytes and blood vessels (funded by NIH RO1 HL70562). The uterine cervix undergoes a ripening process leading to dilation necessary for delivery of the fetus. Ripening is complex and prostaglandins, PGE2 in particular, play a critical role. The cervix is innervated by sensory fibers, creating a potential role for neurogenic inflammation in this process. SP and CGRP are primary neuropeptides in sensory pain fibers and have been localized by immunocytochemistry in the cervix. Fibroblasts are the primary cell type in cervical stroma and integral in regulating cervical integrity. We have found that HCFs express CGRP and SP receptors. In the present study we hypothesized that CGRP and/or SP regulate expression of key genes mediating prostaglandin synthesis. METHODS: HCFs were prepared and characterized. HCFs were treated with SP or CGRP (10 ng) for 4, 8 and 24 hours and mRNA for prostaglandin G/H synthase 2 (PGHS2), prostaglandin E synthase 1 (PGES1), prostaglandin F synthase (PGFS) and prostaglandin dehydrogenase (PGDH) was quantified via quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR Women with excess, compared with appropriate, GWG had proportionately greater accrual of fat mass (88%, 9.0 kg v. 4.8 kg) rather than fat free mass (31%, 10.7 kg v. 8.2 kg). *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Among normal weight women, both FM and FFM accrual were associated with excess, compared with appropriate, GWG. The greater proportion of fat mass, compared with fat free mass, accrual -most of which is water -helps explain why excess GWG even in normal weight women is a significant risk factor for postpartum obesity in women. ERα, ERβ, and G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) in the proliferative phase of the menstrual cycle and during human pregnancy, with the maximum response in the uterine arteries. However, it is unknown if these ERs are expressed in human uterine artery. The objectives of this study is to determine the expression of ER isoforms in the human uterine vasculature during the menstrual cycle and pregnancy. Intact uterine arteries were obtained from hysterectomies from women with different endogenous estrogens (n=5/group), including late pregnant (very high estrogens), premenopausal in the proliferative (high estrogens) and secretory (low estrogens) phases of the menstrual cycle, and postmenopausal (very low estrogens) women. ER mRNA was assessed by real-time PCR and protein was assessed by immunoblotting with specific antibodies. Their cellular specific expression was determined by immunohistochemistry with ER antibodies co-stained with endothelial cell marker CD31. RESULTS: ERα, ERβ, and GPER mRNA and proteins were detected in all human nonpregnant and pregnant uterine arteries. Levels of ERβ, but not ERα and GPER, mRNA and protein were significantly greater in pregnant vs. nonpregnant uterine arteries. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed that ERα, ERβ, and GPER protein were highly expressed in pregnant uterine artery and localized to endothelium and smooth muscle. CONCLUSIONS: All ER isoforms are highly expressed in the human uterine artery endothelium and smooth muscle cells, with upregulated ERβ expression in pregnancy, implicating a critical role of ERβ in estrogen-induced uterine vasodilation (funded by NIH RO1 HL70562 and AHA PRE18570033). The age at which women deliver their first child has increased steadily in recent years, particularly in Western societies. Advanced maternal age (≥35 years) is associated with increased maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Little is known about the impact of aging on vascular adaptations to pregnancy that might continue postpartum and compromise the cardiovascular health of the mother long-term. We hypothesized that pregnancy at an advanced maternal age would lead to endothelial dysfunction in postpartum life. METHODS: Aged female Sprague Dawley rats (9 months; approximately equivalent to a 35 year old woman) were mated with young males. Dams were allowed to deliver and nurse their offspring until weaning at 3 weeks. Vascular function was assessed in mesenteric arteries from dams at 3 months postpartum or aged-matched, never pregnant controls. Endothelial function was assessed using wire myography to investigate responses to methylcholine (MCh) in the absence or presence of superoxide dismutase (SOD) or inhibitors of nitric oxide synthase, indomethacin or endotheliumderived hyperpolarization. RESULTS: At three months postpartum in dams who had been pregnant at an advanced maternal age, vascular responses to MCh were decreased (pEC 50 : 7.92±0.10) when compared to never pregnant aged-matched controls (pEC 50 : 7.49±0.09; p=0.011). This was accompanied by reduced nitric oxide-induced vasodilation (L-NAME pEC 50 : 7.29±0.10, not significant in aged postpartum and 7.22±0.06, p<0.001 in aged never pregnant) and an increase in prostaglandin-mediated vasoconstriction (indomethacin pEC 50 : 7.95±0.07, p<0.05 in aged postpartum and 7.99±0.13, not ssignificant in aged never pregnant). In addition, there was a tendency for increased vasodilation in the presence of SOD; suggesting increased oxidative stress in the postpartum group. CONCLUSIONS: In a rat model of advanced maternal age, postpartum dams exhibited endothelial dysfunction when compared to aged, never pregnant controls which included altered nitric oxide and prostaglandin pathways. An increased constrictive phenotype may predispose mothers of an advanced maternal age to cardiovascular disease. Egle Bytautiene, Cintia Roman, Joshua Dickerson, Huaizhi Yin, Phyllis Gamble, George R Saade. The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. INTRODUCTION: Lactation is association with improved long term cardiovascular and metabolic outcome in the mother. Using a wellcharacterized murine model, we have previously shown that the effect of lactation is direct and specific. The objective of this study was to investigate the oxytocin (OXT) and oxytocin receptor (OXTR) system as a potential mechanism for this beneficial effect. METHODS: Following delivery, CD-1 female mice were randomly divided into 2 groups: lactated (L; n=7), and nonlactated (NL; pups were removed after birth, n= 11). At 6 months post delivery, visceral adipose tissue (VAT), heart and hypothalamus tissue were collected. OXT plasma levels were determined using Luminex magnetic bead technology. OXT, OXTR, GATA4, eNOS and GLUT4 mRNA levels were measured quantitative real time RT-PCR. Student t test was used for statistical analysis (significance P ≤.05). RESULTS: OXT plasma levels were significantly lower in NL group (P=0.04). OXT and eNOS expression were increased (P= 0.04 for both genes) and OXTR decreased (P=0.03) in the aorta from the NL group compared with L. OXT and eNOS expression were reduced in the heart of NL mothers (P= 0.05 and 0.04, respectively, Figure) . OXT and GLUT4 expression were lower in the VAT from the NL group (P= 0.04 and, 0.05 respectively). No differences were found in the hypothalamus tissue. CONCLUSIONS: Lactation alters gene expression in the maternal vasculature and adipocites, and this favorable profile could in part explain its long term health benefits. *Figure(s) will be available online. We recently found a slightly higher renal filtration fraction 10 years postpartum by radioactive tracer measurement in a well-controlled small cohort after PE (Toering 2015, Am J Physiol Renal Physiol), suggesting hyperfiltration as a possible mechanism of late renal damage. To test the latter hypothesis, we studied renal function in formerly PE women in a larger cohort. FEMales study, a retrospective cohort consisting of formerly early-onset PE women (fPE, n=339) and formerly healthy pregnant women (fHP, n=332) with a mean age of 39 years. Renal function was assessed 10 years postpartum as eGFR using the MDRD formula and measurement of total protein-to-creatinine ratio's in urine portions. Data are presented as median (25-75 percentile) or as odds-ratio (95% CI). RESULTS: eGFR was not different between fPE and fHP women [97 (85-110) vs 95 (86-105) ml/min/1.73 m 2 ]. However, examination of the distribution of the eGFR in both groups revealed a significant shift to high-normal eGFR values in fPE women compared to fHP women (p=0.02) with an odds-ratio for having a GFR >110 ml/min/1.73m 2 of 1.6 (1.1-2.4) in fPE women. This odds-ratio was maintained after correction for age, BMI, waist-to-hip ratio and systolic blood pressure. In addition, fPE women had a significantly higher protein-to-creatinine ratio [9 (6-13) vs 7 (6 -10), p<0.01]. We demonstrated a shift of eGFR distribution to the high-normal range and slightly higher protein excretion in formerly earlyonset PE women 10 years postpartum. A high-normal GFR represents a relative state of hyperfiltration, which is a predictor, and mechanism of long-term renal damage in animal models and human diabetes. Our finding is in line with our previous finding of a higher filtration fraction and suggests that hyperfiltration might contribute to the increased risk of ESRD risk after PE. Long-term follow-up studies are required to investigate whether high-normal eGFR can be used as a screening marker for ESRD after PE. They have previously been shown to play a modulatory role in pathways leading to labor onset, and oxytocin (OT) was found to alter the expression of a unique set of myometrial miRNAs including hsa-miR-146a-5p, hsa-miR-196b-3p and hsa-miR-876-5p. Although hsa-miR-196b-3p and hsa-miR-876-5p have no experimentally validated gene targets reported to date, hsa-miR-146a-5p has been validated to target NF-κB activity as well as IL-8, TLR2 and TLR4 expression. These results suggest a further role for OT as a signalling molecule involved in the regulation of gene expression during parturition. Oxytocin receptor (OTR) antagonists have been used therapeutically for the management of labour. In this study we have investigated whether the orally active OTR antagonist, OBE001, can inhibit the OT-driven change in the expression of miRNAs hsa-miR-146a-5p, hsa-miR-876-5p and hsa-miR-196b-3p in human myometrial smooth muscle cells. METHODS: QRT-PCR was used to quantify the expression of candidate miRNAs with the miRCURY LNA kit (Exiqon) with 0.05 ng complementary DNA. LNA assays were custom designed for miRNAs of interest: hsa-miR-146b-3p (204374), hsa-miR-196b-3p (204619), and hsa-miR-876-5p (204527). MiRNA expression data were normalized to 5S ribosomal RNA (203906). RESULTS: Consistent with previous observations, OT down-regulated the expression of hsa-miR-146a-5p and hsa-miR-196b-3p after 2 h of stimulation, and hsa-miR-876-5p after 1 h. Presence of OBE001 reversed this effect of OT on all three miRNAs in a dose-dependent manner. Morever, prolonged exposure to OBE001 (4 h, 6 h and 24 h) led to slight increase in the expression of these miRNAs. CONCLUSIONS: In addition to the typical role of OTR antagonists in inhibiting OT-driven myometrial contractions, OBE001 also reduced OT-induced changes in miRNA expression which target proinflammatory genes. This study shows the importance of an OTR antagonist being able to inhibit both the labour-associated inflammatory and contractile effects of OT. To examine the controversial relationship between thrombophilia and adverse pregnancy outcomes, complicated by a high rate of tobacco abuse, in a West Virginia obstetric population. METHODS: Retrospective study of obstetric patients from a maternalfetal medicine clinic who delivered between January 2009 and December 2013. Maternal characteristic, pregnancy, and birth outcome data were linked to a clinic ultrasound database. Medical records were examined to record missing data and prenatal thromboprophylaxis regimens. Outcomes were compared among four groups: thrombophilia and tobacco use, thrombophilia and no tobacco, no thrombophlia and tobacco use, and no thrombophilia and no tobacco use. Of 8,905 obstetric patients, 114 had a thrombophilia diagnosis; with the majority, 98, receiving thromboprophylaxis treatment during pregnancy. Thromboprophylaxis included: low molecular weight heparin, aspirin, unfractionated heparin, folic acid, and combinations of these. Smokers with thrombophilia were most likely to experience preterm birth and deliver low birthweight neonates (p=0.00 1 and p<0.001, respectively). While women with thrombophilia who smoked had higher rates of PROM, they had significantly lower rates of HELLP and placental abruption. Women with thrombophilia who received thromboprophylaxis during pregnancy had lower rates of adverse birth outcomes, reaching significance for preterm birth <32 weeks gestation (4.2% vs. 21.1%, p=0.026). CONCLUSIONS: Women who have a diagnosis of thrombophilia and smoke during pregnancy may be more likely to experience adverse birth outcomes such as low birth weight neonates and preterm birth; these women may receive more benefit from thromboprophylaxis treatment during pregnancy than their non-smoking counterparts. We developed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics approach that identified two serum protein biomarkers predictive of spontaneous preterm birth (sPTB) risk. Here we present sPTB classification performance derived from the immunoassay measure of these proteins using specimens collected within the 19-21 weeks gestational age window of the Proteomic Assessment of Preterm Risk (PAPR) study. Performance is based on a predefined logarithmic classifier score derived from measures of IBP4 and SHBG. A set of 30 individual clinical specimens and pooled serum standards were analyzed by our peptide-based LC-MRM-MS workflow and in parallel by ELISA to screen antibody pairs for MS-ELISA correlation and for reproducibility. In a nested case:control (1:2) study, representative samples from the PAPR trial were analyzed by ELISAs using the highest performing antibody pairs. sPTB classification performance was calculated using the 57 subjects in the cohort and 34 subjects within a Body Mass Index (BMI) restricted subset. Sensitivity and specificity were calculated from the point on the ROC curve where the sum of each value was maximal. RESULTS: Correlation between ELISA and MS-based measurements of IBP4 and SHBG were calculated for several antibody pairs, with the best performing sets giving Pearson r values of 0.86 and 0.84 respectively. These antibodies also gave highly reproducible ELISA data; intraplate CVs for IBP4 and SHBG were 4.4% and 7.0% respectively. ELISA-based classifier scores resulted in AUCs of 0.82 and 0.72 with and without the BMI restriction. Recently, we defined the functional relevance of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response (ERSR) and its associated unfolded protein response (UPR) in regulating gestational length. We demonstrated that across gestation an increase in the ERSR and caspase 3/7 (CASP3/7) activation disables the ability of the uterine myocyte to contract effectively. At term, an increase in the adaptive UPR limits the tocolytic activity of CASP3/7 permitting the induction of labor. However, an exaggerated ERSR or inappropriate UPR predisposes the quiescent uterus to an increasingly contractile phenotype allowing the initiation of preterm labor (1). The goal of this study is to examine whether circulating peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) can be utilized as a surrogate tissue across gestation to recapitulate the ERSR profile observed in pregnant uterus and therefore serve as a predictive biomarker for term and preterm labor. METHODS: PBMC's and uterine tissues were obtained from pregnant CD1 mice (E6-E19) and those undergoing an ER stress induced preterm birth by administration of Tunicamycin (TM; 0, 0.2, 1.0 mg/kg). PBMC and uterine protein extracts were prepared and the markers of ERSR were evaluated by immunoblotting and flow cytometry. RESULTS: Immunoblot analyses revealed that ERSR-UPR and CASP3 activation maintained a gestationally regulated profile in the PBMC's, which recapitulated that of pregnant uterus, where dramatic increases in the ERSR were found between E6-E13, which declined towards term. In the context of our TM induced preterm birth model, which is triggered by a precociously diminished uterine ERSR (1), the PBMCs also demonstrated a dramatic decrease in ERSR markers prior to the onset of preterm birth. Our preliminary flow cytometry analysis of the PMBCs suggested that the T-lymphocyte population is responsible for the PBMC-ERSR signature prior to preterm birth. We propose that we have identified a novel circulating accessible marker of uterine contractile responsiveness, which represents the local uterine environment in the context of normal gestational length and the onset of preterm birth. S) is a tocolytic produced endogenously from substrate L-Cysteine (L-Cys) by cystathionine β-synthase (CBS) and cystathionine γ-lyase (CSE). L-Cys is degraded by cysteine dioxygenase (CDO). CBS, CSE, and CDO are expressed in the murine myometrium and in pregnancy, as well as in placenta. Previous data from our lab show uterine CSE expression is significantly increased at labor while CDO expression is markedly decreased. Placental CBS/ CSE expression increases as pregnancy progresses, while CDO expression remains unchanged. We hypothesized that decreased L-Cys degradation during labor favors H 2 S production. Thus, we examined the L-Cys and transulfuration metabolites within the myometrium and placenta using metabolomic analysis. METHODS: Myometrium and placentae were collected from timedpregnant nulliparous C57/BL6 mice. Tissue was harvested daily from gestational day 15-19 and at labor. Uterus from one animal or placentae from a whole litter was homogenized in ice-cold extraction buffer containing methanol, acetonitrile, and water at a ratio of 5:3:1. Partially supervised statistical analysis (Partial Least Square-Discriminant Analysis) showed progressive gestation-specific metabolic adaptation. Data reported are mean ± SEM, and were determined to be significant when p≤0.05. Myometrial and placental L-Cys were elevated in labor. In the myometrium, cystine and thiosulfate were elevated as labor approached, whereas metabolites of L-Cys degradation including cysteine sulfinic acid, taurine, and hypotaurine were markedly decreased in pregnancy and labor. Placental metabolites of L-Cys degradation remained unchanged throughout pregnancy and labor, and thiosulfate levels were below the limit of detection. CONCLUSIONS: Increased transulfuration intermediates and L-Cys in the myometrium during pregnancy and labor show myometriumspecific increase in L-Cys. Together with our previous report of increased myometrial CSE expression at term, the enzyme expression and substrate availability suggest increased H 2 S production as gestation progresses. The stable placental metabolomic profile indicates that H 2 S production may be regulated in a compartment-specific manner and serve specific novel functions at the maternal-fetal interface. Adiponectin is a protein hormone secreted by adipose tissue and the placenta. Its concentration in serum is inversely proportional to body weight. In pregnancy, maternal circulating adiponectin levels are inversely related to neonatal birthweight. Infusion of exogenous adiponectin into pregnant mice induces a subsequent decrease in fetal growth rate. These negative effects have been shown to be due to the inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) by adiponectin. mTORC1 promotes transcription of genes involved in protein synthesis and immune modulation and the expression of placental nutrient transporters. Given the apparent influence of adiponectin on nutrition, we evaluated whether its concentration in mid-trimester amniotic fluid could be a predictive biomarker of pregnancy outcome. METHODS: Amniotic fluid from 858 women who underwent a clinically indicated amniocentesis at 15-18 weeks gestation was evaluated. Adiponectin levels were measured by ELISA. Pregnancy outcome data were obtained after completion of all testing. The Mann-Whitney and Spearman rank correlation tests were used to assess associations. RESULTS: Preterm delivery (18-36 weeks gestation) occurred in 82 (9.6%) of the subjects. The median (range) adiponectin concentration in ng/ml was 18.2 (1.8-355) in women who delivered preterm vs. 4.1 (0-256) in women delivering at term (p<0.0001). Median levels were higher in neonates born with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) (30.1 ng/ml) than in neonates with normal weight (4.3 ng/ml) (p<0.05). There were negative correlations between adiponectin concentration and gestational age at delivery (p<0.0001) and neonatal birthweight (p<0.0001). There were no associations between amniotic fluid adiponectin levels and gestational age at amniocentesis, maternal age, maternal body mass index, fetal gender or race. CONCLUSIONS: Elevated adiponectin in mid-trimester amniotic fluid is a sensitive biomarker of subsequent preterm delivery and IUGR. Further analysis is necessary to determine whether the inhibition of mTORC1 and/ or other properties of adiponectin are involved in increased susceptibility to these adverse pregnancy complications. (PTB) is the world's leading cause of perinatal morbidity and mortality. It has been suggested that perinatal programming by stress may increase PTB risk. We have shown that ancestral stress augments PTB risk and is linked with changes in the miR-200 family and targets (Stat5b, Zeb1 and 2) in rat uterus. We propose a two-hit hypothesis in which prenatal stressors affect the expression of genes involved in IL-1 signaling, the stress response or identified as miR-200 family targets differently when combined than either hit alone. METHODS: Long-Evans dams (F0 generation) were exposed to external (swimming/restraint) and immune stress (IL-1β injection, 5µg/kg/day, i.p.) on gestational days 12-18 and 17-delivery respectively. Rats were split into no stress/saline (NS/S), stress/saline (S/S), no stress/IL-1β (NS/ IL-1β), stress/IL-1β (S/IL-1β), n=3-6 each. Female offspring (F1) were tested behaviourally, raised to adulthood, sacrificed and tissues collected. mRNA abundance in uterus, hippocampus was evaluated by real-time RT-PCR of Stat5b, Zeb1/2, IL-1 receptors and accessory proteins Il-1r1/2 and acp/acpb, Crh and its receptors, the glucocorticoid receptor Nc3r1, Hsd11b1/2 and housekeeping gene Cyclophilin. One-way ANOVA or equivalent with post-hoc testing, p<0.05. RESULTS: Administration of S/IL-1β to F0 dams decreased the uterine expression Stat5b mRNA in F1 compared to S/S offspring (p<0.05) and of Crhr1 versus NS/IL-1β and S/S (p<0.01/<0.05), as well as Il-1racp overall (p<0.05). Hsd11b1 expression in uterus was downregulated in S/IL-1β vs NS/IL-1β (p<0.01). In hippocampus, reduced Il-1r1 mRNA expression was seen in NS/IL-1β and S/IL-1β (p<0.01/<0.05) vs control as well as decreased Nc3r1 mRNA abundance in S/IL-1β (p<0.05). Hsd11b2 mRNA was lower in S/S and NS/IL-1β (p<0.05) than NS/S. CONCLUSIONS: Prenatal stressors have an effect on F1 uterine and hippocampal mRNA levels of mediators of the stress and inflammatory response, known to be involved in pregnancy and parturition. Our findings suggest ancestral stress may be transferred to offspring increasing their "stress state" possibly through epigenetic changes programming physiologic responses and pregnancy outcomes e.g. PTB. The first two trimesters of pregnancy are characterised by a range of biochemical, cardiovascular and physiological changes, which are reflected in the maternal plasma metabolome. We hypothesise that the pathophysiological events that precede cervical shortening and preterm birth have their origins in the first and early second trimesters, which will be reflected in perturbations of the normal metabolic trajectory. Analysis of the metabolome at this stage of pregnancy can provide a window for biomarker identification and patient stratification. METHODS: Plasma samples and detailed clinical metadata were collected at 12, 16 and 20 weeks gestation from pregnant women from a mixed ethnic background who experience a normal term (n=245) or preterm (n=52) delivery. 1 H-NMR spectra were acquired for samples using standard 1D and 2D pulse sequences. Spectra were processed, calibrated to TSP and analysed using multivariate statistical approaches. Metabolites of interest were identified using S-BASE (Bruker BioSpin) as well as in-house and public databases. RESULTS: Modelling of the plasma metabolic profiles by partial least squares analysis (PLS) revealed perturbations in the metabolome at 12 weeks associated with the gestational age at the time of delivery. Patients who ultimately developed cervical shortening (<25mm, 14 to 22 weeks) or delivered preterm (<37 weeks) were characterised by different plasma metabolic trajectories between 12-20 weeks compared to those who experienced normal, uncomplicated pregnancies. The plasma metabolome was most discriminatory at the 12 and 20 weeks timepoint with convergence at 16 weeks. CONCLUSIONS: The maternal plasma metabolome undergoes characteristic alterations during the early 2 nd trimester that are predictive of later cervical shortening and delivery before 37 gestational weeks. Analysis of the plasma metabolome by NMR offers a rapid and relatively inexpensive means of monitoring and stratifying pregnant populations on the basis of preterm birth risk. We recently reported the efficacy of a noncompetitive interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor antagonist, termed 101.10, in preventing preterm birth (PTB) associated with inflammation/infection in mice (Nadeau-Vallée et al., J Immunol, 2015) . However, the possible deleterious outcomes in prolonging gestation in the case of chorioamnionitis has been raised. Considering the anti-inflammatory effects of 101.10 observed in gestational tissue, we hypothesize that not only can 101.10 prolong gestation in case of chorioamnionitis, but also protects the fetus from neonatal mortality/morbidity. METHODS: Timed-pregnant CD-1 mice at gestational day 16.5 received 101.10 (1mg/Kg/12h), Kineret (4mg/Kg/12h) or vehicle followed by a single 1 µg intrauterine IL-1β injection. Biochemical analysis were performed on fetal/pups tissues 24h post-IL-1 (amniotic fluids and placenta), at birth (circulating leukocytes, lungs, intestines, brains and eyes) and histological analysis were performed at post-term day (PT) 15 (lungs and guts). RESULTS: The 101.10 decreased neonatal mortality rates (induced by IL-1) by 60% (p<0.001); Kineret was ineffective. The maternal administration of 101.10 significantly inhibited the transcriptional induction (IL-1induced) of a panel of key pro-inflammatory genes in placentas and circulating leukocytes of the newborn. Levels of IL-1β, IL-6 and IL-8 in amniotic fluids and organs of the newborn were significantly lesser (p<0.05) in pups from 101.10-treated dams. The 101.10 was more effective than Kineret (p<0.05) at decreasing inflammation in each biochemical assay. Tissue integrity of the lung and the intestines (ileum/colon) were preserved by the maternal administration of 101.10. CONCLUSIONS: 101.10 is the first anti-IL-1 agent that shows efficacy at prolonging gestation shortened by inflammation, and we herein report its efficacy to improve neonatal and developmental outcomes conveyed by the exposition to inflammation during gestation. Thyroid Stimulating Hormone and Myometrium. Penelope M Sheehan, Janet Stevenson. RWH, Melbourne, Australia. INTRODUCTION: Thyroid disease has been associated with poor pregnancy outcomes. Our recent meta-analysis showed a significant association between both hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism and preterm birth. A biological mechanism by which thyroid disease might cause preterm birth has not been elucidated. Previously TSH receptor (TSHR) was identified in trophoblast and endometrium thus it represents another pathway by which thyroid may affect pregnancy. The aim of this study was to investigate TSHR in reproductive tissues and an intracellular mechanism whereby TSH might affect uterine contractility in pregnancy. METHODS: Placenta samples and myometrial samples were collected in women undergoing elective (not in labour, NIL, n=16) and emergency Caesarean Sections (in labour, IL, n=13).Non-pregnant myometrium was also obtained. Real-time RTPCR was used to determine mRNA expression, while protein expression was investigated with Western Blot and immunostaining. A myometrial cell culture model was used to investigate the response to incubation in different concentrations of TSH. An ELISA was used to determine cAMP production in the cell culture model. RESULTS: TSHR mRNA expression was significantly lower in the IL group compared with the NIL and NP groups (P = 0.0003). TSHR Protein expression was lower in the IL group (P = 0.028). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the presence of TSHR throughout the myometrium in a generalised cytoplasmic distribution in both NIL and IL. In placenta, there was no significant difference with labour status however TSHR expression increased significantly with gestation. Tissue culture with NIL tissue demonstrated a decrease in TSHR mRNA with TSH incubation (p=0.02 ANOVA). This result was not seen in the IL tissue cultures. Myometrial cultures incubated in TSH incubation produced a significant biphasic response in intracellular cAMP compared to control. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of TSH receptors in human pregnant myometrium . The significant decrease in TSHR with labour suggests that TSH or the similarly structured hCG may be involved in uterine quiescence. Effects on cAMP in the model suggest a possible mechanism. The role of TSHR in human parturition deserves further investigation. We have previously identified that estrogen plus progesterone substantially stimulate the expression of receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL), which stimulates leiomyoma stem cell proliferation. Silibinin is a natural non-toxic polyphenolic flavonoid with anti-proliferative, anti-inflammatory, and anti-fibrotic properties. Our goal is to determine the effects of silibinin on RANKL expression in leiomyoma smooth muscle cells. We isolated leiomyoma smooth muscle cells from fresh fibroid tissue and maintained these cells in primary culture (n=3). The cells were treated with vehicle or varying doses of silibinin (30, 60, or 90mM) for 24, 48, or 72 hours respectively, in the absence of estradiol and the progesterone agonist R5020. The total RNA was extracted and the real-time PCR was used to measure mRNA levels of RANKL, estrogen receptor (ERα), progesterone receptor (PR), and the proliferation marker and RANKL target, cyclin D1. RESULTS: Silibinin reduced RANKL expression in a dose-dependent manner with the most significant change observed at 60mM (up to 60%-fold decrease, p<0.05). Silibinin-dependent inhibition of RANKL expression occurred as early as within 24 hours, peaked after 48 hours of treatment and persisted at 72 hours. CylinD1 is a known downstream target of RANKL-activated signaling pathway. Silibinin significantly decreased cyclin D1 mRNA levels in a dose-and time-course dependent manner by up to 80%-fold change (p<0.05). There was no significant change in ERα and PR expression with exposure to silibinin, suggesting that silibinin specifically regulates RANKL expression in leiomyoma smooth muscle cells. CONCLUSIONS: Silibinin is an effective inhibitor of RANKL expression and its proliferative activity in leiomyoma smooth muscle cells. Thus silibinin might be a potential medical treatment option for uterine leiomyoma. Multiple lines of evidence support the premise that parturition is mediated by pro-inflammatory events; our laboratory has proposed that these events are initiated by the increase in cell-free fetal DNA at term. IL10 (an anti-inflammatory cytokine) has been proposed to play a "fail-safe" role by inhibiting the untimely activation of the proinflammatory events leading to parturition. Progesterone (P4) is known to delay parturition, and to extend gestation in the pregnant mouse by several days. These studies sought to test the hypothesis that P4 delays parturition by maintaining significant levels of IL10 in gestational tissues. METHODS: Using placentas from P4 treated and control pregnant C57BL/6 mice, we assessed the production of IL10 and IL6 in placental tissue. In the treatment arm, pregnant B6 mice were injected with P4 (1mg in 100uL sesame oil) on gestational day (gd) 16-20; controls were injected with 100uL of sesame oil daily until delivery. Treated and control mice were euthanized, and specimens collected on gd 17-20 (with parturition occurring on gd 18-19 in control mice). Samples collected included maternal plasma, fetuses, placentas, and fetal membranes. IL10 and IL6 levels were measures in homogenized placental tissue using ELISA assays; subsequently the cytokine results were normalized for homogenate protein concentration. RESULTS: Samples were collected for 34 mice (25 treated, 9 controls). As expected, control mice delivered on gd 18-19, and P4 treatment prevented parturition to beyond gd 20. In treated mice, P4 not only prevented the anticipated nadir of IL10 at term, but significantly increased IL10 levels in placental tissue (gd18 control = 7.5pg/mg protein vs. gd20 P4 = 9.3pg/mg, p=0.01). A modest increase in IL6 levels also was observed in P4 treated mice by gd 20 (gd17-18 controls = 2.2pg/mg protein vs. gd20 P4 = 3.1pg/mg, p=0.01). CONCLUSIONS: These studies confirm that the prolongation of gestation in P4 treated mice is associated with a sustained increase in IL10 in placental tissue. In contrast, P4 treatment did not prevent a modest increase in IL6 levels during prolonged gestation. Our data support the hypothesis that P4 functions through immunomodulary mechanisms at the level of the placenta to prolong gestation. INTRODUCTION: Abruption is associated with increased macrophage and neutrophil infiltration into the decidua and chorion. Previously, we and others showed that IL-8 and IL-6, neutrophil and macrophage chemoattractant/activators, respectively, are increased in abruptionrelated preterm birth and that excess thrombin generated from decidual cell expressed tissue factor induces expression of cytokines in cultured decidual cells (DCs). Colony stimulating factors (CSFs) induce leukocyte differentiation. Specifically, granulocyte monocyte (GM)-CSF targets neutrophils and monocytes whereas granulocyte (G)-CSF and monocyte (M)-CSF target neutrophils and monocytes, respectively. We hypothesize that thrombin induces decidual cell mRNA and protein expression of these CSFs to contribute to increased neutrophil and macrophage numbers and activation in the decidua of abruption associated preterm birth. METHODS: Confluent DCs isolated from term placenta were cultured in DME media containing estradiol (E 2 , 10 -8 M) or E 2 +medroxyprogesterone acetate(MPA) for 7 days then switched to serum free media containing E 2 or E 2 +MPA for 24 h. Thereafter, expression of CSFs was evaluated in leukocyte-free term DCs(n=4) incubated with E 2 (10 -8 M; control) or with E 2 +MPA (10 -7 M) to mimic the steroid milieu of pregnancy ± thrombin(1 IU/mL) for 6 and 24 h followed by qRT-PCR and enzymelinked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to measure mRNA and secreted levels of CSFs. In cultured DCs, compared to E 2 , the addition of MPA did not affect basal GM-CSF mRNA and protein levels. E 2 +thrombin induced GM-CSF mRNA and protein levels by 4 and 25 fold, respectively(p<0.05). Moreover, MPA significantly reduced thrombin-enhanced GM-CSF mRNA and protein levels by 30% and 70%, respectively(p<0.05). Similarly, thrombin induced M-CSF protein secretion 4 fold compared to E 2 or E 2 +MPA(p<0.05) unaccompanied by changes in its mRNA levels. In contrast, thrombin treatment did not significantly affect G-CSF mRNA although there was a modest increase in protein secretion which did not attain statistical significance(p=0.136). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that decidual cell derived thrombin enhances expression of CSFs that induce monocyte and neutrophil infiltration/activation in the decidua, which contributes to abruption associated preterm birth. Recently, we found that mice with the odontogenic Porphyromonas gingivalis (P.g: an important odontogenic pathogen) infection (P.g mice) could be useful as animal models for chronic inflammation-induced preterm delivery because the average gestational period was 18.3 days (vs 20.5 days in normal mice). This study aimed to analyze the expression of contraction associated proteins (CAPs) and ion channels in myometrium and to reveal the mechanism of underlying increase in uterine contractility METHODS: We examined the expression of CAPs (oxytocin receptor, connexin 43 and prostaglandin F2α) and the ion channels (L-type Ca 2+ channel and P2X7 receptor; a purinergic receptor) in the myometrium at day 18 of gestation using real-time PCR in normal and P.g mice. The uterine contraction was recorded in tissue organ bath systems and analyzed. We also measured TNF-α and IL-1β levels in the blood serum using ELISA and in the myometrium using real-time RT-PCR at day 18 of gestation. The mRNA expression of the oxytocin receptor, connexin 43 and prostaglandin F2α were elevated 5.4,3.2 and 2.4 fold in the P.g mice respectively. The mRNA expression of L-type Ca 2+ channel and P2X7 receptor were elevated also 2.5 and 1.7 fold. The concentration-response curves for oxytocin shifted to the left in the P.g mice, compared to those in normal mice. Serum TNF-α and IL-1β levels were 1.9 and 2.7 fold increased, however there was no correlation between the serum cytokine levels and the expression of CAPs in the P.g mice. The mRNA expression of TNF-α and IL-1β did not increase in the myometrium. CONCLUSIONS: We found the enhanced expression of CAPs and ion channels in the P.g mice, leading to uterine contraction. The sensitivity to oxytocin was increased in the P.g mice. Enhanced contractility supposed to be associated with P.g infection should play a role in promoting preterm delivery. However, the mechanism leading to enhance the expression of CAPs has not been determined in this study. Association INTRODUCTION: CRP has been reported as a marker of chronic stress and inflammation. Altered inflammatory profiles may play a role in the links between chronic stress and adverse pregnancy outcomes. This study examined the association between maternal C-reactive protein (CRP) serum, as a marker of systemic inflammation, in mid-pregnancy with the length of gestation. METHODS: 646 participants in a multi-site, prospective cohort study of pregnancy and birth outcomes provided biological and psychological measures between 12'0-20'6 weeks gestation (M±SD: 16.5±2.6 weeks). CRP was measured in serum, and systemic inflammation was defined as CRP >10mg/l. Women with recent infection, fever, antibiotics or steroid treatment were excluded. Pregnancy was dated by best obstetric estimate, and gestational age at birth was abstracted from medical records. Multivariable models were used to determine the independent association between CRP and gestational age at birth.  Adult female mice (6-8 weeks old) received 1x10 9 E.coli (non-pathogenic K-12, MG1655 with integrated luxABCDE operon) intravaginally. An NFκB response element was cloned into a lentivirus vector upstream of the genes encoding a codon-optimised firefly luciferase. High titred virus was injected intravenously at birth to neonatal female C57BL/6 J-Tyr c-2J mice to achieve luciferase expression predominantly in the liver (to monitor systemic inflammatory response). Luciferase expression was monitored continuously by whole body bioluminescence imaging. Local inflammation was determined using H&E, ICAM-1 (Intracellular adhesion molecule 1) and Ly6g immunohistochemistry and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays for serum and uterine TNF-α and IL1-β cytokines. is associated with neutrophil infiltration, release of proteases, and subclinical invasion of commensal bacteria, which may convert decidual macrophages into a proinflammatory state to trigger labor onset. TET2 is a DNA de-methylating enzyme found in leukocytes that enhances gene expression. We hypothesized that TET2 activity is mediated by a protease feed-forward mechanism whereby macrophage and neutrophil secretion of proteases act in an autocrine and paracrine fashion to signal TET2 priming of proximal immune cells through protease activated receptor-1 (PAR-1). METHODS: THP-1 cells, a monocyte/macrophage-like cell line, were cultured and differentiated into macrophages with PMA. Cells were then treated with heat-killed Lactobacillus crispatus or Fusobacterium nucleatum at 10:1, 50:1 and 100:1 (bacteria:cells) or neutrophil elastase (0.0033, 0.033, and 0.33 U/ml) to generate dose response curves. Experimental groups were also pretreated with PAR-1 inhibitor (1 µM, SCH-79797). Activation of TET2 was evaluated by its nuclear translocation using immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. Inflammatory response was evaluated by IL-8 production. RESULTS: Treatment of THP-1 cells with L. crispatus or Fusobacterium showed a dose-response elevation in IL-8, which was inhibited by pretreatment with PAR-1 inhibitor. L. crispatus, a beneficial bacterial species associated with vaginal health, produced a smaller increase in IL-8 than the potential pathogen, Fusobacterium. Concurrent with increases in IL-8 there was a dose-dependent translocation of TET2 from the cytosol to the nucleus, which was prevented by PAR-1 inhibitor. Treatment with elastase also produced a dose-dependent increase in IL-8 and TET2 nuclear translocation, both of which were prevented by PAR-1 inhibition. CONCLUSIONS: These data implicate protease activation of PAR-1 as a critical step in the regulation of inflammation and demonstrate a new protease feed-forward mechanism for innate immune function, presumably via epigenetic mechanisms. Given recent findings that both term and preterm labor are at least in part regulated by inflammation, PAR-1 becomes an attractive therapeutic target. HL069851, P60MD00256  : 1) Decidual and myometrial macrophages from mice injected with endotoxin had higher levels of Nfκb1, Tnf, and Il10 than mice injected with PBS or rosiglitazone alone (p<0.047); 2) rosiglitazone treatment of mice injected with endotoxin reduced the expression of Nfκb1 (p<0.001), Tnf (p<0.048), and Il10 (p<0.006) in decidual and myometrial macrophages when compared to mice treated with endotoxin alone; 3) decidual and myometrial macrophages from mice injected with endotoxin plus rosiglitazone had gene expression levels comparable to those injected with PBS and rosiglitazone alone; and 4) administration of rosiglitazone alone did not modify the basal expression of any of these genes in decidual and myometrial macrophages. CONCLUSIONS: Rosiglitazone treatment to mice injected with endotoxin rapidly attenuates macrophage activation at the maternal-fetal interface. These results provide insight into the immune mechanisms whereby PPARγ activation prevents inflammation-induced preterm birth. Thrombin is a leading contributor to maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. Ureaplasma Parvum (UPA) has been implicated in fetal membrane weakening leading to PPROM. Thrombin also plays a key role in membrane weakening and accounts for the increased prevalence of PPROM in women with bleeding as well as placental abruption. The sources of thrombin in fetal membrane and amniotic fluid are unclear. Thrombin generation directly induced by bacteria in fetal membranes has not been described. We aim to investigate adherence and invasion of UPA to fetal membrane cells and subsequent thrombin generation. METHODS: Primary fetal membrane cells (amnion epithelial, mesenchymal, chorion, and decidua) from elective, term, uncomplicated cesarean deliveries were harvested. Cells were infected with UPA (5x10 6 organisms) for 1h, UPA adherence and invasion was investigated by electronic microscopy (EM). Cell viability was measured using a lactate dehydrogenase release assay. Thrombin secretion in media was measured by ELISA (N=5) after 4h treatment. INTRODUCTION: Exposure to prenatal inflammation, which commonly manifests clinically as intrauterine inflammation (IUI), is strongly associated with adverse neurobehavioral outcomes in exposed offspring. The mechanisms responsible for IUI-induced fetal brain injury (FBI) are poorly understood. We hypothesize that TLR signaling in both the mother and fetus (and placenta) are main mediators of FBI in the setting of IUI. Much of TLR signaling is reliant on the universal adaptor protein MyD88. Therefore, these studies sought to ascertain if deletion of MyD88 in both the mother and fetus (and placenta) would prevent a fetal inflammatory response and FBI from exposure to IUI. [250µg] or saline at E15. Mice were sacrificed 6 hours post-injection and tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen [fetal brain (FB), placenta, uterus, and amniotic fluid (AF)]. QPCR and ELISA were used to measure relative mRNA expression and protein levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines and indicators of FBI. RESULTS: LPS-exposed WT mice exhibited increased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in FB (p=0.005; p=0.001), placenta (p=0.002; p=0.001), and uterus (p=0.003; p=0.001) compared to saline controls. Similarly, LPS-exposed WT mice displayed elevated chemokine [CCL3 & CCL5] expression in placenta (p=0.001; p=0.001), elevated CCL5 protein in placenta and AF (p=0.001; p=0.001), and elevated IL-6 protein in placenta and AF (p=0.001; p=0.017). Expression of the neuronal specific protein MAP2 and the neuronal progenitor protein Nestin were reduced in FB of LPS-exposed WT mice (p=0.040; p=0.001). In KO mice, intrauterine LPS had no effect on cytokine expression in FB, placenta, or uterus. However, LPS-exposed KO mice exhibited elevated CCL5 expression in placenta (p=0.001) and elevated CCL5 protein in placenta and AF (p=0.001; p=0.001). MAP2 and Nestin expression were unaltered in FB of LPS-exposed KO mice. CONCLUSIONS: Consistent with our prior studies, IUI results in FBI. The lack of MyD88 in both mother and fetus was sufficient to prevent most of the inflammatory response in the mother, placenta, and fetus. The abrogation of the inflammatory response appears to mitigate neuronal loss in the FB. These findings may reveal a novel therapeutic target to prevent FBI in high-risk patients. (R01HD076032) Figure) . However, there were significant inverse correlations of Bacteroides to the primary bile acid cholic acid (GCA; r=-0.90, p=0.00001), and positive association of Holdemania (TCA, TDCA, aMCA) in stool. These associations were unique to IHCP, and did not persist post-delivery (FDR<0.05). Placental bile acid abundance correlated with 4 genera, notably Gardnerella (r= -0.66, -0.65, -0.43, -0.65; TCA, GCA, GDCA, aMCA, respectively) and Micrococcus (-0.67,-0.50; GCA, GDCA; p<0.001). Moreover, significant abundance of prokaryotic bile acid genes were present in the placenta (sodium symporters (BASS) and cotransporters (SLC10A7)). We present evidence that the placental microbiome varies with relative abundance of specific bile acids. The maternal bile acid profile may both shape and be shaped by placental taxa. Future lines of investigation into IHCP associated stillbirth ought to include maternal placental and gut microbiomes. * Figure(s)  Women with diabetes took longer to reach active labor and vaginal delivery, and may have an increased risk of cesarean delivery after dinoprostone labor induction. These findings should be considered when counseling patients with diabetes regarding induction of labor. The During labour, the cervix has to soften, efface and dilate. However, the microscopic changes that precede this process, in which collagen plays a key role, are still poorly understood. Previous studies in mice suggest that SHG may be useful to detect changes in the cervix. However, there are no baseline studies characterising the cervical microstructure in non-pregnant women in various physiological states using this technique. Therefore, the aim of this study is to analyse the cervical collagen organization in non-pregnant women based on menopausal status using non-invasive SHG. Cervical samples were obtained from premenopausal (n=4) and postmenopausal (n=4) multiparous women undergoing hysterectomy for benign conditions. SHG images were collected in Z-stacks using an upright confocal microscope. Each sample was examined along a vertical axis, and the mean fibre direction from these images was obtained with a 2D Fourier transform analysis using the Directionality plug-in (FIJI, 2012), which produced a histogram for each Z-stack, with the peak indicative of the dominant orientation [range: -90°, +90°]. RESULTS: Qualitatively, collagen fibres appeared more aligned in postmenopausal women. Quantitatively, the difference in dispersion of collagen fibres in each z-stack was calculated and compared between and within groups using Welch's t-test and Welch's ANOVA respectively (significant Levene's test  Collagen fibres in the cervix of postmenopausal women appear more aligned than in premenopausal women. SHG microscopy can provide qualitative and semi-quantitative information about cervical collagen orientation without the need for sample preparation, and therefore, it may prove a useful technique for assessing cervical remodelling during pregnancy. , a precursor to preterm birth, starts with failure (funneling) at the internal os of the cervix. Recent data shows the stroma at the internal os contains about 60% cervical smooth muscle cell (CSMCs) and that these cells may function as a sphincter. We sought to determine if women with a history of PCR have altered CSMC behavior -specifically cell viability and proliferation. METHODS: Using IRB-approved protocols, CSMC were isolated from cervical tissue obtained prior to cerclage from 6 pregnant women (14-16wks) with a history of PCR resulting in preterm birth [PTB] <28 weeks (study group) and 6 gestational-age matched controls (CTL) undergoing pregnancy termination. Study group and CTL samples were evaluated for apoptosis via Annexin-V-FITC assay and cell cycle progression via EZCell Cell Cycle Analysis assay. Samples from each patient were run in triplicate. Linear regression models based on the methods of generalized estimated equations were used for statistical analysis. RESULTS: CSMC from women with a history of PCR exhibited: 1) higher rates of apoptosis vs CTL (73% vs 62% respectively, Fig. 1) and 2) more cells in the G 0 /G 1 phase vs CTL (84% vs 76% respectively, P<0.001) and less cells in the S phase vs CTL (6% vs 10%, respectively, P<0.001) and mitotic phase vs CTL (9% vs 13%, respectively, P<0.001). *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: CSMC from women with a history of PCR exhibit decreased cell viability and proliferation compared to women without a history of PCR. Further studies are needed to evaluate how increased CSMC apoptosis may activate premature cervical remodeling. These discoveries will help illuminate understanding of how resident cervical stromal cells such as CSMC may activate cervical remodeling leading to spontaneous preterm birth. (MOD Prematurity Research at PENN) Preterm labor (PTL) and preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) are immediate causes of spontaneous preterm birth (PTB) and although these complications are known to be inflammatory syndromes, the physiopathological mechanisms underlying their development are not completely elucidated yet. The transcription factor NF-κB is the major pathway activated during intraamniotic infection/inflammation (IAI) leading to the production of inflammatory mediators that culminate in PTB. Histological chorioamnionitis (hCAM) is an important feature of the IAI commonly observed in PTB. New data support a role for the lysine methyltransferase DOT1L protein (disruptor of telomeric silencing 1 -like protein) as a prominent effector of NF-κB activity. It is possible that differential gene expression of DOT1L could be associated to hCAM. The aim of this study was to compare gene expression of DOT1L in amniochorion membranes from women with or without hCAM that underwent PTB. METHODS: Amniochorion membranes from women with PTB with hCAM (n=22) and without hCAM (n=31) were submitted to total RNA extraction (RNA Spin Mini Isolation -GE) and cDNA was obtained using High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). Gene expression of DOT1L was evaluated by real time PCR using Sybr Green (Applied Biosystems) and PPIA (peptidylprolyl isomerase A) was used as housekeeping gene. Gene expression was calculated using ∆∆Ct method and the results were compared between groups by Mann-Whitney test. RESULTS: The expression of DOT1L was significantly lower in women who presented hCAM (median 0.99, 0.41-2.30) when compared to those without hCAM (median 1.94, 0.95-4.65) (p=0.048). We originally showed that DOT1L may be downregulated in histological chorioamnionitis. However, further studies investigating additional molecules in this pathway and protein expression approach are needed to elucidate the exact role, if any, of DOT1L in PTB.  In vivo Raman spectroscopy is an optical technique that has been used to investigate the biochemical composition of the cervix longitudinally and non-invasively throughout pregnancy. The Raman spectral changes associated with the late ripening and dilation phases have not yet been investigated in mice or humans. Furthermore, the effects of infection-induced (LPS) or progesterone withdrawal-induced (RU486) remodeling compared to term remodeling have not been studied. METHODS: Mice: For LPS or RU486 treated mice, Raman spectra were acquired prior to treatment on gestation day 15 and then every two hours until delivery. Controls were measured starting at noon on gestation day 19 and then every two hours until natural delivery. Human patients: Four pregnant patients scheduled for term labor induction at Vanderbilt Medical Center were recruited in order to observe the most significant amount of changes in the shortest time frame. Raman spectra were measured in four hour intervals before and after labor induction until rupture of membranes. Results were analyzed using generalized linear models for longitudinal data analysis. RESULTS: LPS-treated mice displayed significantly different spectra (p<0.05) over the course of labor compared to the wild type and RU486 mice in regions of the spectrum associated with ECM proteins. The RU486 much more closely mimicked the changes observed in the term group. In the human studies, there was a higher range of variability between subjects, however, broadening of ECM protein peaks was observed as labor progressed. CONCLUSIONS: In vivo Raman spectroscopy has proven sensitive to identifying unique spectral changes in the cervix of preterm birth mouse models compared to term parturition. LPS-treated mice had particularly unique signatures which could be clinically useful for identifying patients with infection-associated preterm labor. Furthermore, spectral changes were observed in the majority of the induction patients as they neared parturition, suggesting that Raman spectroscopy may be a valuable tool for assessing patients with threatened preterm labor. The molecular mechanisms regulating premature cervical remodeling associated with preterm birth (PTB) remain unclear. miR-143 and miR-145 are increased in cervical cells of women destined to have a PTB and have been shown to decrease cervical cell number and increase cervical epithelial cell permeability. The aim of this study was to further elucidate the miR-143 and miR-145-mediated mechanisms contributing to the decrease in cervical epithelial barrier function. METHODS: Ectocervical (Ect1/E6E7) (Ecto) and endocervical (End1/ E6E7) (Endo) cells were transfected for 72 hrs. with miR-negative control (miR-neg), miR-143 or miR-145 mimics using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX. Transfected Ecto and Endo cells were used in Flow cytometry cell cycle assays (n=3) or RNA (n=3) was extracted for QPCR measurement of miR-143 and miR-145 direct target genes specific to cell proliferation including CDK1, PRC1, PLK1, CDK6 and CCND2. RESULTS: miR-143 and miR-145 transfected Ecto cells resulted in cell cycle arrest at G0/G1. Compared to miR-neg, the percent of Ecto cells in G0/G1 was increased with miR-143 (76.4 vs 62.2%, p=0.005) and miR-145 (71.8 vs 62.2%, p=0.03) transfection while the percent of cells in S phase (miR-143: p=0.001, miR-145: p=0.025) and G2/M phase (miR-143: p=0.009, miR-145: p=0.004) were decreased by both miRNAs. miR-143 transfected Endo cells resulted in G0/G1 arrest while miR-145 resulted in S phase arrest. Compared to miR-neg, the percent of Endo cells in G0/G1 was increased with miR-143 (78.6 vs 67.6%, p=0.001) and decreased in S phase (p=0.018) and G2/M (p=0.011). The percent of Endo cells in S phase was increased by miR-145 (32.2 vs 21.6%, p=0.02) and decreased in G0/G1 (p=0.023) and G2/M (p=0.015). miR-143 and miR-145 transfected Ecto and Endo cells show significantly decreased expression in several cell cycle regulator genes including CDK1, PRC1, PLK1, CDK6 and CCND2. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that miR-143 and miR-145 contribute to the breakdown of the cervical epithelial barrier by inhibiting cell proliferation at different stages of the cell cycle due to the direct repression of cell cycle regulator genes. These results provide further evidence that miRNAs play a significant role in regulating cervical remodeling and thus could contribute to the premature cervical remodeling associated with PTB. (MOD Prematurity Research Center at PENN) Backscatter Anisotropy in the Human Cervix. Quinton W Guerrero, 1 Lindsey C Drehfal, 1 Helen Feltovich, 1,2 Timothy J Hall. 1 1 University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA; 2 Intermountain Healthcare, Provo, UT, USA. INTRODUCTION: Previous reports of acoustic attenuation values in the cervix had high estimate variance. Second harmonic generation (SHG) microscopy images have demonstrated layers of aligned collagen that vary along the length of the cervix, and accounting for this structural heterogeneity significantly reduces attenuation estimate variance. We have developed a robust ultrasound method that detects the presence of aligned acoustic scattering sources, can quantify their dominant orientation, and can indicate their degree of organization. We report here the first tests of these methods in the human cervix and show that these ultrasound measures appear consistent with attenuation estimates and observations in SHG images of the same specimens. METHODS: Cervix specimens were obtained from premenopausal women undergoing hysterectomy for benign reasons. There were three groups of women: those unripened (n=5), those experiencing uterine bleeding (ie increased endogenous prostaglandins, n=5), and those given 400 µg of misoprostol 10-12 hours prior to surgery (ie exogenous prostaglandin administration, n=4). The specimens were positioned with the endocervical canal parallel to the face of an ultrasound transducer and radiofrequency echo signals were collected with the acoustic beams steered from -40 o to +40 o in steps of 4 o . Calibrated power spectra were used to quantify differences in echo signal power with changes in beam steering angle (backscatter anisotropy). The internal os and external os locations were used to group parameter estimates among specimens based on the fractional distance from the external os. Backscatter anisotropy, and the steering angle at which the maximum backscattered power was observed, were used to determine the orientation of the underlying scattering sources (collagen structure). RESULTS: At the distal end, the collagen alignment is parallel to the endocervical canal, but the alignment tilts to about 30 o (consistent with the conjecture of a tightly wound helix) from the mid-distal to proximal end. Total backscattered power does not change significantly along the length of the cervix. There were no significant differences in these parameters with ripened state or parity (consistent with animal models where microstructure breaks down just prior to delivery). CONCLUSIONS: These results are consistent with the presence of spatially-dependent aligned collagen in the cervix and thus promising for monitoring cervical change. Healing of the Ruptured Amnion: Mechanistic Insights. Haruta Mogami, Jesus F Acevedo, Ruth Ann Word. University of TX Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. INTRODUCTION: Preterm rupture of membrane (PROM) is a major cause of preterm birth. Clinically, however, there are cases that PROM is spontaneously healed and pregnancy continues until term. These cases of spontaneous healing are usually unrelated to infection. In this study, we created a new in vivo model of non-infectious preterm rupture of membrane, and investigated the mechanisms of healing. METHODS: Uterus and fetal membrane of pregnant mice were punctured with a sterile 26G needle by laparotomy under general anesthesia at 15 days post coitum. In each uterus, ½ of gestational sacs were punctured and ½ were not (control). Fetal membranes were collected at 2, 6, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours after puncture. RESULTS: Significant amounts of amniotic fluid leaked at the time of puncture, and, at each time point of sampling, the volume of amniotic fluid was significantly decreased in punctured group compared with control. Interestingly, membrane puncture did not cause preterm birth. Using stereomicroscopy, closure of puncture sites in the fetal membrane was observed after 72 hours. Healing of amnion was also confirmed histologically. Puncture resulted in increased expression of inflammatory cytokines: IL1β (9-fold), IL6 (34-fold), and TNF (20-fold) mRNA after 2 hours. Expression of epidermal growth factor and fibroblast growth factor-2, which are involved in the healing of adult skin wound healing, however, did not change in mouse fetal membrane. COX2, a rate-limiting enzyme of prostaglandin synthesis, mRNA was also increased by 8-fold at 2 hours. Since amnion is the principal tissue for the synthesis of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), the effect of PGE2 to wound healing was analyzed in primary amnion cells. Interestingly, PGE2 dose-dependently inhibited closure of amnion mesenchymal cells in wound healing scratch assay. CONCLUSIONS: Mechanisms of wound healing differ in fetal amnion compared with adult skin. Whereas Egf,Fgf2, and PGE2 are important mediators of wound healing in adult skin, the growth factors were not expressed in wounded amnion cells, and PGE2 inhibited wound healing in amnion mesenchymal cells. Expression of proinflammatory cytokines was induced dramatically despite the absence of infection. We suggest that our new in vivo PROM model may serve to elucidate the mechanism of healing process of ruptured membranes with or without infection. Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) is an inflammatory cytokine implicated in the onset of labor. The gap junction protein connexin-43 is thought to influence uterine contractility and is known to be modulated by progesterone. However, the effects of TNF-α on connexin-43 expression in uterine smooth muscle cells (UtSMC) has not previously been characterized. Our objective was to investigate the effects of major progestogens on connexin-43 expression in the setting of TNF-α induced inflammation in UtSMC. METHODS: Primary human UtSMC were grown to 60-70% confluence after allowing 24 hours for cell adherence. UtSMC were pre-treated with progesterone (P4), 17α-hydroxyprogesterone caproate (HPC), and progesterone metabolites 16α-hydroxyprogesterone (16α-OHP) and 6β-hydroxyprogesterone (6β-OHP) at 1µM for 24 hours. A subset of UtSMC were exposed to TNF-α (10ng/mL) for 2 hours to elicit an acute inflammatory response. UtSMC treated with DMSO +/-TNF-α served as positive and negative controls, respectively. Connexin-43 protein levels were determined by western blot over three experiments and densitometry was performed using ImageJ software. Data was analyzed using a one-way ANOVA followed by Fisher's least significant difference test (GraphPad Prism, La Jolla, CA). RESULTS: Connexin-43 protein levels in UtSMC treated with DMSO+TNF-α (positive control) demonstrated an 88 +/-32% (mean +/-SEM) increase compared to DMSO-only negative control. TNF-α treatment increased connexin-43 protein levels by 33% in the progesterone treatment group and by 25% in the 16α-OHP treatment group compared to pre-treated UtSMC without TNF-α exposure. No significant change in connexin-43 protein levels was observed in the HPC (3% decrease) or 6β-OHP (<1% decrease) groups. Compared to the DMSO+TNF-α (positive control) group, pre-treatment with HPC (p=0.04) and 6β-OHP (p=0.03), but not progesterone (p=0.14) or 16α-OHP (p=0.10), significantly mitigated the increase in connexin-43. CONCLUSIONS: TNF-α stimulation increases connexin-43 protein expression in UtSMC. The observed increase in connexin-43 was repressed by pre-treatment of UtSMC with specific progestogens (HPC, 6β-OHP). Progestogen treatment may decrease the ability of TNF-α mediated inflammation in human UtSMC to progress to uterine contractility. Transport of Nitric Oxide in Human Uterine Myocytes. Chad L Cowles, Heather R Burkin, Craig C Ulrich, Michael T Lee, Iain LO Buxton. University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, NV, USA. INTRODUCTION: Nitric oxide (NO) is an important regulator of physiological processes including parturition. Fluctuations in NO concentration have been hypothesized to contribute to the timing and onset of labor. The role of NO during pregnancy is disparate from other smooth muscles because NO-mediated relaxation in the myometrium is independent of cGMP. Therefore, events such as specific protein S-nitrosation likely mediate the effects of NO in myometrium. We hypothesize that endogenous NO passages cell membranes as glutathione-NO (GSNO) in a transporter-dependent fashion. METHODS: Real time fluorescence spectrometry for visualization of intracellular NO accumulation in the cell following addition of an NO donor was measured using DAF-FM, an NO sensitive fluorophore. Studies were performed on telomerized and freshly isolated uterine smooth muscle cells. A microplate based assay was developed for high throughput screening of DAF-NO fluorescence. Molecular mechanisms for NO-mediated relaxation in myometrium were investigated using blockade of candidate pathways for NO entry. RESULTS: Addition of GSNO to cultured myometrial cells loaded with DAF-FM demonstrated increasing intracellular fluorescence with a time to peak of 3-5 minutes for both freshly isolated and cultured cells. . A fluorescent signal intensity dependent GSNO concentration effect curve was established in the telomerized cell line and for freshly isolated myocytes with an effective concentration 50% of 3 uM. Blockade of the amino acid transporter gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase by acivicin at uM concentrations prevents GSNO-mediated fluorescence in both freshly isolated and cultured myometrial cells. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that endogenous sources of NO may be transported into smooth muscle cells in the form of GSNO via an acivicin-sensitive transport mechanism. Large-Scale Drug Discovery Strategy to Identify Potent and Selective Small Molecule Regulators of Uterine Contractility. Jennifer L Herington, 1 Daniel Swale, 2 Naoko Brown, 1 Elaine L Shelton, 1 Hyehun Choi, 1 Bibhash C Paria, 1 Jerod Denton, 2 Jeff Reese. 1 1 Vanderbilt, Nashville, TN, USA; 2 Vanderbilt, Nashville, TN, USA. The uterine myometrium is a primary therapeutic target for: mitigation of preterm labor (PTL), labor induction, and control of postpartum hemorrhage (PPH). Current tocolytics used to inhibit uterine contractions, and uterotonics used for PPH, are limited by their short duration of benefit and undesirable off-target effects (primarily vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs)). We developed: 1) a dual-addition Ca 2+mobilization assay to allow dual-detection of agonists (uterotonics) of Ca 2+ -mobilization and antagonists (tocolytics) of oxytocin(OT)-induced Ca 2+ -mobilization in a single screen, and 2) a comparative screen for UT-myo selectivity. METHODS: Primary uterine myometrium (UT-myo) cells were isolated from day 19 pregnant mice. A 384-well Ca 2+ -assay (Fluo-4AM) was performed and optimized as a primary high-throughput screening assay. Using an automated Functional Drug Discovery System, cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO (vehicle), 10uM atosiban (known antagonist; negative control) or 10µM compounds, followed by OT (known agonist). Hit-compounds were identified by using Z´-statistic. Hit-compounds were tested in a comparative screen using primary mouse aorta VSMCs under identical dual-addition assay conditions as the primary screen. The dosereleationship of hit-compounds was examined by performing 10-point, 3-fold titrations in the primary screen RESULTS: This primary assay is robust, reproducible (Z´=0.73), and displayed excellent performance in a pilot screen of 2,727 compounds from the Spectrum Collection, NIH Clinical I and II Collections. The pilot screen revealed the reliability (n=7) of primary UT-myo cells and a confirmed hit-rate of 1.80% for agonist and 1.39% for antagonist compounds. Concentration-dependent responses of hit-compounds demonstrated an EC 50 ≤10µM for 7 hit-agonist compounds and 21 hitantagonist compounds. Using a secondary ex vivo assay, we established that four representative hit-antagonists (benzobromarone, dipryidamole, fenoterol and nisoldipine) are potent, selective inhibitors of uterine contractility at different IC 50 values. CONCLUSIONS: Our studies present the first large-scale drug discovery strategy to identify potent and selective small molecules for pre-clinical development aimed at PTL and PPH. Prostaglandin F2α Alters Myometrial Responses to Inflammatory Stimuli. Yanmin Jiang, 1 Hari Kishore Annavarapu, 1 Patrick W Keller, 1 Robert Garfield, 2 Ruth Ann Word. 1 1 University of TX Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA; 2 GuangZhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China. INTRODUCTION: PGF2α is believed to play an important role in myometrial contractions of labor. Since inflammation and progesterone receptor (PR) function represent a common pathway involved in both term and preterm labor, we investigated the mechanisms by which PGs alter myometrial responses to inflammatory stimuli. METHODS: Highly differentiated primary human myometrial cells from nonpregnant and pregnant women were used. Gene expression was analyzed by RT-qPCR. Cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions were analyzed for NFkB (p65), progesterone receptor isoforms, and COX2 by immunoblotting. H3 and α-tubulin were used to normalize protein input. RESULTS: In myometrial cells, IL-1β treatment (0.008 -1 ng/ml for 6 -24 h) increased IL-8 mRNA (500-fold, P<0.01) and COX-2 (55-fold, P<0.01) in a dose-and time-dependent manner. COX-2 protein levels were also increased (40-fold, 6h). Although PGF2α (100 µM) alone increased COX-2 only 2-fold, PGF2α amplified IL-1β-induced increases in COX-2 mRNA (from 55-to 96-fold, p < 0.01) and protein (from 40-to 136-fold). This synergism of PGF2α with IL-1β was not due to amplified NFkB activation because PGF2α did not activate NFKB and even suppressed IL-1-induced nuclear translocation of p65. This suppression of IL-1βinduced NFKB activation was reflected by suppression of IL-1β-induced increases in Il-8 (from 535-fold to 410-fold, p < 0.01). To determine if PGF2α-IL-1β synergistic activation of COX-2 involved loss of PR, the effect of IL-1β, PGF2α, and IL-1β+PGF2α on PR-A and -B mRNA and protein was quantified. IL-1β suppressed PR mRNA and nuclear PR-A (10-fold) and PR-B (2-fold). PGF2α also decreased PR-A (2-fold), but did not alter IL-1β-induced downregulation of PR appreciably. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these results indicate that, in myometrial cells, PGF2α synergizes with IL-1β to increase COX-2 mRNA and protein through NFKB-and PR-independent mechanisms. We conclude, therefore, that prostaglandins modify myometrial responses to inflammatory stimuli through complex cellular pathways. Mechanical strain is an important signal to the pregnant myometrium, which must expand to accommodate the developing fetus, placenta, and amniotic fluid. Rapid uterine distension greatly increases the risk of preterm labor (Gardner et al., 1995; Hill et al., 1987; Lackman et al., 2001) and mechanical forces are known to regulate gene expression, cell growth, and contractility (Wu et al., 2008) . We subjected isolated human myometrial tissue to mechanical stretch to identify changes in the phosphoproteome of pregnant human myometrial cells in response to mechanical stretch. We detected several components of the mTOR signaling pathway that were differentially phosphorylated in response to stretch. Since recent literature has implicated mTOR signaling in regulating birth timing (Hirota et al., 2011) , we performed experiments to test the following hypotheses: 1) mTOR signaling increases in response to stretch in pregnant human myometrial cells and tissue and 2) alterations in myometrial mTOR activity might be associated with some cases of preterm labor. METHODS: . Uterine biopsies were obtained with IRB approval and written informed consent from mothers undergoing Cesarean section and transported to the laboratory in physiological buffer for immediate processing. Freshly isolated term myometrial tissue was frozen immediately or dissected into strips and mounted vertically in tissue baths and tested for the ability to contract in response to KCl. Strips were left unstretched or stretched to 10g tension and snap frozen. Telomerized pregnant human uterine smooth muscle cells (PHUSMC-hTRT) were grown in the presence of estrogen and progesterone and submitted to biaxial stretch. Protein was extracted from cells and tissue and mTOR expression and phosphorylation was analyzed by western blot. RESULTS: We confirmed phosphorylation of mTOR in response to mechanical stretch in both human myometrial tissue and cultured myometrial cells (p<0.05).We observed increased mTOR expression in samples from term laboring, term nonlaboring, preterm laboring, and preterm nonlaboring myometrium compared to nonpregnant myometrium. but did not observe significant changes in phospho-mTOR between groups. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest human myometrial cells respond to mechanical stretch by activation of mTOR signaling. Labor is characterized by a shift from a quiescent uterus to an activated uterus, with increased myometrial sensitivity to uterotonins (e.g. oxytocin). This activation is led by uterine activation proteins (UAPs), which are a family of proteins essential for labor and delivery. UAPs are promising targets for the prevention of preterm birth (PTB). We hereby describe a novel UAP, Neuromedin U Receptor 2 (NmU-R2). METHODS: Gestational tissue biopsies from pregnant women were used to study the expression of NmU-R2 and its ligands neuromedin U (NmU) and neuromedin S (NmS) whereas pregnant mice were used to explore the role and mechanism of action of NmU-R2. RESULTS: NmU-R2, NmU and NmS are found to be expressed in human gestational tissues and their expression considerably increases with gestation age and labor. NmU is uterotonic ex vivo in murine tissues, and dose-dependently triggers labor by acting specifically via NmU-R2. The uterine expression of NmU and to a greater extent of NmS and NmU-R2 rises near term, to peak during labor, and rapidly decreases postpartum; accordingly, contractile effects of NmU increase with gestational age. NmU-and NmS-induced contraction is associated with increased receptor-coupled Ca ++ transients in myometrial smooth muscle cells. NmU-R2 and NmS are upregulated in vivo in response to pro-inflammatory IL-1β. Concordantly, in vivo knock-down of NmU-R2 prevents pro-inflammatory LPS-induced PTB. Consistently, LPS also induced NmS expression in human cytotrophoblast; correspondingly decidua of women with chorioamnionitis that delivered vaginally preterm had significantly higher expression of NmS compared to those without chorioaminonitis. CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our data suggest an important role for NmU-R2 and its ligands NmU and NmS in term labor and PTB triggered by chorioamnionitis. NmU-R2 therefore represents an interesting target for the prevention of PTB. The Effects of Progesterone Supplementation on Preeclampsia and Associated Outcomes. Jaclyn M Ferro, 1,2 Sasha Sabir, 1,2 Jocelyn Tolentino, 1,2 Avi Hameroff, 1,2 Mudar Dalloul, 1 Cassandra Charles, 1 Ozgul Muneyyirci-Delale. 1,2 1 SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA; 2 Kings County Hospital Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA. INTRODUCTION: Several studies have observed a decrease in placental production of progesterone in patients who develop preeclampsia (PREE). 17 alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate (17-OHPC) is currently used in the prevention of preterm delivery; however it may potentially negate the inflammatory factors that have been implicated in PREE by maintaining normal progesterone levels. In this study, we examined the incidence of PREE, pregnancy outcomes and morbidities in patients at risk for preterm delivery receiving progesterone supplementation (P4) throughout the course of their pregnancy compared to controls who did not. METHODS: An IRB-approved retrospective chart review of women with singleton gestations who took P4 injections secondary to a risk of preterm delivery during their pregnancy and those who did not receive P4 were selected at random without knowing the outcome of their pregnancy to serve as controls. Multiple pregnancy-related variables were collected and assessed. Data were analyzed using two-tailed Student's t-test, Chisquare and Fisher exact test. RESULTS: Study population of 88 pregnant women between the ages of 18 and 43 years: 58 who received P4 and 30 controls who didn't. There was no statistical significance difference in demographics between the two groups. None of the subjects were noted to have developed gestational hypertension, while 9.1% developed gestational diabetes mellitus. During labor, the P4 group had a lower maximum systolic blood pressure (p=0.0146) and a lower maximum diastolic blood pressure (p<0.001) than the control group. Patients who received P4 during their pregnancy were less likely to develop PREE (p=0.0036). At the time of delivery, there was a statistically significant difference in gestational age observed between both groups (p=0.0053).On average, the progesterone group delivered at 37.0 + 4.4 weeks of gestation versus the control group at 39.4 + 1.4 weeks of gestation. CONCLUSIONS: Progesterone supplementation demonstrated a statistically significant reduction in blood pressure and a decrease in the incidence of preeclampsia in pregnancy. These findings suggest progesterone supplementation may be a potential utility for the prevention of preeclampsia in patients at increased risk for its development. Additional investigations need to be executed with a larger study to fortify these results. Manon Bos, 1 Hans J Baelde, 1 Marie-Louise P van der Hoorn, 2 Kitty WM Bloemenkamp, 2,3 Rosanne J Turner. 1 1 LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands; 2 LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands; 3 UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia (PE) is a pregnancy-specific syndrome characterized by placental dysfunction, an angiogenic imbalance and hypercoagulability. In sera from women with PE, levels of thrombomodulin (TM) are downregulated. TM is essential for the maintenance of endothelium; it inhibits inflammatory pathways and coagulation. TM dysregulation causes inflammatory disorders and thromboembolism. Women pregnant after oocyte donation (OD) have a higher risk to develop PE. The pathophysiology of PE presumably differs between autologous pregnancies and OD pregnancies. We aimed to investigate TM expression in placentas from patients with PE after OD, and in placentas from women with healthy, autologous pregnancies and from women with healthy OD pregnancies, and correlate this with parameters of inflammation and coagulation. METHODS: Placentas from 57 OD pregnancies were studied, of which 15 pregnancies were complicated by PE. Placentas from 40 healthy autologous pregnancies were collected as controls. Immunohistochemical staining for TM was performed and syncytiotrophoblast staining patterns were scored as diffuse, focal or absent. Placental mRNA expression was measured for TM, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM1), Factor VIII (FVIII) and tissue factor (TF) with qPCR. RESULTS: TM protein expression was lower in the placenta in OD pregnancies compared with autologous pregnancies (p<0.001). TM protein expression in OD pregnancies was more frequently decreased in women with PE (68.8%) compared to women without PE (56.1%). Placental mRNA expression of TM was 2-fold lower in women with PE after OD compared with both control groups (P<0.005). Placental TM mRNA expression correlated positively with ICAM1, FVIII and TF. CONCLUSIONS: Placental TM protein expression is downregulated in pregnancies with and without PE after OD, and placenta TM mRNA expression is downregulated in pregnancies complicated by PE after OD. Downregulation of TM in OD pregnancies suggests a possible mechanism that causes a higher predisposition for PE in OD pregnancies. The correlation of TM with ICAM, FVIII and TF suggests that this might be caused by dysregulation of anti-coagulation and antiinflammatory mechanisms. This study shows the relevance of endothelial maintenance in placental pathology in OD; further research on the role of vasculoprotective proteins in OD and in the development of placental pathology is warranted. Cyclic AMP Treatment Depletes sFlt1 Production by Human Endometrial Stromal Cells During Decidualization. Hua Lou, 1,2 Juanjuan Wu, 1 Augustine Rajakumar, 1 Neil Sidell. 1 1 Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA; 2 Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia is a major complication of pregnancy in which the placenta is known to have shallow implantation into the decidua. Studies have implicated sFlt1, a soluble vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor protein, in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia through its ability to bind with VEGF and thereby neutralize its angiogenic functions. Although many studies have been carried out involving the levels of sFlt1 in the villous placenta, its presence and action in the endometrium has, to our knowledge, not been reported. In this study, we are seeking to understand the regulation and action of sFlt1 in human endometrial stromal cells (HESC) Aim: To investigate sFlt's potential regulation during in vitro decidualization METHODS: sFlt levels were assessed by Western blot or ELISA in the culture supernatant of primary and immortalized HESC. Decidualization of HESC was induced by adding a cocktail of estrogen, progesterone and cAMP (EPC) for 4, 8 and 12 days. sFlt1 mRNA expression was quantified by real-time RT-PCR. RESULTS: sFlt1 was detected in the culture supernatant of HESC. sFlt1 production was totally abrogated during decidualization induced by the EPC cocktail. This effect coincided with an increased production of VEGF and prolactin, and cellular morphology changes characteristic of the decidualization. Although estrogen and progesterone are critical players during decidualization, our results indicated that cAMP is the dominant factor which causes suppression of sFlt production; both dibutyryl-cAMP and 8-bromo-cAMP alone significantly inhibited sFlt by 4 days, with complete loss of detection by day 8. Consistent with these in vitro results, we found that decidua isolated from placental basal plate tissue after normal pregnancy produced much less sFlt compared with non-decidualized HESC (isolated from the endometrium of nonpregnant woman). CONCLUSIONS: HESC synthesize and secrete measurable quantities of sFlt1 that is downregulated during decidualization as a result of increased intracellular cAMP levels. These findings may have important implications in diseases such as preeclampsia that involve abnormal decidualization and angiogenesis at the maternal-fetal interface. Studies are underway to understand the precise mechanisms of sFlt1 reduction by cAMP in the endometrium. The Impact of Uric Acid During Pregnancy. Benjamin P Luscher, 1,2 Camilla Marini, 1,2,3 Daniel V Surbek, 1,2 Marc Baumann. 1,2 1 University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; 2 University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; 3 University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. INTRODUCTION: High uric acid levels during pregnancy could lead to the development of gestational diseases, such as pre-eclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), and gestational diabetes. Moreover the risk for the child to develop diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular diseases is increased too in these conditions. Unfortunately, the role of the main placental uric acid transporter GLUT9 and the effect of uric acid on placental and foetal development are still not well understood. Our study wants to shed new insights into the role of GLUT9 for placental uric acid transport in order to consider GLUT9 like a possible target to develop novel drugs to reduce gestational diseases following hyperuricemia. METHODS: To understand the effect of foetal hyperuricemia on foetal and placental development we use a systemic GLUT9 KO mouse model. Six-week-old female GLUT9 (+/-) mice, maintained on regular chow diet, were mated with GLUT9 (+/-) male mice. After the mating the diet was changed to regular chow diet plus inosine, which lead to hyperuricemia in GLUT9 (-/-) foetuses, but not in the mothers. At postnatal day 8 we weighted the pups daily to check their development. RESULTS: We observed a normal Mendel ratio for the pups from the mating of heterozygous parents. The GLUT9 KO pups have a significant reduced body weight, starting from postnatal day 12, compared to the wild type and heterozygous pups. CONCLUSIONS: Exposure of the foetus to high uric acid levels leads to differential postnatal weight development. This indicates that uric acid has the potential to affect the foetus and its development after birth. This observation contributes to the hypothesis that uric acid is not just a side product of pre-eclampsia but actively contributes to the effect of the disease leading to abnormal development in mice. The Effect of Pregnancy Interval on Subsequent Pregnancy Blood Pressure Following Preeclampsia. Lindsay S Howe, 1 Erica Hammer, 1 Gary Badger, 2 Ira Bernstein. 1 1 University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA; 2 University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. The lack of uniform recurrence of preeclampsia despite evidence of familial inheritance remains an enigma. We have suggested that pregnancy initiates vascular remodeling that reduces risk for recurrent hypertensive disease when the inter-pregnancy interval is short. Here we hypothesized that the interval between pregnancies would be inversely associated with mean arterial pressure differences, across trimesters, when the first pregnancy is complicated by preeclampsia. METHODS: This study was a retrospective review of existing medical records. We reviewed records of 172 nulliparous women diagnosed with preeclampsia who went on to have a second pregnancy at our institution. We examined factors that could influence blood pressure and risk of preeclampsia including maternal age, BMI, smoking and associated medical disorders. We recorded blood pressure from each pregnancy, segregated by trimester, and noted recurrence of hypertensive complications. Antepartum mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) was compared between pregnancies examining differences as a function of interpregnancy interval. RESULTS: Overall inter-pregnancy interval (IPI) was negatively associated with reductions in mean arterial pressure (MAP) between pregnancies (p=0.04). MAP during the third trimester decreased significantly between first and second pregnancies across all subject groups (IPI <24 months: -5.7 mm Hg, p<0.0001; IPI 24-48 months: -4.5 mmHg, p<0.0001; IPI >48 months -3.4 mm Hg: p=0.03). The recurrence rate of preeclampsia did not vary significantly with inter-pregnancy interval (p=0.21), although the trend was towards greater recurrence with greater inter-pregnancy interval. CONCLUSIONS: The interval between pregnancies, when the first pregnancy is complicated by preeclampsia, influences MAP in the second pregnancy. Shorter IPI resulted in greater reduction in MAP. This evidence of vascular remodeling, and the associated increase in vascular compliance, could contribute to the reduced risk of recurrent preeclampsia when the inter-pregnancy interval is short. Smoking in pregnancy has been associated with a reduction in the risk of preeclampsia (PE). We sought to determine if there is a significant difference in maternal mean arterial pressures (MAP) across pregnancy for women who quit smoking compared to those who continue to smoke. METHODS: In this secondary analysis, we examined the medical records of 215 women who completed a series of prospective, randomized smoking cessation studies examining the efficacy of contingency management on smoking cessation during pregnancy. We excluded women lost to follow-up, with multiple gestation, incomplete records, or blood pressures retrievable from only a single trimester. We identified blood pressure measurements throughout pregnancy and calculated average MAP for gestational age in3 week intervals. Differences in MAP among the quit status groups (defined as first trimester quit (Q1), second trimester quit (Q2), third trimester quit (Q3) and continued smoking (CS)), were examined over gestational intervals using repeated measures analysis of covariance. Covariates included BMI, preexisting hypertension and diabetes. Statistical significance was defined as P<.05. RESULTS: Women from all quit status groups demonstrated increased MAP with advancing pregnancy (p<.001). There was an impact of the timing of smoking cessation on this pattern (p=.02). MAP at term (>37 weeks) of women who quit smoking in the first trimester was found to be significantly higher than those who quit in the second or third trimesters and those who continued to smoke (Q1: 97.4 + 2.6, Q2: 87.8 + 1.6, Q3: 84.6 + 2.4, CS: 86.0 + 0.8 mm Hg, mean + s.e.m.). CONCLUSIONS: Smoking cessation during the first trimester of pregnancy is significantly associated with increased MAP at term. This finding is consistent with the reduction in term PE associated with maternal smoking and suggests a reversible component. Imbalance of Bioactive Sphingolipids Rheostat in Preeclampsia. Aneta Dobierzewska, 1 Gergana Deevska, 2 Macarena Palominos, 1 Marianela Sanchez, 1 Mariana N Nikolova-Karakashian, 2 Sebastian E Illanes. 1 1 Universidad de los Andes, Santiago, Chile; 2 University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia is the major disorder of human pregnancy manifested by pregnancy-induced hypertension and proteinuria, and in severe cases, by renal and liver failure. PE affects 5-8% of all pregnancies, causing nearly 40% of premature births worldwide. The pathological process of PE begins with shallow trophoblast invasion and reduced uteroplacental perfusion that results in angiogenic imbalance and maternal systemic inflammatory response. There is growing evidence for involvement of bioactive lipids, ceramide (Cer) and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) and their synthetic/metabolic enzymes in trophoblast differentiation & invasion, placental angiogenesis; all cellular and physiological processes necessary to establish healthy placenta.We hypothesize that dysregulation of Cer-S1P rheostat during early placentation process may have effect on downstream signaling under hypoxia and may contribute to the onset of the disease. METHODS: Hypoxia was induced in JAR cells and human chorionic explants by oxygen deprivation (1% & 8% O2) for 3, 6, 16 and 24 hours. Protein and mRNA levels were determined by Western blot and real-time PCR. NSMase activity was measured by HPLC using exogenous substrate C6-NBD-sphingomyelin. RESULTS: Our results demonstrate that synthetic/metabolic pathways of S1P and Cer are altered in human term placentae and chorionic villous explants of PE patients as compared to control subjects. Sphingosine kinase-1 (SPHK1) and S1P receptors (S1PR1, -3) mRNA and protein are down-regulated in PE placentae and villous explants, suggesting that they might be involved in challenged angiogenesis in PE. Furthermore, SPHK1 is strongly up-regulated in our in vitro and in vivo models of placental hypoxia (1% O2), pointing to the potential role of SPHK1 pathway in human early placentation process. On the other hand, ceramide synthase 5 (CerS5) of de novo pathway is up-regulated in PE placentae, while neutral sphingomyelinase expression and enzymatic activity is decreased in PE placental speicemen. These results suggest that pro-apoptotic Cer is augmented via de novo pathway in PE complicated pregnancies, while NSMase-derived ceramide may serve other functions. CONCLUSIONS: We postulate that bioactive sphingolipids and their synthetic/metabolic pathways may contribute to pathogenesis of preeclampsia and may serve in the future as novel early biomarkers of this disease. Reduced Placental ATF3 Increases sFlt1 Export via the Cargo Proteins Rab11a and Arf1. Tu'uhevaha J Kaitu'u-Lino, Roxanne Hastie, Fiona C Brownfoot, Natalie J Hannan, Ping Cannon, Laura Tuohey, Stephen Tong. Dept of O&G, University of Melbourne, Heidelberg, Australia. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia is a serious complication of pregnancy associated with increased placental secretion of anti-angiogenic factor sFlt1. We have previously shown Activating Transcription Factor 3 (ATF3) is reduced in preeclamptic placentas, and silencing ATF3 increases sFlt1 production. Surprisingly, silencing ATF3 only affected sFlt-1 protein secretion, but did not affect sFlt1 mRNA expression. This suggests the effects of ATF3 on sFlt1 release may be mediated via a post-transcriptional mechanism. We examined whether ATF3 affects the expression of Rab11a and Arf1, proteins previously been shown to be involved in sFlt-1 transport out of JEG3 (trophoblast) cells. METHODS: Brefeldin A, a chemical blocker of endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi protein transport was administered to primary trophoblast at increasing doses (0-10nM) and sFlt1 secretion assessed by ELISA. To assess whether Rab11a and Arf1 are critical to sFlt1 release in primary trophoblast, they were both silenced using siRNAs. sFlt1 secretion was measured by ELISA, and sFlt1 mRNA measured by qPCR. Furthermore we silenced ATF3 expression in primary trophoblast and measured Rab11a and Arf1 mRNA expression. RESULTS: Adding Brefeldin A to primary trophoblast dose-dependently reduced sFlt1, confirming that sFlt1 secretion is regulated via Golgi to endoplasmic reticulum transport in primary placental cells. Silencing both cargo proteins reduced sFlt-1 secretion: silencing Rab11a reduced sFlt-1 secretion by 40% from baseline, but did not change sFlt-1 mRNA expression, and silencing Arf1 reduced sFlt-1 secretion by 35%. Intriguingly, silencing ATF3 in primary trophoblast significantly increased Arf1 and Rab11a mRNA expression, as expected (Figure 1 ). *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: ATF3 increases sFlt1 secretion by inhibiting the expression of the cargo proteins Rab11a and Arf1 in primary trophoblast. Hence, we have identified a post-transcriptional mechanism of sFlt-1 regulation likely to occur in preeclampsia: reduced ATF3 expression derepresses Rab11a and Arf1, leading to increased sFlt-1 secretion. INTRODUCTION: Sdc1, a transmembrane proteoglycan of the endothelial glycocalyx, regulates inflammation and angiogenesis, and is a marker of endothelial damage. Maternal serum Sdc1 increases during normal pregnancy, with higher levels in HELLP syndrome. Decreased placental Sdc1 observed in preeclampsia(PE) and fetal growth restriction(FGR) may be associated with abnormal trophoblastic invasion. We previously identified the normal range for 1st trimester Sdc1 levels, but the association of Sdc1 with APOs is unknown. We hypothesized that 1st trimester serum Sdc1 would be aberrant in women with APOs compared to controls. We performed a retrospective case control study using subjects from the NSLIJ Health System. Cases (APOs, n=119) were included for singleton pregnancies with PE or FGR who delivered at 20-36 6/7wks and had 1st trimester screens by PerkinElmer/NTD labs with stored blood cards. Exclusions: cancer, placenta accreta, and chronic hypertension <20 wks. For each case, 2 controls (n=238) were identified at the same gestational week and ethnicity. Sdc1 levels were assessed by ELISA (R&D Systems . We previously reported increased vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) immunostaining in the glomeruli of a mouse model of PE with renal endotheliosis and proteinuria, demonstrated by VE-cadherin fragments in the urine. This suggests VEGF may disrupt glomerular endothelial cell (GEnC) barrier function leading to proteinuria. We hypothesize 1) VEGF staining is elevated in glomerular endotheliosis in a mouse model of PE, 2) GEnCs have VEGF receptors and surface proteins common to endothelial adherens and tight junctions. 3) That GEnCs exposed to VEGF demonstrate degradation of barrier function. METHODS: Histo/cytochemistry: Kidneys from pregnant ♀hAGT x ♂hREN transgenic crosses were fixed at D17, when proteinuria and glomerular endotheliosis are also observed, and stained for VEGF using a standard protocol. GEnCs from female C57BL/6 mice (Creative Bioarray) were incubated with antibodies to VEGFR1, VEGFR2, VE-cadherin, connexin-43, ZO-1, or alpha-catenin. Protein expression was analyzed by western blot. GEnC were grown on 96 well electrode plates and treated with VEGF. Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS) system monitoring continued for 24 hours post treatment RESULTS: Glomerular VEGF staining was elevated in the kidney of a mouse model of PE compared to controls at D17. In control GEnCs, immunocytochemistry and western blotting confirmed the presence of VEGFR1, VEGFR2, and junctional proteins known to be sensitive to VEGFR2 mediated degradation. Preliminary ECIS data shows that GEnC barrier resistance is decreased by 20% following VEGF treatment. CONCLUSIONS: An increase in VEGF staining in conjunction with glomerular endotheliosis and VE-cadherin fragments in the urine suggests VEGF signaling may play a role in the development of proteinuria in a mouse model of PE. Preliminary findings suggest VEGF receptors and junctional proteins mediate endothelial barrier function and VEGF may be involved in deterioration of the cell barrier as demonstrated by the ECIS system with VEGF treatment in GEnC. We will examine cytochemical changes that parallel the loss in barrier function following VEGF treatment and use these assays to identify drugs capable of rescuing GEnC monolayer integrity.  Pregnant mice with FOXP3 promoter-driven expression of the human diphtheria toxin (DT) receptor (Foxp3-DTR) were injected with DT (37.5ng/g) on gestational day (GD)3.5 and GD5.5 to selectively deplete FOXP3+ cells; DT-treated C57BL/6J mice served as controls. FOXP3+ cell depletion was measured using flow cytometry on GD6.5. Uterine artery blood flow velocity was measured on GD9.5. We assessed uterine artery function ex-vivo on GD10.5 using wire myography. RESULTS: After DT treatment, FOXP3 expression in uterine draining lymph nodes was reduced in Foxp3-DTR mice compared to wild-type mice (-89±5%; P<0.001). Preliminary data indicate blood flow velocity in the uterine artery was unchanged by Treg depletion. On GD10.5, Foxp3-DTR mice had moderately elevated fetal resorption (Wild-type+DT: 0 resorptions, Foxp3-DTR+DT: 1.67±0.3 resorptions per dam; P=0.01). Uterine artery conversion of bigET-1 to active ET-1 was not different between wild-type and Treg cell-depleted mice. Whereas the MMPinhibitor GM6001 reduced bigET-mediated constriction by 46% in uterine arteries from wild-type mice, the effect of GM6001 was ablated when Treg cells were depleted. Maximal ET-1-induced constriction in the uterine artery was similar for control and Treg-depleted mice (% of phenylephrine maximal constriction, wild-type+DT: 108.0±6.3, Foxp3-DTR+DT: 92.25±10.94; P=0.28). CONCLUSIONS: Treg cell depletion caused increased fetal resorption but did not affect uterine artery blood flow velocity. Contrary to our hypothesis, MMP-induced conversion of bigET-1 to active ET-1 was reduced only in wild-type mice, suggesting dysregulation of the bigETmediated conversion pathways following Treg depletion. Fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (Flt1) and its soluble form, sFlt1, are generated by alternative splicing, and multiple splice variants of sFlt1 have been reported in the placenta -primarily sFlt1-i13 and sFlt1-e15a (also known as sFlt1-14). Although increase in placental sFlt1 production has been implicated as a cause of preeclampsia, the different cell types that produce these splice variants both in normal and preeclamptic placentas are not fully characterized. METHODS: Placental bed biopsies from around the center of the placenta and full-thickness placental samples were collected from preeclamptic (n=12) and gestational age-matched normal (n=15) subjects undergoing cesarean section delivery. Flt1, sFlt1-i13, and sFlt1-e15a mRNAs from basal plate and different regions of placenta were analyzed by qRT-PCR, and frozen tissue sections were examined for localization of thesemRNAs by in situ hybridization (ISH). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed for identification of trophoblasts (cytokeratin 7) and proliferating cells (Ki-67). RESULTS: qPCR analysis revealed that sFlt1-i13 is the most abundantly expressed sFlt1 transcript in the placenta and that the levels of both sFlt1-i13 (p<0.01) and sFlt1-e15a (p<0.05) are significantly higher in the basal plate than in the villous regions. Although both sFlt1-i13 and sFlt1-e15a levels were significantly increased in preeclampsia, primarily in the basal plates, the sFlt1-i13 level was 4.2-fold higher than that of sFlt1-e15a. ISH results were consistent with the qPCR data, with the most abundant expression of sFlt1-i13 mRNA in extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) in the basal plate and a dramatic increase in signal intensity in EVTs at the basal plate in preeclamptic samples. sFlt1-i13 and sFlt1-e15a mRNAs were also expressed in the villous region, but the signals were highly focal. There were also significant (p<0.01) increases in cellularity, proliferation index (Ki-67-positive cells), and thickness of the sFlt1-expressing EVT cell layer in the basal plate in preeclampsia. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that sFlt1-i13 is the most abundantly expressed sFlt1 transcript in the placenta and that the expansion of the sFlt1-i13-producing EVT layer in the basal plate in preeclampsia is the primary contributor to the increases in sFlt1 levels in preeclampsia. Metformin is an anti-glycemic medication, safe in pregnancy, recently found to reduce hypoxic transcripts by inhibiting the mitochondria. We assessed the effect of metformin on sFlt-1 and sENG secretion and endothelial dysfunction in primary human tissues. Furthermore we explored its mechanism of action through mitochondrial inhibition. Metformin or mitochondrial inhibitors were administered to primary human tissues and sFlt-1 and sENG secretion measured. Succinate, a mitochondrial activator, was added with metformin and effect on trophoblast sFlt1 and sENG determined. Endothelial dysfunction was induced with TNFa or placental explant conditioned media and the effect of metformin on VCAM-1 or whole vessel dilation was assessed. A novel assay using human omental vessel outgrowth in the presence of sFlt-1 ± metformin was performed. RESULTS: Metformin induced a significant dose dependent reduction in sFlt-1 and sENG secretion from primary endothelial cells, trophoblasts and preeclamptic placental explants. Mitochondrial inhibitors, rotenone and antimycin, also dose dependently reduced sFlt-1 secretion. Addition of succinate with metformin reversed its effect on sFlt-1 * Figure(s) We previously demonstrated that aPL induce an inflammatory IL-8 and IL-1β response in human trophoblast, the latter via uric-acid induced Nalp3 inflammasome activation. While infection may contribute to the origins of autoimmune diseases like APS, such exposures may also contribute to end-organ damage. Furthermore, preeclampsia may also have an underlying infectious element. Thus, a woman with APS may be at increased risk for preeclampsia or other adverse outcomes if she has an infection. Our objective was to determine the impact the common bacterial component, MDP, has on trophoblast inflammatory responses to aPL. The human first trimester extravillous trophoblast cell line, Sw.71, was treated with media, aPL (20µg/ml), bacterial MDP (1µg/ml), or both aPL and MDP. After 72hr, supernatants were collected and measured by ELISA for the pro-inflammatory cytokines, IL-1β and IL-8; and the Nalp3 agonist, uric acid. RESULTS: aPL alone increased trophoblast IL-1β secretion by 2.6±0.3fold compared to the NT control (p<0.001), while MDP alone had no effect on IL-1β. aPL and MDP in combination significantly and synergistically augmented trophoblast IL-1β secretion to 6.9±1.0 fold compared to aPL alone (p<0.001). aPL alone significantly increased trophoblast uric acid by 1.4-fold compared to the control (p<0.001). MDP had no effect on trophoblast uric acid, ether alone or in combination with aPL. aPL alone significantly increased trophoblast IL-8 secretion by 2.5±0.3 fold compared to the control; MDP alone had a similar effect increasing IL-8 secretion by 2.0±0.2-fold (p<0.001). Together, aPL and MDP had an additive effect by significantly increasing IL-8 secretion by 1.7±0.2-fold compared to aPL alone (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Bacterial MDP sensitizes the trophoblast to aPL, leading to an exaggerated IL-1β response, and contributes to increased IL-8 secretion. MDP-augmented aPL-driven IL-1β secretion is triggered downstream of uric acid production. Together, our data suggests that a bacterial infection at the maternal-fetal interface may exacerbate the impact aPL have on placental inflammation and, thus, on pregnancy outcome. were significantly higher in the PE group than the GH and NC groups, both as an absolute value (medians 16, 6 and 8 mg/dL; p=0.012) and as an A1M/creatinine ratio >13 mg/g (66.7%, 9.1% and 35%; p=0.01). Levels of C5b-9 were also higher in the PE group than in the other 2 groups (medians 4.73, 0.13 and 0.14 ng/mL; p=0.0034). KIM and RBP did not differ between groups at delivery, but RBP remained higher than non-pregnant reference values. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Tubular injury, as assessed by urinary A1M and C5b-9, developed during the interval between the end of the mid-trimester and delivery in patients with PE. These results suggest that PE, but not GH, is associated with proximal tubular injury. The METHODS: This is a secondary analysis of a multi-center trial of 17-OHPC for prevention of recurrent preterm birth (PTB). The parent trial included singleton gestations without suspected anomalies and excluded those with baseline chronic hypertension; 5 patients were lost to follow-up in the parent trial. The current study included all women with outcome data in the parent trial kept in their original intention to treat groups by 17-OHPC exposure. The incidence of our primary outcome, a composite of gestational hypertension and preeclampsia, was compared between exposure groups. We further assessed the incidence of delivery for HDP. We fit a log-linear regression model to adjust for numbers of prior PTB and gestational age at delivery. Epidemiological investigations have shown an association between treatment with SSRIs/SNRIs and congenital heart defects. However, these effects are controversial and the underlying molecular pathway remains unclear. The placenta serves as an early source of serotonin, which is critical in fetal development. We hypothesized that treatment with venlafaxine (the most prescribed SNRI) during pregnancy increases risks of fetal heart defects and alters placental and fetal heart serotonin system METHODS: Timed-pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were gavaged daily with venlafaxine hydrochloride (0, 3, 10, 30 or 100 mg/kg/day; n = 13-22) from gestation day (GD) 8 to 20. On GD21 dams were euthanized; placentas and fetuses were immediately collected by caesarean section and examined for external and internal malformations. Placenta and fetal heart were used for RT-qPCR analysis. RESULTS: Venlafaxine treatment (3 and 10 mg/kg/day) decreased placental weights (12-14%; P<0.01) while fetal bodyweights were not affected inducing an increased of the placental index (11-12%; P<0.05). The overall incidence of cardiac anomalies was doubled in all venlafaxine treatment groups (P<0.05). Nevertheless, males were more affected by cardiac anomalies than females. Data showed a decrease in placental SERT (serotonin transporter) mRNA levels (30%; P<0.05) in the 3, 10 and 30 mg/kg/day treatment groups. In female fetuses, an increase in SERT mRNA levels (209%; P<0.001) was observed in fetal heart after exposure to 10 mg/kg/day venlafaxine. An increase in fgf8 mRNA levels (46%; P<0.01), which is a gene involved in the establishment of the left/right asymmetry during embryogenesis, in fetal heart exposed to 3 mg/kg/day of venlafaxine was also observed. In the same group, the serotonin 2B receptor (5-HT 2B ) mRNA in fetal heart (114%; P<0.05) was increased, suggesting that this pathway (5-HT 2B /fgf8) might be involved in heart defects observed following an in utero exposure to venlafaxine. CONCLUSIONS: Together, results showed that treatment with venlafaxine increased risks of fetal cardiac anomalies and altered placental and fetal heart serotonin systems in rats. (5mC) is an important regulator of gene expression. The ten eleven translocation (TET) family of proteins can further enzymatically convert 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), which may also have important regulatory function. These two modifications are indistinguishable from one another using traditional bisulfite conversion methods, and their regulatory functions are likely distinct, and so disentanglement of these modifications may be important. There is growing recognition of an important role for the placenta in fetal programming and a growing literature on DNA methylation variation in placenta, which may be confounded by 5hmC. METHODS: By parallel processing of genomic DNA using bisulfite and oxidative bisulfite conversion we have investigated the extent and distribution of 5hmC within the human placenta and we have obtained transcriptomic data by RNA-sequencing to determine the role of both 5mC and 5hmC on expression. Values of 5hmC across the placental genome were generally low; however, we have identified approximately 21,000 loci with consistently elevated levels of 5hmC. 5hmC and 5mC within the same loci were anticorrelated, suggesting that the relationship between the two cytosine modification are often dependent on the kinetics of active demethylation. Depletion of 5hmC was observed in CpG islands, with greater extents in shelves and non-CpG island associated regions. Gene bodies, 5'-UTRs and 3'-UTRs also demonstrated increased density, while regions associated with activated transcription were depleted. In line with prior reports, 5hmC was enriched within poised enhancers, and was depleted within active enhancers. Finally, 5-hmC most prominently associated with elevated expression. CONCLUSIONS: Hydroxymethylation appears to be playing an active role in regulating gene expression, but only at select loci and not as a widespread phenomenom within the placenta. To this end, this data may be used as an early roadmap to 5hmC distribution within the human placenta and to highlight potential regions for focus on future studies. We found a net placental uptake of cholesterol from HDL but not LDL. The arterio-venous difference for HDL was 0.014 (SD 0.04) mmol/l, p<0,001 and for LDL 0.016 (SD 0.13) mmol/l, p=0,178. CONCLUSIONS: A gestational change in maternal HDL cholesterol, but not in LDL, is an independent determinant of placental and birth weights. An increase in HDL cholesterol was associated with birth weight less than average, whereas a decrease in HDL cholesterol was associated with birth weight above average. In line with these findings a net placental uptake of HDL cholesterol was found, but unexpectedly no uptake of LDL. We suggest that maternal HDL is a major source of exogenous cholesterol in the human placenta. Maternal BMI is a determinant of neonatal body fat, which differs between the genders. Pregnancy is characterized by physiological metabolic adaptations such as gestational weight gain, hyperinsulinemia and hyperlipidemia. These adaptions are modified by maternal BMI. We assessed the correlations between maternal metabolic variables and % neonatal fat and hypothesized gender differences in these associations. The STORK study included 1031 healthy Norwegian pregnancies. In a subset of 207 mother-baby pairs (113 boys and 94 girls) body fat was examined with bio-impedance (mothers) and Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (neonates). Maternal metabolic status included fasting glucose, insulin and lipids. Maternal and neonatal characteristics were compared by t-tests. Correlations (Pearson) between maternal variables and % neonatal fat were assessed. Analyses were repeated after stratification by neonatal sex. P-values <0.05 were considered significant. RESULTS: Maternal characteristics and metabolic profile did not differ between mothers of boys and girls. Neonatal characteristics differed, boys were larger and girls had more body fat (boys vs girls; birth weight 3711 vs 3450 g, length 51.1 vs 50.3 cm, head circumference 35.6 vs 34.6 cm, 12.9 vs 14.5 % fat, p<0.05). Maternal factors that correlated with % neonatal fat were BMI (0.23, p=0.001), % maternal fat (0.18, p=0.02), fasting glucose week 30 (0.21, p=0.003) and HDL cholesterol (-0.17, p=0.02). Gestational weight gain (GWG), fasting insulin, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol and triglycerides were not associated with % neonatal fat. There were gender differences; for boys the correlations were only found for GWG (0.23, p=0.02), and fasting glucose (0.2, p=0.04), whereas for girls BMI (0.4, p<0.001), % maternal fat (0.36, p=0.001), fasting glucose (0.23, p=0.03), HDL cholesterol (-0.33, p=0.001) and triglycerides (0.24, p=0.02) correlated with neonatal fat. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal BMI, maternal fat %, fasting glucose and HDL cholesterol were correlated to % neonatal fat. However, there were gender differences as more maternal metabolic factors were associated with % neonatal fat in girls than in boys. demonstrating hepatic insulin resistance. IUGR fetal livers also have increased LDHA and PDK4 expression, yet metabolites associated with lactate production and decreased glucose oxidation have not been measured. We hypothesized that IUGR livers would have increased uptake of lactate and glucogenic amino acids and decreased substrate oxidation that support HGP. METHODS: Placental insufficiency and IUGR fetal sheep were produced by exposure of ewe to hyperthermia. We used NMR metabolomics in control (CON) and IUGR fetal livers collected after saline infusion or 3h insulin-clamp (n=4 each). We used chronic hepatic catheters to measure blood flow and net flux of glucose, lactate, pyruvate, amino acids, and oxygen across the left liver lobe in CON (n=7) and IUGR (n=4) fetuses. RESULTS: IUGR fetuses weighed 40% less and had lower oxygen and plasma glucose and insulin and higher lactate levels (P<0.05). IUGR livers had decreased concentrations of adenine+adenosine, nucleotides, choline, glutathione, succinate, acetate, and Glu and increased Gln, Ala, lactate, beta-hydroxybutyrate, branched chain amino acids (BCAA), and bile acids (P<0.05). Insulin-clamp CON and IUGR livers had decreased concentrations of glucose, acetate, and Asp and increased creatine and choline (P<0.05). Hepatic blood flow, adjusted for liver weight, was not different, yet hepatic oxygen uptake was 50% lower in IUGR fetuses (P<0.05). IUGR fetuses had hepatic glucose output (-10 umol/min/100g) whereas CON fetuses had hepatic glucose uptake (12 umol/min/100g, P<0.05). There were no differences in hepatic lactate uptake or pyruvate release. IUGR fetuses had decreased hepatic uptake of Gly, Ala, Met, Leu, Phe, and Lys (P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Decreased hepatic oxygen uptake in the IUGR fetus supports decreased substrate oxidation, consistent with lower uptake rates of amino acids, nucleotides (energy status), and TCA cycle metabolites (succinate, acetate). Increased hepatic concentrations of lactate, Ala, Glu, Gln, and BCAA during saline and insulin-clamp conditions support persistent HGP. We speculate that glucogenic substrates are produced or alternatively metabolized in the liver, spared from oxidation, and used to fuel HGP in the IUGR fetus. Repetitive UCOs with worsening acidemia are associated with increased risk of fetal brain injury and lasting neurological deficits. Existing non-invasive methods for detection of fetal acidemia are not reliable. Hence, new approaches to understanding fetal cardiovascular and metabolic responses to labour-like UCOs are needed to develop and refine our detection tools. We developed a mathematical model of maternal and fetal cardiovascular circuits, coupled with nervous regulation, and reciprocal perfusion-metabolism influences. Our cardiovascular model is based on an electric circuit analogue, with a compartmental model of cardiovascular output. We couple the cardiovascular model with a metabolic model for glucose, lactate, and pyruvate. The nervous system model replicates vagal and sympathetic responses to reduced O2 supply and blood flow, driven by changes in pO2. In silico simulation with fixed UCO length of 1 minute and variable recovery time replicates experimental system dynamics. Figure  1 demonstrates numerics of fetal heart rate (FHR) and blood pressure (MABP) over several hours, reproducing MABP decline and FHR overshoot during UCO, and later biphasic changes. Figure 2 depicts metabolic changes over several hours, matching experimental values. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Our model successfully reproduces salient features observed in fetal sheep experiments of UCO including FHR biphasic behaviour, MABP and pH decline, and increased levels of lactate and CO2. We demonstrate the dependence of acidosis on the total duration of UCOs, rather than individual events, matching experimental evidence. The simplified metabolic model is able to reproduce measured changes in pH, lactate, and glucose in continuous time, rather than through intermittent sampling. In an ovine model of maternal stress, maternal treatment with 1mg/kg/day cortisol beginning at day 120 of gestation resulted in hyperplastic fetal hearts with Purkinje cell apoptosis at 130d gestation and increased stillbirth at term (~145 days). Gene expression changes indicate altered glucose metabolism and decreased mitochondria in the heart. Epicardial adipose tissue (EPAT) and the heart share a common blood supply. We hypothesized that deleterious endocrine and metabolic effects in EPAT occur. These may contribute to cardiac dysfunction and fetal demise in the face of increased fetal cortisol or altered substrates due to maternal hypercortisolemia and hyperglycemia. METHODS: EPAT from fetuses of cortisol treated (CORT) or vehicle (CON) ewes were immunostained for the lipid peroxidation product 4-hydroxynonenal (Abcam ab46545) (n=9/group) and transcriptomic analysis of EPAT (n=8 CON, 7 CORT) were performed. qPCR confirmed the transcriptomic results. Transcriptomic data obtained using Agilent products and methods were analyzed with R with modeling in Webgestalt and Cytoscape. P<0.05 was accepted as significant with adjustment for multiple testing in the transcriptomic analyses. RESULTS: Lipid peroxidation staining, expressed as % of total EPAT area, was increased in CORT vs CON from 16±1 to 23±3%. Of 185 differentially regulated genes, the 83 upregulated genes are associated with immune function, (e,g. macrophage differentiation, complementcoagulation) and negative regulation of fatty acid transport, but neither adipocyte size nor the number of macrophages in EPAT was altered by CORT. The downregulated genes are associated with protein metabolism e.g. translation, protein localization to organelle but response to fructose stimulus was also an overrepresented biological process in these genes. Endocrine responses in EPAT to CORT were not apparent. CONCLUSIONS: CORT increased lipid peroxidation and immune activation in fetal EPAT. Complement components of adipose tissue have been linked to decreased insulin dependent fatty acid uptake and triglyceride synthesis (Gauvreau et al Mol. Immunol. 51 (2012) 73-81). We conclude that maternal stress may predispose the fetal heart to damage from lipid peroxidation products and increased fatty acids in the coronary circulation. Reduction of oxygen content of inspired gas in pregnant sheep decreases both maternal and fetal partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood (PaO2). The reflex chemoreceptor response in the mother stimulates hyperventilation, which decreases arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) in mother and fetus. We have previously reported that, 1 hour after the onset of a 30 min period of hypoxia (HH, reduction in fetal PaO2 to approximately 10 mm Hg), there was an increase in gene expression in the fetal hypothalamus that reflected immune activation and inflammation. We designed the present experiment to quantify gene expression in toll-like receptor pathways involved in the inflammatory response 1 day after the HH and whether ketamine, a known antagonist of the NMDA receptor, ameliorates the inflammatory response. METHODS: Using chronically-catheterized, time-dated, pregnant ewes and their fetuses, we induced 30 min of hypoxia (98 to 56 mmHg in mother and 17 to 10 mm Hg in fetus) by infusion of nitrogen into the maternal trachea. Animals were sacrificed 24 h after the stimulus, and fetal tissues were dissected and snap-frozen. Fetal brains were bisected, with half subjected to further regional dissection and half fixed in 4% buffered paraformaldehyde for histological analysis. After extraction of mRNA, Real-time PCR was used to detect abudance of mRNA for 14 genes (CXCL10, CD14, TLR2, TLR4, NFKB1, MYD88, TNF, IL1B,  PTGS2, CRH, CASP8, OAS1 , NFKBIA, PTX3) using specific primers. RESULTS: Ketamine treatment alone (in normoxic fetuses) reduced mRNA abundance for TLR2, TLR4, MYD88, and PTGS2 in the fetal hypothalamus. HH increased the mRNA abundance of CXCL10, TLR2, CD14, NFKBIA, IL1B, PTGS2, CRH, and CASP8 * Figure(s) will be available online. Ketamine decreased CD14, TLR2, TLR4, and CASP8 mRNA abundance during hypoxia (compared to vehicle-treated fetuses). CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that HH produces an inflammatory response in the fetal hypothalamus that mimics the response to bacterial or viral infection. Maternal Cortisol Regulates Placental CRH Production in Human Gestation. (pCRH) is an area of interest and importance because the amount and rate of change in pCRH production over pregnancy is associated with pregnancy and child health outcomes. Unlike in the case of the HPA-axis, cortisol is hypothesized to regulate pCRH production in a feed-forward manner. Therefore, our objective was to examine the association of maternal cortisol in mid gestation with the pCRH production from mid to late gestation. METHODS: 118 participants in a prospective cohort study of pregnancy and birth outcomes were assessed between 12-20 weeks and 32-35 weeks gestation. At visit 1 maternal saliva samples were collected over 4 consecutive days: at awakening, +30 and +60 minutes post awakening, noon, 4pm and 8pm for quantification of maternal free (unbound) cortisol. The cortisol area under the curve (AUC) using all samples (except the +30 and +60 samples) was calculated for each day and averaged across all 4 days. pCRH was measured by RIA in maternal blood collected at visits 1 and 2. The relationship of maternal cortisol with pCRH was evaluated using multivariable regression analysis. RESULTS: Higher maternal cortisol (AUC) in the second trimester was associated with higher pCRH in the third trimester (standardized beta [β]=0.19, p=0.02), as well as with a greater increase in pCRH from the second to third trimester (β=0.20, p=0.02). These relationships remained significant after adjusting for weeks gestation at biosample collection, as well as maternal age, income, race/ethnicity, pre-pregnancy BMI, obstetric complications, and sex of the baby. CONCLUSIONS: Results support the hypothesis that maternal cortisol regulates human placental CRH production in a positive manner, thereby supporting a linkage between stress-related physiology in the maternal and fetal compartments. INTRODUCTION: Fetal infection is a major contributor to brain injury with neurodevelopmental sequelae. It is crucial to develop treatments for at-risk fetuses. This requires understanding the dynamics of fetal immune response to infection. We studied the effects of perturbation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway (CAP) in fetal sheep. We hypothesized that the up regulation of CAP will suppress the inflammatory responses secondary to noxious stimuli, thereby, diminishing the likelihood of antenatal brain injury. METHODS: Chronically instrumented near-term ovine fetuses were given NaCl (n=9) or LPS IV (400 or 800 ng/d for 2d, n=12 and 5, respectively) and monitored 54h for changes in cardiovascular responses, ileum/cerebral blood flow (CBF, using colour microsphere technique), and systemic inflammation (IL-6, ELISA). To down regulate CAP, fetuses underwent bilateral cervical vagotomy (Vx) followed by LPS400 (n=5) or 800 (n=5). To selectively up regulate efferent or afferent CAP, fetuses, in addition to Vx and LPS400, underwent either efferent or afferent cervical bilateral vagal nerve stimulation (VNS) +/-10 min around the first LPS injection, at 6, 24, 30 and 48h (n=9 and 7, respectively). Centralization of blood flow due to sepsis was defined as the ratio of cerebral to ileum blood flow. GEE modeling was used and results are reported for p<0.05. RESULTS: At 3h, in Vx+LPS400 IL-6 levels increased vs LPS400 by 65%. Afferent VNS had similar effects at Day 1 and, uniquely, also on Day 2, thus abolishing the habituation effect due to second LPS dose seen in other groups. Afferent VNS diminished diastolic blood pressure (dBP) by 23% at 27h compared to LPS400. Blood flow centralization in response to LPS was decreased at 24h by 50% in LPS800, but not LPS400 nor Vx+LPS400, groups and in Vx+LPS800, efferent or afferent VNS groups. CONCLUSIONS: dBP drop in afferent VNS group may be due to central inhibition of sympathetic outflow by vagus. Despite dBP drop and the protracted action of pro-inflammatory cytokines in afferent VNS group, the centralization response was similarly diminished with the higher (800) LPS dose or any of vagus nerve manipulations. Retained cerebral autoregulation likely compensated for these responses to afferent VNS. The role of vagus nerve in immunological memory and the asymmetric effects on control of inflammation require further study. Acute and Chronic Effects of Fetal Surgery and Vagal Denervation on Heart Rate Variability (HRV). C Herry, 1 P Burns, 2 J Benito, 2 M Cao, 3 A Desrochers, 2 G Fecteau, 2 M G Frasch. Little is known about effects of fetal surgery on HRV as a non-invasive marker of fetal health and recovery from surgery. Using the validated continuous individualized multi-organ variability analysis (CIMVA) approach, we aimed to identify HRV measures suitable to monitor effects of surgery and the specific contribution of vagus nerve activity to HRV changes across five signal-analytical domains. In 24 near-term fetal sheep ECG was recorded from the first moment of exteriorizing the fetus for the instrumentation until the end of the surgery. In 15 animals, bilateral cervical vagatomy (Vx) was performed during surgery. Fetal ECG recordings were studied over 15 min starting 30 min prior to (pre-Vx) and 15 min after Vx (post-Vx) to ensure stable recordings. A third recording was studied at 72 h post surgery. As CIMVA panel considers 55 HRV measures, a correction for multiple comparisons was made. Results are reported for p<0.05. RESULTS: Fetal heart rate (FHR) remained unchanged within each group, but recovered slower in Vx fetuses at 72 h. At the onset of surgery, both groups showed no differences in HRV properties (Fig. 1) . Surgery without Vx resulted in acute change of two HRV measures, while in Vx animals HRV was unchanged. At 72 h, one of the two early changing HRV measures recovered; overall, 21 fHRV measures were altered compared to surgery onset; for Vx animals, this was true for a different set of 4 HRV measures. Thus, Vx fetuses recovered slower from surgery and this was reflected in a subset of 30 fHRV measures different at 72h in Vx animals compared to non-Vx animals. *Figure(s) will be available online. For non-Vx animals, 23 out 55 HRV measures were unchanged by surgery; for Vx animals this for was true for 42 fHRV measures. CONCLUSIONS: We identified subsets of HRV measures that can be validated as fetal post-surgical recovery markers. Drugs influencing fetal cholinergic signalling delay the HRV recovery. We also report HRV measures reflecting vagus nerve activity per se to help decode brain-body communication carried via vagus nerve. Hydrocephalus affects up to 3/1000 births and is a significant cause of perinatal and pediatric morbidity and mortality despite surgical treatments. Hydrocephalus is increasingly recognized as a neurodevelopmental disorder. Primary cilia play a critical role in CNS development. The incidence of ventriculomegaly is higher in patients with Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS), a primary ciliopathy, than in the general population. We use a BBS mouse model to explore molecular mechanisms underlying hydrocephalus with the goal of facilitating noninvasive treatment. We hypothesize that abnormal apoptosis in periventricular regions leads to an obstructive form of congenital hydrocephalus in the BBS3 knockout (KO) mouse. We compared BBS3 KO mice to littermate controls and other BBS KO mice. We characterized disease onset and progression by quantifying ventricular and total brain areas of H&E-stained sections from embryonic day 17 (E17) to birth (P0) (n≥3 per group and genotype). We performed Evans blue dye studies in P0 and adult mice (n≥5 per group and genotype) to determine whether the hydrocephalus is communicating or obstructive. To examine whether impaired apoptosis of neural progenitor cells is involved in the pathophysiology, we performed TUNEL assays in periventricular regions early in the development of hydrocephalus (n≥3 per group and genotype). Finally, we measured CSF electrolytes, glucose, and osmolality in adult mice (n≥5 per group and genotype). RESULTS: Ventriculomegaly in BBS3 KO mice appears as early as E17 (p<0.05, Student's t test). Impaired flow of Evans blue dye is seen in 60% of P0 KO pups and 100% of adult KO mice, consistent with obstructive hydrocephalus. An approximately 40% decrease in apoptosis of cells in the cerebellar ventricular zone is seen in KO compared to WT (p<0.05, ANOVA and Tukey tests). Adult CSF composition is the same between KO and controls, although glucose is diminished in KO animals (p<0.001 by Welch t test). CONCLUSIONS: BBS3 KO mice develop fetal-onset hydrocephalus that progresses to a severe form of obstructive hydrocephalus. These KO mice display a significant reduction in apoptosis in periventricular regions relative to controls, suggesting an accumulation of neural progenitor cells. Further studies are needed to determine whether the accumulation of these cells underlies obstructive hydrocephalus in BBS. Gestational diabetes is a pathological state where the fetus is exposed to hyperglycemia during a critical developmental window that increases the risk for metabolic and age-related diseases. Implication of cellular stress in both aging and metabolic dysfunction is well established, however, the impact of high glucose on oxidative stress mechanisms remain unclear. We hypothesize that hyperglycemia in utero alters the stress response of umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). METHODS: MSCs were collected from umbilical cord of term large for gestational age infants of women with gestational diabetes (LGA-GDM, n=6) and appropriate growth, non-diabetic controls (Control, n=6). To measure specific effects of hyperglycemia, MSC of controls exposed to 5 days of high glucose (25mM) were added for comparison (Control-HG, n=4). To determine response to cellular stress (H2O2 treatment), we measured DNA damage (Comet Assay), levels of reactive oxygen species ( CONCLUSIONS: Intrauterine exposure to hyperglycemia via maternal gestational diabetes demonstrates early protective responses to oxidative stress. While these early effects appear beneficial, we propose that repeated hyper-activation over time leads to deleterious effects and may help explain a mechanism for the development of metabolic and age-related diseases earlier in life. Bisphenol BPA exposure has been associated with metabolic alterations leading to obesity. However, sex-based differences in genes involved in metabolism after BPA exposure have not been well characterized. METHODS: Pregnant CD-1 mice were treated with BPA or vehicle control on days 9-18 of gestation. Six weeks after birth, female offspring were ovariectomized. Female and male pups were subsequently treated with 300 ng estradiol (E2) or vehicle (ip). An Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Gene 2.0 ST microarray was conducted to determine differentially expressed genes between the treated and controls. Liver gene expression was analyzed to determine differentially expressed genes due to fetal BPA exposure in both males and females. qRT-PCR was used to quantify differences in gene expression and altered protein expression was confirmed by western blot analysis. RESULTS: Fetal BPA exposure altered liver gene expression, including genes involved in glucose and lipid metabolism and transportation, in both female and male mice. In the female livers, 113 genes were determined to be differentially regulated between the mice treated with BPA compared to the control mice (70 downregulated, and 43 upregulated). In the male livers, 47 genes were differentially expressed between the mice in the BPA treated group and the control group (32 upregulated and 15 downregulated). We selected 12 genes in females (such as G6pc, Cox1, and Nucb2) and 7 genes in males (including Cox1, Cyp21a1, and Sort1) for further validation. Estrogen receptor alpha and beta gene expression was upregulated in females and downregulated in males. Expression in response to estradiol treatment was enhanced in females and repressed in males. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report to demonstrate programming of gene expression in the liver as a sexually dimorphic response to BPA exposure in utero. BPA exposure induces an enhanced response to estrogens in females, versus a repressed response in males. This aberrant response to estrogens is a potential mechanism for explaining the increased incidence of estrogen related metabolic disorders and obesity seen after exposure to endocrine disruptors. The Adult physiology and behaviour is influenced by early life environment, such as maternal diet and fetal exposure to synthetic glucocorticoids. An obesogenic diet can influence endogenous glucocorticoid levels, but whether a maternal obesogenic diet affects fetal exposure to maternal glucocorticoids is unknown. We investigated the effects of an obesogenic diet on circulating maternal and fetal glucocorticoid levels, and expression of placental 11β-HSD2, which inactivates glucocorticoids, acting as a barrier to their transfer from the mother to the fetus. Because of known interactions between glucocorticoids and leptin, we also measured maternal and fetal leptin levels. We fed female mice a high fat/ high sucrose diet (HF; 45% kcal fat, 17% kcal sucrose) or a nutrient-matched low fat, no sucrose control diet (LF; 10% kcal fat) for 13 weeks prior to and throughout pregnancy. RESULTS: HF females had reduced glucose tolerance, weighed more throughout pregnancy and had greater adiposity (P < 0.01 for all), as expected. At 17 days of gestation, HF females had 21% lower circulating corticosterone (CORT) levels than LF females (P < 0.01). Interestingly, HF male fetuses had 20% higher plasma CORT than LF male fetuses (P = 0.04), with no effect of maternal diet in female fetuses (P = 0.12). The contrast between maternal and fetal male CORT patterns suggested that 11β-HSD2 was downregulated in the placentae of male fetuses of HF mothers, allowing increased transfer of maternal CORT. Alternatively, placental 11β-HSD1, which converts inactive glucocorticoids to their active form, might be upregulated. However, we observed no effect of maternal diet on placental expression of 11β-HSD1 or 2 mRNA (P > 0.26 for both). There was no effect of maternal diet on fetal mass, placental mass, or fetal/ placental mass ratio (P > 0.26 for all). HF females consumed 25-35% less grams of food per day than LF females by the end of gestation (P < 0.01), such that there was no difference in caloric intake (P = 0.20). HF mothers had 40% higher leptin levels (P = 0.03), but there was no effect of diet on fetal leptin levels (P = 0.49). CONCLUSIONS: Reduced CORT and increased leptin in HF mothers may have reduced maternal food consumption to protect fetuses from fetal over-nutrition and overgrowth. We are investigating the causes and consequences of increased CORT levels in the male fetuses of HF mothers. Maternal during the perinatal period causes offspring obesity. Obesity is associated with reduced energy expenditure, which is influenced by brown adipose tissue (BAT) activity. The thermogenic function of BAT is stimulated by SNS and can be inhibited by the endocannabinoid system (ECS) that is over active in obesity. The ECS components are endocannabinoids, cannabinoid receptors (Cnr1, Cnr2), fatty acid amide hydrolase (Faah) and monoacylglycerol lipase (Mgll). We hypothesize that maternal HFD will alter ECS mRNA levels, lipid accumulation, and the thermogenic proteins uncoupling protein (UCP1) and beta3 adrenergic receptor (ARβ3) in BAT of male and female rat offspring at weaning. METHODS: Female rats received a standard diet (C; 9% fat) or a HFD (28% fat) during perinatal period. At weaning, offspring from C and HFD dams were killed to harvest the BAT for histology and molecular analysis. We quantified Cnr1, Cnr2, Faah and Mgll mRNA levels using real time RT-PCR, and UCP1 and ARβ3 protein content by western blotting. BAT lipid accumulation was evaluated by HE staining. Results are reported as HFD as % of change compared with sex-matched controls (*p<0.05). Maternal HFD increased body weight (male: +20%*; female: +20%*), visceral adiposity (male: 4 fold increase*; Female: 3 fold increase*) and BAT weight (male: +28%*; female: +40%*) and lipid accumulation (male: +15%*; female: +29%*) in the offspring at weaning. Maternal HFD decreased BAT Cnr1 mRNA levels in male and female pups (-68%* and -75%*, respectively), while decreased Cnr2 mRNA levels only in male pups (-39%*). Maternal HFD also decreased Faah mRNA levels in BAT of male and female pups (-72%* and -69%*, respectively), with no changes in the expression of Mgll. Maternal HFD decreased ARβ3 content in BAT of male and female pups (-60%* and -50%*, respectively) and increased UCP1 content only in female pups (2 fold increase*). CONCLUSIONS: Perinatal maternal HFD decreases the expression of the endocannabinoid system in BAT of rat offspring associated with increased lipid accumulation and decreased ARβ3 content mostly indepedent of the gender. However, maternal HFD increases UCP1 only in female offspring, possibly because of estrogen stimulatory effect on thermogenesis.  The chick embryo is the only animal model to isolate the effects of the environment in programming the physiology of the adult offspring independent of changes in the mother and/or placenta. We used an integrative and longitudinal approach in the chick embryo and in the adult bird, combining ex vivo wire myography and in vivo studies of chronically-instrumented animals. We show significant programming of XO-derived ROS in NO biology that can be rescued by in ovo treatment with the XO inhibitor allopurinol in a model of developmental hypoxia. METHODS: Fertilized chicken eggs were incubated under normoxia or hypoxia (14% O 2 ) ± allopurinol treatment from day 13 of incubation (term is 21 d). Allopurinol (5 mg.kg -1 ) or vehicle (4M NaOH, 0.2µl) was injected daily into the air cell for 6 days. One cohort was investigated as embryos at 19 days. Another was allowed to hatch and raised until adulthood at 6 months. Adult birds were chronically instrumented under anaesthesia with catheters and a femoral Transonic flow probe to determine in vivo cardiovascular function. In both chick embryos and adult birds, femoral vessels were tested by wire myography with acetylcholine (Ach) ± the NOS inhibitor, LNAME, to determine NO-dependent relaxation. RESULTS: Hypoxic development impaired NO-dependent femoral relaxation in the chick embryo ( Fig. 1 a & b) . By adulthood, offspring of hypoxic incubation showed compensatory changes in NO biology, reflected ex vivo by enhanced NO-dependent femoral relaxation (c), and in vivo increased circulating NO-bioavailability (d) associated with decreased peripheral vascular resistance (e) and arterial blood pressure (e). Treatment of hypoxic embryos with allopurinol rescued the NO-dependent vasorelaxation in the chick embryo and normalised cardiovascular function at adulthood. CONCLUSIONS: This model isolates the direct contribution of XOderived oxidative stress in programming alterations in NO biology in adulthood following development under hypoxic conditions, giving insight to mechanism and intervention. INTRODUCTION: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is a liver disease that is characterized by hypercholanemia (increased serum bile acids (BA)) and dyslipidemia. We established that maternal cholestasis causes metabolic disease in the offspring. Specifically, we showed increased BMI and hip/waist girth in 16-year old children from cholestatic mothers. 18-week old females from cholestatic dams developed obesity and insulin resistance after a 6-week challenge with Western diet (WD). We hypothesize that ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) treatment in pregnancy can prevent fetoplacental dyslipidemia and metabolic disease of the offspring. METHODS: Cholestatic mice (fed cholic acid; CA) were fed with UDCA during pregnancy and were either sacrificed on gestational day 18 or alternatively allowed to deliver offspring. Offspring were sacrificed at 18 weeks of age after being fed a normal chow (NC) diet or a WD for 6 weeks. Biochemical profile, lipid gene expression pathways and morphometry were assessed. Each group consisted of at least 4 animals. Data analysis was performed by unpaired Student t test or ANOVA (p<0.05). RESULTS: UDCA did not improve morphometry or hypercholanemia of the cholestatic mother and fetus. However, it reversed the CA feedinginduced elevation of tauro-conjugated BA in both maternal serum and liver. Unexpectedly, tauro-conjugated BA levels were increased in the fetal circulation of cholestatic mice compared to the maternal serum levels and this was not corrected by UDCA. Nonetheless, UDCA had a beneficial effect on circulating and hepatic cholesterol and free fatty acid (FFA) concentrations in the mother and this was consistent with the gene expression profile of hepatic TG/FFA de novo biosynthesis pathways. In the fetus, UDCA improved hepatic CA-induced cholesterol and FFA and the same effect was observed in placenta. Moreover, offspring fed a WD had improved glucose tolerance when exposed to UDCA in utero. CONCLUSIONS: UDCA improves hypercholanemia and dyslipidemia in maternal cholestasis. Although UDCA does not improve the increased BA levels in the fetus, it improves fetal dyslipidemia and glucose tolerance in the 18-week old offspring. To investigate whether the association between the methylation of proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and lipid profiles of blood in obese and normal children and to search for the possibility of biomarker to predict metabolic syndrome using the methylation of POMC. We analyzed DNA methylation in the POMC exon 3 regions in blood from 20 obese and 20 normal children collected between 5 and 14 years of age by pyrosequencing. To clarify whether DNA methylation of POMC gene give an influence for gene expression, the expression level of mRNA in obese and normal children were examined by real time PCR. Serum triglyceride (TG), total cholesterol (TC) and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-c) were measured using an automatic analyzer. We divided subjects into three groups according to POMC methylation: the low (<25 th percentile), mid, and high methylation (>75 th percentile). Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) analyses was used to assess the association between the POMC methylation status and serum lipid profiles. The methylation percentages at the POMC at all CpG sites were significantly higher in obese children than normal children. In obese children, high DNA methylation group of CpG sites 1 and 4 at POMC gene exon 3were significantly associated with higher TG (P = 0.04) and all CpG sites were associated with higher HDL-c levels compared to the other groups (P =0.0001). POMC mRNA expressions in obese children were showed decreased trends than in normal children, although it was not significant. CONCLUSIONS: High POMC methylation at specific CpG sites in obese children was associated with higher TG and higher HDL-c than in normal children, suggesting that POMC methylation may be useful biomarker of future metabolic syndrome. Novel Better understanding and mitigation of noncommunicable disease (NCD) is recognised by Sustainable Development Goal #3 "Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all" as an international priority. Suboptimal fetal growth is associated with adultonset NCD and is likely partly influenced by genomic variation. We aimed to identify genetic variants influencing fetal growth and to investigate associations between these variants and adult metabolic parameters. A genome wide association study (GWAS) of longitudinal femur length, head and abdominal circumference (AC), between 18-38 weeks was performed in the Raine pregnancy cohort (n=1377) to identify gene regions associated with fetal growth. Significant GWAS findings were assessed by ExomeChip Microarray (ECM) with summed number of minor alleles of non-synonymous variants within the identified gene regions. Significant regions after multiple testing correction were tested against 17-and 20-year body mass index (BMI) and fasting lipids, glucose and insulin. Corrected mixed models were used for longitudinal biometry analyses; mixed models and multivariate regression were used to model adult phenotypes. RESULTS: Variation in novel gene regions within SLC39A11, ECHDC3, ANGPTL5 and LOXHD1 had significant associations with both fetal growth and adult metabolic phenotypes. Significant gene-environment interactions modulated the relationship between genotype and metabolic phenotype. Variants in SLC39A11 were associated with increased AC growth. Additionally, the associations with adult phenotypes were dependent upon birth weight (BW), with insulin resistance (HOMA-IR p=0.005, insulin p=0.004) occurring in those at the extremes of BW and dyslipidemia (HDL-C p=0.019) in those of low BW. CONCLUSIONS: Common genomic variants influence fetal growth and adult metabolic phenotypes and play roles in the developmental origins of the metabolic syndrome. Early life environmental influences of growth may further modulate the phenotypic expression of an individual's genotype. These gene-environment interactions could potentially be exploited as early life interventions for individuals at high genetic risk of adult metabolic disease. In the past 40 years, the use of plastics (e.g., water bottles) containing bisphenol A (BPA) has accelerated in parallel to obesity rates. Exposure to BPA is associated with increased adiposity, but the mechanism by which this occurs is unknown. In rodents, adipose tissue overexpression of hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11βHSD1), which converts inactive to active corticosterone, results in adult obesity and metabolic syndrome. We hypothesized that perinatal BPA-mediated effects on glucocorticoid pathways contribute to offspring obesity, specifically through increased local adipose tissue glucocorticoid exposure or activation of the HPA axis. METHODS: Female rats had access to drinking water (control group) or drinking water containing BPA (5mg/L; BPA group) two weeks prior to mating and throughout pregnancy and lactation. Standardized litters were nursed by the same dam. At 3 weeks of age, male offspring body weights and adiposity (DEXA) were evaluated, plasma and subcutaneous adipose tissue were collected, and offspring were weaned with no further BPA treatment. HPA axis function was evaluated by corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH; 10 µg/kg, i.p) challenge at 13 months. Plasma ACTH and corticosterone concentrations were determined by ELISA and protein abundance of the adipose glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and 11βHSD1 and 11βHSD2 enzymes were determined by Western Blot. Data were compared by two-way repeated measures ANOVA or Student's t-test, as appropriate. RESULTS: At 3 weeks of age, male BPA-offspring demonstrated increased body weights (53±1 vs 46±2 g; P<0.05) and body fat (9.7±1.4 vs 6.6±0.7 g; P<0.05). The protein abundance of 11βHSD2 was decreased (0.6-fold; P<0.05) in adipose tissue from BPA compared with control males, though there was no change in 11βHSD1 or GR expression. There were no differences in basal plasma concentrations of corticosterone between BPA and control male offspring at 3 weeks or 13 months, nor in the area under the curves for ACTH and corticosterone responses to CRH in adulthood. CONCLUSIONS: BPA-exposed weanlings exhibit reduced adipose 11βHSD2, suggesting an enhanced local adipose corticosterone effect. As the balance of 11βHSD1 and 11βHSD2 action serves as a modulator of energy partitioning, we speculate that the reduced 11βHSD2 induces adipocyte differentiation and increased serum lipids in BPA offspring. Heart. Jane K Cleal, 1 Hugh Thomas, 1 Felino R Cagampang, 1 Bas B van Rijn. 1,2 1 Institute for Developmental Sciences, Southampton, United Kingdom; 2 UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. A maternal high fat (HF) diet and obesity during pregnancy influence the offspring's postnatal health. In our mouse model of obesity, maternal HF feeding alters blood pressure and heart size in the offspring. MicroRNAs are implicated in cardiac differentiation and remodelling and affect the susceptibility to cardiovascular diseases, including heart failure and ischemic heart disease. We investigated whether the maternal HF diet alters miRNA expression within the fetal heart which may underlie the postnatal cardiovascular phenotype. METHODS: Female C57/BL6J mice were fed either a HF (45% kcal fat, n=4) or control chow (C, 7% kcal fat, n=4) diet 6 weeks prior to conception and throughout pregnancy. On day 16 of pregnancy dams were killed, fetuses collected and the fetal hearts dissected, snap frozen and stored at -80C. MicroRNA expression was measured using small RNA sequencing (Illumina miRNA-Seq, Expression Analysis, USA). Differential expression analysis identified both up and down-regulated miRNAs (p<0.05) and pathway analysis was carried out using DIANA miRPath. RESULTS: Thirty-three miRNAs were expressed differentially between both groups, including upregulation in HF of miR-470-5p, miR-299-3p, miR-574-5p and downregulation in HF of miR-29a-5p, miR-129-1-3p and miR-23a-5p. MicroRNA-regulated pathways potentially upregulated by a maternal HF diet include hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, circadian rhythm and mTOR signalling. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified miRNAs that alter biological pathways linked to cardiovascular and metabolic pathologies in response to maternal HF feeding. This suggests that HF exposure during fetal development could alter the expression of miRNAs in the heart that may underlie the associated cardiovascular dysfunction in postnatal life. INTRODUCTION: Glucocorticoids (GC) play an important role in terminal differentiation of adipose tissue (AT) cells, in particular adipocytes. Exposure to abnormally high levels of GC in utero has been shown to be associated with changes in function and structure of different organs in the adult; one of the accepted mechanism underlying the concept of fetal programming. Epigenetic regulation of gene expression is thought to be one of the important drivers of fetal programming. Micro RNA (miR), a particular species of non-cding RNA is one of the accepted mechanisms for epigenetic regulation of gene expression. Therefore, we hypothesize that antenatal exposure to abnormally high concentrations of GC alters the expression of miR, thus the development of white adipose tissue an ultimately AT function. METHODS: Pregnant sheep were treated with two IM doses of betamethasone (Beta, 0.17 mg/kg) or vehicle (V) 24-h apart at 80 days gestation and allowed to deliver at term. At 18 months of age omental adipose tissue was harvested. AT mRNA was extracted and cDNA libraries prepared. RNA Seq technology was used to characterize the sequence and annotation of miRs expressed in omental AT of adult female sheep. Data are expressed as Mean±SEM and were analyzed by t-test. We identified ten distinct miR species that were significantly altered in AT. Interestingly, expression levels of all miR with statistically significant changes showed downregulation. The decrease in miR expression rangeed between 0.24 and 0.85 of vehicle exposed (Table) . * Figure(s) will be available online. The sequences identified were confirmed to correspond to known ovine miRs. CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that prenatal exposure to a single course of GC at 0.55 gestation has long-term effects on adipose tissue. A significant downregulation of miRs with predicted targets in metaolic and inflammatory pathways were identified. Further studies are required to establish if these abnormalities are causally associated with the cardiometabolic alterations present in Beta exposed sheep. HL 68728 and HD 04784. Antenatal Glucocorticoid Exposure Affects Adipose Tissue in a Sex and Body Weight Dependent Manner. Jie Zhang, Angela G Massmann, Jorge P Figueroa. Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston Salem, NC, USA. We and others have shown that antenatal exposure to glucocorticoids (GC) is associated with significant cardiometabolic alterations. Our working hypothesis states that GC alters the development of white adipose tissue (WAT). This alteration plays a central role in the development of metabolic alterations in the adult offspring. The aims of the present study were to further characterize the effects of antenatal exposure to GC on glucose handling by concentrating on sex differences and the role of adipose tissue as a target of fetal programming. METHODS: Pregnant sheep were treated with two IM doses of betamethasone (Beta, 0.17 mg/kg) or vehicle (V) 24-h apart at 80 days gestation and allowed to deliver at term. At 9 mo of age, male (M) and female (F) sheep were randomly allocated to be fed at either 100% of nutritional allowance (Lean) or ad libitum for 3 mo (Obese). At one year of age omental (OM) and perirenal (PR) WAT was harvested from Beta (M; n=6; F; n=6 and V (M; n=6; F; n=6). mRNA was extracted for determining expression levels of angiotensinogen, ACE, ACE2 and PPARγ. Data are expressed as Mean±SEM and analyzed by ANOVA. RESULTS: Sex, obesity and Beta exposure had significant effects on mRNA expression of components of the Renin Angiotensin System (RAS). Beta increased Aogen and ACE1 mRNA in OM and PR fat in F and M( p<0.05 by Three way ANOVA). Aogen and ACE1 mRNA were significantly higher in F (p< 0.05 by Three way ANOVA). Obesity increased Aogen in F but had no effect on ACE1 in either M or F ACE1. PPARγ? mRNA in OM and PR fat exhibited a significant sex (F=42.8; p<0.01) and obesity (F=6.9; p<0.05) effect and was significantly higher in M ( p<0.01 by Three way ANOVA). *Figure(s) will be available online. The results presented in this study are important as we provide evidence showing that Beta exposure programs WAT development in a sex-dependent manner and that obesity unmasks latent insulin resistance in the male offspring. The study also confirms, once again, that antenatal exposure to clinically relevant doses of betamethasone is associated with alterations in adult sheep consistent with the concept of fetal programming. HL 68728 and HD 04784. Sex We have characterized a gestational low protein rat model that leads to insulin resistance and glucose intolerance during their adult life without obesity.We aimed to identify if the regulation of hepatic glucose production via gluconeogenesis (GNG) and glycogenolysis (GYG) is affected and if there are any sex differences. METHODS: Pregnant rats were fed control (20% protein) or isocaloric low protein (LP) (6%) diet from gestational day 4 until delivery. Standard diet was given during lactation and to pups after weaning. Fasting rats received a primed constant rate infusion of [6,6-2 H 2 ] glucose. Blood samples were drawn during steady states after 4h of fasting and following a euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp. Endogenous glucose production and a fraction of glucose derived from GNG pathway under fasting and euglycemic states were measured from steady state glucose enrichments after the infusion of [6,6-2 H 2 ] glucose and 2 H 2 O tracers utilizing GCMS methodology. GYG was determined by calculating the difference between total and GNG. Hepatic gene expression of molecules involved in GNG and GYG were quantified using qPCR. RESULTS: Liver regulates glucose homeostasis by increasing glucose production during fasting and suppressing during the fed state. Glucose production was normal during fasting (Males: 7.3 mg/kg*min in controls & 7.5mg/kg*min in LP offspring, Females: 12.4mg/kg*min in controls & 10.3 mg/kg*min in LP). However under the simulated fed condition, glucose production was suppressed in controls (Males: 5mg/kg*min & Females: 6mg/kg*min) but not in LP rats (Males: 7.3mg/kg*min & Females: 10.2mg/kg*min). Thus LP rats showed inefficient suppression of glucose production (Males: 31% in controls vs. 2% in LP; Females: 47% in controls vs. 0% in LP) in a simulated fed state. Differential analysis shows that suppression of both GNG and GYG under fed state is affected in these LP programmed rats. These effects were greater in females when compared to males. Further, key genes involved in these processes such as G6Pase, Pepck, pyruvate carboxylase and glycogen phosphorylase in liver are dysregulated. CONCLUSIONS: Our data shows impaired suppression of hepatic glucose production via GNG and GYG in gestational LP programmed rats with greater effects on females. The age at which women deliver their first child is steadily increasing. Advanced maternal age (≥35 years) is associated with increased perinatal morbidity and mortality. Although evidence suggests that the risk of cardiovascular disease is increased in offspring from compromised pregnancies, little is known about the impact of advanced maternal age on developmental programming of vascular function in the offspring. We hypothesized that vascular reactivity would be impaired in male and female offspring born from aged compared to young rat dams. Aged female Sprague Dawley rats (9.5 months; approximate to a 35 year old woman) and young controls (4 months) were mated with young males. In both male and female offspring at 4 months of age, mesenteric artery vascular reactivity was assessed using wire myography. RESULTS: At 4 months, mean systolic blood pressure was not different in male or female offspring of aged dams compared to controls, however endothelial function was altered. Male offspring from aged dams had reduced endothelium-dependent (methacholine; MCh) relaxation ( CONCLUSIONS: In a rat model of advanced maternal age, endotheliumdependent relaxation was impaired in male offspring from aged dams, via a prostaglandin-dependent vasoconstrictor (thromboxane). These data demonstrate developmental programming effects on vascular function in offspring from aged rats, which may contribute to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease in adulthood.  Ewes were fed an obesogenic diet (150% requirements; MO; n=7), or 100% requirements (CTR, n=7) from 60 d prior to conception. Fetal hearts were removed following exsanguination under general anesthesia at 0.9G. and perfused for cardiomyocyte isolation in a Langendorff system. RESULTS: MO increased left (LV) and right (RV) ventricular cardiomyocyte resting cell length and decreased peak shortening (PS) (Fig 1) . There were no significant changes in maximal shortening and relengthening velocitiy or time to peak shortening (TPS) and relengthening (TR) in LV. However, RV, time to 90% peak shortening was shorter in MO fetuses. MO RV and LV cardiomyocytes showed elevated resting and electrically-stimulated increase in intracellular Ca 2+ levels with little change in intracellular Ca 2+ decay rates. * Figure(s) While previous studies have focused on human placenta and cord blood as biological pools for studying developmental programming, the neonatal foreskin has not been evaluated as a tissue of interest. Foreskin has the potential to allow evaluation of a differentiated tissue of interest. The purpose of this study was to establish the use of neonatal foreskin as a model to examine developmental programming specifically in regards to insulin signaling and adipogenesis. METHODS: De-identified neonatal foreskins (n = 8) were collected immediately following planned circumcisions and were dissected to separate the epidermal/dermal and hypodermal layers. Primary dermal fibroblasts were isolated and grown in culture. One set of cells were grown in media specifically designed to induce adipogenesis. Following adipocyte differentiation, mRNA was extracted for quantification of markers of adipocyte differentiation (fatty acid binding protein 4, forkhead box 01, and fatty acid transport protein 4). Protein was also collected and levels of fatty acid binding protein 4 were assayed. Primary dermal fibroblasts (n=3) were stimulated with 100 nM insulin in order to evaluate insulin signaling in a second set of cultured cells. Data were analyzed by student's t test. RESULTS: Human neonatal foreskin primary fibroblasts differentiate into lipid-loaded cells when stimulated with an adipocyte differentiation cocktail. Further, mRNA levels of fatty acid binding protein 4, forkhead box 01, and fatty acid transport protein 4 were significantly elevated following adipogenesis (p < 0.05 for each comparison). Protein levels of fatty acid binding protein 4 were also significantly increased (P < 0.05). Primary dermal fibroblasts had significantly increased phosphorylation of protein kinase B (AKT) when stimulated with insulin (p < 0.05), suggesting that insulin signaling pathways are upregulated. The neonatal foreskin should be considered as a tissue of interest to assess dysfunctional insulin signaling and adipocyte differentiation in response to various maternal exposures during pregnancy. Utilizing this model provides the foundation for future studies to predict pediatric and adulthood obesity and potential diseases related to insulin resistance. Maternal Maternal tobacco smoke (MTS) exposure sexspecifically programs adult-onset disease in humans and rat models. The programming of many adult-diseases involves alterations in circulating fatty acid (FA) levels in the offspring. Maternal-fetal FA transfer is regulated by placental FA transporters. We previously showed that MTS exposure sex-specifically alters FA transporter expression in the rat. However, the effect of MTS on rat placental insufficiency, placental histology and fetal FA levels is unknown. We hypothesize that MTS exposure causes placental insufficiency, changes in placental histology, and sex-specific changes circulating fetal FA levels in the rat. METHODS: Pregnant rats were exposed to tobacco smoke (MTS) or room air (Control) from E11 to term (E21). Fetal and placental weights were measured at birth. Umbilical arterial blood flow was measured via Doppler ultrasound on E15 and E21. Placental sections were used for histological examination. Fetal serum FA levels were measured using direct transesterification and gas chromatography. RESULTS: MTS decreased placental and pup weight of female and male offspring compared to sex-matched control. MTS reduced umbilical arterial flow at E15 and E21 in female, and male placenta compared to sex-matched controls. Female and male MTS placentas had smaller labyrinth layer size, retention of glycogen-rich cells and the presence of larger, immature appearing, trophoblastic giant cells. MTS did not significantly affect circulating fetal FA levels in female rat pups. However, MTS altered circulating fetal FA levels in male rat pups (decreased palmitoleic, oleic and docosapentaenoic acid, and increased docosatetraenoic acid). CONCLUSIONS: MTS exposure causes placental insufficiency, and changes in placental histology in female and male rat pups. Despite similar placental changes in both female and male rat pups, MTS sex-specifically alters circulating fetal FA levels in rat pups. We speculate that previously observed sex-specific differences in FA transporter expression may reflect sex-specific alterations in transcriptional regulation of transporters. Lower In humans lower maternal vitamin D status has been associated with altered bone size and structure. The fetus is reliant on maternal vitamin D status, and vitamin D deficiency affects women before and during pregnancy. However, there is little information to date linking fetal vitamin D status to bone growth and structure during fetal life. METHODS: Welsh mountain ewes were fed 100% nutrient requirements (C, 2000 IU/kg vitamin D3, n= 9), or a similar diet lacking the vitamin D3 supplement (VDD, 0 IU/kg vitamin D, n=10) from 17 days prior to conception until post-mortem. At 126-130 days of gestation ewes and singleton fetuses were killed (pentobarbitone overdose IV). Maternal and fetal serum levels of the total 25-hydroxyvitamin-D (25(OH)-D) were measured by HPLC tandem mass spectroscopy. 3-dimensional images of fetal femur, metatarsal and vertebra were captured using microcomputer tomography (SkyScan 1176 Bruker microCT). Data were analysed by student's t-test and linear regression with 25(OH)-D (adjusted for fetal age at post-mortem). RESULTS: Lower total fetal plasma 25(OH)-D concentration was associated with smaller trabecular thickness (B=0.0005, p=0.006, R 2 =0.363) and greater bone surface-to-volume ratio (B=-0.13, p=0.004, R 2 =0.390) in the fetal femur. In addition, lower total fetal plasma 25(OH)-D concentration was associated with greater fetal femur length (B=-0.078, p=0.016, R 2 =0.295). Bone length and structure were not significantly different between C and VDD groups. CONCLUSIONS: Our finding that lower fetal 25(OH)-D concentrations were associated with longer length and reduced trabecular thickness in the fetal femur could indicate an adaptive response, whereby bone length is preserved at the expense of strength. Our previous observations in this model of altered femoral artery vasodilatation in VDD group fetuses suggest that this skeletal effect may be mediated in part by altered perfusion of the hind limb. Such an adaptive strategy could have implications for stature and skeletal strength in later life. IUGR is associated with down-regulation of placental amino acid (AA) transporter expression and activity at birth; however it is unknown whether these changes are a cause or a consequence of IUGR in the human. We hypothesized that placental AA transport capacity is reduced prior to the onset of reduced fetal growth, at gestational day (GD) 120 (0.65 of gestation) in baboons with maternal nutrient restriction (MNR). METHODS: Pregnant baboons were fed either a control (n=8) or MNR diet (70% of control diet, n=9) from GD30. At GD120, fetuses and placentas were collected. Microvillous (MVM) and basal (BM) plasma membrane vesicles were isolated. System A and system L transport activity was determined in MVM, and leucine transporter activity was assessed in BM using radiolabeled substrates. MVM AA transporter isoform expression (SNAT1, 2, LAT1, 2) was measured using western blots. Maternal and fetal plasma concentrations of AA were determined using mass spectrometry. RESULTS: Fetal and placental weights were unaffected by MNR at GD120. MVM system A activity was reduced by 37% in MNR (p=0.03). MVM AA transporter protein expression was unchanged. MVM system L activity and BM leucine transporter activity were not significantly altered by MNR. Fetal plasma concentrations of the essential AA isoleucine and leucine were significantly reduced, while citrulline was increased (p<0.05) in MNR fetuses as compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: The reduction in plasma leucine and isoleucine in MNR fetuses may be caused by reduced activity of MVM system A, which is strongly coupled with the uptake of essential AA via system L. Placental AA transporter activity is reduced prior to onset of IUGR in MNR baboons at GD120 (0.65 of gestation). Reduced placental AA transport may therefore be a cause rather than a consequence of IUGR in non-human primates. Activity. Brad J Matushewski, Catherine Nevin, Bryan S Richardson. Western University, London, ON, Canada. INTRODUCTION: FGR is a risk factor for neurodevelopmental disorders including ADHD, schizophrenia, and autism with hippocampal and associated areas of the nervous system likely to be involved. Studies in FGR guinea pigs show aberrant hippocampal synapse formation and increased apoptosis, but there is no information on later neurobehavioural outcomes. We sought to determine whether MNR in guinea pigs leading to FGR offspring will impact neurobehavioural activity, thereby implicating early neuroanatomic disorder in later functional impairment with FGR. METHODS: Guinea pig sows were fed ad libitum (Control) or 70% of the control diet pre-pregnancy switching to 90% at mid-pregnancy (MNR) and continuing until weaning at ~14 days postnatal when MNR sows/neonates were switched to the control diet. At ~ 110 days postnatal, ie young adulthood, representative male and female offspring underwent open field monitoring of locomotor activity to assess anxiety-like behavior and Morris water maze (MWM) testing to assess spatial learning and memory retention with necropsy thereafter for neuroanatomic correlates. Results are presented as means ± SEM. RESULTS: FGR-MNR offspring (n=3males/6females) were 28% smaller at birth than the appropriate for gestational age (AGA)-Control offspring (n=2males/6females), 77±2 vs 107±3 gm (p<.001), while at necropsy their weights were the same, 672±47 vs 668±22 gm. FGR-MNR adults showed a 4-fold reduction in ambulatory activity from that of the AGA-Controls (p<.05), and while vertical exploration was also reduced 4-fold in FGR-MNR adults, this was not significant. However, MWM testing of escape latency, escape success rate and distance traveled, showed that both animal groups were comparable in their ability to learn and re-learn the hidden platform location. CONCLUSIONS: MNR in guinea pigs leads to FGR offspring with catch-up growth during the neonatal/adolescent period. These FGR-MNR offspring show reduced open field locomotor activity into adulthood, although spatial learning and memory retention as assessed by MWM testing appear intact. Accordingly, aberrant neuroanatomic development in FGR guinea pigs, including that in the hippocampus, may underlie later inhibition of locomotor activity as the phenotypic expression for this outcome. In many preeclamptic (PE) pregnancies, maternal plasma is low in the placentally-produced angiokine "placental growth factor" (PGF). Offspring from PE pregnancies (PE-F1s) have unexplained higher risks for hypertension, cognitive impairment, and stroke. Pgf -/mice have reduced decidual and placental vascular branching and most experience stroke after common carotid artery occlusion. We hypothesized that PGF deficiency in mice or humans diminishes fetal brain vascular development impairing cognition and elevating stroke risk. METHODS: Pgf -/and Pgf +/+ brain vascular and structural anatomy were compared by whole mount immunohistochemistry, micro-CT, and MRI. Cognition and behaviour were assessed by paradigms testing depression, spatial learning, short and long term memory, activity, and anxiety. Ten pairs of PE-F1 or control children aged 7-10 were analysed for cognitive function (psychometrics, eye tracking) and brain structure through MRI/ MRA. Term maternal plasmas were analysed for PGF. RESULTS: Pgf -/brain vasculature was deficient from midgestation and abnormally patterned compared to Pgf +/+ . Cognitive and behavioural tests revealed numerous, sexually dimorphic impairments in Pgf -/mice. In PE-F1s, brain vascular radii were reduced in the occipital and parietal lobes compared to controls. PE-F1s had regional brain volume enlargements (cerebellum, brainstem, temporal lobe, and right and left amygdalae). PE-F1s showed functional impairments in working memory and visuospatial processing. PGF was 7x lower in maternal plasma from PE-F1s. CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals a formerly unknown link between PGF expression, brain vascular development, and cognitive function in mice. Child pilot study data suggest that a PE gestational experience associated with low maternal PGF also depresses brain vascular development. Development of predictive, image-based biomarkers to identify affected children would be valuable if these results are confirmed in a larger study. (1). We hypothesized that learning impairment involves the following mechanisms: 1) impaired spatial learning in the Morris Water Maze (MWM) task; 2) hippocampal neuronal fine structure changes and 3) altered corticosterone production. We studied male offspring whose mothers ate either control (C) (20% casein) or restricted (R) (10% casein) isocaloric diet in pregnancy. After weaning all pups ate C diet. At postnatal day 108 male offspring were tested in the MWM. At post natal day 110 serum corticosterone was determined and brains obtained to measure in CA3: a) stratum lucidum (SL) mossy fiber area and b) total spine density and mushroom spine in the basal dendrites of stratum orians (SO) by Timm's silver sulfide technique and by analysis on rapid Golgi stained, respectively. Data M ± SEM; Analysis t-test, p<0.05. RESULTS: Serum corticosterone and escape latency to locate the platform area after 24 h of learning (Fig 1A,B) were higher in R vs C; R offspring showed reduction in the suprapyramidal bundle of the mossy fiber area (Fig 1C) , total spine ( Fig 1D) and mushroom spine (Fig 1E) in comparison with C. *Figure(s) will be available online. Fig 1: Post natal day 110 A) corticosterone , B) MWM: latency (sec) to locate the platform area (spatial memory), C) mossy fiber area in SL, D) total spine density and E) mushroom spine in SO. p<0.05 * vs C. CONCLUSIONS: MPR during pregnancy delays male offspring spatial acquisition and memory retention due to alterations in the hippocampal pre-synaptic (mossy fiber) and post-synaptic (spine density) elements and corticosterone hyperactivity as potential mechanisms to explain the observed learning deficits. Competition hypothesis predicts nonhuman primate (NHP) mothers in poor physical condition produce more sons in species in which males have more flexibility in dominance rank. 3,4 NHP studies usually rely on dominance rank as an indirect measure of maternal condition; findings are mixed. Using our well-established baboon (Papio hamadryas) models of moderate global maternal nutrient reduction (MNR) and maternal obesity (OB), we hypothesized MNR mothers carry more males than control (CTR) and OB, and low rank carry more males than high. The sample was 319 pregnancies; before and during pregnancy CTR ate ad lib, OB ate obesogenic diet, and MNR ate 30% less food than CTR. Mothers were ranked as high, medium, or low based on behavioral observations. Hypotheses were tested with chi-square. Student's t-tests analyzed if maternal age at conception, pre-pregnancy weight, or delivery weight were related to offspring sex. Mothers of m and f had similar pre-pregnancy weight (P=0.8), delivery weight (P=0.5), and age (P=0.7). CONCLUSIONS: The models studied provide a novel and precise test of effects of maternal body condition on offspring sex. Results did not support hypotheses. Explanations for equal BSR include baboon social and biological characteristics, captivity interferes with patterns of sex allocation, effects of interacting variables cancel one another out, and/or sample size too small to detect meaningful differences. Identifying factors influencing BSR builds understanding of how in utero environment affects offspring development. During recent decades, obesity is on the rise as are complications as a result of obesity. It's estimated that one-third of the American population is obese leading to multiple co-morbidities including diabetes mellitus (DM). So far there is no study looking into the correlation between BMI and placental pathology with related pregnancy outcome in the population with pregestational diabetes. Current study aimed to fill such a blank. This was a retrospective cohort study. Women were identified through registration in the Diabetes in Pregnancy Program from 2003 to 2011. Placental pathology report and related pregnancy information were extracted by chart review and stratified by BMI (<25, 25-30, >30) measured at first prenatal visit, in both type 1 (T1DM) and type 2 (T2DM) populations. Data analysis was performed with the SAS program. Categorical variables were compared by Chi-square 1 or Fisher's exact test 2 . Continuous variables were compared using t-test 3 . P<0.05 is considered statistically significant. RESULTS: Total 293 gravida were identified with placental pathology reports, including 117 T1DM and 176 T2DM. In T1DM, there were more "increased perivillous fibrin/fibrinoid deposition" in the obese group (BMI >30, P = 0.006). There were significantly less LGA placentas in the lean group (BMI<25) compared to the other 2 groups (P < 0.05). In T2DM, the prevalence of preeclampsia is significantly higher with the obese group (P=0.03), as well as the incident of adverse outcome (P = 0.03). CONCLUSIONS: Current study for the first time reported placental pathology and perinatal outcome stratified by BMI in pregnancies with pregestational diabetes. In T1DM, there were significant different placental pathologies among the 3 groups. In T2DM, the obese group had the highest incidences of adverse pregnancy outcome, esp., preeclampsia. More studies are needed to study the impact of BMI in this patient population. Melatonin Activates NRF2 and Autophagy in Human Placental Trophoblasts. Lucas Sagrillo-Fagundes, Josianne Bienvenue-Pariseault, Cathy Vallancourt. INRS, Laval, QC, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Melatonin in produced in human trophoblast cells and protects placenta against hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R) induced oxidative and apoptosis damage, as observed in pregnancy disorders. Autophagy is an important pathway to degrade damaged cellular content. Nrf2 is a transcription factor that induces the expression of almost a hundred protective genes. Autophagy and Nrf2 pathways are related by positive feedback mechanisms. The objective of this study is to determine how melatonin modulates autophagy and NRF2 pathways to protect human trophoblast against H/R-damage. METHODS: Primary villous cytotrophoblasts (vCTB) isolated from normal term placenta were maintained in normoxia (8% O 2 ) during 72 h (to differentiate into syncytiotrophoblast (STB)) and then exposed to H/R (0.5% of O 2 (4 h)), or normoxia in presence or absence of 1 mM melatonin. Protein expression was analyzed by western blot. RESULTS: H/R and 1 mM melatonin induce by 1.5 fold (p<0.05) LC3B expression in STB *Figure(s) will be available online. Nrf2 is activated under H/R in STB only after treatment with melatonin. In this case, Nrf2 expression doubles (p<0.034). Expression of beclin-1 (responsible for the first step of autophagy) is increased by 115% in STB exposed to H/R and treated with melatonin * Figure(s) will be available online. BeWo cells (placental tumor) were transfected with siRNA to knockdown MT1 and MT2 (melatonin receptors). Double knockdown siMT1 and siMT2 decrease the expression of ATG7 under normoxia and H/R (p<0.05). The protective effects of melatonin tested in a number of clinical trials to treat fetal malformations and placental dysfunctions could be due to the reestablishment of the homeostasis via increase of autophagy and Nrf2 activation. Correlation We have previously shown that placental villous TNFα levels in normal pregnancy peak in the 2 nd trimester. In the present study, we investigated a) the patterns of changes in placental MMP9 in normal human gestation in the same tissues that were previously analyzed for TNFα; and b) the correlation between placental MMP9 and TNFα. In an IRB approved study, placentas were obtained from normal pregnant women who underwent elective abortion or term delivery. Tissues were collected within 10 minutes of completion of the procedure and dissected in saline to identify chorionic villi without associated decidua. TNFα level was previously analyzed using EIA kit from Cayman Chemicals (Ann Arbor, MI). MMP9 levels were analyzed using Human MMP9 DuoSet EIA kit from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN). For analysis, samples were grouped by trimester, and non-parametric tests considered p<0.05 as significant. The median MMP9 levels were highest in the 3 rd trimester. KW test revealed significant differences in MMP9 levels (p<0.0001) among the trimester groups. Spearman's correlation revealed significant positive correlation between MMP9 and TNFα both in the 1 st (rho=0.391, p<0.002) and 2 nd trimesters (rho=0.247, p<0.051) but not in the 3 rd trimester (rho=0.014, p=0.916). Partial correlation further revealed that after controlling for GA, the correlation between MMP9 and TNFα was only significant in the 2 nd trimester (r=0.300, p<0.018);not in the 1 st and 3 rd trimester.  Our findings suggest that a 2 nd trimester TNFa peak, and a significant positive correlation between TNFα and MMP9 in the 2 nd trimester may be essential for a successful pregnancy outcome; and that other placental factors may exert regulatory effects on the synthesis of MMP9 during normal human pregnancy. Short-term Effects of Simvastatin on Human Placental Chorionic Plate Artery Vascular Reactivity. Caitlin ML Wareing, Mark Wareing. The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Statins are known to have short-term (pleiotropic) effects on vascular function that are independent of their cholesterol lowering effects. Our group has previously shown in rats that these effects occur via the AMP-activated protein kinase/phospho-endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS)/nitric oxide (NO)-dependent pathway (1). We aimed to investigate if similar pleiotropic effects were present in human placental chorionic plate arteries (CPAs). METHODS: CPAs, isolated from placental biopsies (elective section from women (N=9) with normal uncomplicated pregnancies), were mounted on a wire myograph (2). Vessel viability was determined with 120mM potassium solution (KPSS) and U46619 (thromboxane-A2 mimetic; 10 -10 -2x10 -6 M). CPAs were exposed to simvastatin (SIM;10 -6 M) or diluent for 2h. Post-incubation, vessels were contracted with U46619 (10 -10 -2x10 -6 M). A subset of CPAs was contracted with U46619 (to 50% of the maximum contraction; EC 50 ) followed by addition of SNP (10 -10 -10 -5 M). Data are expressed as mean±SEM. RESULTS: CPAs had the characteristics of small arteries (n=36;190±8µm normalized diameter). Maximal contractions to KPSS and U46619 were 7.0±0.5kPa and 12.9±1.7kPa respectively (both n=36). Incubation with SIM did not significantly alter basal tone over the 2h incubation period  The expression of Slit2, Robo1 and Robo4 in term placental tissue was shown by immunohistochemistry. hPMSC-conditioned medium and human umbilical vein endothelial cells were studied for Slit2 and Robo receptor expression by immunoassay and RT-PCR. The effect of the conditioned medium of hPMSCs with or without Slit2 depletion on endothelial cells was investigated by in vitro angiogenesis using growth factor-reduced Matrigel. The Slit2 expression was observed in endothelial cells, trophoblast cells, and villous stroma. Robo1 and Robo4 stainings were found in endothelial cells. hPMSCs expressed Slit2 and both Robo1 and Robo4 were present in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells did not express Robo2 and Robo3. The hPMSC-conditioned medium and Slit2 recombinant protein significantly inhibited the endothelial cell migration, but not by the hPMSC-conditioned medium with Slit2 depletion. The hPMSC-conditioned medium and Slit2 significantly enhanced endothelial tube formation with increased cumulated tube length, polygonal network number and vessel branching point number compared to those of endothelial cells alone. Tube formation was inhibited by the depletion of Slit2 from the conditioned medium, or following the expression of Robo1, Robo4, and both receptor knockdown using small interfering RNA. Furthermore, co-immunoprecipitation revealed that Slit2 bound to Robo1 and Robo4. Robo1 interacted and formed a heterodimeric complex with Robo4. These results suggest the implication of both Robo receptors with Slit2 signaling, which is involved in endothelial cell angiogenesis. Slit2 in the conditioned medium of hPMSCs has functional effect on endothelial cells and may play a role in placental angiogenesis. . Changes in intracellular Superoxide/ROS generation (using MitoSox/DCF-DA) and mitochondrial membrane potential (by JC-1) were monitored by fluorescence microscopy. Western blotting was performed to examine the changes in key proteins (XO, CAT, SOD1, and SOD2) in response to treatment. Cytoprotective effect of treatments was also estimated via released LDH measurement. RESULTS: Reduction of ROS generation was accompanied by declension in J-monomer signal when cells were exposed to Rosigltiazone. The protein expression of Catalase (CAT) -a H 2 O 2 reducer-was increased significantly (p<0.05) by 1.35 and 1.56 folds at 50 and 100µM respectively, when compared to no-treatment control. The LDH release was dropped-off by 32 and 43 percent when cells were treated by 50 and 100µM concentration of Rosiglitazone respectively. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that Rosiglitazone, a PPARγ activator, induces the expression of a ROS scavenger key protein in trophoblast cells under hypoxia condition. It leads to enhanced cell survival, lower apoptosis rate and improved mitochondrial membrane potential. Our findings suggest that PPARγ agonists such the Rosiglitazone might be considered as anti-oxidant therapeutic interventions for treatment of placental complications associated with oxidative stress, such as preeclampsia. In previous studies, we detected high levels of expression of the cardiovascular transcription factor, Nkx2-5 in trophoblast cells of human placenta from cases of early onset and severe pre-eclampsia (EOSPE). These elevations are highly correlated with increased expression of the Preeclampsia (PE) marker sFlt-1, and the expression of an mRNA splicing factor, Sam68, which potentially mediates sFlt-1 production. Activation of Nkx2-5 in placental trophoblasts may contribute to EOSPE severity through increased placental sFlt-1 production. Nkx2-5 is also required for normal extraembryonic vascular development. Nkx2-5 knockouts (KO) have abnormal amniotic vessel formation and are embryonic lethal at midgestation (E9.5-10.5). While fetal demise has been ascribed to cardiac defects arising from Nkx2-5's role in heart development, we wish to explore a potential role for Nkx2-5 in placental development, and whether enhanced placental expression of Nkx2-5 precipitates a PE-like syndrome. METHODS: Histological analysis of Nkx2-5 WT and KO embryos, analysis of Nkx2-5 placental expression; Nkx2-5 over-expression in mouse placental trophoblasts; qPCR assay of Nkx2.5 and target gene expression; sFlt-1 ELISA; urine protein ELISA. RESULTS: Placentae from Nkx2-5 KO embryos display simplified villous branching structure, abnormal migration of trophoblastic giant cells (TGC), and abnormal development of decidual vessels. Over-expression of Nkx2-5 in select mouse TGC cytotrophoblasts results in abnormal placental histology, elevation of placental Sam68 expression, higher maternal serum sFlt-1 levels and mild proteinuria as compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: Nkx2-5 plays a potential role in normal placental development. Elevated placental Nkx2-5 expression may play a direct role in the genesis of PE via regulation of placental Sam68 and sFlt-1 production, and may represent abnormal reactivation of a fetal developmental program. 2) . A role for α2-ARs suppression of the anti-angiogenic effect of sFlt-1 was recently proposed, yet knowledge on involvement of α2-AR in the function of the placenta has not been investigated. METHODS: Placental biopsies were collected from 41 women in the following groups: 1) sPE (n=9, GA[31±1]wks); 2) sPE&IUGR (n=3, GA[29±2]wks); 3) idiopathic IUGR (n=5, GA[30±1]wks); 4) idiopathic preterm birth (iPTB, n=14, GA[31±1]wks) and 5) healthy term controls (n=10, GA[39±1]wks). Tissues were immunostained for α2a-, α2b-, α2c-ARs and phosphorylated-ERK(1/2)(p-ERK). The impact of α2c-AR on BeWo syncytialization induced by forskolin was studied in lentiviral α2c-AR knock-down experiments. UK14,304 (An α2-AR agonist) was used for pharmacologic stimulation. Expression of syncytins-1 and -2 (syncytialization markers) was assessed by qPCR. βhCG release was measured by ELISA as a reflection of trophoblastic secretory function. RESULTS: α2aand α2b-ARs localized to the myofibroblast layer of anchoring villous blood vessels. Interestingly, syncytio-, cyto-and extravillous trophoblasts all expressed significant levels of α2c-ARs. p-ERK(1/2) labeling mirrored that of α2-AR subtypes, suggesting receptor activation. sPE showed higher extravillous trophoblasts staining for the α2c-AR both in the presence (p=0.03) or absence (p=0.04) of IUGR. α2b and α2c-AR had the highest gene expression in sPE with IUGR. α2c-AR knockdown increased expression of syncytins-1 and -2, yet significantly decreased βhCG production under basal and forskolin-induced conditions (P<0.01). Pharmacologic stimulation of α2c-AR significantly decreased forskolin-induced βhCG production(P<0.05). Our results suggest that all α2-ARs subtypes are present and expressed in the human placenta. α2c-ARs along with the α2b-AR, may play a role in the pathogenesis of sPE especially when complicated by IUGR. α2c-ARs has a modulatory role in trophoblast syncytialization and secretory function. Little is known about the progression of the pathology. It is generally assumed that AIP becomes more severe as pregnancy progresses. We tested this idea by examining whether the ultrasound diagnostic marker, the area of confluence (A con ), increases with gestational age (GA). We have shown that A con is correlated with AIP severity, and has 100% specificity for AIP at 32 weeks GA. 1 METHODS: We examined serial A con values in 11 cases of placenta previa with AIP (10 percreta, 1 accreta) studied at 3 or more GAs. Sagittal volumes capturing equivalent areas of the placental bed were selected for every visit. A con was measured as previously published, blinded to GA and diagnosis. 1 A con was normalized by log transformation and a generalized linear mixed model was used to test the relationship between GA and log(A con ), regressing on the intercept and GA with the patient as a random factor. RESULTS: Cases were delivered at 33 +4 weeks +days (range 28 +3 -36 +2 ). All mothers and babies were discharged in good condition. GAs at which serial A con was measured ranged from 19 +4 to 34 +6 weeks. We found no increase in log(A con ) over GA (p=0.47). CONCLUSIONS: While A con did not increase with advancing gestation, this study is under-powered to detect small trends. An assumed GAdependent increase in AIP severity is one of the reasons cited by clinicians for early delivery. The absence of increase in A con in this study suggests the disease stabilizes. Therefore delivery for this reason alone may be contra-indicated. In asymptomatic women, pregnancy could be extended, perhaps reducing neonatal complications due to prematurity. However maternal morbidity is the countervailing factor, given that 5 of these 11 cases had emergent delivery due to PPROM or bleeding. A con may be useful in such decision-making. Placentas of obese women have high levels of lipid accumulation leading to lipotoxicity and increased inflammation,which may contribute to fetal adiposity.Omega-3 fatty acids(n-3 FA) such as docosahexanoate(DHA) and eicosapentanoate(EPA) alter FA metabolism in hepatocytes by decreasing synthesis and esterification of FA,though their effect on placental tissue is largely unknown.We hypothesized that 1)FA esterification is higher in placentas of obese vs lean women;2) n-3 treatment will decrease FA esterification in isolated trophoblasts in vitro. METHODS: Fatty acid esterification (accumulation) was measured in isolated placental trophoblast cells collected at scheduled term Cesarean delivery in healthy lean (BMI:22.6±1.5 kg/m 2 and GA 39±0.6wks,n=6) and obese women (37.7±7.1 kg/m 2 and GA 39.1±0.3wks,n=13),following treatment with 3 H-Palmitate (PA,100 µM) with or without DHA(50µM) and/or EPA(50µM) for 18h.Student's t-test was used to assess differences between lean and obese groups before n-3 treatment.One-way ANOVA was used to determine the effect of n-3 treatment compared to lean control. P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.  The higher FA esterification found in trophoblast cells of obese women may underlie the high placental lipid storage in these women.N-3 FA treatment of trophoblast cells of obese women reduced their ability to esterify and store lipids to levels observed in lean women,possibly reducing lipotoxicity and inflammation.Our data also suggests that elevated esterification and accumulation of placental lipids is necessary to detect an effect of n-3 treatment on lipid metabolism pathways. Circulating There are no accurate biomarkers to predict pregnancies at risk that may benefit from intervention. We have previously shown that circulating RNA may provide an insight into placental function and therefore we sought to determine if placental RNA in the maternal blood could identify pregnancies at risk of late onset FGR. METHODS: 600 women were recruited at 26-30 weeks gestation and maternal blood collected. The circulating placental transcriptome was compared between women who delivered a growth restricted baby > 36 weeks and women who delivered a well grown term baby (n=12 x 2) using Illumina HT-12 microarrays. Differentially expressed placental specific genes were validated using PCR arrays (TLDA). A gene signature to predict late onset FGR was validated using digital PCR to quantify the copy number of key genes in a nested case:control cohort (1:2). RESULTS: 40 women with late onset FGR were compared to 80 women with a well grown baby (bwt 2620g vs 3349g, p<0.05). Adverse outcomes occurred more frequently in the FGR cases compared to well grown controls, including operative delivery and neonatal admission (45% vs 23%, p<0.05). 37 placental specific genes were differentially expressed on the microarray *Figure(s) will be available online. , of which 7 were validated with PCR in the larger cohort (p<0.05) *Figure(s) will be available online. The gene signature predicted late onset FGR with an AUC of 0.75. CONCLUSIONS: The placental transcriptome in maternal blood at 26-30 weeks gestation can predict late onset FGR. Adverse outcomes may be prevented by early detection, improved surveillance and timely delivery. Armand-Frappier, Laval, QC, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Depression during pregnancy occurs in about 20% of women, of which 13% take antidepressants. SSRIs are the most commonly prescribed antidepressants for pregnant women, although their effects on placental function have never been studied. A successful pregnancy depends on healthy placental development and function. The extravillous trophoblast cells (evTBs), which invade the uterine wall, are crucial for embryo implantation and the adaptation of maternal spiral arteries. Poor invasion/migration of evTBs can cause important pregnancy complications such as preeclampsia and possibly maternal and fetal mortality. The aim of this study was to determine whether SSRIs commonly used during pregnancy affect migratory and invasive properties of JEG3 cells, used as a model of the evTBs. METHODS: JEG3 cells were treated with increasing concentrations (0.03-10 µM) of fluoxetine, norfluoxetine or sertraline. Cell proliferation was monitored in real-time using a cell impedance-based xCELLigence © system. JEG3 cell-cycle distribution was analyzed by flow cytometry. Migration was determined using a scratch test. Activities of metalloproteinases MMP-2 and MMP-9 (markers of invasion) were determined by gelatin zymography. RESULTS: Fluoxetine and sertraline significantly decreased JEG3 cell proliferation at 10 µM by 93% and 98%, respectively ([ Figure  1 ]-fluoxetine), compared to control, whereas norfluoxetine had no effect. Fluoxetine decreased the number of cells in the G2-M at 1 and 10 µM, and the number of cells in G0-G1 at 10 µM. None of the SSRIs affected JEG3 migration ([ Figure 2 ]-fluoxetine) or the activities of MMP-2 and MMP-9. Legend: Figure 1 : Effect of fluoxetine on extravillous trophoblast-like JEG3 cell proliferation determined by real-time impedance monitoring. Statistically significantly different from DMSO-treated cells. Figure 2 : Effect of fluoxetine on extravillous trophoblast-like JEG3 cell migration determined by scratch test. This study suggests that the SSRIs fluoxetine, norfluoxetine and sertraline do not alter extravillous trophoblast viability or migration at therapeutic levels. Our observations will be verified using primary cultures of evTBs and will include additional SSRIs. Kindlins Integrins are trans-membrane receptors that mediate cellextracellular matrix (ECM) and cell-cell adhesion. Trophoblast cells undergo changes in integrin expression (switching) as they differentiate into highly invasive cells. The Kindlin proteins are integrin activators that help mediate integrin-mediated signaling. Thus, it was hypothesized that Kindlin-1 and -2 would be highly expressed in trophoblast cells and mediate trophoblast -ECM interactions necessary for proper development. METHODS: Following ethics approval and written informed consent, placental villous tissue was obtained from patients undergoing elective terminations by dilatation and curettage at week 8-11(n=10) and 12-14 (n=8) of gestation, and from term deliveries at 37-40 weeks (n=10). Tissues were fixed, processed, paraffin embedded and tissue sections utilized for immunofluorescence analysis with Kindlin-1 or Kindlin-2 specific antisera. Additionally, HTR8-SVneo trophoblast cells were cultivated under standard conditions in supplemented RPMI 1640 media. Cells were transfected with Kindlin-1 or -2 specific siRNA or non-targeting siRNA (control) and used in cell viability and cell-substrate attachment assays. RESULTS: In villous cytotrophoblast, Kindlin-1 and -2 were membrane localized continuously around individual cells or only in basement membrane-associated sites where cytotrophoblast fusion with syncytiotrophoblast had occurred. In contrast, both Kindlins were always membrane localized around individual extravillous trophoblast cells. siRNA-mediated knockdown of Kindlin-2 resulted in significantly decreased trophoblast-substrate attachment relative to control cells (p<0.05). Knockdown of Kindlin-2 also resulted in significantly decreased cell viability relative to cells transfected with non-targeting siRNA (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Both Kindlin-1 and -2 are highly expressed in villous cytotrophoblast and extravillous trophoblast cells and Kindlin-2 modulates trophoblast-substrate adhesion. Kindlin-2 also appears to modulate substrate-dependent trophoblast cell viability. Receptor 2. Jesenia Acurio, 1 Felipe Troncoso, 1 Kurt Herlitz, 1 Claudio Aguayo, 2,3 Patricio Bertoglia, 4 Enrique Guzman-Gutierrez, 3,5 Ambart Covarrubias, 3,5 Gernot Desoye, 6 Carlos Escudero. are often hypervascularized. We aimed to analyze whether changes in phosphorylation of tyrosine 951 or tyrosine 1175 (pY951 or pY1175) of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (KDR) are associated with the proangiogenic state observed in placental from GDM. In placental from women with normal pregnancies (n=24) or GDM (n=18), we measured the relative expression of markers for endothelial cell number (CD31, CD34), VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (Flt-1), KDR, pY951 and pY1175 of KDR, and the proliferation marker Ki67 in placental homogenate. Proliferation and migration of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) obtained from normal pregnancy and GDM were determined in absence or presence of conditioned medium (CM) harvested from GDM or normoglycemic HUVEC cultures. RESULTS: CD31 and CD34 protein were significantly higher in GDM than normal pregnancy (p=0.02). Reduced levels (mRNA and protein) of Flt-1 associated with reduced mRNA (p<0.05 in all cases), but unchanged protein levels of KDR were found in placentas from GDM. KDR phosphorylation at Y951 was elevated (p=0.05), but was unaltered in Y1175 in placentas from GDM. This was paralleled by enhanced HUVEC migration, without changes in their proliferation. The latter is in line with unchanged Ki67 protein in total placental tissue. Conditioned medium harvested from GDM HUVEC cultures significantly enhanced KDR protein amount, cell migration, and tube formation capacity in HUVEC from normoglycemic pregnancies. The data suggest that GDM exhibit a proangiogenic state associated to reduced expression of Flt-1 but high pro-migratory activation of KDR. Notch signalling is evolutionarily conserved and critical for many biological processes including cell-fate determination and differentiation. Growing evidence implicates the Notch pathway in placental development. NOTCH has been associated with trophoblast differentiation and invasion in mice. We and others have previously shown that NOTCH pathway members are differentially expressed in placentas from pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia. Hence, we aimed to determine the role of NOTCH pathway in trophoblast and endothelial cell function in vitro. METHODS: HTR8/SVneo cells (first trimester extra villous trophoblast cell line) and human microvascular endothelial cells (HMECs) were treated with 5mM DAPT, a small molecule inhibitor of NOTCH, for 24 and 48 hours prior to running functional assays. NOTCH inhibition on (i) migration and invasion was tested using transwell assays; (ii) angiogenesis was assessed by matrigel tube formation assays. Effect of DAPT treatment on the downstream targets of NOTCH pathway was determined by by real-time PCR and western blotting. RESULTS: DAPT treatment inhibited the translocation of NICD (NOTCH Intracellular Domain) to the nucleus in HTR8/Svneo cells and had significantly lowered gene expressions of HES1 and HEY1 (both downstream targets of NOTCH), suggesting that treatment indeed inhibited Notch signaling. DAPT treatment significantly reduced invasion and migration of HTR8/SVneo cells in vitro. In addition, inhibition of NOTCH significantly inhibited the tube formation of HMECs. However, the treatment had no significant effect on cell viability. CONCLUSIONS: Our results imply that the Notch pathway regulates trophoblast invasion and migration and angiogenesis. Given that NOTCH pathway members have already been shown to be deregulated in placentas from pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia, a targeted induction of this pathway may have important therapeutic implications. Defining The progenitor cytotrophoblast of the human placenta can differentiate by fusion to the syncytiotrophoblast or invasive extravillous trophoblast. Rbfox2, an RNA-binding protein, controls tissuespecific alternative splicing in diverse processes such as epithelial to mesenchyme transition and myoblast cell fusion. The placenta represents a singular system where two diverse activities of Rbfox2 regulation, cell invasion and cell fusion, may be studied. Our preliminary results suggest that Rbfox2, by conferring mRNA diversity, may act as a master regulator in trophoblast differentiation to either the fusion or invasive pathways. In this investigation we characterize the contribution of Rbfox2 to trophoblast differentiation in mouse and human placenta. METHODS: Rbfox2 immunohistochemistry/immunofluorescence was performed on human and murine placental tissue sections in normal pregnancy and placental pathologies. Inhibition of Rbfox2 alternative splicing in isolated primary trophoblasts was evaluated by immunofluorescence and BhCG. RESULTS: Trophoblast lineage specific expression of Rbfox2 was observed in both normal and pathological human placentas. Rbfox2 is expressed in the progenitor cytotrophoblast, reduced in the terminally differentiated syncytiotrophoblast and conversely, highly expressed in an increasing gradient of expression in the invasive trophoblasts. Reduced Rbfox2 expression was observed in fused primary trophoblast cell culture with inhibition of Rbfox2 upregulating BhCG production. Murine Rbfox2 expression changes as gestation progresses. As compared to normal pregnancy, decreased staining was observed in a spontaneous abortion prone model, and more intense staining observed in a preeclampsia model. CONCLUSIONS: Rbfox2, an alternative splicing factor, is differentially expressed in specific trophoblast cell lineages and may act as the molecular switch determining the trophoblast differentiation pathway with implications to several human pregnancy disorders including preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction. INTRODUCTION: Placenta cell invasion mis-regulation is largely responsible for placental complications including accreta. Invasion processes are controlled by actin binding protein (ABP) mediated actin dynamic at invading cell edges. The ABP complexes profilin1/VASP pS157 promotes while cofilin1/VASP pS239 suppress cancer cell invasion via actin polymerization and stabilization, respectively. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a polyunsaturated fatty acid and dietary supplement, has been shown to alter invasive cellular phenotypes. We hypothesized ABP complexes are regulators of placenta cell invasion and are associated with placental disorders including accreta. Furthermore, we hypothesize that ABP are regulated DHA supplementation. Highly invasive and cancerous placenta epithelial choriocarcinoma cells (BeWo) were treated with DHA (30 µM for 6 and 24 h) and exposed to hyperoxia (35% O 2 for 6 and 24 h). ABP (profilin1, cofilin1, VASP, and phosphorylation of VASP at serine 157 and 239) expression, cell migration, and proliferation were studied by standardized protocols. To correlate in-vitro findings with placenta invasion disorders, hyper-invasive placenta accreta tissues were stained immunofluorescently with specific antibodies for each ABP and phalloidin for F-actin. Images were captured to locate extra villi cytothrophoblast at the leading edge of placenta invasion by florescent microscopy. In vitro and in human placenta accreta tissue staining analyses indicated higher expression of F-actin, profilin1, VASP pS157 and lower expression of cofilin1, VASP pS239 . Both hyperoxia and DHA treatment reversed this expression in-vitro. Moreover, both treatments significantly decreased BeWo cells migration and proliferation in comparison to untreated cells. These findings indicate a possible interaction of profilin1 with VASP pS157 and cofilin1 with VASP pS239 in regulation of invasive phenotypes of placenta cells and their modification by hyperoxia and DHA in attempt to reduce high invasion potential. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that DHA is modulating the relative expression and association of profilin1 with VASP pS157 and cofilin1 with VASP pS239 and thus invasive phenotype. Profilin1 with VASP pS157 may be linked with invasive placental disease progression such as accreta. Further studies are warrants to validate both VASP complexes as biomarker, diagnostic tool and therapeutic targets. The use of antihypertensive medication is indicated for the treatment of severe hypertension during pregnancy to prevent adverse outcomes, including stroke and myocardial infarction. However, the use of antihypertensive drugs is not recommended in mild to moderate hypertension during pregnancy because of their association with fetal growth restriction. This study was designed to determine the effect of labetalol on the perfusion pressure in the chorionic plate vessels of dually perfused human placenta. This study included placental tissues from women undergoing C-section at term with uncomplicated pregnancies (n=7). The dual-perfusion system was used and the maternal and fetal compartments were continuously perfused with Krebs solution equilibrated with 95% O 2 /5% CO 2 and 95% N 2 /5% CO 2 gas mixtures, respectively. Changes in the perfusion pressure in the fetal compartment were continuously recorded. After the stabilization of perfusion, labetalol was infused at varying doses (150 -1,000 ng/ml) to the fetal and maternal compartments, and the changes in fetal perfusion pressure were assessed RESULTS: Labetalol infusion into the fetal compartment produced a dose-related decrease in the fetal perfusion pressure: with no effects at 150 ng/ml, a 6% decrease at 750 ng/ml, and maximal effect (9% decrease) observed at 1,000 ng/ml. However, labetalol infused into the maternal compartment, even 1,000 ng/ml, did not produce a reduction in fetal perfusion pressure. CONCLUSIONS: Administration of labetalol into fetal circulation caused a dose-dependent decrease in fetal perfusion pressure with maximal effect observed at the 1mg/ml concentration. However, labetalol was ineffective in causing the changes in fetal perfusion pressure when administered to the maternal compartment of the placenta. Thus, labetalol at the pharmacological doses prescribed to pregnant patients may not affect the fetal arterial pressure. Antonio, TX, USA. INTRODUCTION: Fatty acids (FA) are critical for growth and development of the fetus. Maternal obesity impacts pregnancy outcome and programs the fetus for later metabolic disease. There is increasing evidence of sexual dimorphism in placental function. We hypothesized that maternal obesity would alter placental fatty acid transport (FAT) and oxidation (FAO) in a fetal sex-specific manner. METHODS: Placental villous tissue was collected in a random manner at term c-section (no labor) from lean (LN, pre-pregnancy BMI <25), overweight (OW, BMI 25-29.9) and obese (OB, BMI >30) women with either a male (M) or a female (F) fetus (N=6/group). Total protein was isolated and western blot was used to determine expression of FAO enzymes: very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD), long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCAD), medium-chain acyl-coA dehydrogenase (MCAD), L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase 2 (HADH2), and 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase (HADHA), FAT enzyme: lipoprotein lipase (LPL), and FA transporters: SLC27A4, FA binding proteins (FABP1, FABP3), and FA translocase(CD36). Differences between groups were determined by ANOVA and Student's t-tests with p<0.05 considered as significant.  We found that maternal obesity affects FAT (FABP3, SLC27A4) and FAO (VLCAD). We also show the effect of fetal sex on placental FAO (LCAD, MCAD, HADHA and HADH2) and on LPL. These changes may relate to alterations in fetal growth and development and underlie the dimorphic programming effect of maternal obesity. The growing fetus requires continuous supply of glycine for structural development and as a metabolic precursor. In sheep, fetal glycine is derived from placental conversion of maternal and fetal serine. Lewis et al (2004) have shown that the activity of the placental enzyme converting serine to glycine is much lower in the human than the sheep placenta. We hypothesized that placental conversion of serine is not a major source of glycine for the human fetus, and tested this employing our human in vivo model. METHODS: 177 healthy women with uncomplicated singleton pregnancies undergoing planned cesarean section were included in a cross sectional human in vivo study. Blood samples were obtained from the uterine vein (UV) and radial artery (RA) before uterine incision, and from the umbilical vein (uv) and artery (ua) before delivery of the placenta. Serine and glycine were quantified by high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Paired differences between vessels on the maternal and fetal side were assessed with Wilcoxon sign rank tests. -47.5,26.8) Using paired statistics we found a significantly higher concentration of glycine in UV compared to RA (p 0.025), but no significant difference between uv and ua. For serine there were no significant differences between the concentrations in RA and UV or in uv and ua. CONCLUSIONS: *Figure(s) will be available online. We observed no significant uteroplacental delivery of glycine to the umbilical circulation and no significant uteroplacental uptake of serine from the maternal or umbilical circulation. Our data support the hypothesis that placental conversion of serine is not a major source of glycine for the human fetus. INTRODUCTION: Previously we demonstrated that maternal high fat diet (HFD) was associated with fetal growth restriction in both control C57BL/6J mice and mice deficient in the enzyme catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT -/-), and increased blood pressure in pregnant COMT -/mice. This was associated with significant alterations in utero-placental perfusion. Given the key role of the placenta in both fetal growth and the development of preeclampsia, the aim of this study was to determine the effect of maternal HFD on placental gene expression. METHODS: Female C57BL6/J and COMT -/mice received normal diet (4% kcal from fat) or HFD (60% kcal from fat) for 8 weeks prior to mating (n=6-11). Placentas were collected at gestational day 18.5 and gene expressions determined using RT-PCR. Genes investigated included nutrient transporters (GLUT1, 2, 3 and 4, SNAT2 and 4, CD36 and DLK1), angiogenic (PlGF, VEGFR1 and 2) and inflammatory (TLR4, IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α) markers. RESULTS: Gene expression of nutrient transporters was significantly increased in placentas from mice fed a HFD, with a significant increase in GLUT1 (q=0.013) and CD36 (q=0.047) expression, and a trend towards increased GLUT3 (q=0.06) and SNAT2 (q=0.05) expression. There was also a significant increase in gene expression of the pro-angiogenic factor PlGF (q=0.027) and the inflammatory marker IL-1β (q=0.033). CONCLUSIONS: Maternal high fat diet had a significant effect on placental nutrient transporters, with a significant increase in the expression of glucose and fatty acid transporters, and a trend towards an increase in amino acid transporters. This may be a compensatory measure to counteract the reduced utero-placental perfusion and associated fetal growth restriction previously observed. Increased PlGF gene expression may also be an attempt to increase placental efficiency. As maternal obesity is an important risk factor in a number of pregnancy complications it is important to better understand its effects on placental development and function. (11β-HSD) , the physiological barrier for glucocorticoids, leading to increased fetal exposure to glucocorticoids resulting in intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). We hypothesized that carbenoxolone exposure influences the expression of placental estrogen receptors-α & β (ERa & ERb) and p53 leading to inhibited fetal and placental growth. METHODS: Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were injected twice daily with either carbenoxolone (10 mg/kg; ip) or vehicle (control group) from gestational days (dg) 12 onwards. Maternal blood and placentas were collected on 16, 19 and 21 dg. The expression of ERa, ERb and p53 were studied in placental basal and labyrinth zones by RT-PCR, Western blotting and immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: Carbenoxolone did not affect placental and fetal body weights, but ELISA showed decreased estradiol levels on 19 and 21 dg and increased luteinizing hormone levels in maternal serum on all dg. The follicle stimulating hormone levels decreased on 16 and 19 dg, and increased on 21 dg. Carbenoxolone decreased ERa mRNA levels on 16 dg in both zones and its protein level on 19 dg in the labyrinth zone. However, carbenoxolone increased ERb mRNA levels on 19 and 21 dg and protein levels on 16 and 19 dg in the labyrinth zone. The p53 mRNA levels increased on all dg, buts its protein levels increased on 21 dg in both zones. In conclusion, carbenoxolone exposure changes placental ERa, ERb and p53 expression in favor of cell death but these changes are not sufficient to induce IUGR and reduced placental growth in rats. We hypothesized that a more frequent AS-AIU, but not ES-AIU, would be associated with preterm birth (PTB) due to PTL and preterm-PROM at lower GA. METHODS: Study population included 1,034 singleton pregnant-women who delivered at preterm due to PTL (n=490) and preterm-PROM (n=544). Patients were divided into 4 groups (i.e., 20.0~26.9wks, 27.0~30.9wks, 31.0~33.9wks, and 34.0~36.9wks) according to GA at delivery in PTL and preterm-PROM. Acute histologic chorioamnionitis (acute-HCA) was defined in the presence of inflammation in at least one placental compartment (i.e., choriodecidua [CD], amnion, umbilical cord or chorionic-plate), and ES-AIU and AS-AIU were defined in placental pathologic examination as follows; 1) ES-AIU: inflammation restricted to CD; and 2) AS-AIU: inflammation in amnion, umbilical cord or chorionic-plate beyond CD. 47,99,100,153, or 209 in the presence and absence of 10 7 CFU/ml heat-killed E. coli for 24 h. Conditioned medium was then harvested and concentrations of IL-1 β, TNF-α, IL-6, sgp130, HO-1, IL-10, BDNF, and F 2 IsoP were quantified. RESULTS: For unstimulated cultures: all PBDEs, except PBDE-47, reduced IL-1β production. BDNF concentrations were reduced by PBDE-47 (P = 0.026),-99 (P = 0.027), and -153 (P = 0.041). IL-10 production was enhanced by PBDE-99 (P =0.003), -153 (P < 0.001), and -209 (P = 0.023) and basal IL-6 and F 2 IsoP production was increased by PBDE-153 (P < 0.001). For cultures stimulated with E. coli: PBDE-47 increased IL-1β production and PBDE-47 (P = 0.054), PBDE-153 (P = 0.019), and PBDE-209 (P = 0.064) reduced TNF-α production. Bacteria-stimulated IL-6 production, however, was enhanced by all congeners except for PBDE-153. E. coli-stimulated IL-10 production was enhanced by all PBDE congeners except for PBDE-47. All PBDE congeners enhanced BDNF and F 2 IsoP production. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that PBDE congeners vary in their effects on basal and bacteria-stimulated production on biomarkers of inflammation, neurodevelopment, and oxidative stress. They were most consistent at promoting IL-10, IL-6, BDNF production, and F 2 IsoP production by bacteria-stimulated cultures and with suppressing BDNF production by unstimulated cultures. Our objective was to address this conundrum by investigating the prevalence and diversity of microbiota present in various regions of the placenta METHODS: We obtained placentas from a cohort of 40 women from Barnes Jewish Hospital. Biopsies were sampled from the basal plate at the maternal-fetal interface; villous tissue, and the amniotic/chorionic plate. After extraction of genomic DNA, the hypervariable region 3 and 4 of the bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA gene was PCR-amplified by high-throughput Fluidigm technology. Amplicons were sequenced using the Illumina Mi-seq platform. Raw reads were quality filtered, distance matrices were denoised and the most significant Principal Coordinates Analysis eigenvectors extracted. Microbial communities in the basal plate, villous tissue, and fetal amniotic membranes were taxonomically mapped and assembled using QIIME v.1.7. Average pairwise-weighted UniFrac distance between communities, an estimate of beta diversity was calculated. RESULTS: High levels of interconnectedness were revealed within bacterial communities in the basal plate and within communities in the fetal membranes. However, the microbial profiles between each placental location revealed strong regional differences: Lactobacillus, a common vaginal microbial genus, was exclusively identified in the fetal membranes while the maternal basal plate harbored aerobic Gram-negative bacterial rods of the Ralstonia genus, which are non-fermenting species adapted to low-nutrient conditions and typically found in oral niches. CONCLUSIONS: Distinct microbiome clusters and unique bacterial genera found in the basal plate and the amniotic membranes suggests that microbiome in each placental location may originate from two different routes-oral and vaginal, respectively. Thus, placental microbiome studies should consider regional differences and host-microbial underpinnings which may affect maternal, fetal, and/or neonatal health and physiology. In clinical studies, cervical biopsy tissue specimens were collected from women before and after DMPA initiation, and assessed for changes in mucosal permeability. RESULTS: In the mouse model of intravaginal HSV-2 infection, we found MPA or LNG interaction with the progesterone receptor enhances susceptibility to viral infection by increasing genital mucosal permeability. These changes in mucosal permeability increased genital inflammation in uninfected mice by permitting infiltration of endogenous vaginal microbiota. Loss of barrier protection was not caused by mucosal thinning, but correlated with decreased genital tissue expression of desmosomal cadherins. Concomitant treatment of mice with DMPA and topical or systemic estrogen restored desmosomal cadherin expression and barrier protection, and made mice resistant to HSV-2. Remarkably, evaluation of cervical biopsies from women before and 1 month after starting DMPA revealed tissue inflammation, desmosomal cadherin expression, and mucosal permeability were altered by treatment in ways identical to the changes seen in mice. CONCLUSIONS: Our work reveals DMPA and LNG impair the mucosal barrier, a first-line defense against all sexually transmitted pathogens, and implies that DMPA use is impeding efforts to curb the HIV epidemic. Discovery that concurrent use of DMPA and estrogen eliminates susceptibility to viral infection by restoring mucosal integrity however provides groundwork for a new contraceptive strategy less compromising of barrier protection. Hyaluronic 1-3 and hyaluronidases (HYAL) 1-3. HAS and HYAL expression is altered in the endometrium in endometrial adenocarcinoma and correlated with increased hyaluronan production 2 . Here, we assessed HAS and HYAL expression in endometrial epithelial cells (EECs) and stromal cells (ESCs) in women with and without endometriosis to determine if there were alterations similar to that in endometrial adenocarcinoma. We also assess HA receptors, standard CD44 and RHAMM, in EECs and ESCs. METHODS: EECs (n=8) and ESCs (n=6) were isolated from menstrual endometrial biopsies from women with (N=5) and without (N=5) a diagnosis of endometriosis confirmed by laparoscopy. RT-PCR was used to assess mRNA expression of HAS isoforms 1,2, and 3 as well as HYAL isoforms 1 and 2. Western analysis and densitometry were used for confirmatory protein detection and quantification. Standard CD44 and RHAMM were analyzed by RT-PCR and western blot. Student T-test in Graph Pad Prism was used to analyze results. RESULTS: HAS1 was not detectable in EEC or ESCs from women with or without endometriosis. There was no significant difference in HAS 2 or 3 as well as HYAL 1 or 2 mRNA expression or protein levels in EECs or ESCs from women with or without endometriosis. Standard CD44 and RHAMM were expressed in both cell types and their expression did not differ in cells from women with or without endometriosis. The pain and extended inflammation in endometriosis, especially in the peritoneal cavity, is caused by an amplification of the immune response, ubiquitous production of pain mediators and by increased leucocyte recruitment. Macrophages are the most abundant cells in the peritoneal fluid of affected women, and accumulation of these cells in the cavity is determined by cycle phases, as suggested by the retrograde menstruation hypothesis. However, macrophage activation in the human peritoneal cavity is ill defined, and comprehensive studies dedicated to characterize the activation types of macrophages in endometriosis are scarce METHODS: In this study we evaluated at multiple levels the activation status of macrophages in the peritoneum of patients with endometriosis: at the mRNA level with up to date sequencing techniques and phenotypically using multiple colour FACS, mass cytometry (Cytof) and quadruple colour histology. In addition to evaluating peritoneal macrophages, in selected patients we compared the activation status of macrophages isolated from the endometrium and peritoneum as well as monocyte activation in blood, thereby retracing the axis of recruitment and activation in the disease. Our results show complex gene and protein signatures in patients, which support the notion of endometriosis as a syndrome mirrored by a complex activation state of infiltrating pro-inflammatory immune cells. CONCLUSIONS: Elucidating these inflammatory subtypes and identifying therapeutic targets to control inflammation, fibrosis and associated pain are impending as we move towards personalized medicine. deprivation is a clinically proven concept for pharmacological treatment of endometriosis. In the current study we characterized the in vitro and in vivo profile of a novel partial estrogen receptor destabilizer (pERD) identified in the frame of a compound optimization. METHODS: pERD (BAY-153) was tested on a) its in vitro ER antagonising activity b) induction of estrogen receptor degradation and c) selectivity against other nuclear hormone receptors. Effects on the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis have been assessed by a test for ovarian stimulation and penetration across the blood brain barrier. In vivo (anti)-uterotrophic activity as well as impact on bone mass (in agonistic & antagonistic setting) have been studied. Finally pERD has been tested in two preclinical endometriosis models (rat & mice). RESULTS: BAY-153 demonstrated important preclinical pharmacological prerequisites for an application in endometriosis patients: High antagonistic activity on ER (ERα,β: IC 50 0.86nM, 3.25nM), partial destabilization of the ER and strong selectivity towards other nuclear hormone receptors. When tested for its interference with the HPG-axis, BAY-153 displayed no relevant induction of systemic estradiol levels (rat) and a very low to absent penetration of the brain (mouse). Remarkably, BAY-153 combines ER-destabilizing in vivo activity with bone protective potential and a dissociation of antagonistic activities at the uterus and bone level. Finally BAY-153 exhibited dose-dependent efficacy in two endometriosis models. CONCLUSIONS: Compared to available antiestrogens and SERMs, pERD provides a unique profile demonstrating ER-destabilizing activity combined with bone-protective efficacy, no effects on the HPG-axis at pharmacological relevant doses and a low to absent penetration of the brain. Next step is to evaluate the profile of pERD in women. Development Histological analysis of the lesions together with the connected tissue revealed that extra cellular matrix but not infiltrating endometrial tissue are responsible for this intra-tissue attachments. To evaluate the value of the rectovaginal endometriosis model for the characterization of novel therapeutic endometriosis drugs, we studied the effect of a classical antiestrogenic as well as of an anti-inflammatory treatment on the disease development in the rat model. BAY 865041 as well as dexamethasone attenuated significantly the disease development. The development of adhesions was less pronounced in both treatment groups. In addition, the anti-estrogenic as well as the anti-inflammatory treatment reduced strongly the formation of intra-organ connections. The new developed and characterized rodent model of rectovaginal and bladder endometriosis is a suitable model to study key features of the human disease such as endometriosis associated adhesion development. Kocbek, Nick A Bersinger, Michael D Mueller. Frauenklinik, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. INTRODUCTION: Endometriosis is characterized by the growth of endometrial epithelial and stromal cells outside the uterine cavity and is accompanied by an altered inflammatory environment. In epithelial malignancies senescent fibroblasts with a distinct inflammatory profile contribute to epithelial cell survival. Endometriotic stromal cells are progesterone resistance, do not decidualize and have an inflammatory response, mediated through NFκB, that will have a paracrine effect within the lesion. These endometriotic stromal cells may be analogues to senescence fibroblast and influence epithelial cells differently to nonendometriotic stromal cell. We therefore propose an aberrant stromal cell inflammatory profile created by cells from women with endometriosis may contribute to the survival of endometriotic epithelial cells. METHODS: Primary endometrial stromal cells (ESC) isolated from women with and without endometriosis and immortalized endometrial/ endometriotic epithelial (EEC) cells lines (12Z, EME6/E6, Emosis) were used as in vitro models. NFκB activation was determined by semiquantitative Western blot of phos-p65 and phos-p100. TNFα, IL6, IL8 and RANTES mRNA expression was determined via qPCR and cell viability determined by an MTS assay. RESULTS: Constitutive activation of the NFκB p65 subunit was observed in ESC from non-endometriotic women, but not endometriotic women. TNFα treatment produced a significant increase in TNFα, IL6, IL8, MCP1 and RANTES mRNA by endometriotic and non-endometriotic ESC, although with a distinct profile for each. TNFα, RANTES and IL6 had a significantly stronger induction in non-endometriotic ESC, whereas IL8 was significantly stronger in endometriotic ESC. Treatment of EEC with TNFα resulted in a concentration dependent reduction in cell viability, whereas IL6 and IL8 increased cell viability. CONCLUSIONS: An aberrant basal activity of NFκB leads to a distinct inflammatory profile of ESC from endometriotic women. This distinct profile leads to an increased production of cytokines, but with a reduced production of TNFα compared to non-endometriotic women. Early pERD) shows high ER-antagonistic activity in vitro and exhibits dose-dependent efficacy in preclinical endometriosis models. Therefore, pERD has been tested in a first in human (FiH) clinical trial to assess safety, pharmacokinetics (PK) and to predict efficacy by a modeling approach. METHODS: pERD and its main human metabolites M1/M16 have been tested on their antagonistic and agonistic activity at the ER and towards their in vivo efficacy by rat uterine growth in single dose and in combination of doses reflecting the exposure in women. In the FiH clinical study, 55 postmenopausal women each received single oral doses of 3 to 300 mg. pERD, M1 and M16 were determined in plasma using a LC-MS/MS method. Safety assessments included adverse events, laboratory parameters and ECG. Based on the preclinical and clinical results, simulations were performed to estimate the overall efficacy in humans. RESULTS: Oral administration of pERD and the main human metabolites M1/M16 to rats demonstrated a clear compromised antagonistic activity on the rat uterus exerted by partial ER agonistic activity of the two metabolites (p<0.0001). Single escalating oral doses of up to 300 mg to postmenopausal women were well tolerated. pERD exposure increased roughly dose-proportionally in plasma. The metabolites M1/M16 were exceeding the exposure of pERD. E max models could be developed to separately estimate the antagonistic effects of pERD and partial agonistic effects of M1/M16. Overall efficacy for different exposure ratios of pERD and metabolites were simulated suggesting that the overall antagonistic efficacy of pERD is substantially impaired by the metabolites at clinically relevant exposures. CONCLUSIONS: Simulations based on preclinical and early clinical data predict that the major metabolites of pERD compromise the antagonistic activity of pERD at the ER at clinically relevant doses, leading to a halt of further clinical development. Replication The current studies test the hypothesis that IL-1β, a known product of activated macrophages, interferes with endometrial decidualization in vitro. Human endometrial stromal cell (ESC) cultures prepared from fertile participants were induced with hormones to undergo decidualization. Paracrine macrophage-ESC interactions were modeled by dose-and time-effects of exogenous recombinant IL-1β. ESC prolactin and VEGF (ELISA), Cx43 (Western blots) and cell morphology (phase contrast microscopy) were indicators of decidualization. Activation of the NF-κB pathway was evaluated by immunofluorescence cytochemistry (ICC) and Western blots of specific NF-κB signaling factors. ESC apoptosis was assessed by cleaved caspase 3 Western blotting. RESULTS: IL-1β treatment showed a dose-responsive inhibition of prolactin, VEGF and Cx43 with an IC 50 =0.2 nM. The phospho-p65 subunit of NF-κB was rapidly (<20 min) translocated into the nucleus, corresponding to a downregulation of IKBα. Over the next 48 h a dramatic decrease in prolactin, VEGF and Cx43 was noted, as was a progressive increase in NF-κB, IKKα/β and endogenous IL-1β. Morphological changes induced by estrogen, progesterone and cAMP were blunted by IL-1β and cleaved caspase 3 indicated activation of ESC apoptosis. Our results indicate that IL-1β inhibits classical as well as emerging biomarkers (VEGF, Cx43) of ESC decidualization. IL-1β autoregulates its own production, apparently through the NF-κB pathway, and also activates ESC apoptosis. The phenotype is reminiscent of eutopic endometrium in cases of endometriosis, where enhanced cytokine production, inflammation, reduced Cx43 and impaired decidual differentiation have been reported. We postulate that IL-1β, produced by infiltrating macrophages and activated ESC themselves, is a critical factor responsible for reduced fecundity in endometriosis. Supported by NIH grants T35 DK07400 and R21 HD78818. Red ginseng, especially Rg3, is known for its antiinflammatory and anti-proliferative effect, and recent discoveries indicate involvement of miRNAs in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Therefore, the aim of this study is to evaluate the potential therapeutic effect of red ginseng on endometriosis and to identify the target miRNA that are related to therapeutic effects of red ginseng on endometriosis. METHODS: Primary endometrial cell culture from patients with endometriosis and Ishikawa cell line was processed and incubated with RG extracts. Cell viability after different concentrations of RG extracts was evaluated using MTT assay. Cultured cell lines were treated with RG extract for 24 and 48 hours. After incubation, total RNAs were extracted and the proliferation, apoptosis, and fibrosis-related markers (Ki-67, Caspase3, and Col-1) were analyzed with real-time PCR. The results were statistically analyzed with SPSS ver.21. Further, total RNAs enriched with miRNAs were extracted before and after RG treatment and microRNA microarray analysis using Affemetrix's miRNA 4.0 was performed to evaluate miRNA changes associated with RG treatment; RESULTS: MTT assay on endometrial stromal cells with endometriosis revealed loss of viability at 0.8mg/ml of red ginseng extract for 48 hours. Therefore 0.4mg/ml of red ginseng extract was used for further analysis. The cell proliferation marker, Ki-67, and the fibrosis marker, Col-1, were significantly decreased in both stromal and Ishikawa cell lines after red ginseng treatment for 48 hours. MiRNA microarray revealed significant changes in several miRNAs after treatment. Among these miRNAs, mir-18b-5p, which is known to target connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), was significantly downregulated. Significantly decreased CTGF expressions were confirmed in endometrial stromal cells after 48 hours of RG treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Red ginseng was effective in alterations of proliferative and fibrotic characteristics of endometrial stromal cells. RG treatment appears to be strongly associated with inhibiting fibrosis. Moreover, this effect is presumed to be regulated by microRNAs. ), history of infertility (yes or no), and at least five years of documented clinical outcomes to evaluate for disease persistence and de novo presentation of breast cancer or adnexal cancer (ovary or fallopian tube). This yielded 180 cases for analysis. Negative controls were white non-Hispanic postmenopausal women with archived tissue biopsies for DNA and no history of endometriosis (n=177). DNA was extracted from FFPE tissue blocks and ID4 allelic discrimination was performed using Taqman. RESULTS: Infertility was more common in cases of severe endometriosis (12/52, 23%) than cases of mild endometriosis (7/128, 5%), Fisher exact p=0.001. Persistent endometriosis five years after index surgical staging was also more common in severe disease (37% vs 24%). The ID4 minor allele frequency in white controls was 0.40 (expected 0.39). The frequency was increased in endometriosis (0.45) and more so in severe disease (0.47), yielding an odds ratio of 1.6 [0.99-2.75], p=0.05. The ID4 variant was not associated with infertility or increased risk of persistent disease, but it may be a risk factor for breast/adnexal cancer (11% of CT/TT cases compared with 7% of CC homozygotes). CONCLUSIONS: ID4 is a tumor suppressor gene that regulates BRCA and is known to play a role in breast cancer. Although the functional significance of this allelic variant is unknown, we observed significant differences in allele frequency related to the severity of disease and possibly cancer risk. Characterization of the inflammatory response in the peritoneal lavage and the endometriotic lesion was performed using immunohistochemistry, multiplex ELISA and flow cytometry. The inoculated tissue showed increased signs of cell death and led to an elevated level of extracellular ATP, a known danger-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) for the immune system. Simultaneously the tissue exhibited an acute pro-inflammatory status that is characterized by the up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines and was strongly infiltrated by neutrophils and macrophages. The inflammation within the tissue is accompanied by a rapid elevation of neutrophils and inflammatory monocytes into the peritoneum together with a reduction of resident peritoneal macrophages, a phenotype that has been described for an infectious peritonitis. Utilizing the dynamic weight bearing system we show that this mild peritonitis inflammation is associated with pelvic pain. Both inflammation and pain were dependent on the amount of uterine tissue inoculated and was modulated by blocking estrogen signaling. Our findings indicate that cell death occurring in the peritoneal cavity induces a sterile peritonitis similar to infectious stimuli with possible implications for the inflammatory pain in endometriosis. Risk UFs poses a significant clinical and economic burden worldwide. Several signaling pathways including Wnt/β-catenin signaling are involved in the pathogenesis of UFs. However, the mechanism underlying activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in UFs is largely unknown. In this study, we used an in vitro cell culture model to investigate the role of polycomb protein EZH2 in Wnt/β-catenin signaling of human UFs. METHODS: Immortalized human fibroid cells (HuLM), as well as human fibroid and adjacent myometrial tissues were used. Overexpression of EZH2 was performed using adenovirus expressing EZH2. RNA and protein expression was measured by quantitative PCR and Western blot analysis. Nuclear extraction was prepared to determine the nuclear translocation of β-catenin. Cell proliferation was measured by cell counting. Selective inhibition of β-catenin was performed using ICG-001 compound. RESULTS: Quantitative PCR analysis indicated that expression levels of a subset of Wnt ligands and receptors are significantly increased in EZH2-HuLM cells compared to control cells (P<0.05). Importantly, both protein and RNA levels of β-catenin are markedly increased in EZH2-HuLM cells. Accumulation of β-catenin via translocation from cytoplasm into the nucleus was significantly increased in EZH2-HuLM cells as well. Further study indicated that the expression levels of β-catenin-regulated gene WISP1 are higher in EZH2-HuLM cells versus control (P<0.05). Inhibition of β-catenin using the compound ICG-001 decreased EZH2-induced increased cell proliferation. This effect is associated with decreased expression of β-catenin response gene WISP1 (P<0.05). At tissue level, higher RNA expression of WSP1 is observed in fibroid tissues as compared to adjacent myometrium samples, suggesting that Wnt/β-catenin signaling is activated in UFs. Our data provides a novel link between EZH2 and Wnt/β-catenin signaling in UFs. EZH2 increases accumulation of β-catenin in the nucleus of fibroid cells via activation of β-catenin transcription activity and stabilizing β-catenin protein. Our data suggest that activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling by independent EZH2 methyltransferase activity may contribute to the development of UFs. These findings also provide novel therapeutic targets for medical treatment of women with symptomatic UFs. The Impact of MicroRNA 21a-5p on Mediators of Extracellular Matrix Formation in Uterine Leiomyoma. Eden R Cardozo, 1,2 Anatte E Karmon, 1,2 Leah Gatune, 1 Rosemary Foster, 1,2 Bo R Rueda, 1,2 Aaron K Styer. Although microRNA (miR) 21 is overexpressed in uterine fibroids relative to myometrium, the functional contribution of miR-21 to leiomyoma pathobiology remains unclear. Aberrant expression of miR-21 has been implicated as a regulator of fibrosis and extracellular matrix (ECM) formation via transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) signaling in human disease. However, the role of miR 21 in fibroid development and ECM formation (inclusive of TGF-ß mediators) has been incompletely studied. The aim of this study was to assess the impact of miR-21 overexpression on mediators of ECM formation in uterine fibroid cells. METHODS: An immmortalized fibroid cell line was infected with a SMARTchoice shMIMIC ™ lentiviral microRNA vector to achieve overexpression of miR 21a-5p. The relative expression of genes related to fibroid ECM formation were analyzed by RT-PCR and the resultant levels were compared to those determined in control cells infected with a lentivirus encoding a missense miR (NTC). Protein levels were evaluated by western blot. All experiments were performed with three biological replicates and each sample was analyzed in triplicate. A p-value of ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: MiR-21 overexpression resulted in an increase in gene expression of TGF-β3 (p<0.01), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 (p=0.02) and MMP-11 (p<0.01) and a decrease in gene expression of fibronectin (FN1) (p<0.01), versican (p<0.01), collagen 1A1 (p=0.02) and connective tissue growth factor (p<0.01) compared to control. No significant change in TGF-β receptor II expression was detected. Protein expression of TGF-β3 was increased in miR-21 over-expressed cells (p<0.01) versus control. CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of miR-21 in uterine fibroid cells results in increased TGF-β3 expression as well as changes in the expression of several genes involved in the extracellular matrix. These findings suggest that fibroid ECM formation may be mediated by miR 21 regulation of TGFβ3 and MMPs. Future studies will be necessary to delineate the mechanisms by which miR-21 influences ECM dysregulation in fibroids. INTRODUCTION: Uterine leiomyomas are common and symptomatic uterine tumors. The tumors demonstrate a disrupted retinoic acid pathway, with a reduced retinoic acid production proteins and increased breakdown enzymes, resulting in decreased endogenous retinoic acid. Treatment of leiomyoma cells with retinoic acid transformed the ECM phenotype to one that closely resembled myometrium. Ulipristal acetate (UPA) decreases leiomyoma volume, but it is unknown what impact UPA has on the retinoic acid metabolic pathway. We therefore hypothesized that UPA treatment increases endogenous retinoic acid and inhibits aberrant ECM formation. METHODS: Next generation sequencing (RNAseq) or genome-wide quantitative screening followed by western blot analysis for protein analysis, in surgical specimens of UPA-and placebo-treated leiomyomas. In-vitro analysis with human leiomyoma cells grown in 3D culture, treated with different concentrations of UPA. RESULTS: RNASeq data demonstrated that ulipristal acetate treated patient leiomyomas demonstrate a 4.61-fold downregulation of the transcripts of cytochrome P450 enzymes of the CYP26 family that are involved in catabolism of all trans-retinoic acid (ATRA). Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH1A1) involved in production of ATRA and is down regulated in fibroids demonstrated a 2-fold upregulation in UPA treated fibroid as compared to placebo group. An increase of 2-fold was observed in ATRA binding proteins CRABP1 and CRABP2 in UPA treated fibroids. This indicates an increase in endogenous ATRA on UPA treatment. We further observed a 2-fold downregulation of beta-catenin and related WNT pathway transcripts. Decrease in transcripts related to a decreased beta-catenin protein amount in most patients as observed by western blot analysis. We also demonstrated a 3-6-fold increased CYP26A1 protein in leiomyoma cells on treatment with gonadal hormones. Treatment of human 3-dimensional leiomyoma cultures with UPA confirmed that treatment resulted in increased ATRA concentration and increased ALD1A1, CRABP1, CRABP2, and decreased CYP26A1 protein concentration. CONCLUSIONS: Ulipristal functions, at least in part, by increasing retinoic acid exposure in human leiomyomas. Regulation of ATRA may therefore represent a critical step in controlling leiomyoma growth. The HTN has also been shown to be associated with pelvic organ prolapse (POP), which occurs when the uterosacral ligaments (USL) fail. Classical risk factors for POP include aging, childbirth and menopause. The USL vasculature has not been characterized in women with POP, and the potential link between HTN, hypoestrogenemia and POP has not been studied. We have demonstrated that the homeobox gene, HOXA11, is necessary for USL development and regulates homeostasis in USL. We hypothesized that the architecture of USL arterioles are altered in women with POP, and that HOXA11 expression is decreased in women with hypertension. We compared the architecture of arterioles in USL of women with POP (n=3) and with normal pelvic support (n=3) using immunofluorescence staining with antibody against SM alpha actin (SMA). To determine whether an association between HTN and HOXA11 exists in the USL, HOXA11 gene expression was determined by RT-PCR in USL from women from the following groups: normal pelvic support (control,CTL) with normal blood pressure (CTL/NBP, n=3), normal pelvic support with HTN (CTL/HTN,n=3), POP with normal blood pressure (POP/NBP, n=7). Data was analyzed using one-way ANOVA. The most common cause of anxiety among women in health care centers, due to the nature of low sexual desire that proper treatment is important. Low sexual desire is a prevalent symptom. When accompanied by distress, loss of libido is known as hypoactive sexual desire disorder, which can have a significant impact on a woman's wellbeing. The etiology of hypoactive sexual desire disorder is multifactorial and its management requires a combination of psychosocial and pharmacological interventions. Low sexual desire is a complaint that many pharmacological agents used to treat it. The drug is used to treat Low sexual desire vitamin. Due to the absence of a fully effective medication and side effects, this study was conducted to determine the effect of vitamin B1 on the treatment of Low sexual desire related PMS. In a Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT) two blind, 120 young women with Low sexual desire in the age group 30-18 years with Low sexual desire were divided randomly into two groups. In a group of 60 Students gives 100 mg vitamin B1 daily for three months, and a second group of 60 students for 3 month, placebo (placebo) was administered. Low sexual desire severity and Low sexual desire chart was assessed daily. T tests, Wilcoxon and Mann-Whitney tests were analyzed. RESULTS: There was no significant difference among the studied variables in terms of confounding variables. The comparison of vitamin B1 group before the intervention with that after the intervention showed that vitamin B1 increased sexual desire (36%) significantly (P < 0.01). At the end of the quarter, 36% of the vitamin B1, 0.96% responded to placebo (P <0.1). Vitamin B1 was well tolerated and caused no side effects. CONCLUSIONS: It seems that vitamin B1 is effective in recovery of mental and physical symptoms of PMS such as Low sexual desire. Therefore, this vitamin can be used to reach a major goal of midwifery, that is, reduction of symptom severity of PMS -specially libido-without any side effects. Vitamin B1 is safe and effective drug therapies to treat Low sexual desire and it is known that most of the upper side is better tolerated. This study is result of an original article that recognized the effect of vitamin B1 on the treatment of cyclic Low sexual desire in young women. HPV infects immature epithelial cells and requires autophagy to provide nutrients for its proliferation. The human hsp70 is a potent inhibitor and regulator of the extent of autophagy induction. We evaluated whether intracellular levels of hsp70 in cervicovaginal epithelial cells would be associated with detection of oncogenic HPV types as well as with abnormal Pap smears. METHODS: 42 women who came for their annual exam including a Pap smear were recruited (median age 42.5 years). Cervicovaginal epithelial cells were obtained with a cotton swab and deposited into sterile phosphate-buffered saline. Following centrifugation the pellet fraction containing epithelial cells was lysed in the presence of protease inhibitors. Aliquots were tested by ELISA for concentrations of hsp70 and for p62, an intracellular protein that is consumed during autophagy (high p62 = low autophagy). Clinical data was obtained after completion of the laboratory studies. High risk HPV was assessed by Aptima.Associations between hsp70 and clinical parameters were assayed by Student's t-test; associations between hsp70 and p62 were analyzed by the Spearman rank correlation test. The median hsp70 level (5.6 vs. 15.8 ng/ml) was decreased in epithelial cells from women positive for high risk HPV (p=0.0118) and the intracellular hsp70 and p62 levels were highly correlated (r=0.4844, p=0.0013) (low hsp70 = high autophagy). The median intracellular hsp70 level was higher (24.4 vs. 9.9 ng/ml in married as opposed to single women (p=0.0329). There was no association between hsp70 and previous history of HPV, current or prior history of an abnormal Pap or currently being sexually active. The decrease in hsp70 in epithelial cells in women with high risk HPV suggests a mechanism, namely elevated autophagy, which facilitates HPV proliferation. Elevated hsp70 in married women may indicate a stress response to more frequent sexual exposure. Further studies are required to evaluate hsp70 levels in genital epithelial cells as a clinical biomarker of enhanced permissiveness for HPV infection. Although the uterine cavity has classically been believed to be sterile except in pathologic settings, recent microbial analysis of hysterectomy specimens has suggested otherwise. However, the microbiome of healthy reproductive aged women without any history of gynecologic disease or infertility has not been assessed. The objective of this study is to evaluate the endometrial microbiome of healthy reproductive aged women carefully compared to their own matched cervical and vaginal microbiome. METHODS: Healthy reproductive aged volunteers underwent vaginal and cervical swab sampling followed by an endometrial biopsy. Samples were frozen and stored at -80C until thawing on ice and processing using the MoBio PowerSoil DNA Isolation protocol. Negative controls were preprocessed according to the Manual of Procedures for the Human Microbiome Project for initial processing of clinical specimens, whereas 0.01g of endometrial biopsy tissue and supernatant were added to PowerBead tubes for DNA extraction. 16S rRNA amplicon libraries were subsequently generated for each specimen using the Ion 16S Metagenomics kit specific to the V2-V4 and V6-V9 hypervariable regions for sequencing on the Ion Personal Genome Machine. : Surprisingly, the endometrium from healthy reproductive aged women harbors a distinct microbiota that is discrete from cervical and vaginal composition. As previously described, healthy vaginal and cervical microbiomes are composed primarily of different Lactobacillus species. In concordance with this, we found that Lactobacillus species make up approximately 80% of total vaginal composition and 60-80% of the cervical microbiome. However, endometrial samples appear to be more diverse in their microbiota with Lactobacillus contributing only about 30-40% of total diversity. At the phylum level, approximately 90% of total microbial diversity was composed of Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Bacteroidetes. CONCLUSIONS: It appears that healthy endometrium is not a sterile environment, as is classically thought. In addition, the endometrium has a distinct microbiome from the vagina and cervix. To our knowledge, this is the first study to directly compare endometrial with vaginal and cervical microbiomes from matched healthy reproductive aged women. Sequencing of women with implantation failure is currently underway to assess for subclinical infectious causes of infertility. Myeloperoxidase In this work, we elucidate the mechanism behind deregulation of the spindle force balance, by monitoring changes in the movement and disintegration of key scaffold proteins such as pericentrin after exposure to myeloperoxidase (MPO) compared to activated macrophages. Macrophages, ubiquitous inflammatory cells, are major cellular producers of MPO and downstream inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Oocytes with and without cumulus cells were exposed to either 40 nM purified MPO (n=648/648) for 3, 6, 12, and 24 hrs or cocultured with activated macrophage cells (n=200/200) for 1, 2, 3, and 4 hrs, and resultant changes in spindle morphology and pericentrin were assessed. RESULTS: Exposure to purified MPO caused the spindles to thin and elongate along the pole-to-pole axis to over double the normal spindle length. In contrast, exposure to activated macrophages caused the spindles to shorten along the pole to pole axis, widen and expand to spherical shape. Although, our results show the deterioration in oocyte quality is likely to be caused by MPO in both cases, opposite movement along the pole to pole axis was noted after exposure to purified MPO versus macrophage co-culture. Treatment with purified MPO shows a predominance of outward forces as seen in spindle fiber depolymerization, whereas activated macrophage treatment caused increased inward forces causing shortening and widening similar to a spindle fiber repolymerization effect. Interestingly, the lengthening effect shows persistence of pericentrin near the spindle poles. However, after co-culture with activated macrophages, which produce higher amounts of MPO and importantly, other inflammatory cytokines and ROS, pericentrin is lost. CONCLUSIONS: These findings are consistent with our group and others previous results suggesting ROS implication is spindle fiber breakage and/or disintegration. Pattern recognition and further quantification of these spindle morphologies may provide information as to the condition of the genetic material within the oocyte and serve as a biomarker for functional competence. This study investigated the effect of an isocaloric low protein (LP) diet with and without folate supplementation on the fluxes of cysteine and serine in the oocyte. These amino acids are critical for metabolic homeostasis because cysteine is the rate limiting amino acid for the synthesis of glutathione, the primary intracellular antioxidant. Serine provides the carbon skeleton for the synthesis of cysteine from methionine, and is a precursor for glycine, one of the amino acids that forms glutathione. METHODS: 24 rats were in three isocaloric dietary groups (n=8) for 40 days; control (C, 20%), low protein (LP, 6%) and low protein + folate (LPF, 6% + 5mg/kg folate). 15U of pregnant mare serum gonadotropin was given; 48h later animals underwent central catheterization under gas anesthesia. Isotopic tracers of 13C3-Serine and D2-Cysteine were infused as a 4h prime-constant rate. After sacrifice, germinal vesicle oocytes were denuded of cumulus cells. The rate of appearance of each traced amino acid was calculated using the tracer dilution method. ANOVA followed by post-hoc comparisons were performed. RESULTS: Preovulatory isocaloric protein restriction reduced the kinetics of oocyte serine and cysteine and folic acid supplementation rescued these changes. The flux of serine in the oocyte was significantly lower in the LP group compared to the LPF group (2133±191 vs. 3130±329; P<0.05) and trended lower compared to the control group (2722±215; P=0.06). The flux of cysteine in the oocyte was significantly reduced in both the LP and LPF groups compared to the control group (260±26 and 255±18 vs. 355±23; P=0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Preovulatory LP diet results in profound changes in oocyte amino acid metabolism. Serine flux is reduced which in turn impairs cysteine synthesis. Folate reversed the reduction in serine flux but cysteine production remained depressed, suggesting impaired glutathione synthesis and impaired oxidant-antioxidant homeostasis in the oocyte. These metabolic responses may affect the growth and development of oocytes. INTRODUCTION: As a model for stress in vivo, we hypothesize that clinically relevant AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) agonists may cause unwanted early pregnancy complications. Agonist types include pharma such as metformin and aspirin, and diet supplements (DS) such as bromo-3,3' diindolylmethane (BR-DIM) and resveratrol. To test this hypothesis, we cultured totipotent 2-cell mouse embryos with positive control stress hyperosmotic sorbitol or with experimentally and clinically relevant AMPK agonists. We then assayed for 1) the necessity and sufficiency of AMPK in mediating rapid potency loss (1hr), or 2) AMPK function via pharma and DS to affect culture of 2-cell embryos to blastocyst stage. We obtained mouse zygotes, cultured them to the late 2-cell stage, and then treated them for 1hr with sorbitol to induce hyperosmotic stress +/-the AMPK antagonist compound C, or without stress in the presence of AMPK agonists, metformin and/or aspirin, or DSs. We analyzed potency loss by immuno-fluorescence using previously published antibodies to Rex1 (Zfp-42) and Oct4 (octamer-binding transcription factor 4) potency factors. RESULTS: Positive control, sorbitol stress decreases potency in mouse embryos and AMPK mediates stress-induced potency loss. The AMPK agonist metformin is sufficient to induce potency loss without stress. Nuclear Oct4 and Rex1 in 2-cell stage embryos undergo stress-induced loss that is decreased by the AMPK antagonist compound C. Preliminary data show that metformin and aspirin slow embryo growth in the 2 nd day, but cause embryo death by the 4 th day and these effects are completely reversed by compound C.This suggests that both metformin and aspirin act through AMPK to create morbidity. CONCLUSIONS: Clinically important pharma and DSs (e.g. metformin, aspirin, BR-DIM) are known to activate AMPK and a growing list of stem cell potency factors undergoes AMPK-dependent loss. Taken together the data suggests a possible toxicity range of single or multiple AMPK agonists prescribed to improve fertility or used by pregnant women ad hoc. AMPK appears to be the "master regulatory" enzyme that mediates stress-induced loss of potency factors in the totipotent 2 cell embryo that are important later in pluripotent ESCs and multipotent TSCs. We anticipate that AMPK agonists will mediate anabolic-to-catabolic shifts as in TSCs and this will slow growth of the embryo. Blastocyst To investigate the G-CSF mechanism on trophoblast,we examined HLA-G,CD34 and VEGF and its receptors VEGFR1 and VEGFR2 expression in ours RM patients delivering at term after G-CSF therapy. METHODS: 25 placental tissues from G-CSF treated RM women and control was 25 placental tissues of normal pregnancies at term no disease affected. All samples were fixed in formalin and paraffin embedded;sections of 5 mm were dewaxed,rehydrated and incubated over night with anti-HLA-G,anti-CD34,anti-VEGF,anti-VEGFR1 and anti VEGFR2 antibodies(Santa Cruz Bioteechnology,Santa Cruz California).Indirect avidin-biotin complex(Vectastin-ABC-peroxidase-kit) immunoperoxidase assay was used,and staining obtained with DAB.To analyze statistically immunostaining for each protein,semi-quantitative analysis of specific staining was performed with HSCORE system and Statistical analysis with Fisher exact test and Student's test. Cyto and syncynthiumtrophoblast and also vasal endothelial cells of villi in normal pregnancy at term showed immunostaining for VEGF and CD34 whilst HLA-G was present only in extravillous cytotrophoblast.Cyto and syncynthiumtrophoblast of placental villi G-CSF treated women showed a strong positive increase of specific of VEGF and CD 34 immunostaining and only in extravillous cytotrophoblast of HLA-G, in all 25 cases(P<0.001). Cyto and syncynthiumtrophotblast of villi in normal pregnancy at term and also endothelial cells of villi vasa showed immunostaining for VEGF-R 1 and VEGF-R 2 whilst cyto and syncynthiumtrophoblast of G-CSF treated women overexpressed strongly immunostaining of these growth factors in all 25 cases (P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: G-CSF therapy during the pregnancy in RM women increases CD 34,VEGF and its receptors expression in all trophoblast,both in syncynthium and in cytotrophoblast,throughout the pregnancy,enhancing growth and development of placental flow,with increase placental blood flow and consequently the foetus. The increase of HLA-G in extravillous cytotrophoblast can also explain effectiveness of this drug in the immunologic tolerance helping to avoid miscarriage. Expression Previous studies have demonstrated that differential promoter usage and alternative splicing-generated GR mRNA transcripts and result in differential cellular GC responses. The aim of this study was to evaluate the potential role of inflammatory cytokines in the control of GR mRNA transcripts expression in first trimester decidua. METHODS: First trimester decidua specimens were obtained from uncomplicated, elective terminations of pregnancy between 6 and 12 weeks. Isolated, purified first trimester decidual cells (FT-DC) were pretreated for 8 days with 10-8 mol/L E2 + 10-7 mol/L MPA in order to mimic the hormonal milieu of pregnancy and then exposed for 5 hours to TNFα at different concentrations.RNA was purified and relative mRNA levels of GR mRNA transcript were assessed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. RESULTS: GR mRNA transcripts produced by alternative splicing were detected in first trimester decidua and included GR-α, GR-γ and GR-P, while GR β mRNA was undetectable. Among the five untranslated exon 1 regions, mRNAs for exon 1C and 1B were observed. GR-α and exon 1C were the most represented isoforms. Corresponding results were obtained in purified cultured FT-DC.There was an extensive alteration in GR promoter usage and GR transcripts expression in FT-DC after treatment with different doses of TNFα. Specifically, there was an increase in mRNA levels for GR-α, GR-1C, GR-γ, GR-1B and GR-P while GR β mRNA expression remained undetectable. The present study has demonstrated that first trimester decidua is characterized by a complex pattern of GR mRNA transcripts expression. Furthermore, the observed changes in GR mRNA transcript levels exerted byTNF-α suggest a potential role for inflammatory cytokines in regulating GR mRNA relative abundance in early pregnancy. INTRODUCTION: MicroRNAs (miRs) are highly conserved 9-22-nucleotide-long non-coding RNAs that regulate more than 30% of the human genome. The endometrium is a steroid-hormone-responsive tissue that undergoes highly organized cyclic structural changes in preparation for embryo implantation. Here, we identified and investigated 17-β estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P) regulation of miRs in human endometrial stromal cells. Further, the effect of the widespread endocrine disruptor, bisphenol A (BPA), on these miRs was investigated. METHODS: Human endometrial stromal cells were serum-deprived for 16-24 h prior to treatment with vehicle, E2 (3 nM), P (100 nM) or E2+P for 16 h and subjected to miR microarray analysis in triplicate. RT-qPCR was performed to validate selected miRs. RESULTS: Several miRs were differentially expressed in the microarray based on treatment. Using biologic plausibility and fold-change, select miRs were validated in additional preps of primary stromal cells. Interestingly, E2 resulted in transient downregulation (3-fold, p=0.0004) of miR-let-7c at 8 h with return to baseline at 16 h. E2 also resulted in transient downregulation of miR-27b (5-fold, p=0.009) and miR-181b (2-fold, p=0.04). E2+P resulted in sustained increases of miR-181b (2.5-fold, p=0.04) and miR-let-7e (2-fold, p<0.01) at 24 h. In contrast with the negative effects of E2 on let-7c, miR-27b, and miR-181b; two miRNAs were transiently upregulated by E2 (miR-let-7e, 2-fold, p=0.08, 8h; miR-3613, 2-fold, p<0.02, 24 h). Similar to E2, BPA (3 -30 µM) resulted in transient downregulation (4-8 h) of miR-let 7c and miR-181b. BPA also downregulated miR-27b; but unlike E2, this downregulation was sustained and more profound (3.5-fold, p=0.006) at 24 h. The effects of BPA on miR-let-7e were also similar to E2 with significant transient upregulation at 8 h (2.5-fold, p=0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data indicate that E2 and P regulate miR profiles in endometrial stromal cells. E2-induced loss of miRlet-7c, miR-27b, and miR-181b may bring about increased expression of their predicted targets, IGFR-1, HOXA10, and osteopontin, respectively in endometrial stroma and thereby, promote endometrial growth and receptivity. The endocrine disruptor, BPA, exhibited effects similar to E2; but temporal relationships differed, suggesting that chronic exposure of endometrium to BPA may lead to dysfunctional endometrial cyclicity, implantation failure, or pregnancy loss. and 3. its production is up-regulated by TNFα via NF-κB signaling in endometrial epithelial cells. In normal pregnancy, the trophoblast releases TNFα into the maternal circulation, leading to a controlled physiologic inflammation. However, abnormal inflammation due to elevated TNFα has been associated with clinical miscarriages. We hypothesized that these two molecules can be measured in serum as a reflection of increased inflammation and can therefore be used as markers to predict implantation outcome. Objectives: 1) to measure luteal phase serum levels of MFG-E8 and TNFα in women with recurrent pregnancy loss, repeated failed implantation in IVF (IF), and fertile controls (C); and to examine if TNFα regulates MV secretion of MFG-E8 in vitro. METHODS: Serum levels of markers were measured by ELISA (n= 14 women). Ishikawa cells were treated or not with TNFα (20 and 50 ng/ml for 3 days), and MVs isolated by ultracentrifugation of the culture media were subjected to immunoblotting, atomic force microscopy (AFM) and LC-ESI-MS/MS. RESULTS: Patients with IF showed higher levels of MFG-E8 and TNFα as compared to C, increased over 2 times and 1.5 times, respectively. Ishikawa cell MVs secreted MFG-E8 was detected at 30kDa, and secretion was up-regulated by TNFα (p<0.05). Furthermore, a specific peptide 1765.657048 was identified by MS/MS spectra with the sequence VTFLGLQHWVPELAR. These MVs were immobilized on mica substrate by AFM, and cross sectional imaging showed that MVs were approximately 115 nm in diameter. CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary data show that MFG-E8 and TNFα levels in serum may be associated with defective or failed implantation, and that MFG-E8 MVs secretion in vitro is regulated by TNFα. The findings of this study could have major clinical impact and provide basis for potential therapeutic use of MFG-E8 and TNFα analogues for implantation failure. Embryo implantation involves a complex sequence of events, and a large amount of molecules have been postulated to be involved in the interaction of embryo and endometrium. This study evaluated the endometrial expression of α-inhibin and betaglycan in the mid-secretory phase of women scheduled to in vitro fertilization (IVF) and tested whether these markers are associated with implantation failure. This was a nested case-control study including 52 women submitted to in vitro fertilization (IVF) and embryo transfer, divided into two groups: cases with implantation failure (n=33) and controls with confirmed clinical pregnancy (n=19). Endometrial α-inhibin and betaglycan gene expression was evaluated in the mid-secretory phase of the natural menstrual cycle immediately before IVF, using real time PCR. Partial correlation coefficients were calculated to test the correlation between implantation rate and endometrial expression of α-inhibin and betaglycan, adjusting for potential confounders. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were calculated for prediction of implantation failure with their respective 95% confidence intervals (CI). We found a higher gene expression of α-inhibin (fold increase = 2.14 ± 0.32, p<0.05) and betaglycan (fold increase = 1.44 ± 0.16, p<0.05) in implantation failure patients compared to confirmed clinical pregnancy patients. *Figure(s) will be available online. Partial correlation analysis adjusting for age, time of infertility, endometrial thickness, and serum AMH levels showed an independent association between implantation rate and endometrial expression of α-inhibin (r = -0.391, p = 0.004) and betaglycan (r = -0.248, p = 0.048). The areas under ROC curves for prediction of implantation failure in this context were 0.692 (95% CI 0.551-0.833) for α-inhibin and 0.678 (95% CI 0.526-0.830) for betaglycan. The present results suggest that high expression levels of α-inhibin and betaglycan transcripts in secretory phase endometrium are associated to a lower chance of achieving pregnancy with IVF. Previous work suggests that thrombin generation may play a pivotal role in development of these complications. Here, we investigated global gene expression profiles of human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs) before and after decidualization and the effect of thrombin on these genomic changes. METHODS: HESCs from proliferative phase endometrium were treated with vehicle or thrombin at baseline or during decidualization with cAMP and MPA x 72 h. Next generation RNA sequencing was conducted in duplicate from two different cell preps. RESULTS: RNAseq data revealed massive changes in gene expression profiles during decidualization representing the following cell signaling pathways: cell cycle repair, embryonic stem cell pluripotency, ILK signaling, cAMP-mediated signaling, STAT3 pathways, β-adrenergic signaling, inhibition of MMPs, leukocyte extravasation, and oxidative stress response genes. As expected, and confirmed by qPCR in multiple cell preps, PRL was induced 9-fold as well as PRLR, IRS1, and JAK2. Likewise upregulation of IGF-1 and IGFBPs was confirmed including cell survival pathways and STAT3 signaling. Leukocyte activation and extravasation pathways were affected by induction of JAM2, ICAM-1, and CXCR4. Interestingly, thrombin altered decidualization-induced changes in gene expression with the most dramatic effects on IL-8 and IL-6. Specifically, thrombin (2U/ml) increased baseline IL-8 gene expression 33-fold (p < 0.001) in HESCs and 22-fold in decidualized cells (p < 0.001). IL-6 was increased from 1.0 ± 0.5 to 2.6 ± 0.25 RU/h36B4 at baseline and 2.5-fold during decidualization (p < 0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide insights regarding the predominant cell signaling pathways activated during decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells. Further, the results indicate that thrombin adversely affects decidualization in vitro primarily through increases in proinflammatory chemokines IL-8 and IL-6. We suggest that intrauterine bleeding and generation of thrombin accentuates leukocyte extravasation and endometrial inflammation, impairs decidualization, and endometrial support of early pregnancy. Analysis of the Effect of Growth Factors on the Early Stages of Follicular Development in Cultured Murine Ovarian Tissue Through the Use of BrdU Immunostaining. Tomohiko Murase, Satoko Osuka, Tomoko Nakamura, Sachiko Takikawa, Maki Goto, Akira Iwase, Fumitaka Kikkawa. Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan. INTRODUCTION: Due to the remarkable progress of fertility preservation techniques, in recent years the autologous transplantation of frozen-thawed ovarian tissue has become possible. In the field of basic research, the development of ovarian follicles is being studied by adding various growth factors to human-or animal-derived ovarian tissue or isolated follicles. It has been reported that the early stages of follicular development can be promoted through the fragmentation of ovarian tissue. In this study, we fragmented murine ovarian tissue and evaluated the activation of primordial follicles and the development of early-stage follicles after cultivation in the presence of various growth factors, through the use of a new method with which ovarian tissue can be immunostained with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU). This study was conducted with the approval of the Institutional Review Board. First, both ovaries of four-week-old murine females were removed, and each ovary was cut into four pieces. Then, the DNA synthesis of the granulosa cells that were obtained after cultivation in the presence of various kinds of growth factors for different lengths of time was evaluated by immunostaining using anti-BrdU antibody. In the groups to which GDF-9, TGF-α, or bFGF had been added, the percentage of BrdU-positive granulosa cells was significantly higher than in the other groups. When comparing the groups to which these growth factors had been continuously added for one week with the groups to which these growth factors had only been added on Day 6 and 7, the same percentage of BrdU-positive granulosa cells was obtained. In the groups to which BMP-4, HB-EGF, or mTOR activator had been added, no significant changes in the BrdU-positive rates were observed compared to the control groups. This study showed that the use of BrdU immunostaining in cultured murine ovarian tissues is useful for evaluating which growth factors play a role in the early stages of follicular development. We think that this method will facilitate the evaluation of the effects of growth factors on in vitro cultures of human ovarian tissue in the future. Few reproductive events are more devastating to couples than recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL), however, in less than 50% of losses there is no associated etiology found. Although sporadic pregnancy loss occurs in 10-15% of pregnancies, RPL is experienced in 2-5% of couples and even less often in younger women. Anti-Mullerian Hormone (AMH) is produced by granulosa cells of developing oocytes and has been shown to decrease in parallel with the physiologic decline of oocyte number and chromosomal normalcy, which is an objective quantification of ovarian age. In the present investigation, 166 couples with 2 ore more documented pregnancy losses underwent complete evaluation as outlined by the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Unique to this study is the additional evaluation of ovarian "biologic age" by assessment of serum AMH adjusted to chronologic age and ovulation status. RESULTS: Evaluation of 166 RPL couples disclosed the incidences of thyroid dysfunction, uterine anomalies or anti-phopholipid disorders were no higher that that in the general population. However, 5 of 166 women (3%), demonstrated chromosomal abnormalities and 47 of 166 women, or 28%, were diagnosed with ovulatory dysfunction by transvaginal ultrasound. In contrast to the low incidence of reproductive abnormalities identified by traditional evaluation, 116 patients (70%) had significantly decreased ovarian reserve, or premature ovarian aging, with AMH values more than 2 standard deviations below that of age adjusted expectations. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that "biologic ovarian age" was significantly older than "chronologic ovarian age" and that AMH values are significantly lower in the majority of patients with RPL. These results may have significant implications for couples for any age and especially RPL couples. AMH assessment should be included in the initial evaluation of RPL and a low value should prompt a discussion of pre-implantation genetic evaluation. While women with RPL and/or low AMH are not necessarily infertile, they may be at an increased risk for both decreased fecundity and the potential long term health implications of subsequent premature menopause. We hypothesize that CD83 as well as sCD83 are involved in adaptation to pregnancy and regulate maternal immunologic response. A well-established model of pathologic pregnancy in mice was used (CBA/J x DBA/2J) and compared to normal pregnancy mice (CDA/J x Balb/c) as well as non-pregnant CBA/J mice used as a control. The spleen, thymus and both the aortal and inguinal lymph nodes were harvested on day 14 of pregnancy. Blood was also collected and serum was frozen for further examination. Single cell suspensions were then generated from each organ and stained with specific antibodies for flow cytometry analysis. In addition, lymphocytes were stimulated with LPS and PMA for 48h and the expression of CD83 was investigated. The supernatant was frozen for evaluation of sCD83 levels by ELISA. We were able to show that CD83 was expressed in lower levels in mice with normal pregnancies as compared to those who suffer from immune induced miscarriages. LPS and PMA stimulation of lymphocytes led to overexpression of CD83 in splenic B cells, MZ cells and T cells from normal pregnancies. No differences in CD83 expression levels were detected in either aortic-, inguinal lymph nodes or thymi. We have shown a different pattern of CD83 in pathologic pregnancies and the immunological status during pregnancy, suggesting a possible involvement in the successful establishment of pregnancy. Further functional experiments are needed to depict the mechanism of CD83 actions. Unbiased identity. We present an experimental workflow novel to reproductive biology for unbiased identification of decidual immune subsets by dimensionality reduction of highly-polychromatic flow cytometry. METHODS: Decidual specimens were dissected from human term placentas and mononuclear cells (MCs) were isolated by mechanical (GentleMACS) and enzymatic (2 mg/mL Collagenase 5, 0.2 mg/mL DNAse I) disruption. MCs labeled by flurochrome-conjugate antibodies against CD3, 4, 8, 11c, 14, 16, 19, 24, 25, 27, 34, 45, 45RA, 45RO, 56, 80, 94, 117, 123, 127, 161, 183, 184, 196, 197, 294, 336, 370 . Data acquisition was performed using BD Fortessa flow cytometer in a 4 laser (355nm, 405nm, 488nm, 562nm), 18 parameter (2 scatter and 16 fluorescent narrowband detectors) configuration. Manual data analysis was performed using FlowJo. Dimensionality reduction by Barnes-Hut modification of t-distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) and density-based k-means clustering was performed using the ACCENSE package (Shekar, K, et al. PNAS 111:202 Observational studies have demonstrated that the incidence and severity of sexually transmitted HIV infection increases in association with long acting progestin contraceptive use. It is suspected that progesterone alters the constitutive immune environment of the female reproductive tract (FRT) possibly by decreasing cytokine expression. We believe the type I interferon, interferon epsilon (IFNε), may play a role in this process but its localization and regulation by steroid hormones in human tissue from the FRT has not be established. METHODS: Endometrial, endocervical, ectocervical and vaginal tissue from 26 premenopausal women were obtained from non-malignant hysterectomy samples. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for IFNε, estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) was performed to determine localization. Effects of estradiol (E2), progesterone (P4), and E2+P4 on IFNε expression was measured in endometrial and vaginal tissue explant cultures using quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and IHC. Two-tailed Student's t-test was used for statistical analysis. RESULTS: IFNε was detected in the epithelial layer of the vagina and ectocervix, specifically localized within the basal cell layer, and in endometrial and endocervical glandular epithelial cells. No IFNε was detected in the stromal tissue of the FRT. IFNε co-localized with ER and PR within endometrial and endocervical glandular cells but not vaginal and ectocervical squamous epithelial cells. IFNε mRNA expression was found in all four tissue types. In endometrial tissue, IFNε mRNA expression significantly decreased from baseline in the E2+P4 treatment group (p=0.004). Treatment with P4 also decreased IFNε abundance, however this was not statistically different (p=0.064). Neither steroid affected IFNε mRNA expression in vaginal tissue (p >0.648). CONCLUSIONS: Constitutive production of IFNε occurs in the FRT. Direct hormonal control in the form of progesterone inhibition may exist in the endocervix and endometrium, however this may not be true in vagina and ectocervix. This may be a mechanism by which long acting progestin contraceptive use is associated with increased risk for HIV infection via the FRT. Tom EC Kieffer, 1 Marijke M Faas, 2 Sicco A Scherjon, 1 Jelmer R Prins. 1 1 University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands; 2 University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. INTRODUCTION: An adequately regulated immune balance is vital for tolerance towards paternal antigens and therewith uncomplicated pregnancies. Studies have shown that the maternal immune system memorizes paternal antigens and with that possibly reduces the risk of pregnancy complications. This project aims to examine the short-and long-term effects of pregnancy on memory T cells. METHODS: Memory T cell subsets and their activation status were analyzed in peripheral blood of 14 women that were never pregnant (nulligravida), 13 women that were pregnant for the first time (primigravida), and 15 women with an uncomplicated pregnancy that delivered at least 6 months before blood withdrawal. Analysis was done using flow cytometry and populations were compared between the healthy volunteer groups using Mann-Whitney U-test; p<0.05. RESULTS: Frequencies of CD4+ memory cells (CD45R0+) were significantly higher in women that delivered compared to nulligravid women. In these women both central memory (CM; CD45R0+CCR7+) and effector memory (EM; CD45R0+CCR7-) cell frequencies were significantly higher. EM/CM ratios did not differ between women that delivered and nulligravid women, however, in the primigravid women a shift towards EM cells was seen. Compared to nulligravid women, proportions of activated (CD69+) cells in both memory cell subsets were significantly higher in pregnant women and in women that delivered. This study showed that pregnancy has short term and long term effects on CD4+ memory T cells in the peripheral blood. During pregnancy a proliferation from CM cells to EM cells seems to occur. The CM/EM ratio is partly recovered in women after delivery though higher memory cell and activated cell frequencies persist. These findings support the theory of memory cells playing a role in the memorizing competence of the maternal immune system and contribute to future research on therapies for pregnancy disorders.  Of the 20 blastocysts biopsied in 4 patients, 4 were found to be diploid (20%), 10 had abnormal chromosomal status (50%) and 6 (30%) did not yield a result due to DNA amplification failure or degraded DNA. When the six 'failed' embryos were rebiopsied, three were found to have normal chromosomal status, increasing the ratio of diploid embryos from 20% to 35%. The ovarian follicular pool is progressively depleted leading to increased serum FSH levels and associated shortening of the follicular phase. We hypothesize that these changes are associated with increased expression of genes involved in folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis. Hence the objective of the study is to determine the changes in ovarian gene expression associated with aging. METHODS: C57BL/6J mice (N=12) were fed normal chow (NC) diet. At 20w of age, 6 mice were sacrificed. The remaining 6 mice continued their NC diet for another 12 weeks. At 32w of age, the remaining 6 mice were sacrificed. At the time of sacrifice, one ovary was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and used for RNA extraction and RT-PCR for detecting the following genes: Gdf-9, Bmp-15, Foxl2, Gja1 (mouse homolog for human connexin 43), Fshr, B-fgf, Lhcgr, epiregulin, Star, Scc, Cyp19a1 (aromatase), Hsd3b1 (3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase), and Cyp17a1 (17-alpha-hydroxylase). Ribosomal protein 36b4 was used as loading control. Data given as units of expression ± SEM and p<0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS: With aging, NC mice had a significant increase in the expression of genes involved in folliculogenesis, including Gdf-9, Bmp-15, Gja1, Fshr, B-fgf and epiregulin. *Figure(s) will be available online. Similarly, the expression of genes involved in steroidogenesis, Scc, Cyp19a1, and Hsd3b1, also increased with aging. *Figure(s) will be available online. There was no change in the expression of Foxl2, or Lhcgr with aging, nor of Star or Cyp17a1. Aging leads to increased expression of genes involved in both folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis. This may be the result of increasing FSH, which in turn induces the expression of these genes. Obese women undergoing controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) have higher cycle cancellation rates, fewer oocytes collected and lower pregnancy rates. The exact mechanism of how obesity causes impaired response to COH is unknown. We hypothesize that obesity and high fat diet are associated with altered ovarian gene expression, which interferes with steroidogenesis and follicle development. Mice were subjected to dietary manipulation starting at 6w to develop 2 female rodent models: Group 1: C57BL/6J normal chow fed mice (NC) (N=12); Group 2: C57BL/6J high fat diet fed mice (HF) (N=12). At 20w of age, 6 mice in each group were sacrificed while another 6 underwent superovulation (SO) with gonadotropins and then were sacrificed. At the time of sacrifice, one ovary was snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and used for RNA extraction and RT-PCR for detecting the following genes: Star, Scc, Cyp19a1 (aromatase), Hsd3b1 (3 betahydroxysteroid dehydrogenase), and Cyp17a1 (17-alpha-hydroxylase). Ribosomal protein 36b4 was used as loading control. Data given as relative units of expression ± SEM and p<0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS: HF mice gained significantly more weight than NC mice (26.9g ± 4.3 vs. 19.1 ± 1.5, p< 0.01). HF mice also produced significantly lower number of oocytes after SO compared to NC mice (1.8 ± 0.5 vs. 6.7 ± 1.8, respectively, p=0.04). As expected, superovulated NC mice had increased expression of Star (8.0 ± 2.2 vs 44.9 ± 4.7, p=0.01), Scc (3.1 ± 0.5 vs 8.3 ± 1.0, p=0.01), Cyp19a1 (1.6 ± 1.5 vs 36.8 ± 7.9, p=0.01), Hsd3b1 (6.0 ± 2.7 vs 16.8 ± 3.9, p=0.03), and Cyp17a1 (4.6 ± 6 vs 125.8 ± 42.8, p=0.01) compared to non-superovulated NC mice. On the other hand, superovulated HF mice had increased expression of Star (1.7 ± 0.4 vs 9.0 ± 1.7, p=0.01) and Cyp19a1 (6.2 ± 0.8 vs 37.6 ± 15.5, p=0.01) following SO compared to non-superovulated HF mice. However, unlike NC mice, they did not have an increase in expression of Scc, Hsd3b1, and Cyp17a1. CONCLUSIONS: HF diet, together with increased adiposity leads to blunted response of steroidogenic genes to SO. Lack of upregulation of Scc, Hsd3b1, and Cyp17a1 genes in the ovaries of mice fed high fat diet may contribute to the poorer response to COH seen with obesity. These changes may be responsible for decreased oocyte collection seen in HF diet and obesity. Studies performed in Europe have found that pregnancy rates for SRI are two to three times higher than bolus IUI. The purpose of this study is to determine patient satisfaction and tolerability of the Evie® SRI device for US population. This was a prospective, randomized control trial of 21 women age ≤39 with unexplained infertility who were undergoing their first IUI cycle. There were two groups -one group received traditional in-office IUI and the other group received the Evie® SRI device. After the insemination procedure, both groups received a standardized survey. Satisfaction was measured using the average of three survey questions regarding patient preference for this type of insemination again (score 0-4, higher score is more satisfaction), comfort was measured with a survey question about physical comfort during insemination (score 0-4, higher score is more comfort), and pain was measured with an average of seven numeric pain rating scales for various times throughout the insemination procedure (score 0-10). Pregnancy rates were monitored with serum βHCG levels 2 weeks after insemination. Traditional IUI (N=11) The follicular phase of the menstrual cycle is responsible for oocyte maturation with accompanying endometrial proliferation. However, there is considerable variability in follicular phase length, which may impact pregnancy. We hypothesize that a shortened or lengthened follicular phase will result in a decreased ongoing pregnancy rate, defined as ≥10 weeks of gestation. METHODS: This is an observational cohort study of prospectively collected data. Institutional IRB approval was obtained. Inclusion criteria: women with a history of 2 or more documented pregnancy losses < 10 wk size and a subsequent monitored pregnancy, seen in an academic RPL program between 2005 and 2012. All pregnancies were conceived with intercourse timed to the LH surge. The length of the follicular phase was defined as the number of days from the LMP to LH surge, inclusive. The primary outcome was ongoing pregnancy of ≥10 weeks of gestation. Logistic regression controlling for age and body mass index (BMI) was performed. RESULTS: 131 pregnancies (110 women) were included in the analysis with a mean age of 35.5 yr (SD 3.6) and a mean of 3.9 prior pregnancy losses (SD 2.0). The ongoing pregnancy rate in this cohort was 62.6% (82/131). The mean follicular phase length in the cycle of conception was 15.6 days (SD 4.5). There was a higher ongoing pregnancy rate among women with a follicular phase of 13-15 days, however this difference did not reach statistical significance. The ongoing pregnancy rate was 53.9%, 72.6% and 57.4% among women with a follicular phase of < 13 days, 13-15 days and > 15 days respectively (p=0.16). Controlling for age and BMI did not significantly alter the results. CONCLUSIONS: There was a trend toward a lower ongoing pregnancy rate in women with a shortened or lengthened follicular phase. Given the small small sample size of this study, further investigation in a larger cohort is ongoing. Evaluation of E2 and P4 Levels Following Flushed vs. Non-flushed Follicular Aspiration. Austin J Zanelotti, George R Attia, Angelica Melillo. University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA. INTRODUCTION: Saline flush aspiration during oocyte retrieval has long been described as a method for increasing oocyte retrieval rates. Data has been mixed on the effectiveness of this practice and has yet to show a clear advantage or disadvantage to flush aspiration procedures. Our study focused on the possibility of hormonal side effects to flush aspiration. The flush aspiration process may disrupt the ability for granulosa cells to produce estrogen and progesterone effectively. This is the first study to our knowledge designed to examine if saline flush aspiration is associated with significant increase in oocytes retrieved and if this procedure could be associated with any significant changes in hormonal milieu post-retrieval. METHODS: Medical records review of UM infertility clinic patients ages 18 years and older undergoing IVF stimulation and trial transfers from 9/2014 to 1/2015. The data collected included: E2 level at day of HCG trigger, day of aspiration of oocyte, 24 hours post-retrieval and day of transfer; P4 level at day of HCG trigger, day of aspiration of oocyte, 24 hours post-retrieval and day of transfer; all points were compared for aspiration with saline flush versus non-flush. In comparison of saline flush vs non-flush aspiration groups overall, no statistical difference was noted in regards to age, total oocyte retrieved, fertilization rate. There was no statistical difference between E2 levels on day of HCG trigger (mean 3337.4 pg/ml versus 4906.1 pg/ ml, P= 0.15). No statistical difference was noted in E2 level 24 hours post-retrieval (P-value 0.09, mean 0.79125 vs. 0.73818). However, in analysis of P4 values 24 hrs post retrieval statistical significance was seen in drop in P4 in flush versus non-flush aspiration (P=0.029)In further analysis, controlling for IVF protocol and analyzing only Lupron stimulation patients, there was no statistical difference in E2 on day of retrieval (P=0.27). However, there was statistically significant decrease in both E2 and P4 levels 24 hours after flush aspiration in comparison to non-flush aspiration groups (P=0.03, P=0.042). CONCLUSIONS: Follicular aspiration flush did not increase the number of oocytes retrieved. Furthermore, there was significant drop in P4 levels in patients that underwent follicular flush 24 hrs post retrieval. In agonist protocol patients a significant drop was noted 24 hrs post retrieval in both E2 and P4. These significant hormonal changes could negatively impact pregnancy rates. Transfer of cryopreserved-warmed embryos into a uterus unaffected by controlled ovarian hyperstimulation has become common in recent years. There is limited information on the effect of embryo cryopreservation and warming on placental function. We sought to determine if cryopreserved-warmed embryos differed from fresh embryos in placental function, by comparing birth weight, preterm delivery rate, and preeclampsia rate between embryo transfer types. We performed a retrospective database cohort study of 612 singleton deliveries following assisted reproductive technology cycles at an academic medical center (455 fresh and 157 cryopreserved-warmed transfers). Cycles were performed between January 12, 2007 through December 8, 2014 and included infants born at ≥20 weeks gestational age, excluding donor egg cycles. We examined the association between transfer type (fresh or cryopreserved-warmed) and proportion of deliveries complicated by preeclampsia, preterm delivery (gestational age <37 weeks), and low birth weight (<2500 g). We assessed associations using generalized linear models, both unadjusted and adjusted, for maternal age, newborn sex, and obstetric history. We observed more pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia following cryopreserved-warmed transfers (3.8%) compared to pregnancies following fresh embryo transfers (1.1%), (p=0.038), unadjusted Odds Ratio = 3.6 (95% CI: 1.1--11.9). Newborns resulting from cryopreserved-warmed transfer cycles had a similar mean birth weight (3506 g) compared to those resulting from fresh transfer cycles, (3414 g),(p=0.13). Newborns resulting from cryopreserved-warmed transfers had similar rates of low birth weight (7.6%) compared to those resulting from fresh transfers (6.2%),(p=0.53). Newborns resulting from cryopreserved-warmed transfer cycles had similar preterm delivery rates compared to those born following fresh transfer cycles, 12.7% vs. 11.2%, respectively, (p=0.61). Statistical adjustment for confounders did not change the unadjusted results. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that cryopreservation with warming may impair placental function since preeclampsia is increased in cropreservedwarmed cycles compared to fresh embryo transfers. Cryopreservation with warming does not affect birth weight or preterm delivery rate. Fresh embryo transfers should be considered when possible as they may reduce the incidence of preeclampsia. and phosphoramide mustard are the two major cytotoxic metabolites of CY. Humans may also be exposed to acrolein through a variety of other sources including cigarette smoke, industrial, and environmental exposure. Phosphoramide mustard introduces alkyl radicals into biologically active molecules inducing cell apoptosis. Mesna, used as an adjuvant during chemotherapy, is an organosulfur compound given to patients in order to reduce the undesired side effects of CY. Females exposed to CY based chemotherapy experience ovarian failure. We hypothesized that CY and its major metabolites affect female fertility through a mechanism that involves deterioration of oocyte quality. We investigated the effects of cyclophosphamide, acrolein, phosphoramide mustard, as well as mesna on metaphase II mouse oocytes (n=210) through exposure to increasing concentrations of each molecule (0, 5, 10, 20, 50, and 100 µM) for 45 min. Oocytes were fixed and subjected to indirect immunofluorescence for detecting changes in microtubule morphology (MT) and chromosomal alignment (CH) using a previously validated 1-4 scoring system. RESULTS: Collectively, our results show treatment of oocytes with increasing concentrations of CY shows a linear increase in poor scoring for both spindle structure and CH alignment, which plateaued at 50 µM. In contrast, acrolein showed more damaging effects as judged by the shift of the curve to the left. Phosphoramide mustard showed no significant or slight increase in poor scoring of both CH and MT upon increasing the drug concentration. Importantly, exposure to mesna also adversely affected the oocyte quality, similar to the deterioration seen with CY. Deterioration in oocyte quality in all treatment groups was mediated through the production of ROS. CONCLUSIONS: Based on these results, role of therapeutic options like antioxidant supplements should be investigated to counteract the effect of CY based chemotherapy to increase fertility in women undergoing this treatment. Stephanie Recently, kisspeptin neurons in hypothalamic arcuate nuclei (ARC) have emerged as the GnRH/LH pulse generators and as the targets and the transmitters of negative feedback of sex steroids. In the current study, we generated postnatal or prenatal androgen induced rat models of PCOS and explored the involvement of kisspeptin and its related molecules in the pathogenesis of PCOS. We developed two different hyperandrogenized rat models of PCOS by postnatal (90 days from 21 days of age) or prenatal (during days 16-19 of maternal gestation) administration of dihydrotestosterone (DHT). We evaluated their estrous cyclicity, the serum hormonal levels, ovarian morphology, and immunoreactivity of kisspeptin, neurokinin B (NKB) and sex steroid receptors in ARC. All protocols were approved by the Committee on Animal Experiments in Nagoya University. RESULTS: Both models showed impaired estrous cyclisity. As for ovarian morphology, both models showed decreased number of corpora lutea, moreover, prenatal androgenized rats showed increased number of antral follicles. Serum LH concentration of the prenatal androgenized rats significantly elevated than the controls, while postnatal treated rats didn't show increased serum LH levels. Immunohistochemistry in ARC showed increased kisspeptin and NKB immunoreacitivity in prenatal androgenized rats, while postnatal androgenized rats showed decreased kisspeptin immunoreactivity. Immunoreactivity of estrogen receptor α and progesterone receptor were not changed in both models. CONCLUSIONS: Prenatal androgenized rats showed more PCOS like phenotype than postnatal androgenized rats. Increased kisspeptin immunoreactivity in ARC of the prenatal androgenized rats might be involved in their PCOS phenotype. The (n=15) and saline group (n=15). After 10 days, rats were sacrificed. Epididymis and testis were removed. Obtained serial section from paraffin blocks were stained by Cx43 immunostaining method. A strong Cx43 staining intensity was observed in the bloodtestis barrier area, which is formed by Sertoli cells connections and stays between the apical of spermatogonia and the basal of primary spermatosit, among the control group. Cx43 staining intensity was significantly low in tubules where germ cells are shed into the lumen *Figure(s) will be available online. Also blood testis barrier, which was heavily stained in the control group, was observed as striating intermittently close to the peritubular tissue in this group *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: A reduction of Cx43 expression because of ceftriaxone means a corruption of the blood-testis barrier, which provides protection of microenvironment created by Sertoli cells, for the differentiation of spermatogenic cells in the seminiferous tubules. Our study demonstrates ceftriaxone's negative impact on Cx43 protein expression. We believe that gap junction channels protein; Cx43 has an important role in supporting the spermatogenesis process and organization. Deterioration and reduction of spermatogenic cell development or apoptosis might be associated with disruption of communication provided by Cx43. Developing an accurate noninvasive preoperative diagnostic tool for LMS is a high priority in the field to improve healthcare of women with suspicious myometrial mass. We previously reported that AD ANS-886 is a LMS specific promoter that is expressed only in LMS cells (LMS-ON/Leiomyoma-OFF) which can be exploited for diagnostic molecular imaging techniques(ASRM2015). In this work we are further validating our in vitro results in a nude mice model of human leiomyosarcoma and AD ANS -886 injected intravenously followed by the proper gene assay. METHODS: Ad-ANS-886 conditioned gene expression in vivo was tested by intravenous injection of adenovirus (1x 10 9 ) in a 10 week old female nude mice previously challenged with human uterine LMS cells (20 x 10 6 ). Imaging of the animals was carried out 2, 4, and 8 days after intravenous virus injection by IVIS machine. Control animals were implanted human fibroid primary cells. DNA isolation from tumor tissue as well as liver,spleen,lung, and kidney was done to track virus dissemination by PCR for denovirus E4 region. The LMS group expressed the gene with a ten fold increase over the control group (P<0.0001); the time course of gene expression showed a maximal signal 48 hours after intravenous virus injection, which disappeared by day 10. PCR showed that the virus despited being able to reach, the signal was detected only in the leiomyosarcoma tissue. CONCLUSIONS: Ad-ANS-886 provides a potentially reliable diagnostic molecular bio-imaging tool to triage patients with suspicious uterine mass. Discriminating the more common benign leiomyoma from the malignant leiomyosarcoma is an area of high priority that could have major positive impact on women reproductive health. Chemotherapy we employed murine FTE in the assay ex vivo to verify transferrin could introduce DNA-DSBs in vivo. We also investigated human follicular fluid as fallopian tubes are intermittently exposed to the follicular fluid. METHODS: A pair of adnexes from each mouse was divided into transferrin treatment group and control group. Tissues were incubated ex vivo and DNA-DSBs formation was compared by immunohistochemistry. Human follicular fluid was collected from patients who received oocyte retrieval at Tohoku University Hospital based on the approval of the ethic board at Tohoku University School of Medicine. The concentration of transferrin was measured by competitive ELISA. Hydrogen peroxide, a substrate for a Fenton reaction, was also measured by colorimetric determination method. Fallopian tube epithelial cells and A2780 ovarian cancer cells were exposed to the follicular fluid and the induction of DNA-DSBs were assessed by immunocytochemistry. Phospho-Histone A2X (γH2AX) was employed as a marker for DNA-DSBs.  The In 2013, the MGH Oncofertility Clinic was established to provide fertility counseling to reproductive aged women with newly diagnosed cancers. We seek to better understand barriers to referral and whether the dedicated clinic increased the number of fertility preservation consults and decreased the time from referral to appointment. We conducted a retrospective chart review of all women aged 18-44 years who were referred for fertility consultation from 2011 to 2015. Additionally, a questionnaire assessing barriers to referral was administered to providers seeing women for a new consultation by the MGH Cancer Center between August 2014 to July 2015. A one tailed t-test and chi-square were calculated using a p=0.05. RESULTS: A total of 6,895 women, aged 18-44, were seen at the MGH Cancer Center from December 2010 to August 2015. 4,367 of them were seen before the establishment of the Oncofertility Clinic and 2,528 after. Of those, a total of 150 were referred for fertility consultation, 74 before the clinic and 76 after. Since the clinic was founded, the mean time from booking to appointment decreased by 2.81 days, from 10.38 to 7.57 (p=.034). Furthermore, the percentage of cancer patients referred has increased from 1.7% to 3.01% (Chi-square = 12.95, p<0.01). Of the patients not referred, "have children" (38.9%) and "treatment likely won't impact fertility" (20.7%) were the leading causes. Only 2% of doctors cited "not enough time for referral" and none cited that "fertility preservation would be unsafe." CONCLUSIONS: Despite the recommendations of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, not all female cancer patients of reproductive age are referred for fertility preservation consultation. Barriers cited include emergent need to start treatment, providers own lack of knowledge, poor prognosis, and already having children. In our cohort, we demonstrated that a dedicated Oncofertility Clinic increases physician referrals and decreases the mean time to consultation. Of those not referred, the safety, timeliness, and appropriateness of fertility preservation treatment appear to not be a factor in clinician decision-making. As fertility preservation options improve, establishing a dedicated oncofertility clinic is a crucial step in enhancing access to fertility preservation specialists. Under an approved Human Investigation Committee protocol, endometrial samples were obtained from patients undergoing surgery for benign gynecological disorders. Endometrial cell suspensions containing stem cells cells were plated with the murine cardiomyocytes. Co-cultured cells were treated with differentiation medium containing 100 nM oxytocin (OT) for 2 weeks (10% FBS DMEM-F-12, 1% antibiotics-antimycotics, and 100 nM OT). Control endometrial cell suspensions containing stem cells were cultured in isolation and also received differentiation medium. Differentiation medium was replaced every 3 days. 14 days after differentiation, dsRed positive cardiomyocytes were separated from the differentiated endometrial stem cells cells via FACS. mRNA was extracted from the co-cultured and control cells using a Qiagen RNeasy kit, and expression of cardiomyocyte markers (NK2 Homeobox 5, Cardiac Troponin T and I, and ISL LIM Homeobox 2) was analyzed by qRT-PCR. RESULTS: Co-culture with murine neonatal cardiomyocytes significantly increased the expression of NKX2.5, a transcription factor that regulates heart development and protects cardiomyocytes against cytotoxins, by 8-fold. Co-culture did not significantly affect the expression of ISL1, cTnI, or cTnT in comparison with differentiation medium alone. CONCLUSIONS: While the effect of oxytocin as a differentiation agent for EDSCs has been previously demonstrated, co-culture with murine cardiomyocytes may prove to be a useful tool in increasing efficiency of differentiation to a cardiomyocyte-like fate. EDSCs may offer a novel and easily accessible source of stem cells with vast clinical potential. Role Evans rat uteri by using surface markers.We sought to explore their role in pregnancy-induced remodeling and establish the impact of hypoxia on their proliferation. METHODS: Myometrial tissues were enzymatically digested to obtain single cell suspensions.The % of Stro1 + /CD44 + stem cells in uterine cervix and horns from breeder versus virgin rats was calculated by flow cytometry.Then,we evaluated the % of stem cells through pregnancy and labor to elucidate the effect of gestational age.Isolated stem cells were also plated for cell proliferation assays under 2% vs 20%O 2 conditions. Finally, hypoxia signaling PCR superarrays were performed to compare the differences in gene expression. RESULTS: Prior parity significantly increased the % of Stro1 + /CD44 + stem cells in cervix (9.5±2.2vs3.1±0.8) and horns (6.3±1.1vs3.4±0.5). During pregnancy,two different phases were identified:expansion,where the % of stem cells increased significantly;versus involution(labor and day after delivery),where the % of stem cells decreased to basal levels(p≤0.05).Cell proliferation assays showed that myometrial stem cells possessed higher proliferative rate under hypoxic versus normoxic conditions(p≤0.05).Lastly,we found 36 up-regulated and 45 downregulated hypoxia related-genes,which were differentially expressed in stem cells. Since pregnancy-induced mechanical stretching results in hypoxia, we propose that Stro1 + /CD44 + myometrial stem cells,which preferentially grow under low oxygen conditions,promote uterine enlargement,thus contributing to a successful pregnancy.Further studies are needed to elucidate the exact role of these cells in healthy pregnancy and/or pathological conditions,such us preterm labor. Modeling Our lab has focused on comparison of this in vitro differentiation process to the in vivo cell types in the placenta, determining the mechanisms by which early trophoblast differentiation occurs. We have identified p63 as a proliferative cytotrophoblast (CTB) stem cell marker in the early human placenta, and have shown that it is required for BMP4-induced differentiation of hPSCs into functional trophoblast (hCG-secreting syncytiotrophoblast/ STB and HLAG+ extravillous trophoblast/EVT). We have developed defined media for reproducible differentiation of hPSCs into bipotential p63+/CDX2+ CTB stem cells, and applied this protocol to both normal and Trisomy 21-hPSCs, showing that a trophoblast differentiation defect can be modeled using hPSCs. METHODS: Feeder-free hPSC lines were differentiated into CTB in minimal media plus 10 ng/ml BMP4 for 4-6 days (1st step). These cells were then replated into feeder-conditioned media with BMP4, and cultured for additional 6 days to terminally differentiate (2nd step). Differentiation was analyzed by flow cytometry and qRT-PCR for lineagespecific markers, hCG ELISA for STB-specific hormone secretion, and immunohistochemistry for morphological evaluation. During the 2nd step, we also treated some cells with 5 ng/ml Activin A and assayed for morphologic and functional rescue of the T21 phenotype. (Table) . Risks for low Apgar scores and need for antibiotics, assisted ventilation, and surfactant therapy were similarly lower for older, compared to younger, mothers. Risk for seizures did not differ significantly between the groups. CONCLUSIONS: Risk for stillbirth was lower for women with twins aged 35 to 39 and >39 compared to women aged 18 to 34. Risk for early preterm birth (<32 weeks) was lower for older women as well, as was risk for several adverse outcomes associated with prematurity. Twin pregnancies for older women may involve similar risk as younger women. *Figure(s) will be available online. (Figure) . Gestational age retained significance in the adjusted model. Cumulative risk for stillbirth increased approximately 0.1% per week from 36 to <40 weeks gestational age, with higher rates of increase beyond 40 weeks gestation (Figure) . CONCLUSIONS: Determination of optimal delivery timing for pregnancies affected by chronic hypertension involves balancing risk for stillbirth with risk for adverse neonatal outcomes. Delivery after 40 weeks gestational age was associated with both increased risk for the composite adverse neonatal outcome and additional risk for stillbirth, suggesting that perinatal outcomes may be improved with delivery by estimated due date for this condition. *Figure(s) will be available online.  The observed association between CS and ADHD persisted in sibling-matched analyses for emergency, but not elective CS. As emergency CS begins after the onset of labour, babies are likely exposed to microbiota of the birth canal and experience the raised stress hormones associated with delivery. If there were a true causal effect of CS through either of these mechanisms we would expect the association to remain for elective CS, where neither of these exposures occurs. The persistence of the effect of emergency CS is more likely related to factors that led to the emergency rather than the procedure itself (confounding by indication). We hypothesized that parents who themselves were born in breech presentation would be more likely to have first born children also born in breech presentation. This was a retrospective cohort study using linked intergenerational birth certificate data (1961) (1962) (1963) from the Utah Population Database. Singleton live births were linked to the birth certificates of their parents as well as their aunts and uncles (parental siblings) resulting in a cohort of 192,518 first born singleton children with both parents born in Utah, 6,786 (3.5%) of whom were born in breech presentation. Adjusted odds ratios were determined for an increased risk of breech presentation in first born children based on either their mother or father being born breech while controlling for gestational age at birth, maternal age, uterine malformations, amniotic fluid abnormalities, congenital anomalies, birth weight, parental education, and parental gestational age at birth. Additionally, interactions between parental sibling birth status and a child's risk for breech presentation were analyzed. RESULTS: If either parent was born breech, their first born child was significantly more likely to be delivered in breech presentation. Pts with IAS had significantly shorter Cx length at time of cerclage; 9.9 ± 7 vs. 13.7 ± 6.7mm (P = 0.025) and more frequently had Cx funneling (P = 0.022). Other baseline characteristics were largely similar. CONCLUSIONS: Despite associated differences in Cx funneling and shorter Cx, presence of IAS did not affect pregnancy outcome for gestational age (GA) at birth and neonatal birth weight. These results suggest that presence of IAS does not contraindicate use of optimally placed cerclage in asymptomatic pts who are candidates for cerclage. Optimal timing for delivery is accepted to be 39-40wks, but whether increased risk of complications in these pregnancies modulates delivery timing has not been studied. We examine complications & optimal timing for delivery of these "premium pregnancies". METHODS: Term non-anomalous singleton 2013 US deliveries that underwent infertility treatment were selected. Propensity score matching was used to select matched controls. Cases with hypertension/ preeclampsia, diabetes, low birth weight, history of previous cesarean and/or history of poor pregnancy outcome were excluded. Cases were categorized by mode of conception(conception-assisted vs. spontaneous) & gestational age. Separate composite scores for maternal and neonatal complications were created a priori. Bonferroni correction was used to compare frequencies and logistic regression to calculate adjusted odds of complications by gestational age, using 39 weeks as reference. RESULTS: 19,862 cases were identified, with 17,864 controls selected by the model. Similar to spontaneous conception cases, in conception-assisted pregnancies the distribution of frequencies was "J" shaped, with the nadir at 39 weeks ( Figure) for both maternal (0.8%, p=0.025, z=1.47) & neonatal (6.2%, p=0.001, z=6.04) complications. Although an overall higher risk of complications in assisted-conception was found at all gestational ages compared to spontaneous-conception, the risks of complications for the former group was the lowest at 39wks. * Figure( s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Despite its increased risk of complications and intense monitoring and/or intervention, 39 weeks remains as the optimal timing for low risk pregnancies occurring after infertility treatment. This result may support decreasing elective early-term deliveries in this specific population. Effect from the immediate pre-operative ultrasound to the post-operative day number one ultrasound evaluation, and location of hysterotomy (anterior, posterior or fundal). Spearman and Pearson correlation coefficients were determined between these clinical characteristics and length of gestation from time to procedure to time of delivery. RESULTS: A total of 34 patients were available for analysis. The mean gestational age at the time of open fetal myelomeningocele repair was 24.7 weeks (± 0.9). The mean duration of pregnancy following the procedure was 7.1 weeks (± 3.1) with a mean gestational age of delivery of 31.8 weeks (± 2.9). The change in transvaginal cervical length from the pre-operative ultrasound to post-operative day number one ultrasound showed a statistically significant correlation to the duration of pregnancy after the procedure by both Spearman (r=0.38, P=0.04) and Pearson (r=0.39, P=0.03) correlations. There was also a correlation between earlier gestational age at procedure and increased duration of pregnancy after procedure by Pearson (  Patients who need cerclage revision have higher premature birth compared to those who have successful primary cerclages. Revised cerclages were associated with a high take-home baby (7/9 or 78%) but also with higher preterm birth rate (8/9 or 89%), which should be considered when counseling pts who are candidates for revision cerclage In prior studies, we observed LIT prevents cervical change, when given early in the second trimester to high-risk women. This project assessed efficacy of LIT relative to degree of cervical shortening -is the benefit sustained for even the very short cervix? METHODS: Singleton pregnancies at risk of preterm birth (PTB), defined by initial early midtrimester cervical length (CL)≤25mm were studied. Serial CL measurements (16-32w), start/stop dates, gestational age (GA) at onset and delivery, obstetric outcomes were documented. Early-onset LIT was oral indomethacin starting at 18 to 24 6/7 w, maintained at 25mg qid, stopped automatically at 32w if undelivered. Overall CL change is expressed as first-to-last CL difference/days of pregnancy prolongation, mm/day. CL at LIT start was categorized in 5mm increments. Last CL was 32w, or when delivered if <32w. Degree of cervical shortening was analyzed between groups by ANOVA.  Early onset long-term indomethacin therapy in patients with short cervix stabilizes cervical length and prolongs pregnancy, influenced little by initial cervical length. The  In this retrospective cohort study, 774 nulliparous women with a singleton viable gestation undergoing cervical ripening with foley balloon catheter were compared based on cervical status after catheter removal. A modified Bishop score, which is calculated based on dilation, effacement and station, was used to categorize cervical exams as favorable (score ≥5) or unfavorable (score <5). Women who simultaneously received prostaglandins were excluded. Bivariable and multivariable analyses were performed to determine whether a favorable cervical exam post-ripening was associated with VD as well as VD within 24 hours. Cox proportional hazard regression was used to compare time intervals from catheter removal to complete dilation and from catheter removal to delivery. RESULTS: 387 women were included in each group. In univariable analysis, women with a favorable exam after cervical ripening had a lower BMI (30.6kg/m2 ± 5.4 vs. 32.2kg/m2 ± 6.3, p<.001) and a slightly more favorable cervical exam on admission (modified Bishop score of 1.59 ± 1.24 vs. 1.13 ± 1.14, p<.001). The frequency of VD, as well as VD within 24h, was higher in the women with a favorable exam (57.9% vs. 46.8%, p=0.002 and 48.6% vs. 34.6%, p<.001, respectively). The median time intervals from foley catheter removal to complete dilation (8.6h vs. 11.5h) and to delivery (11.2h vs. 14.0h) were also significantly shorter for women with a favorable exam after foley catheter removal (p<.001 for both). In multivariate analysis, after adjusting for potential confounders, a favorable exam after foley catheter removal remained associated with a higher odds of VD, of VD within 24 hours, and a shorter time from catheter removal to complete dilation and to delivery. No statistically significant difference was noted for other adverse maternal or neonatal outcomes. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Modified Bishop score after cervical ripening with foley balloon catheter is associated with the chance of VD and length of labor. . Antenatal MgSO4 especially reduces the incidence of cerebral palsy (CP). However, controversy remains about the benefits of MgSO4 in the Dutch population, since the incidence of CP is lower than in the USA and because of its potential side effects, including cardiorespiratory depression. Therefore the aim of the study was to assess the effect of MgSO4 on brain injury (and neonatal morbidity) in a Dutch cohort of extremely premature infants born before 28 weeks of gestation. METHODS: Retrospective cohort study performed at the UMCU evaluating the effect of MgSO4 on brain injury assessed on MRI at 30 and 40 weeks corrected age and, as a secondary outcome, neonatal complications. The infants born in the two years after implementation of the protocol were compared with a historical cohort of infants born in the two years before implementation of MgSO4. Patients were included if they were born at the UMCU between 24 and 28 weeks of gestation between January 2011 -2015. RESULTS: In 4 years time, a total of 207 children were included for analysis by MRI at 30 and 40 weeks (108 before implementation of the protocol and 99 after  Interleukin-6 Trans-Signaling and the Pathogenesis of Broncho-Pulmonary Dysplasia. Michael J Stark, 1,2 Kathryn Martinello, 1,2 Tara Crawford, 1,2 Chad C Andersen, 1,2 Nicolette A Hodyl. 1,2 1 University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia; 2 Women's and Children's Hospital, Adelaide, Australia. The pro-inflammatory cytokine, interleukin-6 (IL-6), may play a critical role in the pathogenesis of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). IL-6 can act through both a classical signaling pathway (via the IL-6 transmembrane receptor) and an alternate trans-signaling pathway via the soluble IL-6 receptor (sIL-6R). Inhibition of trans-signaling is mediated by soluble gp130 (sgp130) binding to the sIL6R. This study investigated the IL-6 trans-signaling pathway across the neonatal period in very preterm infants (<30 weeks) with and without BPD. METHODS: Plasma was collected from infants <30 weeks gestation (no BPD n=27, BPD n=13) on day 1-2, 7, 14, and 28 of life. BPD was diagnosed by a physiologic challenge at 36 corrected weeks gestation. IL-6, sIL-6R and sgp130 were measured by ELISA. RESULTS: Gestational age was inversely correlated with day1-2 IL-6 (p=0.02) and positively correlated with day 1-2 sgp130 (p<0.01). While IL-6, sIL-6R and sgp130 concentrations did not change with postnatal age, both sgp130 and sIL-6R were positively correlated at each study time-point (p<0.001). Further, the ratio of sgp130:sIL-6R, was lower on day 1-2 in infants who later developed BPD compared to those who did not (p=0.04). The positive relationship between sgp130 and sIL-6R seen across the neonatal period demonstrates dynamic regulation of IL-6 trans-signaling. However, the inverse relationship between gestational age and sgp130 suggests the most preterm infants have limited capacity to regulate IL-6 trans-signaling. The reduced sgp130:sIL-6R ratio on day 1-2 of life in those who subsequently develop BPD suggests that early dysregulation of the IL-6 trans-signaling pathway may contribute to the pathogenesis of this significant neonatal morbidity.  systole, +0.5 vs -1.1, p = 0.005), but also seen in the cardiac apex (end systole, +1.4 vs -0.1, p < 0.05) and base (78% systole, -0.2 vs -1.3, p <0.05). Apico-midventricularcardiac torsion was also different in GC baboons in mid systole (44% systole, 0.2 vs 0.6, p < 0.01). *Figure(s) will be available online. Figure 1 : Left ventricular rotation at midventricular level in CTL (n=5) and GC (n=5) offspring. *p < 0.05 CONCLUSIONS: Decreased myocardial rotation in males exposed to GC in fetal life vs. CTL indicates altered cardiac development and function. While the functional consequences remain to be investigated, these results indicate that fetal exposure to GC may have long-term, later life cardiovascular dysfunction. and merit further study to enable diagnosis and management of potential adverse outcomes. Use Figure 2 shows the number of cases with EI, FPR, and number of additional CD. Use of the HRS with the M5T or MC algorithms would have resulted in EI in 31.7% and 39% of cases, respectively vs 9.7% and 12.2% with only the 5T or Clark. Median timing of recommended EI was 1 hour prior to actual delivery for the HRS + M5T and 3.5 hrs for the HRS + MC. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort, the use of a risk score and algorithm resulted in earlier identification of cases with pH <7.1 but also resulted in a significant increase in the cesarean section rate.  A retrospective chart review was performed on women who had an ultrasound between 36+0/7 and 43+0/7 weeks of gestation and had complete delivery data available through electronic medical records. Ultrasound-derived fetal weight was adjusted by 21g per day of gestation that elapsed between ultrasound and delivery to arrive at the predicted birth weight. BMI was kept as a continuous variable and accuracy was calculated as the percentage of predicted weight to birth weight. Maternal race and diabetes status were also assessed. Linear regression analysis was conducted using STATA 12 RESULTS: 403 pregnant women met inclusion criteria. Age ranged from 13-44 years (Mean = 28.38, SD = 5.97). The average BMI was 32.62 (SD = 8.59). The majority of the women did not have diabetes (N = 300, 74%). The sample was primarily white (N = 166, 41%) and Hispanic (N = 147, 36%). Average neonatal weight at delivery was 3335.92g (SD = 585.46g). The average predicted weight of neonates at delivery was 3562.28g (SD = 531.88g). Based on regression analyses, as BMI increased, so did predicted weight (p < .000) and weight at delivery (p < .000). The accuracy of estimation of ultrasound-derived birth weight was not predicted by maternal BMI (p= .441). Maternal race and diabetes status were not associated with the accuracy of ultrasound in predicting birth weight. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal Body Mass Index, race and presence of diabetes do not affect accuracy of ultrasound in prediction of birth weight. The  We performed a retrospective cohort study of nulliparous women with a vertex-presenting fetus at term (NTSV) with a vaginal delivery. Prolonged second stage was defined using the ACOG definitions of > 3 hours without regional anesthesia and > 4 hours with regional anesthesia. Our primary outcome was a third or fourth degree laceration. Secondary outcomes included hemorrhage and chorioamnionitis. Univariable and multivariable logistic regression models were used to estimate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals and to adjust for potential confounders. The incidence of third and fourth degree lacerations among NTSV women with a second stage length of <1 hour, 1-2 hours, 2-3 hour, 3-4 hours, 4-5 hours and > 5 hours was 2.9%, 3.5%, 5.7%, 7.8%, 16.1% and 28.6%, respectively (p < 0.001). A prolonged second stage was associated with an increased risk of third and fourth degree lacerations after adjustment for confounders (aOR 2.1, 95% CI 1.14-3.89, p = 0.016). This association was seen with each additional hour in the second stage. Other predictors of third and fourth degree lacerations included operative delivery (aOR 6.34, 95% CI 3.34-12.07, p < 0.001) and Asian race (aOR 2.06, 95% CI 1.06-4, p = 0.032). Age, obesity, macrosomia, prenatal provider type (physician versus midwife), regional anesthesia, episiotomy and induction of labor were not associated with an increased risk of these lacerations. As expected, the risk of hemorrhage was increased with a prolonged second stage (aOR 2.73, 95% CI 1.35-5.52, p = 0.005). A trend towards an increased risk of chorioamnionitis was seen in our cohort; however, this did not reach statistical significance (aOR 1.51, 95% CI 0.92-2.49). CONCLUSIONS: Second stage length is associated with an increased incidence of third and fourth degree lacerations among term nulliparas as early as two hours into pushing. This study compares one group of low-risk, spontaneously conceived pregnancies with no antithrombotic treatment to a second consisting of high-risk, ART conceived pregnancies being treated with antithrombotics using LMWH and low-dose aspirin. While taking into consideration the statistically increased poor outcomes associated with infertility and ART pregnancies in general, it is our goal to study the effects of LMWH treatment on the incidence of adverse perinatal outcomes in ART conceived pregnancies in comparison to a cohort of spontaneously conceived low-risk pregnancies, not treated with antithrombotics. METHODS: 615 ART patients treated with anticoagulants were compared with 391 low-risk, untreated patients which were matched for age and time of delivery. All ART patients suffered from multifactorial thrombophilia diagnosed during infertility evaluation and were treated with 40mg daily of enoxaparin and 81mg daily of aspirin. The two groups were than compared for significant clinical outcomes including IUGR, PPROM, prematurity, preeclampsia, fetal death, abruptio placentae, fetal death, neonatal death.Data analysis was performed using simple regression, and one-way analysis of variance for comparison of the means of numerical continuous data, and X2 analysis categorical. Statistical significance was set at p value of <0.05 RESULTS: The incidence of preterm birth, IUGR, preeclampsia, oligohydramnios, and PPROM were significantly lower in the ART, anticoagulated study group in comparison to the control group. There was no statistically significant difference seen in the incidence of fetal demise or placental abruption. Administration of 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17OHP) along with midtrimester cervical length screening are strategies to prevent recurrent preterm birth. Some providers continue cervical length screening beyond 24 weeks gestation, though data supporting this practice are limited. We sought to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of cervical length screening beyond 24 weeks gestation in women with a prior preterm birth. METHODS: A decision analytic model was designed using TreeAge software to compare cost-effectiveness of cervical length screening and no cervical length screening beyond 24 weeks gestation in a theoretic cohort of 100,000 women with a singleton gestation and prior preterm birth who are treated with 17OHP in the current pregnancy. Cost, probability and utility estimates were derived from existing literature. The primary outcome was cost per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) with a cost-effectiveness threshold of $100,000/QALY. Secondary outcomes included deep venous thromboembolism (DVT), maternal death, neonatal demise and neonatal neurodevelopmental disability. Timing of antenatal corticosteroid administration was taken into consideration with each possible outcome. RESULTS: In our theoretic cohort, cervical length screening beyond 24 weeks gestation was not a cost-effective strategy with an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of $553,768 per QALY. In addition, there would be 4,220 more DVTs and 4 more maternal deaths in women who are screened. Neonatal outcomes did not differ between the two groups (Table) . Outcomes of 100,000 singleton pregnancies in women with a prior preterm birth , Embase (1974 Embase ( -2014 , and China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI, 1994 (CNKI, -2014 . Any randomized controlled study of PCOS patients that of stratified BMI and received IVF/ICSI treatment was included, and data were extracted independently by two reviewers. Eight out of 27 identified studies reporting data on 1456 patients (1482 cycles) fulfilled these inclusion criteria. We performed this meta-analysis with Review Manager 5 software. Odds ratio (OR) and weighted mean difference (WMD) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to evaluate dichotomous and continuous data, respectively. RESULTS: Overweight and obese PCOS patients needed significantly higher gonadotrophin doses than normal-weight PCOS patients and the duration of stimulation was also longer but not significantly in the overweight and obese group. Compared to normal-weight PCOS patients, the number of oocytes retrieved was significantly decreased in the overweight and obese patients, while the number of embryos transferred was similar in both groups. Moreover, overweight and obesity was associated with a reduced implantation rate and clinical pregnancy rate. The findings from this meta-analysis suggested that overweight and obesity in PCOS patients might have an adverse effect on assisted reproduction technology outcomes. Our purpose was to evaluate the effect of legalization on the prevalence of marijuana use by urine toxicology screening in pregnant teenagers. In addition, we sought to evaluate the agreement between selfreported use and urine toxicology screening before and after legalization. This was a retrospective cohort study of young women enrolled in an adolescent-specific (ages 12-22 years) prenatal care program from 2009-2015. All young women seen in this clinic had urine toxicology screening at their first prenatal visit and completed a questionnaire for self-reported drug use. Women with their first prenatal visit before the legalization of marijuana in Colorado on January 1, 2014 were compared to women with their first prenatal visit after legalization. Chi-square was used to compare rates of urine positivity for marijuana in the two groups. The two groups were also compared for demographic characteristics and the use of tobacco and other drugs using t-tests and chi square as appropriate. Cohen's kappa coefficient measured concordance of reported use with positive urine toxicology screening. RESULTS: 1,698 young women were included; 1,148 before legalization and 550 after. Demographic characteristics of young women before and after legalization were not different with the exception of the percent of nulliparous women which was higher in the post-legalization group (74% versus 68%, p=0.016). The percentage of young women with a positive urine toxicology screen for marijuana was higher after legalization (16.2% versus 20.2%) [OR 1.3 (1.0-1.7), p=0.048]. The agreement between selfreported marijuana use and urine toxicology screening for marijuana was better after legalization (kappa = 0.191 before versus kappa = 0.504 after). CONCLUSIONS: Over 20% of pregnant teenagers had positive urine toxicology screens at entry to prenatal care in a state with legalized marijuana. Marijuana use was higher following legalization, even in a population that cannot legally access it. Agreement between self-report and urine toxicology results improved in a legalized environment which may allow for earlier education and intervention to decrease use. INTRODUCTION: Thyroid dysfunction has been associated with adverse obstetrical outcomes. However, less is known regarding subclinical hypothyroidism (SCH) and thyroid autoimmunity and their relationship to obstetrical events. Thus, our objective was to examine the association between pre-pregnancy anti-thyroid antibodies, subclinical hypothyroidism and preterm delivery (PTD), gestational diabetes (GDM), and preeclampsia. METHODS: Prospective cohort study from a multi-center, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of preconception low-dose aspirin to prevent pregnancy loss among healthy fertile women (n=1228). Baseline levels of TSH, fT4, anti-thyroglubulin antibody (anti-TG) and anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (anti-TPO) were measured. Relative risk (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were estimated using generalized linear models adjusting for age and body mass index. [1996] [1997] [1998] [1999] [2000] [2001] [2002] [2003] [2004] [2005] [2006] [2007] [2008] [2009] [2010] [2011] [2012] [2013] ) was used to identify pregnant patients with penetrating trauma injuries. Demographics, clinical variables on admission (including injury severity score, ISS), injury mechanism, and pregnancy and maternal outcomes were recorded and analyzed. ISS is an anatomical scoring system based on 6 body systems; higher scores indicate more severe injuries. Patients with SBP < 90mmHg were examined to determine if their outcomes were worse than those with SBP ≥ 90mmHg. We identified 121 patients admitted with penetrating trauma. The median age was 22 years. Median SBP on admission was 118 and heart rate was 100. Median ISS was 9. Twelve percent required intubation and 22% required a surgical procedure, all within the first 24 hours. Approximately 12% delivered during the trauma admission; most by low-transverse cesarean delivery (65%). Overall maternal mortality was 17% (n=21). Patients with SBP < 90mmHg on arrival had significantly higher ISS (25 vs. 5, p<0.001). These patients were more likely to require delivery (35% vs. 5%, p<0.001). (Table) Patients who presented in shock were 14-times more likely to die (58% vs. 4%, p<0.001) during the admission *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Patients who presented with SBP < 90mmHg were more likely to require delivery and were 14-times more likely to die. SBP < 90mmHg is a predictor for poor maternal and pregnancy outcomes and can be used to define shock in pregnant patients. Understanding Understanding how revealing the role of microbiome is changing our approach to many disease states, there remains a paucity of data on the cervicovaginal (CV) microbiota during human pregnancy. This study sought to assess the prevalence of different microbial communities (community state type (CSTs)) at varying time points in pregnancy, to determine if there is an association between race and the frequency of CSTs, as well as protective low vaginal Ph and CSTS. METHODS: CV biospecimens from a prospective cohort of singleton pregnancies were collected at 3 time points, 16-20; 21-24; and 25-28 weeks. 177 women who delivered at term were randomly select from the parent cohort. Characterization of the microbiota was performed by 16S rRNA gene sequence analyses. CSTs were determined using Support Vector machine classifier trained on 4000 vaginal samples. A cohort of non-pregnant (NP) women (n=173), frequency matched for race, were used to compare the effect of pregnancy on CST frequency. Bacterial taxa analyses were performed using mixed effects models to determine associations between specific bacteria and pregnancy outcomes. RESULTS: CSTs were stable throughout pregnancy. Frequency of CSTs was significantly different by race (Figure 1 ). * Figure( s) will be available online. Comparing CST frequencies to a NP cohort, race and pregnancy status significantly altered the proportions of CSTs. The presence of a Lactobacillus dominated CST was not consistently associated with an acidic pH. Specific bacteria were significantly associated with having a vaginal delivery compared to C-section. U. parvum was more likely to be presented in women with term PROM. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the most comprehensive assessment of the CV microbiota during human pregnancy. Contrary to existing dogma, in pregnancy, an basic vaginal pH is not consistently correlated to the absence of Lactobacillus and may explain different host immune responses to microbial communities. The significant racial differences in the frequency of CSTs during pregnancy may explain racial disparities in PTB. (RO1NR014784-01) consisting of 2 nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTI) and 1 protease inhibitor (PI) have been used in pregnant women with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) to reduce significantly the risk of maternal-to-child-transmission (MTCT). Recently, alternative ARV regimens including non-NRTI (nNRTI) or integrase inhibitors (II) instead of PI have been introduced to minimize the side effects of standard ARV and improve compliance. We sought to compare obstetric and perinatal outcomes of both standard and alternative ARV. Retrospective cohort study of all HIV pregnant patients with prenatal care at a single tertiary care institution between 2004 and 2015. Cases were identified by accessing our Maternal Fetal Medicine database. Obstetric and perinatal data were recorded. Chi square and T-test analyses were used where appropriate. Logistic regression and linear regression were computed. RESULTS: We identified 379 women with standard ARV (NRTI + PI) and 27 women with alternative ARV (NRTI + nNRTI or II or NRTIs only) during the study period. There was no significant difference in the rate of preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, fetal growth restriction, prematurity, or mode of delivery among groups. Women on standard ARV were more inclined to choose permanent sterilization while those on alternative ARV opted for long-acting reversible contraception more frequently (adjusted P=0.001). We identified 21 MTCT cases (4.7% rate) during the study period; however, there was no significant difference in the rate of HIV infected infants among groups, 20/379 (5.2%) with maternal standard AVR and 1/27 (3.7%) with alternative ARV; P=0.3. However, women receiving comparable duration of treatment had lower viral load <1,000 copies at the time of delivery with alternative than standard ARV (89% vs. 74%, respectively; adjusted P=0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Alternative ARV regimen is a safe option in candidate pregnant women and may be associated with lower viral load at the time of delivery. Madeline Manning Meurer, Kelly R Kelly. Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center at the Permian Basin, Odessa, TX, USA. INTRODUCTION: Adaptations to pregnancy include physiological changes, which often can be associated with nausea and vomiting. This process can become a pathological state of hyperemesis gravidarum. The differential diagnosis includes twin gestation, molar pregnancy, and one recently described, hyperemesis cannabinoid syndrome. This pathologic process occurs with chronic and frequent use of cannabis, usually seen with a smoking history longer than one year. Symptoms include severe cyclic vomiting, flushing, sweating, and pyrexia. Abstinence of cannabis resolves symptoms in 24-48 hours with intravenous hydration. The purpose of this case report is to bring to the attention of maternal and fetal medicine specialists to consider hyperemesis cannabinoid syndrome in patients when hyperemesis gravidarum does not follow its usual clinical course. Hyperemesis cannabinoid syndrome may be misdiagnosed or underreported in pregnancy. METHODS: This is a case report and literature review of hyperemesis cannabinoid syndrome. RESULTS: Patient is a 21 year old primigravida with no history of drug use. The patient's first admission occurred at six weeks gestation followed by 13 admissions. The patient improved on each admission with intravenous hydration and antiemetics. At 30 weeks gestation, patient admitted to one week history of daily cannabis use. The hyperemesis severity was worsened by Helicobacter pylori infection which was incompletely treated during pregnancy secondary to non-compliance. Patient was diagnosed with hyperemesis cannabinoid syndrome at 30 weeks gestation by gastroenterology physician. At 35 weeks gestation, the patient developed pre eclampsia and was induced into labor. Patient delivered a viable male infant weighing 2430 grams. Patient was discharged on postpartum day two. The patient was readmitted on postpartum day nine with intractable vomiting, tachycardia, and dehydration. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed with biopsies which were positive for inflammation and H. pylori. She received intravenous hydration, antiemetics, and discharged on hospital day two. CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of hyperemesis cannabinoid syndrome may be increasing in the general population, therefore it is important to draw attention in the obstetric population. Release Through Activation of PI3K/Akt Pathway. Xiuyue Jia, Jie Xu, Yang Gu, Lynn J Groome, Yuping Wang. LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Vitamin D (VD) deficiency has been identified as a potential risk factor for cardiovascular diseases (CVDs). On the other hand, VD supplementation is believed to have potential benefit in reducing CVDs and mortality risk. Increased endothelial (EC) microparticle (MP) shedding plays significant roles under oxidative stress in CVDs. In this study, we aimed to investigate if VD could protect EC to reduce MP release under oxidative stress condition and what cellular mechanisms is involved. METHODS: ECs were isolated from umbilical cord vein of normal term placentas. 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 was used as bioactive VD. ECs were grown in 6 well/plate and incubated under normoxic (5%CO 2 /95% air) or hypoxic (2%O 2 /5%CO 2 /93%N 2 ) conditions in the presence or absence of VD at 50nM for 48h. MP was then isolated from culture medium by a two-step centrifugation (400xg for 20min and 20,000xg for 60min) procedure. Total cellular protein was collected for protein expression. MP release was quantified by detection of annexin V positive binding by flow cytometry. TruCount was measured as internal control for each sample. Cell protein expression for VD receptor (VDR), Akt signaling pathway molecules total Akt, p-Akt ser473 and its downstream molecules heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOs) were determined by Western blot. Data are expressed as mean ± SE and were analyzed by ANOVA and paired t-test. A p level < 0.05 was set as statistically significant. RESULTS: MP release was significantly increased in ECs when cultured under hypoxic condition compared to normoxic condition, p<0.01. In contrast, cells treated with VD released significantly less MP vs. untreated controls under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions, p<0.05. For protein expression, VDR expression was down regulated in cells cultured under hypoxic condition but was upregulated in cells treated with VD under both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. EC expression of Akt, p-Akt ser473 , HO-1, and eNOs were all reduced in cells cultured under hypoxic condition, which could be prevented when cells were treated with VD. In this study, we demonstrated that VD could protect EC from MP release under hypoxic condition. Since PI3K/Akt pathway signaling is involved in protection of oxidative stress-induced cell injury, regulation of Akt pathway signaling could be a potential cellular/molecular mechanism of beneficial effects of VD on the cardiovascular system. Reduced In normal pregnancy, insulin resistance in the mother facilitates nutrient supply to the growing fetus and is counterbalanced by expansion of beta cells. Low protein (LP) diet during pregnancy results in reduced placental and fetal weights and programs hypertension in adult offspring and in these pregnant rats insulin levels were lower during late gestation. In this study we hypothesized that expansion of pancreas is impaired in pregnant rats fed LP diet due to disrupted function of local renin-angiotensin system. METHODS: Pregnant SD rats were fed a diet with 20% (control; CT) or 6% casein (LP) from Day 1 of pregnancy until sacrificed on Day 21 (n=6-10 rats/diet) and plasma was collected for insulin measurement by ELISA. Pancreatic islets were isolated and both mRNA and protein levels of Ace, Ace2, Agtr1a and Agtr2 were measured by real-time PCR and Western blotting analysis, respectively. The effect of LP diet on these parameters was analyzed by one-way ANONA. RESULTS: 1) Plasma insulin levels were reduced (P < 0.05) by 2.3-fold in LP compared to CT group; 2) mRNA levels of Ace in pancreatic islets were unchanged in LP rats, while those of Ace2 were increased (P < 0.001) by 1.5-fold; 3) mRNA levels of Agtr1a were unchanged in LP rats, while those of Agtr2 were reduced (P < 0.001) by 5.5-fold; 4) The abundance of ACE protein was unchanged in LP rats, while the abundance of ACE2 was decreased (P < 0.05) by 1.7-fold; 5) The abundance of AGTR1 protein was unchanged in LP rats, while the abundance of AGTR2 was decreased (P < 0.05) by 2.1-fold. CONCLUSIONS: Despite increased plasma angiotensin II levels in pregnant rats fed LP diet, the reduced expression of angiotensin II type 2 receptor in pancreatic islets may cause impaired pancreatic expansion. Our objective is to determine the association of body composition with the development of preeclampsia and changes in endothelial function. Therefore, we hypothesize that women who develop preeclampsia will have reduced flow mediated vasodilation (FMD) and a greater percentage of central abdominal adipose tissue prior to pregnancy. We examined 26 nulliparous women prior to pregnancy and in early pregnancy (11-14 weeks) as part of a longitudinal cohort of subjects evaluated prior to conception. At both visits, we measured brachial artery flow mediated dilation (FMD). Pre pregnancy, we estimated body composition (body fat percent, android (trunk body fat) percent, and gynoid (hip body fat) percent employing DXA scanning. Differences between mean group values were assessed with the appropriate parametric or non-parametric tests. Spearman correlation coefficient was calculated to assess the relationship between FMD and BMI, body fat%, android % , and gynoid %. Values are presented as mean ± SE. Statistical analyses were performed using JMP software (version 12.0, SAS; Chicago, IL), and significance was accepted at a value of P < .05. RESULTS: Nulliparous women who developed preeclampsia (n=6) had no difference in their pre pregnancy BMI (25.5+2.2 vs. 22.6+10.9 kg/ m 2 )in comparison to those women who did not develop preeclampsia. However, women (n=20) who go on to develop preeclampsia have a greater percentage of total body fat (41.2±2.5 vs 33.3±1.5%;P<0.05) that is preferentially distributed in the android (43.2±5.8 vs 32.4±1.9%;P<0.04) and gynoid (50.4±2.8 vs 41.5±1.3%;P<0.02) regions. FMD is not associated with BMI (P=0.11). Although FMD is associated with % body fat (r=0.36, P<0.02), % android body fat (r=0.37, P<0.02) and % gynoid body fat (r=0.37, P<0.02), there is no difference in FMD between women who develop preeclampsia and those who do not. CONCLUSIONS: The distribution of total body fat is associated with preeclampsia in nulliparous women. Although FMD is associated with pre pregnancy body composition, we did not observe that pre pregnancy or early pregnancy FMD was associated with the subsequent development of preeclampsia. These findings suggest that there is a strong likelihood that pre pregnancy adiposity is more associated with preeclampsia than alterations in endothelial function as indexed by FMD. Metabolic Adaptations in Pregnancy Are Associated with Differential Metabolic Tissue Profiles. Pregnancy is associated with maternal metabolic adaptations (increased cholesterol and triglycerides) that are essential for the growth of the fetus. In mammals, physiological and behavioral changes are driven via biological clocks entrained by the light-dark/restactivity cycles that define feeding time and body temperature. A number of oscillators are present in the peripheral organs that are synchronized by cues from the suprachiasmatic nucleus and impact metabolic pathways. We hypothesize that maternal metabolic adaptations fluctuate during the light dark cycle (LDC) and are differentially regulated in early and late pregnancy. METHODS: C57BL6 mice were sacrificed in early pregnancy (day 7 post-coitum (pcm)) and in later in pregnancy (day 14pcm) at 4-hour intervals over a 24-hour LDC. Mice collected on day 2pcm were used as controls. Metabolic and clock gene pathways were assessed. One-way ANOVA was performed to establish significant changes in LDC fluctuation at each stage of pregnancy and also at the same time-points at different stages of pregnancy (p<0.05). We observed that in late pregnancy, triglycerides (TG) were constantly raised and did not fluctuate like on day 2 and day 7. We demonstrated a significant increase of hepatic TG biosynthesis pathways on day 7 of pregnancy with a partial 'switch off' of these genes on day 14 of pregnancy and this was consistent with the free fatty acid (FFA) levels in the liver. However, day 14 of pregnancy was characterized by significantly increased levels of FA oxidation and transport pathways in the muscle, especially in the dark phase of the 24-hour cycle. This concurred with increased levels of FFA availability in the dark phase and it synchronized with peak gene expression patterns of the FA transport pathways in placenta and also FFA levels in the fetal liver. Interestingly, our data imply that liver metabolic actions in pregnancy are mediated by the Rev-erb-α clock gene, whereas muscle metabolic activity is mediated by Rev-erb-β. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that maintenance of pregnancy and fetus development are facilitated by a liver to muscle gestational switch between early and late pregnancy. Creatine is an amino acid derivative required for the maintenance of intracellular ATP. Half of the adult daily requirement of creatine is obtained from a diet containing animal products. The rodent fetus relies upon placental transfer of creatine until late in pregnancy. Animal studies show that maternal creatine supplementation improves outcomes for offspring after birth asphyxia. Human placenta produces creatine (ex vivo) at term. However, creatine levels throughout normal human pregnancy are undefined. Therefore, we sought to determine creatine concentrations in maternal plasma and urine across gestation in a population of demographically diverse women, and to relate these to fetal growth and pregnancy outcomes. METHODS: In a retrospective cohort study of 284 women, plasma and urine were collected at 13, 18, 30 and 36 weeks gestation. Creatine was measured by enzymatic analysis. Statistical associations between maternal creatine, and change of creatine between 13 and 36 weeks with maternal factors and fetal growth parameters were assessed. RESULTS: Creatine concentrations were significantly higher in pregnant women than previous reports in non-pregnant women. Maternal creatine concentration was associated with parity, socioeconomic status, and maternal smoking, asthma, and body mass index. Higher maternal urine creatine concentration was negatively associated with birth of a small for gestational age (SGA) baby and positively associated with placental weight. After adjustment for confounders, there was a 17% reduced odds ratio (95% CI 0.72-0.85, p=0.007) of SGA for every 50µmol/L increase in urinary creatine. For every 50µmol/L change in urine creatine between 13 and 36 weeks there was an associated 5.2 g increase in placental weight (95% CI 1.26-9.10, p=0.01). The high maternal creatine concentrations in pregnancy compared to reported values for non-pregnant females and males, and the significant associations with several maternal factors and with fetal growth suggest an important role for creatine in pregnancy. The possibility that a simple urine test for creatine may identify women at risk of SGA warrants further investigation. The cause of gestational thrombocytopenia is unknown. Potential mechanisms include hemodilution and increased spleen size. We postulated that additional potential physiologic mechanisms may be either platelet pooling (higher platelet counts) or consumption (lower platelet counts) in the maternal intervillous space of the placenta. METHODS: Women ages 18-44, undergoing term, scheduled cesarean delivery without labor were enrolled. The placenta was placed in EDTA solution to prevent coagulation, and five blood samples from the maternal intervillous space were collected. We used a KB test to determine the amount of fetal blood contamination and then performed a CBC on the sample containing the lowest percentage of fetal blood. We used a paired t-test to compare maternal placental platelet count to the maternal peripheral venous platelet count performed on admission. RESULTS: 42 women consented, 2 were excluded due to delivery complications and sample clotting. Median age at delivery was 28; median gestational age was 39 weeks; median fetal blood contamination was 13.5%. Placental platelet counts were corrected for dilution by the EDTA solution using the ratio of peripheral blood hemoglobin to placental blood hemoglobin concentration. Differences between maternal placental and peripheral venous platelet counts were not statistically significant. When stratified by percentage of fetal blood contamination [≤13.5% vs. >13.5%], differences in maternal placental and peripheral venous platelet counts were diminished among samples with limited fetal blood contamination. The maternal placental platelet count did not differ from the peripheral venous platelet count. These data do not support the hypotheses of platelet pooling or platelet consumption within the placenta as potential physiologic mechanisms for gestational thrombocytopenia. The In the UK, coffee is the most commonly consumed pharmacologically active beverage above alcohol (1). Coffee contains biologically active chemicals (e.g. caffeine) and natural phenols with antioxidant properties and potential health benefits such as caffeic (CA) and chlorogenic (CHLA) acid. Pregnant women are encouraged to limit their caffeine consumption during pregnancy, however the effects of CA and CHLA are unclear. Here we investigate the effects of CA and CHLA on myometrial artery function and test the hypothesis that they protect arteries from the effects of oxidative stress. METHODS: Human myometrial arteries (MAs; n=136) were isolated from biopsies collected at the time of elective Caesarean section from women (N=39) with uncomplicated pregnancies and mounted on a wire myograph as described previously (2). MA viability was determined with 120mM potassium solution (KPSS), arginine vasopressin (AVP; 10 -8 M) and bradykinin (10 -6 M). Dose-response curves to CA and CHLA (both 10 -8 -10 -5 M) were constructed to determine direct contractile or relaxatory (in the presence of AVP-induced contraction) effects. Effects of reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation using hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ; 10 -4 M) and xanthine/xanthine oxidase (XA/XO; 10 -4 M) were determined in the presence / absence of CA / CHLA (10 -5 M; 15 minute incubation). Data are expressed as mean±SEM. RESULTS: MA (n=136) diameters were 350±11µm. MAs showed significant contraction (KPSS / AVP) and relaxation (BK) suggesting fully functioning smooth muscle and endothelial cells post-isolation and mounting. CA and CHLA did not significantly affect basal tone (P›0.05; t-test) or induce relaxation of AVP pre-contracted MAs (P›0.05; RM-ANOVA). Addition of H 2 O 2 and XA/XO produced triphasic responses in AVP-contracted MAs (transient relaxation / re-contraction / sustained relaxation at 15 minutes post-addition). Pre-incubation with CA or CHLA did not significantly alter the triphasic response to ROS application (P›0.05; Kruskal-Wallis with Dunn's post-hoc test). CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that short-term application of CA and CHLA does not provide protection to MAs from ROS-induced stimuli. Further studies will focus on chronic incubation of MAs with CA and CHLA. References: Obesity is one of the most powerful drivers for the onset and development several pregnancy complications with short and long term consequences on both the mother and the child. During pregnancy, the placenta releases exosomes into maternal circulation, however, the effect of maternal metabolic status on the exosomal profile across gestation has not been yet established. METHODS: Plasma samples were obtained from pregnant women at different times of gestation (10-38 weeks) from the Ochsner Baptist Medical Center (New Orleans, USA) and classified according to the body mass index (BMI) in lean (n=13, BMI 18.5-24.9 Kg/m 2 ), overweight (OW, n=13, Kg/m 2 ) and obese (n=15, BMI >30 Kg/m 2 ). Exosomes were isolated from plasma by differential and buoyant density centrifugation. The total number of exosome vesicles (EXO) and specific placenta-derived exosomes (PdE) were determined by Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NanoSight™) using quantum dots (Qdot™) coupled with antibodies to CD63 or PLAP. Finally, only fluorescent particles were tracked and the exosomal profile was determined. RESULTS: Correlation analysis showed that EXO increased progressively across gestation from 10 to 38 weeks, and this was independent of the maternal BMI. The slopes of the fitted lines were significantly different (p<0.001) between obese and lean or overweight women (4.7 ± 0.2, 4.3 ± 0.57 and 7.49 ± 0.8 for lean, OW and obese, respectively. Similarity, PdE increase across gestation in lean and overweight women, however, correlation analysis did not show a significant difference in obese women (p=0.083) across gestation. At late gestation (i.e. >30 weeks), EXO was significantly higher in obese women compared to lean and OW (1.94 ± 0.88, 1.37 ± 0.25 and 1.22 ± 0.16 x10 9 vesicles/ml for obese, OW and lean, respectively). Finally, the contribution of PdE to the total exosomal population was significantly higher in obese women between 10-20 weeks compared lean and OW (26 ± 3.7 %, 15 ± 2.5 % and 11 ± 3.4 % for obese, lean and OW, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal BMI was associated with higher levels of total and placenta-derived exosomes in maternal circulation. Placental exosomes may contribute to the proinflammatory state associated with obesity. Testosterone Impairs Placental Vascularization and Oxygenation, Reduces Uterine Blood Flow, and Triggers Sex-Specific Placental Gene Expression in Pregnant Rats. Kathirvel Gopalakrishnan, Jay Mishra, Kathleen Vincent, Gary DV Hankins, Sathish Kumar. University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA. INTRODUCTION: Placenta vascular formation is important for fetal growth and development. Among many factors, sex steroid hormones including estradiol and progesterone play an important role in placental vascularization. However, little is known about the role of androgens. Plasma testosterone levels are elevated in preeclampsia, PCOS mothers and pregnant African-American women, who often have fetal growth restriction. We previously showed that experimental increase in maternal testosterone levels cause fetal growth restriction, culminating eventually in adult onset hypertension that is more pronounced in males than females. We tested whether elevated testosterone affects placental vascularization and oxygenation, and if these effects vary in the male and female placentas. We injected pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats with vehicle or testosterone propionate (TP; 0.5 mg/Kg/day from gestation day [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] to increase plasma testosterone level twofold, similar to that observed in clinical conditions like preeclampsia. On gestation day 20, we quantified uterine artery blood flow using micro-ultrasound, visualized utero-and feto-placental arterial network using x-ray microcomputed tomography, determined fetoplacental hypoxia using pimonidazole and hypoxiainducible factor 1α, and used Affymetrix array to determine changes in placental expression of genes involved in vascular development. . Mediation analyses showed that body mass index (BMI) at follow-up explained 50-80% of the observed differences. In 587 women with the placental syndromes 2nd trimester median PlGF was 194.6 pg/mL (90% range 71.2-502.2) and 7.8% had low PLGF. In this smaller group we could not demonstrate statistically significant differences in cardiac measurements. CONCLUSIONS: Low 2nd trimester PLGF is associated with cardiovascular findings 6 years after pregnancy that are known to be associated with cardiovascular diseases in later life. These associations are independent of adverse pregnancy outcomes and are partly explained by current BMI. To compensate for the increased demand for insulin during pregnancy, β-cell mass expands. This process does not occur properly in gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Prior to β-cell expansion, the pancreas must also undergo vascular remodeling. Interactions between endothelial cells and β-cells are essential for enhancing insulin expression and supporting β-cell proliferation. Insufficient vascular remodeling in the pancreas contributes significantly to the development of type II diabetes, but this process has not been studied in the context of GDM. We hypothesized that pancreatic vasculature is reduced in GDM and that this reduction persists, contributing to an increased risk of type II diabetes. To test this, we used a previously described mouse model of GDM. Briefly, C57Bl/6 mice were placed on either a control diet (CD) or a 45% kcal/fat, 17% kcal/sucrose diet 1 wk prior to and throughout pregnancy (GDM). Mice were either sacrificed at d17.5 or followed long term. After giving birth, dams followed long term, were returned to a normal chow diet until 7 weeks post-partum, and then challenged with a high fat diet (HFD) for 6 weeks, at which time a glucose tolerance test was performed and mice were sacrificed. At sacrifice, the pancreas was collected for immunohistochemical analysis for the following markers: glucagon (alpha cells), insulin (beta cells) and CD31 (endothelial cells). RESULTS: At d17.5, β-cells were significantly reduced (p<0.05) in GDM compared to CD. There was evidence of alpha cell number reduction, though not significant (p=0.054). The number and ratio of CD31+ cells/β-cells was significantly reduced at D17.5 (p<0.02). In the long term, glucose tolerance was significantly reduced in females that had experienced GDM compared to those that did not. There was no difference in α or β-cell numbers in long term dams. However, there was a significant decrease (p<0.0001) in the ratio of CD31+/β-cells and some indication of a reduction in the overall number of CD31+ cells (p=0.07). CONCLUSIONS: Pancreatic vasculature was reduced in a mouse model of GDM and these vascular changes persisted later in life. Ongoing studies will evaluate remolding of pancreatic vasculature throughout a pregnancy complicated by GDM and its impact on long term maternal health.  Robyn T Bilinski, George Guirguis, Joseph J Apuzzio, Shauna F Williams. Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA. INTRODUCTION: Preterm birth is a major cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality, yet the causes and mechanisms of preterm labor are poorly understood, and identifying at risk patients remains a challenge. Procalcitonin is an acute phase protein secreted during infection and inflammation that is detectable in the serum of pregnant women, neonates, and umbilical cord blood, but has been infrequently studied in amniotic fluid. We sought to determine if procalcitonin (PCT) levels measured in amniotic fluid samples at the time of genetic amniocentesis are predictive of preterm delivery. METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed on all women presenting for genetic amniocentesis between 15-23 weeks of pregnancy at our institution from 2011 to 2013 with stored amniotic fluid samples. Patients were excluded from the study for multifetal gestation, HIV, hepatitis B or hepatitis C infection, abnormal karyotype, major fetal anomaly, elective termination of pregnancy or outcome data not available. Amniotic fluid was excluded from immunoassay if it was visibly bloody. PCT protein levels were measured in the samples using a commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The assay was validated for use with amniotic fluid by spike and recovery testing. The primary outcome compared PCT levels in women who delivered less than 37 weeks versus those who delivered at or after 37 weeks. The Mann-Whitney test was used; medians and ranges are shown. RESULTS: Eighty-eight samples were available for analysis and of these 7 (7.95%) were from patients who delivered preterm. Sixty-two (70%) of the amniotic fluid samples tested had PCT levels below the lower limit of quantification, which was 25 pg/mL. Median PCT levels did not differ between the preterm and term group (20.4 pg/mL (range 0 -82.8) and 20.2 pg/mL (range 0 -198.4), respectively, p= 0.95). CONCLUSIONS: Our study found that procalcitonin can be reliably measured in second trimester amniotic fluid by ELISA down to the picogram level. However, in the asymptomatic women undergoing genetic amniocentesis in this cohort, procalcitonin levels were low to undetectable and did not correlate with risk of subsequent preterm birth. is identifying the driver genes and pathways that distinguish preterm labor from term labor. To date no RNAseq study has been done to examine the preterm myometrium, or compare non-laboring samples between preterm and term myometrium. Firstly, this study aimed to identify differentially expressed and alternatively spliced genes in term laboring (TL), term non-laboring (TNL), preterm laboring (PTL) and preterm non-laboring (PTNL) myometrial samples. The secondary objective was to identify networks and pathways enriched with the identified genes. RNAseq was performed on a cohort of 4 PTNL, 4 TNL, 3 PTL, and 3 TIL myometrium samples. The Tophat-Cufflinks-Cuffdiff protocol was used to analyze the data to identify differentially expressed and alternately spliced genes. Genes were considered significant if they achieved an FDR q-value less than 0.05. Crosstalker, a random-walk based method, was used to identify significant subnetworks of genes enriched with candidate differentially expressed genes. A Fisher's exact test was used to test the resulting networks for significant pathway enrichment in the NCI Pathway Interaction Database. RESULTS: 90 genes were differentially expressed between TNL and TIL in our cohort, 52 of which overlap with a previously reported RNAseq study. Five pathways were enriched including validated transcriptional targets of AP1 family members, FOXA1 transcription factor, and IL23 mediated signaling events. 57 genes were differentially expressed and an additional 24 genes were differentially spliced between PTNL and PTIL. Seven pathways including post-translational regulation of adherins junction stability and disassembly, VEGF/VEGFR signaling and IL-2 signaling were identified. 37 genes were differentially expressed between PTNL and TNL. Four pathways were enriched including post-translational regulation of adherins junction stability and disassembly, Syndecan-4 signaling, and VEGF/VEGEFR signaling. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first RNAseq study to identify differentially expressed genes in the PTNL myometrium compared to PTL and TNL myometrium. The pathways and genes implicated in these comparisons, and the 24 alternatively spliced genes in particular, may serve as biomarkers of preterm labor and suggest novel therapeutic targets to prevent PTB. The cervix has an integral role at both spectrums of a successful pregnancy -to remain closed and firm during pregnancy and to soften and dilate to allow passage of the fetus at term. Changes in the mechanical function of the cervix during pregnancy result from alterations in the composition and structure of the cervical extracellular matrix (ECM). Variations in the stromal cell populations could impact ECM function. We hypothesized that the distribution of cell types evolve throughout pregnancy allowing for synthesis of a customized ECM that can fulfill the changing needs during pregnancy. METHODS: Immunofluorescent localization of smooth muscle actin (SMA), vimentin, desmin and heavy chain myosin was used to identify fibroblasts, myofibroblasts and smooth muscle cells and their distribution within the stroma. Transverse cervical sections from wild type mice, both nonpregnant (NP) and pregnant: days 6,12,15,18, and 1 day postpartum were evaluated. Areas of the stroma, including subepithelial stroma and mid-stromal regions were imaged in each section at each time point. The mouse cervical stroma contains an abundant smooth muscle cell population concentrated in a band like pattern in the midstroma, and this remained constant through all time points examined. The subepithelial stroma was unique in the fact that it was completely devoid of smooth muscle cells. Fibroblasts were localized throughout the stroma at all stages. Myofibroblasts were prominent in the NP cervix, disappeared during pregnancy and reappeared in the postpartum period. The heavy chain myosin diffusely co-stained with SMA in the non-pregnant cervix and throughout pregnancy. The presence of myofibroblasts in the NP cervix suggests a potential role to maintain an ECM that promotes cervical rigidity and their loss during pregnancy may alter the ECM to allow loss of this rigidity during pregnancy. The localization of heavy chain myosin in smooth muscle cells suggests these cells have potential contractile function. Ongoing studies will uncover the importance of these patterns and their potential contribution to alterations in structure and composition of ECM and mechanical function of the cervix. Aggregate Preterm birth is the leading cause of neonatal mortality with 10% of pregnancies ending before the completion of term gestation. The underlying physiological differences occurring in these pregnancies remain unclear, and biomarker discovery will facilitate prediction and prevention of this global issue. We aimed to identify transcriptional signatures and perturbed gene networks related to preterm birth in an aggregated dataset. METHODS: Placental microarray data was aggregated from a targeted search of public databases, excluding infants with preeclampsia, and represented 21 preterm and 105 term infants. Consensus clustering was employed to identify molecular subtypes. Relationships between expression and preterm birth were examined using linear regression. Functional enrichment analysis was performed to identify biological processes associated with prematurity. Consensus clustering revealed 2 distinct subtypes categorized by placental gene expression whose membership was independent of study design and contained heterogeneous distributions of preterm infants. In cluster 1, differential gene expression of MT1E, FAM179A, and SNX10 were most reliably associated with preterm birth. Preterm infants in cluster one displayed altered expression of genes involving homeostatic processes, regulation of immune effector processes, and lymphocyte mediated immunity. In Cluster 2, differential gene expression of DEPDC5, DYM, and NDST2 were most reliably associated with preterm birth. Preterm infants in cluster 2 displayed altered expression of genes involving RNA splicing and regulation of cellular adhesion. CONCLUSIONS: The two distinct molecular subtypes exhibited differences in individual genes and functional groups in relation to prematurity. MT1E regulates placental transfer of micronutrients and cellular growth, and is implicated in implantation. MT1E expression was most reliably associated with preterm birth in cluster 1. Variable expression of genes involved in immune regulation observed preterm infants from cluster 1 may be reflective of perturbations in the placentas function as an immunological barrier. Overall, our work suggests there may be distinct placental gene expression phenotypes with unique molecular mechanisms resulting in the presentation of delivery before term gestation. The Mouse Myometrial Metabolome in Pregnancy Suggests a Parturition Role for Sulfur Metabolism. Rachael Bok, 1 Angelo D'Alessandro, 2 Matthew Wither, 2 Vibhuti Vyas, 1 K Joseph Hurt. 1 1 Univ of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA; 2 Univ of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA. In murine uterus, we have shown transulfuration changes that suggest roles for L-cys and H2S in parturition physiology. Enzyme expression changes in term mouse uterus correlate with metabolomic profile changes. Now, we perform a broader analysis of the mouse myometrial metabolome during gestation and hypothesize that there are specific metabolomic signatures of impending labor. We identified and relatively quantified small molecules (60-900Daltons) from matched plasma and tissue extracts (uterus, placenta, and liver)from non-pregnant C57/Bl6 mice, or timed-pregnant or laboring mice. Liquid phase extraction with methanol:acetonitrile:water (5:3:2) was performed before fractionation through ultra-high performance liquid chromatography coupled online with high resolution mass spectrometry. Compound identification, relative quantitation, and statistics were performed against freely available databases (KEGG pathway, Metlin) with ad hoc bioinformatics tools (MAVEN, MassMatrix, Metlin), and validated against an in house library of >650 standard compounds. RESULTS: 160 metabolites were monitored in uterus, placenta, liver and plasma from non-pregnant mice or on gestation day 15 through 19 (e15 -e19) or at labor. Partially supervised statistical analysis (Partial Least Square -Discriminant Analysis) showed gestational day specific metabolic adaptations in all tissues, including uterus (Fig, left panel) . The metabolome suggests regulation of sulfur homeostasis in multiple tissues, hinting at a potential causal or correlative role for SO2/SO3 and H2S signaling during parturition. Two significant examples are shown for hypotaurine and cysteine (Fig, right panel; p < 0.05 and 0.001), which decrease and increase, respectively, in the myometrium during labor. *Figure(s) will be available online. The tissue-specific metabolome of rodent gestation reveals previously unrecognized changes in metabolic pathways that may regulate parturition physiology. Further testing in human pregnancy will confirm the validity of these metabolic signatures for diagnosing and preventing preterm birth. Metabolomics In addition to facilitating nutrient and gas exchange, the placenta is involved in energy production and metabolite excretion. Thus, it is likely that deficits in the capacity of the placenta to maintain bioenergetic and metabolic stability during the course of pregnancy could result in preterm birth (PTB). While not the only cause, intrauterine inflammation is regarded as one of the leading causes of PTB. Using our mouse model of PTB in the setting of intrauterine inflammation, we hypothesized that analysis of the metabolic profile of the placenta could reveal pathway alterations that result in the placental dysfunction seen in PTB METHODS: Timed-pregnant CD-1 mice received an intrauterine injection of lipopolysaccharide (50 µg/dam, LPS, n=8) or saline (n=8) on E15 of gestation. Placentas were collected six hours post-injection, frozen, and sent to Metabolon for analysis. The dataset comprised a total of 547 compounds of known identity. Data were analyzed using 2-way ANOVAs corrected for multiple testing. RESULTS: LPS-placentas (LPS-P) had significantly lower levels of metabolites involved in glycolytic, pentose phosphate, and glycogen synthesis/degradation pathways. Significant increases were observed in several long-chain acylcarnitines. Acylcarnitines are responsible for transporting long-chain fatty acids into the mitochondria; increased levels suggest increased ß-oxidation, an alternative source of energy in the setting of decreased carbohydrate metabolites. This is supported by the increased levels of 3-hydroxybutyrate. Carbon flow through the TCA cycle was diminished in LPS-P supporting mitochodrial dysfunction as a link to PTB. LPS-P also exhibited decreases in adenosine and guanidine nucleotides and pyrimidine catabolites, consistent with alterations in DNA/RNA turnover which may be associated with altered energy homeostasis as certain nucleotides play important roles in energy metabolism. Finally, levels of 11-dehydrocorticosterone and corticosterone were significantly increased in the LPS-P. CONCLUSIONS: LPS-P exhibited significant alterations in the availability and utilization of several energy sources. Thus, localized inflammation appears to have major impacts on the transfer and utilization of metabolites in the placenta resulting in placental dysfunction that may lead to PTB. Funded by MOD Preterm Birth Center Penn. Exploring Differences in the Tensile Mechanical Properties of the Pregnant and Non-Pregnant Mouse Cervix. Carrie E Barnum, 1 Jennifer L Fey, 1 Brianne K Connizzo, 1 Snehal S Shetye, 1 Michal A Elovitz, 2 Louis J Soslowsky. 1 1 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 2 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. The cervix is a unique organ able to dramatically change its shape and function from serving as a barrier to protect the growing fetus to completely dilating and allowing delivery of a term infant. There is an emerging concept that the cervix may change or 'remodel' early in many cases of preterm birth (PTB). While the cervix must have certain biomechanical properties to allow this diverse function, little is known regarding the tensile mechanical properties of the cervix throughout pregnancy. These studies sought to assess the biomechanical properties of the cervix through pregnancy. METHODS: Non-pregnant (NP) and pregnant CD-1 mice at embryonic day 10, 12, 14, 16 and 18 (n=6-21) were sacrificed and frozen. The cervix was harvested and cut along its length to expose the lumen surface and lay the tissue flat. The ends were affixed between two pieces of sandpaper for gripping and a custom laser device was used to measure cross sectional area. Tensile properties were measured after subjecting samples to a protocol consisting of a single ramp to failure at 1mm/minute. Statistical comparisons used one-way AVOVAs with post-hoc Bonferroni tests (significance at p<0.05). RESULTS: Cross-sectional area was significantly reduced in E10 pregnant cervices but gradually returned to NP levels by E14. Maximum load was not different between groups, but stiffness was decreased in pregnant samples. Maximum stress and modulus were also significantly decreased in pregnant samples after E14 compared to NP. *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, compared to NP the tensile biomechanical properties of the cervix decrease during pregnancy. These differences in mechanical properties suggest that during gestation, the cervix becomes less stiff and more deformable to allow for delivery. This work lays a foundation for investigating cervical biomechanics and the role of the cervix in PTB. ( Many physiological and behavioral processes show daily rhythms that are generated endogenously and are synchronized to environmental stimuli. Chronotype defines the stable phase relationship between a biological rhythm (e.g., wake-sleep) and an environmental rhythm (e.g., dawn-dusk). Chronodisruption results when biological rhythms are not stably synchronized to daily environmental cues (e.g., jetlag or shift-work). Although studies have shown that genetic and environmental disruptions of circadian rhythms are associated with increased risk for infertility, miscarriage, and preterm birth, little is known about normal changes in chronotype during pregnancy. Here, we investigated the effect of pregnancy on chronotype in both normal and genetically chronodisrupted mice. We monitored wheel-running behavior in pregnant mice of three circadian genotypes (C57BL/6NJ or WT, Per1 -/-Per2 -/-, and hPer2SG) with different chronotypes (WT=normal, Per1 -/-Per2 -/-=arrhythmic, and hPer2SG=early). All mice were maintained on a 12h:12h light dark cycle. We measured the onset of locomotor activity each day, from the day of appearance of a post-copulatory plug until delivery of pups. RESULTS: Compared to non-pregnant mice, pregnant mice of all three genotypes consistently advanced their daily onset of activity around the fourth day after copulation (dpc4) by 5hrs. Specifically, the phase angle of entrainment, or chronotype, of pregnant mice was 14.64 +/-2.08 hours, whereas that of non-pregnant mice was 19.38 +/-0.2502 hours. The advance in activity onset was largest between dpc8 and dpc14, and the onset of activity shifted back to that of nonpregnant dams during the last three to four days of pregnancy in all genotypes. CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide evidence that, regardless of circadian genotype, female mice advance their daily onset of locomotor activity during the early stages of pregnancy.  Vaginal swabs were taken throughout pregnancy and after PPROM (before and after antibiotics). Bacterial species composition and structure of resident communities were examined by NGS of 16S rRNA gene amplicons(V1-V3) using the IlluminaMiseq platform. RESULTS: Women delivering at term(n=39) sampled between 27-30 weeks possessed a vaginal microbiome dominated by L.crispatus 43%, L.iners 31%, L.jenseni 13% and L.gasseri 13% with no samples displaying dysbiosis. In contrast, the vaginal microbiome preceding PPROM(n=12) was characterised by L.iners dominance 57% or by dysbiosis defined by low levels of Lactobacillus spp. and enriched numbers of gramnegative bacteria 25%. A significant correlation (P=0.02,Fisher's exact) was found between L.iners dominance and/or dysbiosis and subsequent PPROM compared to controls delivering at term. Membrane rupture prior to treatment with Erythromycin (Ery)(n=17) was associated with L.iners dominance 47% and increased dysbiosis 35%. Ery treatment was associated with a significant shift toward dysbiosis (P=0.0095,78%,18/23) *Figure(s) will be available online. CONCLUSIONS: Absence of L.crispatus and dominance of L.iners are prominent features of the vaginal microbiome prior to PPROM. This suggests a protective role for L.crispatus and the potential of microbiome modulation to reduce infection mediated PPROM. Association of Ery treatment with increased prevalence of dysbiosis and the emergence of bacteria implicated in neonatal and maternal sepsis indicates Ery is a suboptimal antibiotic for the treatment of PPROM. (SPTB) is a major factor associating with deaths and with lowered quality of life. According to family studies, SPTB has a significant genetic background. Genetic factors from both the mother and fetus likely play a role. However, little is known about the actual predisposing genes. The objective of the study was to discover genetic variants predisposing to SPTB using a genomewide association study (GWAS). The study population consisted of mothers with SPTB (gestational age, GA <36 weeks) and SPTB infants, and mothers with exclusively term deliveries (GA 38-41 weeks) and infants born at term recruited in Oulu and Tampere University Hospitals, Finland. Only individuals of Finnish origin were included. DNA samples were genotyped with the Illumina HumanCoreExome BeadChip consisting of approximately 550,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). The analyses were performed with PLINK, v. 1.09. In addition to the study of SPTB as a dichotomous trait, GA was studied as a quantitative trait. After quality control, 230 case and 378 control mothers, and 247 case and 419 control infants remained for GWAS. RESULTS: We detected potential association signals for several SNPs in GWAS. Many of these SNPs were located in the vicinity of plausible candidate genes. In GWAS of SPTB, these included e.g. the IGSF21 and COL23A1 genes encoding immunoglobin superfamily, member 21, and collagen, type XXIII, alpha 1, respectively, in the mothers; and the DLC1 gene encoding DLC1 Rho GTPase activating protein in the infants. SNPs within the uncharacterized locus LOC105377819 and those near the GLI3 gene encoding GLI family zinc finger 3 showed the best signals for gestational age in term infants. Next, we will analyze the most promising SNPs in a large Finnish population-based cohort and in a replication population from Finland to assess which associations are replicated. CONCLUSIONS: We detected several suggestive associations in GWAS of spontaneous preterm birth. To verify these results, we will analyze the most promising SNPs in additional populations. Furthermore, the role of the arising candidate genes in the onset of preterm delivery will be assessed in functional studies. The INTRODUCTION: Labor pain has long been known to increase cord hormones and these hormones contribute to a reduction in neonatal respiratory problems such as respiratory distress syndrome. Hence timing of the cesarean delivery may be important in terms of the fetal health. In our study we aimed to evaluate whether neonatal cord blood concentrations of cortisol, free triiodothyronin (fT3), free tetraiodothyronin (fT4), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) relate to the onset of labor or labor pain in patients with history of previous cesarean section and also we evaluated maternal morbidity. METHODS: This prospective controlled study comprised 219 patients, divided into two groups according to the presence of labor and related labor pain before cesarean section. All patients in both groups were applied cesarean section >38 weeks gestational age due to previous cesarean section. The cord blood pH, fT3, fT4, TSH, cortisol and neonatal Apgar scores were compared. RESULTS: There was no statistically significant difference in age, gestational week, gravida and number of previous cesarean deliveries between groups (p>0.05). A comparison of the groups for cord blood fT3, fT4, TSH levels revealed no significant differences (p>0.05). However, fetal cord blood pH, cortisol levels were found to be higher than that of the control group (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The onset of labor and related labor pain in cesarean delivery provide high cord ph and cortisol values it means pain induces stress related cortisol and these condition can provide fetal lung clerance fastly and lower respiratory problems. There is an urgent need for sensitive and specific biomarkers to predict risk of PTB. Progesterone receptor membrane component 1 (PGRMC1) is a novel membrane progesterone receptor that is highly expressed and actively regulated in gestational tissues. Research suggests roles of PGRMC1 in mediating progesterone function in gestational tissues and maintaining pregnancy. It has been reported that PGRMC1 is detectable in plasma and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in tumor patients as potential biomarker. Our objective is to identify whether PGRMC1 is present in plasma and PBMCs during pregnancy and thus may be investigated as a candidate biomarker for obstetric pathology including PTB. METHODS: Whole blood samples were collected from pregnant patients, and plasma and PBMCs were isolated. Western blot and Immunoprecipitation (IP)-Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass spectrometry Analysis (LC-MS/MS)were used to investigate the presence of PGRMC1 in plasma. Flow cytometry and Western blot were used to detect PGRMC1 expression in PBMCs collected from pregnant subjects. RESULTS: Flow cytometry and Western blot results confirmed that PGRMC1 is differentially expressed in different cell types of PBMCs. However, Western blot and IP-MS results demonstrated that PGRMC1 is undetectable in plasma samples from pregnant women. CONCLUSIONS: These data characterize the presence of PGRMC1 in the bloodstream during pregnancy. PGRMC1 is differentially expressed in different cell types of PBMCs of pregnant subjects but is not detectable in the plasma of these subjects. These data provide a foundation for future evaluation of PGRMC1 in PBMCs as a potential novel biomarker for PTB. Marcia Arenas-Hernandez, 1,2,3 Roberto Romero, 1 Amy-Eunice Furcron, 1,2 Tara N Mial, 1,2 Bogdan Panaitescu, 4 Sonia S Hassan, 1,2 Nardhy Gomez-Lopez. (hCG) has been implicated in the maintenance of uterine quiescence by down-regulating myometrial gap junctions during pregnancy, and it was suggested as a strategy to prevent preterm birth after the occurrence of preterm labor. We have previously demonstrated that hCG has anti-inflammatory effects at the maternal-fetal interface during late pregnancy. The aim of this study was to investigate whether the anti-inflammatory effects of hCG would prevent endotoxin-induced preterm birth (PTB) and improve perinatal outcomes. METHODS: In B6 mice, hCG was administered on 13, 15, and 17 days post coitum (dpc) while endotoxin was administered on 16.5 dpc (n=11). Controls included pregnant mice injected with PBS (n=10), hCG (n=6), or endotoxin (n=10) alone. Mice were then placed for video recording to determine the rate of PTB. Prior to term parturition (18.5 dpc), Doppler Ultrasound was used to measure fetal heart rate and umbilical artery pulsatility index in fetuses from dams injected with PBS or hCG alone (n=4 each). Comparisons were made using Mann-Whitney U tests and T tests. RESULTS: 1) Pretreatment with hCG reduced the rate of endotoxininduced PTB when compared to mice injected with endotoxin alone [hCG 36±28.37% (4/11) vs endotoxin 80±24.79% (8/10); p=0.04]; 2) administration of hCG alone caused high rates of dystocia when compared to PBS controls [hCG 100% (10/10) vs. PBS 0% (0/10)]; 3) on 22.5 dpc, fetuses from mice injected with hCG alone that underwent dystocia appeared hypoxic and non-viable; and 4) on 19.5 dpc, fetuses from mice injected with hCG alone had increased heart rates (p=0.001) and decreased umbilical artery pulsatilty indexes (p=0.001) when compared to those from PBS controls. CONCLUSIONS: Pretreatment with hCG reduced the rate of endotoxininduced PTB, yet caused dystocia and fetal compromise. Further research is needed to evaluate the safety of hCG administration in the prevention of preterm labor. Use of Cell Penetrating Peptides to Treat Inflammatory Responses in Human Uterine Cells. Leo RI Gurney, 1 Stephen C Robson, 1 Arwyn T Jones, 2 Michael Taggart. 1 1 Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom; 2 Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. A lack of effective therapies continues to impair attempts to prevent preterm birth associated with inflammation. With the aim of broadening the scope of candidate agents available to be tested to address this clinical problem we investigated the ability of a novel class of peptide vectors, termed Cell Penetrating Peptides (CPPs) attached to a peptide cargo, the Nemo Binding Domain (NBD) peptide directed at the inhibition of inflammatory Nuclear Factor Kappa B (NFκB)-related signalling in uterine cells. The ability of three CPP derived vectors (Pen, TAT and R8) to deliver fluorescent cargo to human primary myometrial cells was tested using live cell confocal microscopy. Western blotting and quantitative polymerase chain reaction gene array techniques examined the efficacy of the CPP linked peptide cargo NBD peptide to dampen cytokine stimulated inflammatory responses in these cells. RESULTS: Pen, TAT and R8 were able to deliver fluorescent cargo to uterine myometrial cells within one hour over a concentration range of 1-10µM. The NBD peptide, conjugated to Pen CPP (Pen-NBD), significantly inhibited cytokine stimulated cyclo-oxygenase 2 (COX2) protein induction at four hours, *Figure(s) will be available online. Figure 1 Pen-NBD effect on IL1β COX2 expression. Representative Western blots indicating COX2 protein expression in myometrial cells over a four hour time frame following IL1B exposure alone (Control) or with 1 hour pre-incubation of increasing concentrations of Pen-NBD. This effect was not seen with other CPP-NBD conjugations, nor with mutant or un-conjugated peptide controls. Data derived from both Western blot and gene array indicated that the anti-inflammatory effects of Pen-NBD were comparable with a series of non-peptidic small molecule inhibitors of NFκB. CONCLUSIONS: This research demonstrates that CPPs can enter human uterine cells and deliver cargo to exert an anti-inflammatory effect, opening new avenues for the development of treatments aimed at preventing preterm birth associated with inflammation.  maternal peripheral cytokine patterns are transmitted to neonate circulation and how maternal peripheral inflammatory profiles during pregnancy associate with those in neonate circulation. Our objective was to assess whether maternal cytokine levels during the second (Tri2) and third (Tri3) trimester are associated with neonate cord blood cytokine levels. METHODS: 100 healthy pregnant women were recruited as part of a study on stress and inflammation. Maternal blood samples were collected at Tri2 and Tri3, and vein cord blood samples taken at delivery. Proinflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL) 6 and anti-inflammatory IL10 and IL13 were assessed using electrochemiluminescence. Inflammation regulation was modeled by calculating the balance of pro-and antiinflammatory cytokine expression, specifically IL6:IL10 ratio. Correlation analyses were run between maternal peripheral Tri2 and Tri3 cytokine levels and neonate cord blood cytokine levels. RESULTS: Mothers were 31 +/-5.4 years old at entry, and 50% White and 27% Black. At Tri2 and Tri3, higher maternal anti-inflammatory cytokine levels were associated with anti-inflammatory phenotype in cord blood: Maternal IL13 was positively associated with cord IL13 (r's > .87), and negatively with IL6:IL10, (r's < -.37). Maternal IL10 was positively associated with cord IL13, (r's > .40), and IL6, (r's > .39). At both Tri2 and Tri3, tighter maternal regulatory control of IL6 by IL10 was associated with anti-inflammatory phenotype in cord blood: Maternal IL6:IL10 was negatively associated with cord IL13, r's < -.33. Only Tri3 maternal proinflammatory IL6 was associated with greater cord IL6, r = .35. CONCLUSIONS: Higher maternal anti-inflammatory cytokine levels and tighter IL6-IL10 regulatory loop coupling across the 2nd and 3rd trimester were associated with anti-inflammatory cord blood profiles in the neonate. In the third trimester maternal pro-inflammatory cytokine, IL6, was also associated with cord blood IL6 cytokine levels at delivery. These findings suggest a unique link between maternal inflammatory profiles during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy and inflammatory profiles in neonate circulation after delivery. Second Trimester Amniotic Fluid MicroRNA Signatures in Pregnancies with and without Complications. Shaofu Li, Dorota A Doherty, Jan E Dickinson, John P Newnham, Jeffrey A Keelan. The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. INTRODUCTION: MicroRNAs (miRNA) play key roles in the regulation of gene expression. Many miRNAs have been measured and identified in biological fluids as potential biomarkers or predictors of disease. The aim of this study was to determine the miRNA profile of 2 nd trimester amniotic fluid (AF) samples and compare signatures in samples from pregnancies complicated by preterm birth (PTB), preterm pre-labour rupture of membranes (PPROM), intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and preeclampsia (PE) with normal control samples (CON). METHODS: AF samples were selected from 517 amniocentesis samples taken at 15-22 weeks' gestation (n=40 samples total). After extraction and reverse transcription, quantitative expression of 752 human miRNAs (plus controls) was performed using Exiqon miRCURY LNA TM Panel I and II 384-well PCR plates on a QuantStudio Real-Time PCR System. Amplification plots from each plate were individually inspected to exclude artefacts and false positives. Ct values were then derived, tabulated and filtered to exclude rarely-detected miRNAs. Due to overlapping clinical criteria, two composite groups (PTB-PPROM, n=8 and PE-IUGR, n=22) were compiled for statistical comparison with CON samples (n=10). RESULTS: Of the 752 miRNAs investigated, 389 were detectable in more than one sample, while 34 miRNAs were detected in ≥50% of samples. The most abundant of these were: miR-218-2-3p, miR-302e, miR-376a-5p and miR-587. Levels of miR-1471 (function/targets unknown) were significantly elevated in the PE-IUGR group (p=0.025, ANOVA). In the PTB-PPROM group, abundance of two miRNAs involved in regulating expression of inflammation-associated genes were significantly altered vs. CON: miR-206 (decreased, p=0.017) and miR-324-3p (increased, p=0.005). Levels of embryonic cell-derived miR-376c-3p were also decreased in the PTB-PPROM group vs. CON (p=0.034). The present study is the first to comprehensively profile miRNA expression in 2 nd trimester AF, identifying a pro-inflammatory miRNA signature associated with subsequent PTB and PPROM. These findings now need to be replicated in a large cohort to a) assess the predictive potential of AF miRNA measurements for identifying high risk pregnancies, and b) explore the links between miRNA activity and disease pathogenesis. women (Ulrich, Quillici et al. 2012 ). An important regulator of protein S-nitrosation is the availability of S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), an endogenously expressed NO donor. The enzyme GSNO Reductase (GSNOR) regulates GSNO levels. We hypothesize that the overexpression of GSNOR in preterm laboring myometrium may contribute to the preterm contractile phenotype and that inhibiting GSNOR may promote relaxation in the myometrium by increasing the available NO. The drug N6022 is potent and selective inhibitor of GSNOR with an IC 50 of 8 nM and is in clinical trial as an airway smooth muscle relaxant. An exploration of NO availability in the myometrium might provide insight into the regulation of muscle contraction and the initiation of labor preterm. METHODS: GSNOR protein expression is compared in preterm/fullterm laboring human myometrium as well as in guinea pig myometrium (15-72d) at various stages of pregnancy and parturition using western blot analysis. GSNOR enzyme activity assay conducted using an oxygenpurged total protein lysate in the presence of NADH (GSNOR co-factor) and GSNO. N6022 effectiveness is tested using myometrial tissue strips connected to a force transducer in an organ bath. The force/frequency of contractions are monitored before and after application of N6022. RESULTS: GSNOR is overexpressed in preterm laboring myometrium as compared to full term myometrium. GSNOR activity is increased in preterm laboring myometrium as compared to full term. Preliminary data suggests that N6022 may serve as a novel tocolytic by decreasing the peak force of contraction in laboring myometrium. CONCLUSIONS: Nitric oxide is a potent smooth muscle relaxant. The overexpression of GSNOR in preterm laboring myometrium is hypothesized to decrease the availability of NO by eliminating GSNO from the cytosol and may explain the dysfunctional relaxation seen to exogenous NO. N6022 increases available GSNO by selectivity inhibiting GSNOR and this may promote relaxation in preterm laboring myometrial tissue that overexpresses GSNOR. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that NF-kB and AP-1 transcription factors promote miR-155 expression that in turn induces inflammation by downregulating SOCS1. Thus miR-155 inhibitors may be a used as a therapeutic for women with PE in the future. Cathepsin C Upregulates Chymase Expression and Angiotensin II Production in Endothelial Cells. Yang Gu, Lynn J Groome, Yuping Wang. LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport, Shreveport, LA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Chymase, a chymotrypsin-like serine protease, is an ACE-independent angiotensin II (Ang II) generating enzyme. Chymase expression is increased in maternal vessel endothelium in women with preeclampsia (PE). Therefore, chymase activation could contribute to increased vasoconstriction and maternal hypertension in PE. However, how chymase became activated in PE is not known. Cathepsin C (CC) is a central coordinator for activation of many serine proteases including chymase. In the present study, we aimed to investigate if vascular CC expression is increased in PE and whether CC could induce chymase expression and stimulate Ang II generation in endothelial cells (EC). METHODS: Subcutaneous fat tissue (scfat) was obtained by cesarean section delivery from pregnant women (6 normal and 6 PE). Vessel CC and ACE expression was examined by immunostaining of scfat tissue sections. ECs were isolated from umbilical cord vein of normal term placentas. Confluent ECs were treated with different doses of CC (0, 1, 5, 20, and 100pg/ml) or CC 100pg/ml with or without ACE inhibitor captopril or chymase inhibitor chymostatin separately or in combination. Effects of CC on EC chymase activation were determined by chymase expression and Ang II production measured in cell culture medium. Data are expressed as mean ± SE and analyzed by ANOVA. A p level < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: Positive CC expression was detected in vessel endothelium in 4 out of 6 subjects in the PE group. Vessel endothelial CC expression was not detected in samples from normal pregnancies. ACE expression was undetectable in vessel endothelium in both normal and PE groups. Chymase expression was dose-dependently increased in EC treated with CC. EC Ang II production was significantly reduced when either captopril (captopril + CC+Ang I) or chymostatin (chymostatin+CC+Ang I) present in the culture compared to those without (CC+Ang I), p<0.001. EC Ang II production was further significantly reduced when cells were treated with both captopril and chymostatin (chymostatin+captopril+CC+Ang I) compared to those treated with either captopril or chymostatin alone, p<0.01. CONCLUSIONS: Increased CC expression could promote chymase activation in maternal vessel endothelium in PE, which subsequently stimulate EC Ang II generation. CC activation may contribute to increased vasoconstriction through activation of chymase-Ang II regulatory pathway in PE (supported in part by NIH grant R21HD076289). New Generation, Orally Available Antiplatelet Agents as Novel Therapeutic Candidates for Preeclampsia. Natalie J Hannan, Sally Beard, Natalie K Binder, Tu'uhevaha J Kaitu'u-Lino, Stephen Tong. University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia is characterized by endothelial dysfunction, hypertension, proteinuria and end-organ damage. Aspirin, an antiplatelet agent, is used to prevent preterm preeclampsia but its efficacy appears modest. Newer antiplatelet therapies such as Clopidogrel, Prasugrel and Ticagrelor are now available, used clinically to prevent heart attacks and stroke. Key pathophysiological steps in preeclampsia are 1) increased oxidative stress, 2) elevated placental secretion of sFlt1 and soluble endoglin (sEng) and 3) endothelial dysfunction. We set out to functionally examine whether aspirin or the new generation antiplatelet agents can counter the pathophysiology in preeclampsia. METHODS: Isolated primary trophoblast and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and placental explants were treated with Aspirin, Clopidogrel, Prasugrel or Ticagrelor (0-100µM). Endothelial dysfunction was modelled in vitro where HUVECs and uterine microvascular cells (UtMVs) were treated with TNFα (10µg/mL), then subsequently treated with Aspirin or Clopidogrel. Media and cell lysates were collected to assess 1) the Nrf2/antioxidant response element signaling pathway (nuclear translocation of Nrf2 and expression of HO-1, NQO1 and GCLC), 2) anti-angiogenic factors (sFlt1 and sEng) and 3) markers of endothelial dysfunction (vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM1) and endothelin-1 (ET-1)). RESULTS: Clopidogrel induced nuclear Nrf2 translocation and increased expression of antioxidant genes: HO-1, NQO1 and GCLC. In contrast, aspirin did not affect Nrf2 nuclear translocation and did not alter antioxidant gene expression. Clopidogrel, Prasugrel and Ticagrelor induced a potent reduction in sFlt1 secretion from placental and endothelial cells; and reduced sEng secretion from HUVECs. In contrast, aspirin did not affect sFlt1 or sEng secretion. Clopidogrel rescued endothelial dysfunction, mitigating TNFα induced VCAM1 and ET-1 mRNA and protein production/secretion. In contrast, aspirin did not affect VCAM1 or ET-1 expression by endothelial cells. The new generation antiplatelet therapies Clopidogrel, Prasugrel and Ticagrelor potently upregulate the antioxidant response, decrease sFlt1/sEng secretion and quench endothelial dysfunction in primary human tissues. Given they are classified as category B/C drugs, they represent exciting candidate drugs to prevent or treat preeclampsia. Many studies have attempted to link circulating GF and Cyt with PE diagnosis with limited success. We have previously shown using ATPstimulated sustained Ca2+ signaling as an assay for proper endothelial cell function, that TNFa or VEGF mediated Src kinase signaling can induce endothelial dysfunction at doses which are commonly reported in preeclampsia, while VEGF stimulated greater function at doses in the normal range. We therefore hypothesize that any GF or Cyt which activates Src kinase will induce endothelial dysfunction at pathophysiological doses but will stimulate function in the normal range. In this study, we screen a panel of GF and Cyt at a variety of doses in vitro for their effect on endothelial cell function. This will assess whether GF and Cyt effect on endothelial cell function is a global phenomenon, which might explain why correlation of any single factor may be difficult. METHODS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were grown on 96 well plates to >90% confluence. HUVEC were loaded with Fura-2 AM dye (for Ca2+) and treated with bFGF, EGF, IL-1b, IL-6, and IL-8 at doses of 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, and 100ng/ml for 30 or 60 min. For Ca2+ measures, cells were subsequently treated with 100uM ATP for 30 min and monitored for any inhibition vs ATP control. RESULTS: Statistical analysis by Student's T test revealed the following doses resulted in significant stimulations from ATP control (P<0.05), in ng/ml: EGF, 0.1, 0.3; IL-1b, 0.3, 1, 3; IL-6, 0.1; IL-8, 0.1. The following doses resulted in significant inhibition from ATP control (P<0.05), in ng/ ml: bFGF, 0.3, 100; EGF, 1, 30; IL-1b, 30; IL-8, 10. CONCLUSIONS: Despite some variation, in general GF and Cyt promote increased endothelial function at doses in the normal physiologic range and inhibit endothelial function as they move into the pathophysiologic range and beyond. This supports the idea that it is unlikely that any single Src coupled factor is responsible for the endothelial dysfunction associated with preeclampsia. It is more likely that appropriate amounts of these factors are essential for healthy pregnancy but any deviation from normal levels could have profound effects on endothelial function. NIH HD079865, HD069181, T32HD41921, and UW ICTR Voucher. , a pregnancy specific syndrome of multi-organ dysfunction and hypertension, has been linked to elevation of cytokines (Cyt) and growth factors (GF) causing endothelial dysfunction. Our recent work has shown inhibition of connexin 43 (Cx43) gap junction function by phosphorylation via Src and Erk kinases stimulated by GF and Cyt. This inhibition is associated with decreased sustained phase Ca² + bursting in endothelial cells leading to decreased production of nitric oxide (NO), a potent vasodilator. Pretreatment of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) with a known Src inhibitor, PP2, showed rescue of Ca² + bursting in response to ATP in cells exposed to VEGF, TNFα, IL-1β and bFGF. In this study, using the HUVEC model, we examine sustained calcium bursting response in cells pre-treated with conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) isoforms 9, 11 (control) and 10,12 (known Src inhibitor) prior to GF and Cyt exposure. METHODS: HUVEC from normal pregnancies were grown to >90% confluence on 35 mm glass dishes and then loaded with Fura-2 for Ca² + imaging. Control Ca² + sustained-phase bursting with 100 uM ATP alone (30 min.) was followed by a wash prior to pretreatment with 50 uM 9, 11 or 10, 12 CLA. GF/cytokine (VEGF, TNFα, IL-1β, bFGF, EGF, IL-6, IL-8, and INFɤ) 10ng/ml treatment was then applied (30-60 min.) and cells were re-stimulated with ATP. Ca² + burst numbers were then compared to internal control results. RESULTS: Pretreatment with 50 uM 10, 12 CLA showed significant recovery (p<0.05) in sustained-phase Ca² + bursting in HUVEC cells exposed to VEGF, bFGF, and TNFα (recover of 82 to 88% of control). Significant recovery was not noted with the 9, 11 CLA isoform, which is not known to be a Src inhibitor. CONCLUSIONS: Preclamptic effects on endothelial cell function can be mimicked by the addition of GF/cyt found to be elevated in preeclamptic patients. 10, 12 CLA, will partially improve these inhibitory effects with near global recovery for a wide range of GF and Cyt; and in the case of TNF even better than recovery with PP2. Further studies of CLA, may lead to potential trials of prophylactic and therapeutic treatments for preeclamptic pregnancies. Supported by OBGyn R&D to DMB and RO3 HD079865 to DB. Maternal Hyperglycemia and Effects on Phosphorylated Endothelial Nitric Oxide Expression in Placenta. Luckey C Reed, Nicholas M Ieronimakis, Peter G Napolitano. Madigan Army Medical Center, Tacoma, WA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Diabetes in pregnancy is associated with adverse fetal outcomes, the cause is believed to be hyperglycemia. Nitric oxide (NO) is the principle regulator of vascular tone in the placenta. The synthesis of NO by endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) can be activated by phosphorylation. The eNOS serine 1176 residue shows reduced phosphorylation in non-pregnant diabetics. This study evaluated the effects of hyperglycemia on vascular reactivity to thromboxane resulting from altered eNOS activation, indicated by lower phosphorylation at serine 1176. METHODS: We collected cotyledons from placentas of normal term patients at caesarian section. Two cotyledons from each placenta were isolated and perfused in parallel. The intervillous circulation was perfused in the control with a glucose concentration of 100mg/dl (normal glycemic) and the treatment was perfused at a glucose concentration of 300mg/ dl (hyperglycemic), and then constricted with thromboxane. After 30 minutes, tissues were collected for analysis of eNOS phosphorylation at serine 1176. RESULTS: Staining's for phosphorylated eNOS showed a lower intensity with exposure to maternal hyperglycemia *Figure(s) will be available online. Quantification of the phosphorylated eNOS intensity was decreasede with the 300mg/dL perfusate *Figure(s) will be available online. In contrast, perfusion with 100mg/dL was not different from samples that were not perfused but isolated at the time of the collection. CONCLUSIONS: In a dual perfusion placental model, we were able to show a reduction of activated eNOS in response to a hyperglycemic perfusate. These results suggest that the increased vascular reactivity observed with diabetes result from alterations in NO synthesis caused by hyperglycemia . This model could be used to elucidate the mechanisms behind increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes associated with hyperglycemia. Cytomegalovirus Infection Dampens Thromboxane A2-Induced Vascular Tone Mediated by Sphingosine 1-Phosphate. Daniel Kerage, Denise G Hemmings. University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is associated with preeclampsia and IUGR. CMV increases sphingosine kinase 1 (SK1) expression. Both SK1 and SK2 produce the bioactive lipid sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P). S1P, exported from cells by ABC-type transporters, signalsthrough S1P2/S1P3 receptors to induce vasoconstriction. We have shown that thromboxane-A2 (TXA2), a vasoconstrictor, signals through the S1P pathway. However, the effects of CMV infection on this signalling pathway are unknown. We hypothesize that TXA2-mediated constriction through the S1P pathway will be increased in arteries from CMV-infected mice. METHODS: Uterine arteries isolated from uninfected and CMV-infected female S1P3-/-or S1P2-/-mice and their wildtype (WT) controls were mounted on a pressure myograph. Constriction was assessed to increasing concentrations of the TXA2 mimetic U46619 (0.1-20nM) added to the bath followed by studies of 20nM U46619 with or without inhibitors to SK1 (1µM SK-II), SK2 (10µM ABC294640), ABC transporters (1µM FTC, 10µM MK571), S1P1/S1P3(1µM VPC23019), S1P2 (10µM JTE013), or Rho kinase (10µM Y27632). RESULTS: Constriction of arteries from CMV-infected compared to uninfected WT mice was significantly increased after cumulative addition of U46619. However, addition of 20 nM U46619 by itself to arteries from uninfected and infected mice induced similar levels of constriction (70.1±2.2%; 69.7±3.4%) that was significantly but differentially reduced in response to infection, except where indicated, by SK-II (20.2±9.2%; 63.3±1.2%-NS), ABC294640 (1.5±1.3%; 28.4±6.4%); FTC (47.9±8.8%; 45.6±5.6%), MK571 (6.1±5.2%; 47.8±6.1%), JTE013 (13.3±5.9%; 24.7±7.7%), VPC23019 (12.7±5.0%; 49.0±4.0%) or Y27632 (70.7±7.3%-NS; 32.3±9.5%), respectively. U46619-induced constriction was significantly reduced in arteries from uninfected S1P3-/-, but not S1P2-/-mice, suggesting the dependence on S1P3. In contrast, constriction in arteries from infected S1P3-/-mice was not affected. Thus infection reduces the dependence of the TXA2 response on S1P signalling. CONCLUSIONS: Signalling by TXA2 through the S1P pathway to induce constriction in uterine arteries is dampened during CMV infection with an increased dependence on the Rho kinase pathway. Understanding alternative downstream signalling by TXA2 in the presence and absence of infection is essential for choosing appropriate therapies for treatment where TXA2 is known to be elevated. Placental Thrombomodulin Dysregulation in Preeclampsia. Rosanne J Turner, 1 Kitty WM Bloemenkamp, 2 Jan A Bruijn, 1 Hans J Baelde. 1 1 LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands; 2 LUMC/UMCU, Leiden/Utrecht, Netherlands. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia is a pregnancy-specific syndrome characterized by placental dysfunction and an angiogenic imbalance. Levels of thrombomodulin, an endothelium-and syncytiotrophoblastbound protein that regulates coagulation, inflammation, apoptosis, and tissue remodeling, are increased systemically. We aimed to investigate the role of placental thrombomodulin dysregulation and consequent downstream effects in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. METHODS: Placentas from 28 pregnancies with preeclampsia, from 30 uncomplicated pregnancies and from 21 pregnancies complicated by growth restriction as extra controls were included. Immunohistochemical staining of thrombomodulin, caspase-3, and fibrin was performed. Placental mRNA expression of thrombomodulin, intercellular adhesion molecule 1, tumor necrosis factor alpha, matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9, and soluble Flt-1 were measured with PCR. Choriocarcinoma cell lines Jeg-3, JAR and BeWo were transfected with vascular endothelial growth factor plasmids and the effect on thrombomodulin expression was measured with qPCR. RESULTS: Thrombomodulin protein and mRNA expression were decreased in preeclampsia as compared to both control groups (P=0.001). Thrombomodulin mRNA expression correlated with maternal body mass index (P< 0.01), and with diastolic blood pressure (P<0.05) in preeclampsia. More apoptotic cells were present in placentas from preeclamptic patients (P<0.001) than in placentas from both control groups. Thrombomodulin mRNA expression correlated positively with matrix metalloproteinase 2 mRNA expression (P<0.01) in preeclamptic placentas, but not with fibrin deposits or parameters of inflammation. In placentas with decreased thrombomodulin protein expression, expression of soluble Flt-1 was increased. In vascular endothelial growth factortransfected choriocarcinoma cells, thrombomodulin expression was increased. Our findings indicate that decreased thrombomodulin expression may play a role in the development of placental dysfunction in preeclampsia, either through impaired placental cell survival or decreased matrix metalloproteinase activity. This decreased expression could be a consequence of the angiogenic imbalance of preeclampsia. These results set the stage for further basic and clinical research on thrombomodulin in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia and other syndromes characterized by placental pathology. Changes in the Maternal Immune System in Late-Onset and Postpartum Preeclampsia. Agnes Ditisheim, Adriana Carbonaro, Kevin Ippersiel, Ines Boufaied, Sylvie Girard. CHU Sainte-Justine -Research Center, Montréal, QC, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia (PE) is a syndrome specific to pregnancy. It is one of the leading cause of materno-fetal mortality and morbidity worldwide. Placenta is thought to play a role in its physiopathology as its only cure is delivery. Classically, PE occurs during pregnancy. By an unexplained mechanism, it can also develop in the postpartum period after placenta expulsion. Inflammation is known to be involved in PE but the actual changes in the maternal immune system during normal pregnancy as well as pregnancies complicated with PE are still incompletely understood. We sought to determine the immune profile of women with normal term pregnancies, pregnancies complicated with PE (PrePE) as well as the profile at birth of women that later developed PE (PostPE). METHODS: Women were recruited prospectively at the Sainte-Justine Hospital (N=50) with either uncomplicated pregnancies with term delivery (Ctrl, N=20), pregnancies complicated with PE (PrePE, N=15) or normal pregnancies with postpartum occurrence of PE (PostPE, N=15). Blood samples were collected prior and 24h after delivery in all patients as well as at the time of diagnosis (for PostPE). RESULTS: Delivery was associated with changes in the maternal circulating immune system with elevated total leukocytes and neutrophils numbers with a decreased proportion of lymphocytes and monocytes in Ctrl pregnancies. However, in pregnancies complicated with PE (PrePE), leukocytes and neutrophils count were elevated prior to birth as compared to Ctrl and did not change after delivery. However lymphocytes, which were similar to Ctrl levels prior to birth, were significantly elevated after delivery. In cases with PostPE, leukocytes and neutrophils count were the same as Ctrl prior to birth but contrary to Ctrl pregnancies, they did not raised following delivery and were significantly lower when the diagnosis of PostPE occurred. Furthermore, in the PostPE group, the proportion of lymphocytes was significantly elevated when the pathology was diagnosed. Altogether, these results suggest that changes in the immune system occur rapidly after delivery in normal pregnancies and that these changes are abrogated in PrePE. Furthermore, differences are observed around delivery in women with seemingly normal pregnancies that will later develop PostPE. Detailed understanding of these changes is important to address the mechanisms of PE and for early identification of women at high-risk of PostPE. Pregnancy Specific Activation of Neutrophils in Preeclampsia via Protease-Activated Receptor-1 (PAR-1). William H Nugent, Maria E Teves, Sonya L Washington, Jerome F Strauss III, Scott W Walsh. Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Neutrophils express PAR-1, but only during pregnancy. In preeclampsia, elevated levels of PAR-1 activating proteases could lead to a pregnancy-specific inflammatory response. A mechanism linking PAR-1 to inflammatory signaling could be through the recently discovered TET proteins that increase gene expression by enzymatic de-methylation of DNA. We tested the hypothesis that proteases activate neutrophil PAR-1, which activates RhoA kinase (ROCK) to trigger translocation of TET2 and NF-kB into the nucleus to increase expression of inflammatory genes. METHODS: Neutrophils were isolated from normal pregnant women and treated for 2 h with: 1) control media; 2) neutrophil elastase (0.033U/ml); 3) activated matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1, 5 ng/ml, a concentration present in preeclamptic women). Inhibitory treatments were added before protease activating treatments: 1) specific PAR-1 inhibitor (1 µM, SCH-79797); 2) specific ROCK inhibitor (10 µM Y-27632). Nuclear translocations of TET2 and NF-kB were evaluated using immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy (n=10). RESULTS: TET2 and NF-kB were localized to the cytosol in control cells. Protease treatments stimulated translocation of TET2 and NF-kB from the cytosol to the nucleus as well as significant increases in IL-8, an NF-kB regulated gene (P<0.001). When cells were pretreated with inhibitors, nuclear translocation and IL-8 increases were prevented. TET2 was localized to the nucleus in untreated neutrophils isolated from preeclamptic women. Treatment with PAR-1 inhibitor emptied the nucleus of TET2 restoring a normal state, even in the presence of protease stimulation. CONCLUSIONS: Proteases that are elevated in preeclampsia activate PAR-1 on neutrophils obtained from normal pregnant women causing translocation of TET2 and NF-kB from the cytosol to the nucleus, which may epigenetically produce an inflammatory response. We speculate that inhibition of PAR-1 may be an effective treatment for reducing inflammation associated with preeclampsia. NIH HL069851 INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia (PE) is a pregnancy related endothelial disease characterized by hypertension and proteinuria. The postpartum persistent deterioration of endothelial function in women with a history of PE implies that changes in the maternal endothelium may be more than transient. We postulate that women with a history of PE have an impaired endothelial dependent vaso-relaxation with related reduced kidney function, both reflecting persistent endothelial dysfunction. We investigated endothelial and kidney function in women with a history of PE (n= 85) and uncomplicated pregnancies (n =49). They were all normotensive and had no hypertension, diabetes, or kidney disease prior to the pregnancy. We measured albumin and creatinine in a 24-hour urine sample and calculated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) by CKD-EPI. Flow mediated dilatation (FMD) was measured continuously and analyzed by a custom designed edge-detection and wall-tracking software. Data were analyzed by multiple linear regressions and adjusted for age and time postpartum. RESULTS: Women with a PE in their history had lower FMD, higher GFR and comparable albumin creatinine ratio (see table) . Independent of obstetric history, in both controls and women with a history of PE respectively, albumin creatinine ratio (r=0.08, p=0.61 and r=0.06 p=0.60) and GFR (r=-0.07, p=0.68 and r=0.10, p=0.37) did not correlate with FMD.  At least 4 years after pregnancy, women with a history of preeclampsia showed a decreased flow mediated dilatation when compared to healthy parous controls but no evident decrease in kidney function. r=0.41, P=0.003). Patients with thrombophilia (n=27) compared to those without (n=30) received a higher daily dose of LMWH (p=0.33), had a higher mean anti Xa level (p=0.004), and increased birthweights (3157.7g v. 2769g, p=0.02). Birth weight did not differ, between those receiving therapeutic (n=40) compared with prophylactic (n=17) regimens alone (p=0.24). LMWH dose was higher in the therapeutic group (p<.05) however the antiXa level was not different between those getting therapeutic v prophylactic dosing (p=0.09). CONCLUSIONS: Mean maternal daily dose of LMWH positively correlates with birth weight. Neonates of mothers with thrombophilia who were treated with LMWH have a higher birthweight compared to those similarly treated but without thrombophilia Cord Reduced subcutaneous fat is a major cause of lowered birth weight in FGR compared to normal neonates. Peroxisome proliferatoractivated receptor (PPAR) γ is a nuclear regulator which known to regulate glucose and lipid metabolism especially in terms of glucose utilization and lipogenesis through heterodimer formation with the retinoid X receptor a (RXRa). Therefore, we hypothesize that glucose and lipid metabolism is compromised in FGR fetus due to PPARγ dysfunction. METHODS: 24 term pregnancy placentas were collected from FGR (n=12) and normal (n=12) pregnancies in the department of Obstetrics, the first affiliated hospital of Chongqing Medical University, and immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and then stored in -80. The expression levels of mRNA and protein were determined by qPCR and immunoblotting respectively. The immunofluorescence staining of PPARγ was performed on the frozen-sections of placental tissue. RESULTS: Both immunofluorescence staining and qPCR confirmed PPARγ expression in placenta tissues but there were no difference in PPARγ mRNA levels between FGR and normal placenta (p=0.91, n=6). Expression of total PPARγ was also similar in FGR and normal placentas, as was expression of AMPK, ACC, PI3K and AKT. However, a significant reduction in phosphorylation of PPARγ (p=0.002, n=6), AMPK (p<0.0001, n=6), ACC (p=0.004, n=6), PI3K (p=0.004, n=4) and AKT (p=0.0007, n=6) was found in FGR compared to normal placenta. In addition, the expression of membrane-bond GLUT4 protein was lower in FGR placentas (p=0.007, n=6), while the total GLUT4 protein expression level was increased in FGR placenta (p=0.04, n=6). CONCLUSIONS: Down-regulation of PPARγ activity and its related metabolic signaling pathways is associated with FGR; this indicates that FGR placentas undergo disturbed glucose uptake and lipogenesis. Therefore, PPARγ is a potential interventional target for FGR prevention. Obesity and Early Fetal Growth. Animal studies have shown that environmental exposures are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction affecting oocyte quality and early embryonic development. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between environmental exposures affecting mitochondrial function and early fetal growth. In a prospective cohort of 1,020 singleton pregnancies conceived with assistance of in vitro fertilization or intrauterine insemination with precisely known duration of pregnancy early fetal growth was estimated at 10 4/7 to 13 6/7 weeks. The difference between observed and expected based on duration of pregnancy crown-rump length was expressed as percentiles for gestational age. The late fetal growth was defined as difference between birth weight and early fetal growth percentiles. The relationship between early fetal growth and environmental exposures: maternal BMI in early pregnancy, diabetes, smoking, age and use of folic acid were evaluated using linear regression. RESULTS: BMI was inversely proportional to the percentile of early fetal growth. Each unit of BMI was associated with 0.7 percentile decrease in early fetal size (coefficient [95% CI] -0.007 [-0.011, -0.004], p<0.0001). Obese women (BMI>30 kg/m 2 ) had mean fetal size 7 percentiles lower than other women (coefficient [95% CI] -0.07 [-0.13, -0.02], p=0.006). Conversely, BMI was positively associated with late fetal growth. Obese women had a mean increase in fetal size between 1 st trimester and birth 14 percentiles higher than other women (coefficient [95% CI] 0.14 [0.07, 0.21], p<0.0001). There was no significant association between early fetal size and other environmental exposures affecting mitochondrial function. CONCLUSIONS: Woman's weight and especially obesity in early pregnancy is associated with detrimental effect on early fetal growth. The later fetal growth until birth is increased in obese women resulting in larger birth weights. These findings show that negative effect of obesity on pregnancy outcome is already established at the onset of pregnancy and provide strong rationale for weight control before conception. The decidua is the major source of IGFBP-1 in the maternal circulation; however the role of decidual IGFBP-1 phosphorylation, in IUGR is unknown. IGFBP-1 phosphorylation markedly reduces IGF-bioavailability. Maternal IGF-I regulates placental function and alterations in IGF-I/IGFBP-1 phosphorylation may contribute to IUGR. We hypothesize that inhibition of decidual mTOR and activation of AAR enhances total and phosphorylated IGFBP-1 in IUGR. We used human decidua from IUGR and gestational age matched control (AGA) (n=16 each) and determined total and phosphorylated IGFBP-1 101/119/169 by immunoblotting. Human decidualized endometrial stromal cells (HIESC) were utilized as an in vitro model to study regulation of IGFBP-1 phosphorylation by mTOR/AAR signaling. : : Transgenesis was confirmed by visual inspection for the presence of EGFP expression under UV light. Transgene insertion was confirmed in the genome by PCR. We confirmed knockdown of Glut1 expression in doxycycline induced transgenic mice by qPCR. CONCLUSIONS: Fetal programming is critical to adult health and heavily influenced by the in-utero environment, including nutrient transport levels and a novel model of Glut1 knockdown is a new tool allowing for further investigation into the effects of glucose transport levels on fetal overgrowth and fetal programming. Intrauterine Growth Restriction Impacts on Lung Structure and Function? Beth Allison, 1 Chloe Bourguignon, 1 Stuart Hooper, 1,2 Valerie Zahra, 1 Graham Jenkin, 1,2 Atul Malhotra, 1,3 Martin Kluckow, 4 Andy Gill, 5 Foula Sozo, 6 Suzie Miller, 1,2 Graeme Polglase. Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and preterm birth are frequent co-morbidities and, combined, increase the risk of respiratory outcomes. Mechanisms increasing respiratory morbidity in IUGR infants compared to appropriately grown (AG) infants are not known, but likely include altered lung development, inflammation and increased respiratory requirements. The aim of this study was to investigate whether IUGR alters fetal lung development and have increased ventilator requirements after birth. METHODS: IUGR was surgically induced in fetal sheep at either 88d (early-onset) or 105d (late-onset) gestation by single umbilical artery ligation. At 127d gestation, fetuses were euthanized at delivery, or lambs ventilated (volume guarantee mode) for 24 hours. Ventilator requirements, lung inflammation, early markers of lung injury, lung morphological, vascular structure and surfactant composition were analyzed. RESULTS: Both early-and late onset fetuses were assymetrically growth restricted and hypoxic at birth. Both early-and late-onset fetuses showed no upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokine, injury marker expression, surfactant, lung parenchymal or vascular structure compared to AG fetuses. Early-onset lambs required higher oxygen and peak inflation pressure after 24h ventilation, despite comparable surfactant properties, lung structure and inflammatory response when assessed at post mortem following completion of ventilation. CONCLUSIONS: Despite a lack of histological pulmonary structural changes, early-onset IUGR increased ventilator requirements. This study suggests that duration of exposure to in utero insult may affect the ability of an IUGR infant to transition to ex utero life. *Figure(s) will be available online. Reduced Insulin-Stimulated Glucose Uptake in Skeletal Muscle Strips from Intrauterine Growth Restricted Lambs. Leticia E Camacho, Dustin T Yates, Ronald E Allen, Sean W Limesand. The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. INTRODUCTION: Evidence shows that intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) increases the risk for insulin resistance and Type 2 Diabetes in adulthood. This association indicates that skeletal muscle responsiveness to insulin decreases in individuals with IUGR. The aim of this study was to show decreased insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in skeletal muscle strips from IUGR lambs. METHODS: Placental insufficiency-induced IUGR was created by exposing pregnant ewes to high ambient temperatures during mid gestation. IUGR lambs (n=4) were compared to controls (n=4). At 33±5 days, the semitendinosus muscle was collected and strips of fibers were isolated for glucose uptake analysis. Briefly, semitendinosus strips (30-50 mg) were dissected, mounted in Plexiglas clamps, and pre-incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C in oxygenated KHB with 0.1% BSA, 5 mM of glucose, and 32 mM mannitol. Treatment conditions were 0, >10 µU/ml insulin (HumalinR), and >10 µU/ml insulin plus 20 mM cytochalasin B (n=6/ condition/lamb).Then, strips were incubated for an additional 30 minutes with 2-deoxy-D-[ 3 H] glucose in the same conditions. Fold change was determined relative to insulin plus cytochalasin B. RESULTS: IUGR lambs were lighter at birth than control lambs (2.0±0.4 kg vs. 4.2±0.4 kg; P<0.05) and remained smaller at ~33 days (7.2±1.1 kg vs. 14.3±1.1 kg; P<0.01). The rate of glucose uptake with no insulin was not different between control and IUGR muscle strips. Insulin stimulated (P<0.05) glucose uptake in muscle strips independent of treatment group. Strikingly, the rate of glucose uptake with high insulin was lower (P<0.05) in IUGR lambs compared to control lambs (1.30 vs. 1.60 ± 0.05 fold change, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Insulin-stimulated glucose uptake was reduced in IUGR semitendinosus muscle strips. These data demonstrate that skeletal muscle becomes insulin resistant by one month in IUGR lambs, which has been suggested to initiate the onset of Type 2 Diabetes. Further investigation into the intracellular signaling pathway of insulin is needed to define the mechanisms that lower glucose uptake in the skeletal muscle of IUGR lambs. However, this is difficult to prove in humans as ex-preterm adults have likely been exposed to synthetic glucocorticoids during the perinatal period. Here, we isolated the long-term effects of AGT used in humans on cardiovascular function at adulthood in sheep not born preterm. METHODS: At 0.8 of gestation, pregnant ewes carrying singletons were treated with steroids (2 x 12mg dexamethasone i.m. 24h apart, D; n=7) while the other received saline vehicle i.m. (C; n=10). After natural delivery, offspring were maintained until 9 months, and then chronically instrumented with vascular catheters and a femoral flow probe to assess in vivo cardiovascular physiology followed by ex vivo cardiac (Langendorff) and vascular (wire myography) function analysis. RESULTS: Both C and D ewes delivered at term (148±3 vs. 148±2 d). At adulthood, C and D offspring had similar in vivo basal arterial blood pressure (89.8±1.8 vs. 92.8±2.6 mmHg) and heart rate (97.5±3.2 vs. 97.3±8.5 bpm). However, isolated hearts in D relative to C offspring showed markedly elevated left ventricular end diastolic pressure (LVEDP), an index of diastolic dysfunction, and impaired dP/dtmax, a measure of myocardial contractility (Fig. 1 a & b) . Further, in vivo baroreflex function (Fig. 1c) showed enhanced sympathetic dominance and depressed vagal dominance in D relative to C adult offspring. CONCLUSIONS: Human AGT adversely affects cardiovascular function in adult offspring independent of preterm birth. Support: British Heart Foundation *Figure(s) will be available online.  Gene Mortality in flu infection is related to decreased immune clearance of virus from the lungs, enhanced virus-induced inflammation, tissue damage, secondary bacterial infection and respiratory failure. We have used a mouse model of flu infection to understand the enhanced morbidity/ mortality observed in young and aged human populations infected with flu. Preliminary data suggests enhanced susceptibility in neonates as compared to adults and possible sex-related differences. Due to the importance of the lung epithelium in the immune response to flu, we examined the gene expression profile of lung epithelial cells from neonatal, adult and aged male and female mice. METHODS: Lungs from C57BL/6 2-(8 pools, 4 male 4 female), 12-(4 male 4 female), and 76-(4 male 4 female) week old mice were used to generate lung epithelial cell suspensions. RNA was examined using the Affymetrix Mouse gene 2.0 st array. Multivariate Principal Component Analysis was done with Partek Genomics® Suite 6.6 to explore sample group variation. A binary filter (FDR of 0.05, two-fold change) and ANOVA was used to delineate significant differences in transcript presence. Pathway analysis was performed with NIH David. Relative expression of genes of interest was confirmed with qtPCR. RESULTS: Overall age accounted for more variability than sex, with Pups differing more from Adults or Aged mice than these groups differed from each other. Sex differences were stronger in Pups and Aged than in Adults. Sex-by-age interactions were more pronounced in Adult and Aged mice and focused on pathways involved with extracellular matrix interactions. Genes differing between males and females across age groups included development and inflammatory response-related genes. CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression in lung epithelial cells differs relative to developmental milieu and aging and may reflect sex-inherent differences. Ongoing work relates inflammation and infection to these differences. Supported by NIH P20 RR021905-01 and the University of Vermont. Pre-Natal and Post-Weaning High Fat Diet Effects on Vitamin D Status and Skeletal Muscle Function. Lisa E Jones, 1 Filip P Markiewicz, 2,3 Felino R Cagampang, 1,2 Rob S James, 4 Emiliano Rustighi, 3 William D Fraser, 5 Kirsten R Poore, 1 Jane K Cleal, 1,2 Philip L Newland, 2 Lucy R Green. Previously we showed that adult skeletal muscle force reduced by postweaning (POST) high fat (HF) diet is modified by prior prenatal (PRE) HF diet. Here we related muscle contraction to vitamin D status and insulin-mediated glucose uptake markers. METHODS: C57 mice were fed HF (45% kcal fat) or control (C, 7% kcal fat) diet in PRE (6 wk preconception to weaning) and/or POST periods (HF/HF, HF/C, C/HF, C/C, n=7-8/group Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) reduces prenatal muscle growth and is associated with postnatal limitations in skeletal muscle growth and function. In IUGR fetuses, myoblast proliferation rates and myofiber size were decreased in semitendinosus muscle, but these defects have not been defined postnatally. Thus, the objective was to determine if IUGR lambs grow slower and have deficiencies in satellite cell proliferation and myofiber size. Endometriosis is a common disease in women of reproductive age, causing pelvic pain and reduced fertility. With a suggested prevalence of 5-10% it is estimated that 176M women worldwide are affected by this chronic inflammatory condition. Nonsurgical means of diagnosis are required to reduce length of time until diagnosis and treatment. Variations in systemic inflammatory response mediators have been associated with adverse clinical outcome in infectious diseases including malaria and tuberculosis as well as malignancies such as lymphoma and various solid carcinomas. Moreover, the ratio of specific leucocyte subpopulations such as monocytes and lymphocytes has been implicated as prognostic factor of inflammatory response and endothelial dysfunction (e.g. in myocardial infarction). The aim of this study was to investigate the potential role of the monocyte to lymphocyte ratio (MLR) as a predictive marker of endometriosis, in the context of disease stage and menstrual phase. As part of the ENDOX study we collected pre-operative full blood count (FBC) results from women undergoing a laparoscopy for symptoms suggestive of endometriosis. Endometriosis was subsequently intra-operatively confirmed or excluded. Clinical and phenotypic data were simultaneously recorded according to WERF EPHect standards. Linear regression models were used to assess differences in M/L ratio between cases and controls, adjusted for covariates. We analyzed the FBCs of 390 ENDOX study patients and matched controls. Data were stratified according to severity of the disease, hormonal exposure and menstrual phase to investigate differences in the MLR in these patients and evaluate their potential clinical and prognostic relevance. Early, unadjusted, results (n=40) suggest that in patients with endometriosis the MLR is significantly higher (0.31) than in healthy controls (0.24; P<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Endometriosis is a chronic inflammatory disease. Preliminary results from our study demonstrate that the MLR is significantly increased in patients with endometriosis. This opens new urgently needed diagnostic and therapeutic avenues and might have important clinical significance as a prognostic marker. Increased Secretion of Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1 and Myofibroblastic Changes Is Mediated by Focal Adhesion Kinase in Endometriotic Stroma Cells. Akira Iwase, Chiharu Ishida, Takashi Nagai, Tomohiko Murase, Tomoko Nakamura, Sachiko Takikawa, Maki Goto, Fumitaka Kikkawa. Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. INTRODUCTION: Adhesion of endometrial cells to extracellular matrix is thought to be the initial step of endometriosis development in the endometrial-tissue implantation theory. Another feature of endometriosis is chronic inflammation. However, mutual effects of these two important features of endometriosis, adhesion and inflammation, have hardly explored. Integrins, transmembrane cell surface receptors of extracellular matrix, have been demonstrated to regulate cell survival, proliferation and invasion via focal adhesion kinase (FAK) in many types of cells including endometriosis. In the current study, we investigated that FAK and adhesion-mediated monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) that activates monocyte and macrophages secretion from endometrial and endometriotic stromal cells. We also investigated the FAK-mediated myofibroblastic changes of endometriotic stromal cells. We purified and cultured stromal cells from surgically removed specimens of endometrium and endometriotic cysts. We assayed the concentrations of MCP-1 in the culture media of endometrial stroma cells with or without endometriosis (eESC and ESC, respectively) and endometriotic cyst-derived stromal cells (CSC). The concentration of MCP-1 was more than 10-fold in CSC culture media compared to ESC and eESC. MCP-1 secretion was increased by attachment to collagen and fibronectin. FAK inhibitor and Jnk inhibitor inhibited secretion of MCP-1 from CSC. FAK inhibitor also attenuated the myofibroblastic changes of CSC induced by TGFβ1. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that inflammatory cytokines, such as MCP-1 and TGFβ1 and cell adhesion mediated by FAK is possibly interrelated and implicated in the development endometriosis. Endometrial Cells in Peritoneal Fluid of Endometriosis Patients and Controls. Dorien O, Tania Roskams, Christel Meuleman, Danielle Peterse, Thomas D'Hooghe, Amelie Fassbender. KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. To reinforce Sampson's theory of retrograde menstruation, proof should be provided that during menstruation endometrial cells are present in peritoneal fluid (PF). We hypothesize that the prevalence of endometrial cells is higher in endometriosis patients than in controls without endometriosis during the menstrual phase of the cycle. METHODS: PF pellets were selected for immunocytochemistry from our stored biobank samples collected during menstruation from women with (n = 9) or without [(n = 8), normal pelvis n = 3] endometriosis. PF had been collected during laparoscopy, centrifuged and the resulting pellet had been stored at -80°C. 5 µm sections were stained using the Dako Envision Flex system with ready-to-use primary antibodies (Dako, Denmark) against Ep-CAM, CD10, Prekeratin, Vimentin, Calretinin and CD68. A frozen endometrium and peritoneum biopsy were used as positive controls. As negative control, the primary antibody was omitted. Proportions of positive pellets were compared using Fisher's exact test. Prekeratin (mesothelial/epithelial cells) 3/3 5/5 9/9 Vimentin (mesenchymal cells) 3/3 5/5 9/9 CD68 (macrophages) 3/3 5/5 9/9 CONCLUSIONS: PF contained mostly CD68+ macrophages. Epithelial and/or stromal cells were detected in 13/17 pellets. However, we could not confirm our hypothesis of a higher prevalence of endometrial cells in endometriosis patients versus controls, suggesting the importance of other mechanisms (immune system, endometrial stem cell theory) for the pathogenesis of endometriosis. at anovulatory levels throughout the study. Unlike a GnRH agonist, hormone suppressions are rapid and observed within hours of elagolix administration. *Figure(s) will be available online. Elagolix had an acceptable safety and tolerability profile at doses up to 400 mg BID for 21 days in this study. The most frequently reported adverse events (AEs) were headache, hot flush, abdominal pain, diarrhea and dizziness. The majority of AEs were assessed by the investigator as mild in severity. CONCLUSIONS: Elagolix administration allows for modulation of gonadotropins and ovarian hormone concentrations from partial suppression at lower doses to full suppression at higher doses. The results of this study provide a rationale for dose selection of elagolix for the treatment of various sex hormone-related diseases. was measured. Hypothalami were dissected and analysed for expression of genes related to appetite regulation (Npy, Agrp, Pomc and Cart) and phosphorylation of AMPK (AMP activated protein kinase) and ACC (acetyl-CoA carboxylase) proteins (downstream proteins of ghrelin receptor activation). RESULTS: In response to ICV injection of ghrelin, 1) diet intake was significantly lower in LP rats than CT rats; 2) water intake was not affected in LP rats; 3) expression of Npy and Agrp, but not Pomc and Cart, were higher in the hypothalamus of LP rats than CT rats; 4) the abundance of phosphorylated AMPK and the ratio of phosphorylated to total AMPK, but not the abundance of total AMPK, were lower in LP rats; 5) the abundance of phosphorylated ACC, but not total ACC, was lower in LP rats. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that blunted ghrelin signaling in the hypothalamus of pregnant rats fed a LP diet leads to reduced diet intake and exacerbates gestational protein insufficiency. For this reason, preconception screening for thyroid dysfunction is controversial and is not currently standard practice. The goal of this study was to investigate whether levothyroxine (LT4) treatment has beneficial effects on IVF and pregnancy outcomes in infertile patients with subclinical hypothyroidism undergoing fresh IVF cycles. METHODS: An IRB approved retrospective chart review of patients undergoing IVF cycles between January, 2010 and December, 2013. A total of 151 patients were identified meeting inclusion criteria. Patients were divided into two groups: those receiving LT4 at IVF start (treated, n=102), and those not receiving LT4 (untreated, n=49). Primary outcomes were ongoing pregnancy, miscarriage and live birth rates. Secondary outcomes were number of oocytes retrieved, endometrial thickness, average total gonadotropins used and chemical pregnancy rate. RESULTS: There were no differences in patient characteristics between the two groups. The live birth rate was significantly higher in the treated group (51% vs 49%, p=0.033). Though not statistically significant, there was a trend toward higher ongoing pregnancy rate, lower miscarriage rate and higher number of oocytes retrieved in the treated group (53.9 vs 44.9, p=0.299; 4.9 vs 10.2, p=0.219; 16.52 vs 13.78, p=0.1229). No difference was found in endometrial thickness or average total gonadotropins used. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates a higher live birth rate in patients with treated subclinical hypothyroidism undergoing fresh IVF cycles compared to untreated patients. There was also a trend toward higher ongoing pregnancy rate, lower miscarriage rate and higher number of oocytes retrieved in the treatment group. These results suggest that untreated subclinical hypothyroidism adversely affects a patient's likelihood of ART success, and therefore provides support for the proposal of standardized preconceptual TSH screening and the need for further research into the optimization of treatment for thyroid dysfunction in this patient population. The The effects of commonly used fertility medications such as progesterone(P) on the properties of cervical mucus(CM) have been studied for years, but limited data is available regarding CM changes in patients using different progesterone formulations.In our study we use microfluidics technology to investigate the permeability properties of CM from patients undergoing fresh(ET) and frozen embryo transfers (FET). Positively(PCP) and negatively(NCP) charged peptides were the basis of our study.Sperm falls under the category of negatively charged epitopes and antimicrobial peptides are positively charged. METHODS: Patients presented to our clinic on the day of ET or FET. ET group was using vaginal P(8% gel daily) and FET patients used intramuscular(1 ml P injections 50 mg/ml daily) Control group consisted of natural cycle FET patients. CM samples were collected prior to the transfer via speculum exam using 1 ml syringe directly from cervix. Samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80C until use. Microfluidic devices were fabricated from polydimethylsiloxane(PDMS)using molds. 3µL of whole mucus was pumped into the channel. Fluorescently labeled PCPs and NCPs were flowed by gravity orthogonally to the mucus-water interface. Images of peptide transport were taken every 10 sec for 15 min using inverted epifluorescence microscope(Olympus,PA) RESULTS: Average peptide concentration as a function of distance along the length of 300µm microfluidic channel follows a similar trend as phosphate buffer (H7) INTRODUCTION: Accurate pregnancy dating is essential for optimal timing of delivery. Standard practice is to use LMP for gestational age calculation. The accuracy of dating based on LMP is limited by patient recall and cycle variability. We hypothesize that LH surge will predict crown rump length (CRL) on first trimester ultrasound better than LMP. We have a unique opportunity to test this hypothesis in a recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) program since LH testing and early ultrasound monitoring is performed. METHODS: This is an observational cohort study of prospectively collected data. Institutional IRB approval was obtained. Inclusion criteria: women with a history of 2 or more documented pregnancy losses < 10 wk size and at least 1 subsequent monitored live birth, seen in an academic RPL program between 2005 and 2012. All pregnancies were conceived with intercourse timed to the LH surge. LMP and LH surge were recorded; LH surge was defined as the day prior to conception. Correlation coefficients between crown rump length and gestational age by LH surge or LMP were compared using a Fischer's z-test. Paired t-tests were used to compare CRL dating to dating based on LH surge or LMP. RESULTS: 78 live births (75 women) were included in the analysis with a mean age at delivery of 35.4 yr (SD 3.4 yr) and mean of 3.7 prior pregnancy losses (SD 1.6). The mean crown rump length at the time of the dating ultrasound was 6.2 mm (SD 3.8), corresponding to 45 days of gestation (Hadlock). Dating by LH surge more closely correlated to CRL than dating by LMP, correlation coefficient 0.86 and 0.68 (p=0.005), respectively. Dating based on LH surge (mean 45.0 days, SD 4.8) was not significantly different from dating based on CRL (mean 44.9 days, SD 4.4), p=0.85. In contrast, dating based on LMP (mean 46.0 days, SD 5.6) was significantly different from dating based on CRL (p=0.007). 
