0948b758cb8ee05161ab5d2434161c622fbd8333
PART 2 Abstracts of Educational Symposia: 1. Pancreatic Surgery Today 2. New Approaches for the Management of Acute Pancreatitis 3. Possible Role of CCK for the Development and Progression of Acute Pancreatitis and Therapeutic Application of CCK-Antagonist 4. Assessment of Pancreatic Exocrine Insufficiency and Its Treatment 5. New Horizons of Pancreatic Imaging. Clinical Utility of Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography 6. Assessment and Treatment of Severe Acute Pancreatitis PART 3 General Abstracts from IAP'98 Tokyo Abstracts 195



clinical practice and studies, reliable insight mto tumor blolog.~ and differences m grins th patterns The present torm of I DS ~s as dust gned by the authors ~s tth the help of leadtug surgeons and pathologists from the USA. Japan and Europe (PCIDS-Group) ~s tth a vast background of pancreatolog.x -X classification mamx ~stth coding mstructtons has been defined, supported b.x a softs~are program (based on .X hcrosoft Access C) ~s htch allm~ s simplified data acqutsmon, stattsUcal analysts as ~sell as automated stage grouping m UICC and JPS classtficauoa The IDS ot EPC ts based on the Japanese experience about the pattern ot cancer dissemmauon mctudmg tumor sue. N[-. N2-bmph acde mxohement, retropancreatic spread, pcn~ ascular gross th. peritoneal spread and haematogenous metastases From the first contact xstth the patient through all diagnostic and therapeutic measures mcludmg follows.up IDS enables a compact and eas.~ to use t~x~i tot prospective data at.qUlSltlOn and exchange ~n an international basts THE LINK BETWEEN EXOCRINE PANCRETIC CANCER AND THE ENIX)CRIb~ PANCREAS PM. Pour, Liu (3, Schmied B UNMC/Eppley Cancer Center, Univ.ofNebraska Med. Center, Omaha, NE Introduction. Observations in the hamster panctentic cancer model and in patients with pancreatic cancer have indicated a relationship between cancer and the endocrine pana'ena. We have performed studies to clarify this issue. MethedL Syrian Golden hamsters treated with BOP, transplanted hamster pama, eatic islets, cultumt human end hemster islets, and surgical or autopsy m~'rial from l~tic cancer patients were used. Remits. a) Studies in the hamster Ipodel: 1) Most invasive ductal cancers developed within islets. 2) Over 90% of induced ductal cancers contained endocrine cells. 3) Dem-uctioa of pancreatic 13 celis with stmptozotocin or alloxaa inhibited pancren~ cascinogenasis. 4) Genetically diabetic hamster strain with atrophic islets was resistant to pancreatic carcinogenic effect of BOP; whereas, the genetically non-diabetic strain with intact islets was not. 5) Induction of nesidioblastosis significantly enhanced the incidence and numtans of pancreatic cancer. 6) BOP induced tumor in the submandibular glands where homologous islets were transplanted but not in those without islet transphmtation. 7) Treatment of isolated hamster islets in culture with BOP led to the development of malignant cells with invasive potential in vivo whan transplanted into the subcutaneous tissue, pancreas or submandibular gland of recipient hornet's. 8) Hamsters with cancer show serum hormone abnormalities. Studies in humerus: 1) As in hamsters, malignant glandular structures were found in the pancreas of patients with or without pancreatic cancer. 2) Over 90% of pancreatic cancer contained variety of pancreatic endocrine cells. 3) No cancers have ever been recorded in type I diabetic patients. 4) Treatment of isolated human islets in culture with BOP causes malignant transformation. 5) Pancreatic cancer patients show hormonal abnormalities similar to that found in hamsters. Conclusion. C'ertah populations of pancreatic islets (most probably the stem cells) present cancer progenitor cells. Pancreatic carcinogenesis involves both the exocrine and endocrine pancreas. Since our original report of 4 patients in 1984 who had islet cell mrno~, massive gastric acid bypea'se~e~en, peptic =lceratien but normal c~ gastrm level (r we have found 20 with eug~mrcmia ameng 46 r patiems with ulcerogcnic pancreatic tumor syndrome. The remaining 26 patients had hypa~ These obs~vatiens suggested that the ixevalea~ of ulcerogenic panczmtic tumors with euglycemta may be as frequent as that with hypergasmmmla. c s of the ulccoge~c pancreatic tumor syndrome with eugastrL,~-mi~ are; I) un.k~ ~ the tumors contain only a nammal amount of gamrin. 2) the tumor and plasma contain a nen-gastrin acid secretagogue which is a peptide (NGASP), 3) l~ological activity of NGASP is abolished by trypsin whereas that of gaswm is not, 4) incubatien with antibody to human synthetic gasu-in did not affect bimaivity of the peplide while that of human gasmn was completely abol/slled, and 5) the release of hL~arain~ by gaslrm from ECL ceils in rat gastric fumlus is bloc.k~ by a CCK-B receptor amagc~st whereas histamine release by NGASP is not. It is of ccc~iderable imerest to note that the dose response of acid secretien to NGASP in rats receiving pentugasmn (PG) in a thresbuid dose was significantly greater than that achieved by NGASP alone. Similarly, the response to PG combined with atta, eshold dose of NGASP was significantly ~'eater than that produced by PG alone. Likewise, mammum acid secreuon by PG was potentiated by NGASP and vine ~ Thus it ~s likely that circulating gasmn and NGASP may potentiate each other to produce greater acid secretion than that produced by eaher one of the two secretagogues in nicerogemc pancreatic tumor sym~'en~ NGASP ts being purified currentiy from islet cell tumors. Through gel filuralion and several HPLC steps, it IS now purified to near homogeneity. Final parification and stmctm'~ determinauen and symbes~ of the pepude will allow developmem of radioanmunoassay of NGASP. Then. early detecuen of this tumor syndrome will be poss4ble, Takashi Sugim-ura National Cancer Center, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan Cancer is a disease of DNA, reflecting "Multiple genetic alterations", "Multiple steps of carcinogenesis", "Multiple carcinogenic xenobiotics and autobiotics", and "Multiple genetic backgrounds". Epigenetic mechanisms including methylation of DNA also might be involved in some steps. Based on the knowledge which has accumulated, multiple approaches to cancer therapy with multiple target molecules and multiple cancer prevention measures are now feasible. Pancreatic cancer is one of the most dreadful malignancies which afflict mankind. Although the genes involved are multiple and highly complex in their combinations, perturbed signal transduction resulting in abnormalities of cell cycle checkpoints and cell-cell / cell-stroma interactions explain most of phenotypes in pancreatic cancer. In addition, examples of paraneoplastic hormone hyperproduction in some malignancies of the pancreas are noteworthy. With the information available, molecular mechanisms of pancreatic carcinogenesis, possible prevention strategies, and advances in molecular diagnosis and treatment will be rev=ewed and discussed. Introduction: Long-term survwal of surglcally treated patients with pancreatic invasive ductal cancer(pancreauc ductal cancer) has remained low, and five-year survwal rate has been lower than 10% Micmscop=c curative resectmn is o~en very difficult to achieve in most of the pancreatic cancers, because of widely-spread lymph node metastases, defimte retropentoneel invasion and wide spread of cancer cell invasion through the nerve plexus Clinical staging with imaging techniques is still difficult owing to the very invasive and hematologicaliy me~tstatic characteristics of this cancer, h is, thus, difScuh to preoperative or inn'aopemtive estimate of the extent of the curability by surgery. For these reasons we have rather routinely performed a so-called extended resection of pancreatic ductal cancer, which includes 1) dissection of a part of the lymph nodes along the abdominal aorta with group 2-lymph nodes, 2} cleaning of nerve plexus along the common hepatic artery (or splenic artery), the cdiac axis, and a part of the superior mesenteric artery with pancreat,c head plexus I and 11, 3) resect,on of a part of the celiac ganglions, and 4) PW(-) resection. Patients and Results: We have performed macroscopicaIIy curative resection of the invasive ductal pancreatic cancer in 141 patients (median age: 63, head cancers" I I3, body and tail cancers: 28, stage I: 6, stage I1: 4, stage 111.28, stage IVa. 67, stage IVb 26). Following results were obtained; I) The R0 resection is essentmlly necessary for long-term survival. 2) Comprehensive stage, curability and irradiation are clearly independentprognnsuc factors (Cox's proportional hazards model) 3) Patients w~thout lymph node metastases showed a s~gnificantly better survwal curve than those wxth node metastasis; however, those with lymph node metastasis have also been alive more than three years 4) The ,nc:dence of plexus invas=on increased w=th the s=ze and the extensmn of the cancer, and plexus mvaslon was observed m 20 % of the smallcancer of less than 2 cm in diameter 5) Patients who underwent intranperative irradianon after the resect=on showed higher survival rate than those with surgeD' alone 6) Postoperat=ve regional chemotherapy with continuous 5-FU infuslon decreased the hepatic metastasis w=thm 6 months 7) For improvement of the postoperative nmrmonal state, preserving the whole stomach (PpPD) seems to be useful Conclusions: These findings, presumably, suggest that the local recurrence of pancreet=c cancer might possibly be controlled by the extended resecuon and the mtraoperative Jrradiauon, and the early development of hepatic metastases might be controlled w~th regional chemod~erapy We will present a vsdeo of our method of resection and reconstrucuon forthe p~mcreanc mvasive cancer Since 1980 extended surgery has been used to n-ant panc~adc cancer in many institution in Japan in the hope of cumuve resection and good outcome. The resection ram increased, but the final outcome was unsatisfactory, and instead the question of postoperative quality of life (QOL) following exmnded surgery has become a burning issue. During the past 22-year period (1976.10 -1997.5 ) 168 of the 187 padenm with invasive pancreatic ductal carcinoma were treated surgically at Mie University Hospital Them were 3 groups of panents: an early period group (1976.10 -1981.4, n=34) , a middle period group (1981.5 -1993.3, n=lO0) , and a late period ~oup (1993.4 -1997.5, n=34) . The standard operation (pancreatoduodcnectomy with DI lymph node dissection) was performed in the early period, extended operations (pancreatodundenectomy with D2 ~ymph node dissection) were performed in the middle penod, and a modified standard operation (pancreatoduodenectomy with DI lymph node+a dissection) was performed m the late period. DI dissection is similar to dissection up to the NI level m the UICC classifination. "D2 dissection" means dissection of lymph nodes up to the para-anrtic mglon. Our "modified standard method" means dissecuon of the anterior pancreattcoduodenal (APDL posterior pancreaucoduodenal (PPD), pyloric (PY), hepatoduodenal ligament (HDL), common hepanc artery (CH), rr-ddle colic vessel (MC) lymph nodes and half of the sopermr mesenteric (SM) lymph nodes. Thus, the lymph node dissection level m the modified standard procedure is between the level in the standard and extended procedure, but the pancreatoduodenectomy LS the same as usual. We consider the previous standard operauon to be a less curative rcsecuon procedure, and the extended operauon to be curative resection, hot a high-stress operauon. Accordingly, we have modified the surgical procedure (modified standard operauon) m our recent cases out of constderauon for the panents QOL. [ would Uke to show our modified standard procedure acraaJly being performed on one of our panents in the v~deo tape presentation. Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan Introduction. Both Iocoregtonal recurrence and hepatic meta-stasis are major causes of cancer death after resection of adenocarcmoma of the pancreas. Thus, in resection of pancreatic head cancer, we have performed a wide range of lymphatic and connective tissue clearance plus postoperative liver perfusion chemotherapy (LPC). Operative procedure and postoperative LPC(Vidao):During operation, the major vessels such as the superior mesenteric artery, celiac truncus, aorta are skaletonized to clearly remove the surrounding connective tissues and lymph nodes (Extended pancreatectomy). The portal vein, if cancer invasion is suspected, is also resected together with the pancreatic head w=thout performing the 'tunneling" procedure. Each one catheter is placed in the hepatic artery and one of the vein in the mesenterium. Postoperatively, 125 mg/day of 5-fluorouracil is infused via each of the two routes continuously for 4 weeks (LPC). Result,= The 5-year surv=val rate in our extendetl pancreatectomy plus LPC was 41% wtl~ch was slgmficantty h=gher than 24% of extended pancreatectomy alone or 8% of the conventional pancreatectomy alone. Th=s procedure has succeeded in producing the 5-year surv=vors even among the patients with nodal involvement or portal vein invasion. However, it is almost impossible for more advanced cancer which involved any arteries or the lymph nodes wh=ch were not adjuscent to the pancreatic head. A watery diarrhea is the most troublesome complication. Conclusion. An extended pancreatectomy in combined with LPC should be more actively performed in resection of pancreatic cancer, but a careful attention is needed on the patients' setectton. Various attempts are currently being made to determine the best method of treating pancreatic heed cancer, which has the poorest treatment outcome of cancer in the per/ampullary lesion. The ind/cadous for pylorus-preserving pan~odenectomy (PPPD) as a u~amem for pancreatic head cancer are currendy being debated from the standpoint of curabiStz We be@a performing PPPD in 1983 as a method of fronting only poor risk or non-curative cases, and [arm" we enlarged the indications. As a result, PPPD is now consxdered capable of serving as the standard procedure for cancer of the heed of the pancreas if the fo~lowing 3 conditions are suitable: (1) absence of metastasis to the supra and/or infra-pylonc lymph nodes, (2) no direct invasion of the duodenum or stomach, and (3) the absence of extensive invasion anteriorly, so that removal is possible within the extent of resection by PPPD. In accordanr with this policy, PPPD combined with D2 dissection has been performed in 29 patients thus far, and no problems have been found in terms of the curability of PPPD when the results were assessed in comparison with 62 cases of ordinary PD, with no significant differences between the two groups in stage distribution, surgical mortality, hospital deaths, incidence of postoperative complications, or postoperative survival onlr Assessment of the autopsy findings in pancreatic cancer resection cases has reconfirmed the importance of prevenuon of local recurrence and liver metastases, and we have been performing mtraoperative irradiation since 1985 and continuous administrauon of anucancer drugs via a portal catheter since 1986. We wall watch a video of PPPD in a patient w~th pancreatic head cancer and see that retropentoneal dissection including combined resection of the portal veto, D2 lympnode dissectmn associated with resection of r ne~'e plexus, and we wdl also see mtraoperative zrradianon, portal vein cathetenzauon, and digestwe tract rccons~'x~cuon by the [manage procedure Few agents which exert a therapeutic effect on anute pancreatids have been available, although various drugs such as protease inhibitors have been reported to have a prophylacuc effect. 15-74l, a new synthetic anti-inflammatory agent, is known to have some inhibitory effect on cytosolic phospholipase Az (cPLA2), an enzyme which hydrolyzes cellular phospholipids, liberating fatty acids and iysophospholipids and prodding the precursor substrates for the biosynthesis of eicosanozds and platelet-activatmg factor, cPLA2 is therefore an attractive target for the development of novel theraples. The aim of the present study was to assess a therspeutlc effect of IS-741 on a lethal model of acute pancreatitis in dogs, focusing on cPLA2. Materials and Methods. Adult mongrel dogs were endotracheally intobated under intravenous anesthesia and maintained on spontaneously breathed room mr. During infusion of lactated Ringer's solution at a rate of l0 ml/kg/hour, acute pancreatztis was induced by electing autologous gallbladder bile into the mare pancreauc duct. The dogs were then divided into two groups: Group A (non-treatment), no treatment during the experiment, and Group B (IS-741), mtravenously injected with IS-741 at 6 and 30 hours after eduction of acute pancreatius. PLA2 acuvtty in venous tissues were measured by separating the samples into high molecular fractions for cPLA2 and low molecular fracuons for secretory PLA2 (sPLA2) on a Sephadex column. Results. The survival rate was slgnificandy higher m Group B than in Group A (80% vs. 30% at 36 hours). Mean arterial pressure, PaOL and creanmne clearance were well maintamed m Group B as compared with Group A. The NAG index, which is known to be markedly increased in renal tubular damage, was s]gmficantly lower in Group B than m Group A. Histologlcad examination of the pancreas, lung, and kidney m Group B showed cmlder changes than in Group A. cPLA: actwlty in the pancreas, lung and renal cortex was much lower in Group B than in Group A, but sPLA: acuvtty in these tissues did not differ s=gmfinantly between the two groups. Conclusion. IS-741 exerts a potentmlly therapeutic effect on experimental acute pancreautlS by nutLgattng the degree of damage in the pancreas, lung, and kidney. The mhib,tory effect of IS-741 on cPLA: may conmbute to one of the anu-inflammatory mechanism of acuons of this agent. Acute pancreatitis ts an inflammatory disease, which varies in severity from mild to severe. Factors determ=ning the severity of pancreatitis are not known. It is generally believed that the earliest events in the evolution of acute panczeatitis lead to premature intra-acinar cell activation of digestive zymogens and that those enzymes, once activated cause acinar cell injury. Recent studies have suggested that the ultimate severity of resulting pancreatJtis may be determined by events which occur subsequent to acinar cell injury. These include inflammatory cell recruitment and activation as well as the generation and release of cytokines and other chemical mediators of inflammation. Recently we have undertaken studies to eluc=date the role of various inflammatory agents in determming the severity of pancreatitis. Results from these ongoing studies indicate that substance P acting via neurokinln-1 (NK1) receptors and intraceUular adhemon molecule-1 (ICAM-1), which is expressed on the surface of endothehal cells play an important pro-inflammatory role ~n regulating the severity of pancreatitis. Mice that are genetrcally defic=ent ~n these agents have significantly less severe pancreatJtts compared with the wild type mice. Furthermore, hydrolysis of platelet activating factor (PAF) by PAF-acetyl hydrotase decreases the seventy of pancreatitis and associated lung injury. These results suggest that PAF plays an important pro-inflammatory role =n determmlng the seventy of th=s disease On the other hand, re:ca deficient ~n complement factor 5a (CSa) receptor have more aggravated form of the disease, indicating that C5a acts as an anh-mflammatory agent dunng the development of pancreatitis ~W APPROACI~S TO THE ,%~NAG~I~r OF ACIITE ?ANCRF~TITIS James .Yormm, M.D. Derision of General/Gastrointestinal Surgery, University of South Flo-rid~, ~ISA. A great deal has been learned during the past fev years about the production of inflammatory cytokines during acute pancreatitis. At the same time, the dominant role these fey mediators play in the pathngenesis od SIRS and organ dysfunction is nov becoming much better understood. There is little doubt that preventing the effect of either [L-I, ~F, P~ dramatically alters the expected course of experimental pancreatitis. The question remaining is vhether similar amtageniam during clinical pancreatitis would benefit patients. A m~or consideration is the suitability of acute pancreatitis to cytokine amtngonis= in the clinical setting and whether s thrapeutic windov exists. Although sose patients present a day or tvo after the onset of pain, the majority seek medical attention within 12 tO 18hrs. Similarly, fay patients presentting shortly after the onset of pain rill exhibit organ dysfunction at that time. By the third day, however, the incidence of organ dysfunction rises rapidly to distinguish patients likely to have a proctrscted and complicated course. Cytokine production begins shortly after pain onset, but does not peak until 36 to 48 hrs later. If the goal is to prevent organ dysfunction, this seherin provides a thrapeutic vindov begining at hospital presentation and lasting two days. The results of the the first phase Ill anti-PAF study confirmed this theory showed dramatic beneficial effects in those treated prior to 48 hrs, but no nenefit for those treated 48 hrs. Anti-cytokine therapy in pancreatitis patients has distinct advantages over similar therapies in sepsis in that pancreatitis patients will declare the onset of thief disease and therefore the initiation of the cytokine cascade. In contrast, septic patients typically declare themselves only with the onset of systemic organ dysfunction, typically after the cytokine cascade has peaked. The therpeutic window provided by pain onset during pancreatitis =my alloy amtaganism of specific sedfator while they are produced in large amounts prior to the onset of organ dysfunction. Since the majority of the morbidity and mortality of this disease is due to systemic manifestations of inflammatory mediator overproduction, acute pancreatitis is ideal suite for thief antagonism. Acute pancreatitis ran,,es from a mild self-limiting course to a severe illness with fatal outcome. The most important concept in the management of severe acute pancreatitis is early identification of those suffering from the necrotizing pancreatitis. Laboratory parameters such as C-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase and contrast-enhanced CT scan are highly sensitive discriminatory tests (accuracy 90%). The initial treatment is conservative, including intensive care medicine and adequate fluid replacement. The indication for an operative intervention should be based on clinical and bacteriological data. Infection of pancreas necrosis occurs in 30 to 70%. de+pending on the extent of necrosis and is the key indication for the operative management of necrotizing pancreatitis. Infection of necrosis is assessed by fine-needle aspiration with a sensitivity of 77.8 and a specificity of 90.2%. The indication for an operative intervention is persisting organ failure despite intensive care treatment and/or proven infections of pancreatic necrosis. Necrosectomy and continuous-closed lavage of the lesser sac provide an atraumatic and tissue-sparing evacuation of debris, bacteria and toxic compounds. 140 patients who were admitted primarily to our hospital were treated accordingly. The clinical severity according to Ranson and APACHE II scores was 4.0 and 9 respectively. lntraoperatr, e bacter%%gy revealed infected necrosis in 52 (37+'7,) of patients. Lavage was carried out over medium 22 days with an initial lavage volume of 24 I day. Postoperative complications were secondary abscess m 20%. pancreatic fistulae in 19.3%. bowel fistulae in 12.9% and systemic sepsis in 32.1%. Bleeding occurred in i5.7%. Reoperation was necessar:, in 36.-I.% (51 of 140 patients). The overall post-operative mortality of those patients who were admitted primarily to our hospital was t4.7%. This relatts ely low overall postoperative mortality in these patients is probabl+~ due to timely and sufficient therap.,.. Introduction. LS-741 was first screened on the basis of PLA2-inhJbltory activity, (IC~:500 ~t M) and secondarily a therapeutic effect against acute pana'catitis in rats. It was shown that a therapeuoc concentration in plasma (in a ran~ of 0.I to 0.3 ~ M) was lower than the concenwauon of m vtrro PLA: intubtdon. Therefore, it was smpected that intubition of PL-k: did not related to aad-pancreauc action ol IS-741. it was no~ewomhy ~ iS-761 exceed ma inlubttory effect on SOme ncutzophil activity, in a proceas of the delerioratton of pitoCl~tltlS. Wr have studied the effects of 15-741 against sornc ncumopl~l activities m experimental acute panc~:attus. Method. Study l : Acute pancreautis in rat was reduced by closed duodcn~ loop method. IS;-741 (10mg, kg) was injected intravenously at 0.i.2.3.4 and 5 hours after the induction. Thc number of leukocytes mfihrated into pancreas was evaluated by image annie,sis on the tissue sections. Study 2 9 Severe acute pancreatlrs m rat was induced by a tQpsin and taurochohc acid method. 1S-741 was Continuously admJ.n.mtered for 0-24 hr by subcutaneo~ly implanted osmotic pump. Survival rats were sacrificed for blocbemJcal and htstopatholo~cal examination at the end of admimstranon. Study 3: In ~aro cell adhesion of HL. 60 onto HUVEC was examined. Result. Study 1 : It was shown that lS-741 had the mlubltory effect (P<t}.05) on leukocxres mtiltrauon in spleen lobe of pancreas rather than m duodenum lobe. Study 2 : IS-741 (0.03 or 0G mg, kg, hr) suppressed the pancreauttsasscoated tucreasc m LDH. GOT. GPT. CK. HBD. BL.'N, Creannme. Dpo.sr and Intefleukin-8 m serum. In histopathotomcal exammauon. IS-7-,tl improved pancreautts associated changes, pamculariy on bemorrhage, neutmphiis infiltration and blood vessel degeneration m various orE.ans. Sur.lx at rotes of rats recewing veincte. 0.003. 0.03 and 0.3 m~k~hr of IS-7..1+1 were 20. 60. 70 (P<O.05) and 80 % (P<0.01) at "4 hr after induction, re'+pectwety. Study 3:Adherent HL-H) cells on I-ILWEC shov, ed tlat shape. '.,. hfle thc,+e treated wltJ~ 1 " M IS-7-I.I ~howed spbencal ~hape under a ~cantung electron mlcro,~cope. The number of adberent cells '.~,as suppressed by the treatment ,.,,th 1S-74t. Conclusion. It has been +~ugge~ted trom our m t ttro and m ~ a o ,~tudies that the intubtoou of neutrophd-adheslon and, or neutrophll-mfiltranon into damaged o rgarts plays ,m tm0orrant role on the detcnoranon ot acute pancrt:atms. It ts sugg~ted that IS-741 may become an u~ethl drug tot Jt~Jie pancrentms and MOF m clin=c. The novel carboxamide derivative (IS-741) attenuates lung injury in rats with cemiein-induced pancreatitis complicated by sepsis Y. Yamaguchi, I. Liang, F. Matsumura, K. Okabe, H. Ohshiro, T. Matsnda, S. Nakano, K. Ishihara, M. Ogawa Department of Surgery [I, Kumamnto University Medical School, Kumamoto, Japan The therapeutic effects of an intravenously injected carboxamide derivative (IS-741) on lung injury were studied in rats with cerulein-induced pancreatitis complicated by sepsis. Pancreatitis was induced by [our intramuscular injections of cerulein (50 /z g/kg at t-hour i~tervals). Pancrcntitis rats were injected intraperitoneaily with 10 mg/kg of [ipopolysaccharidr (LPS) 6 hours following the first cerulein injection as a septic challenge. Rats were divided into four groups: group I, pancreatitis with LPS; group II, pancreatitis with LPS treated with a continuous intravenous injection of [S-741 (0.03 mg/kgthr); group III, pancreatitis with LPS treated with a coulinuous intravenous injection of {5-741 (0.3 mglkg/hr) ; and group IV, pancreatitis with LPS treated with a continuous intravenous injection of [S-741 (3 mglkg/hr). [S-741 was administered 30 minutes before the septic challenge. Intense mononuclear ceil infiltration and lung hemorrhage occurred in untreated pancreatitis rats with LPS (group I), but hemorrhage was not seen in group IV rats receiving a continuous injection of IS-741 shortly before sepsis induction. The IS-741-treated rats (groups [I, III. and IV') have lower serum concentrations of cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant (CINC), as well as fewer the pulmonary infiltrates immunoreactivr for CINC or Mac-1 (CDllb/CD18). The number of neutrophils infiltrated the lung in groups If, [II. and IV was significantly lower than that of group I. Conversely. CINC production by bronchoaiveolar macrophages in vitro were stimulated by bee venom phospholipase A.2 but were reduced by the presence of [S-741. The carboxamide derivative I5-741 effectively prevented pancreatitis-aSsociated lung injury following the septic challenge. Severe acute pancreatitis results in significant morbidity and mortality. No specific therapeutic options aside supportive care have been proven to be effective in patients. The development of various animal models of acute pancreatitis (AP) has made it possible to rapidly study new approaches of potentially beneficial medical compounds, The pathogenesis of AP involves the release of lysosomal enzymes which trigger a cascade of events including activation of digestive enzymes ultimately leading to autodigestion. The initiation process of AP potentially includes activation of CCK-A receptors since blockade of these receptors with spec=fic antagomsts decreases the severi~ of injury in the pancreatic tissue, tn the past years, a venery of potent and selective CCK-A receptor antagomsts have been developed. The different antagomsts have been studied ~n different models of AP' prophylacttc admimstration of CCK-A receptor antagomsts prevents the development of inflemmahon induced by cerulem or by cholin-defictent diet ~n rats, mice, and dogs. Along these lines of mvest=gat=ons, CCK-A receptor blockade ameliorated the seventy of AP ~n bile duct-and pancreatic duct-ligated rats. Thus last modet reflects ~n many ways the pathcgenesis of human pancreat=tis. Conclusions. Prophylactic or therapeutic administration of CCK-A receptor antagomsts ameliorates the severity of AP ~n different an=real models; based on these observations, it was suggested that CCK-A receptor blockade with consecutive early inh=bltton of protease achvtty may be beneficial in severe AP. The results furthermore tmply that endogenous CCK appears to play a contnbutary role ~n the development of AP. The control of pain is often the most important aspect of management to the patient. In those with large ducts due to compression of focal areas of the duct system surgical by-pass therapy is indicated. There is a bigger problem in patients with small ducts and chronic pancreatitis in whom extensive resection may be inappropriate. Our experience with minimally invasive thomcoscopic splanchnicectomy has been encouraging over the last three years. Having previously tried both percutaneous coeliac ganglion block and surgical excision of this nerve tissue, it is a great deal easier to carry, out this procedure which usually takes only 15 -20 minutes per side. Patients are usually only admmed for 48 hours and the immediate beneficial effect frequently results in opiate analgesia being discontinued with considerable improvement m quality of life. While there is a slight drop-off in benefit between six and twelve months post-operatively, the clinical effectiveness of this approach is to be commended and the author's experience will be presented to support this view. WHAT TO DO WHEN A PATIENT WITH EXOCRINE PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY DOES NOT RESPOND TO PANCREATIC ENZYME SUBSTITUTION. A PRACTICAL GUIDE. P G. Lankisch. Dept. of Medicine, Municipal Hospital, Ldneburg, FRG. Background. Pancreatin mlcrosphere preparations containing 25000 -40000 F.I.P units of lipase are recommended for the vast malorib/ of patients. This will lead normally to clinical improvement and reduction of steatorrhea. However, a number of patients fading to respond present a problem for the physician in charge of their treatment. Practical guide. 1. Increase enzyme dosage by 2 -3 times the initial dosage. If treatment still remains unsuccessful, 2. patient compliance should be checked by asking appropriate questions or by estimating fecal chymotrypsm. If the patient is compliant, 3. the diagnosis should be reevaluated (is it really exocdne pancreatic insufficlencyg), and the doctor make tests for giardiasis, bactenat overgrowth, and blind loop in operated patients. 4. If the patient ;s operated (gastnc section), non-acid protected granule enzyme preparat=ons should be g=ven. If gastroduodenal passage is disturbed (diabetes mellitus etc.) rnicrospheres or non-ac=d protected granule enzyme preparations plus H~-receptor antagonists or proton pump mhlbitors should be given If a seamh result is negative, 5. other intestinal absorption disorders (e.g. celiac disease) should be excluded. If this agmn ~s negative, 6. a last resort is to decrease fat intake to 40 -60 g per day or to add Hz-blockers or proton pump inhibitors to the treatment. Conclusion. Although this stepw=se procedure ts time-consuming, =t Es necessary to prevent in patients not responding to pancreatic enzyme substitution the development of late complications of exocnne pancreatic insufficiency. Background: Enzyme replacement therapy is common in the management of patients with exocrinc pancreatic insufficiency. However, fipase preparation that is acid-stable and has higher lipolylic activity is necessary to correct fat malabsortion due to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Furthermore, the ideal treatmant should be based on reliable evaluation of exoerine pancreatic function. The secretin (S') test is the gold-standard test, but BT-PABA test or fecal chymolrypsin test (FCT) is popular in Japan. In the present study, we investigated (I) the diagnostic value of the, so tubeless tests in comparison to the S test. and studied (2) the in vitro and in vivo lipolytle activity of bacterial lipase (BL) that has been recently developed. Methods and Results: (I) The S test and the two tubeless tests were performed in 157 subjects comprising 51 patients with definite chronic pancreatitis (CP) and 27 patients with probable CP. The diagnosis of CP was based on the diagnostic criteria for CP by the Japan Pancreas Society (1995) . In the S test, we analyzed fluid volume, bicarbonate concentration and amylase output of duodenal aspirates for 60 rain. The results of the S test correlated with the morphological changes in pancreatic imaging tests. The values of FCT and BT-PABA test significantly correlated with max. bicarbonate concentration in the S test. The values of these tubeless tests decreased in proportion to the degree of exocrine pancreatic dysfuncnon. Each tubeless test was less sensitive and specific for determining exocrine pancreatic impairment than the S test. However, greater reliability for diagnosing. CP can be obtmned by performing the two tubeless tests simultaneously. (2) Lipolytic acnvities of BL and porcine pancreatic lipases (PL: Pancreatm and purified pancreatic lipase) were determined using radio-labeled triolem emulsion as a substrate. BL had a higher activity of in vitro lipolysis without need of colipase. In the perfusion study of double-labeled molem emulsion into the jejunal loop in rats with bile-pancreatic juice diversion. BL had a sigmficandy higher absorption rate of fat than PL. Conclusion: (1~ The S test is a useful technique to evaluate exocnne pancreanc function accurately. To obtain reliable results by the tubeless test, combining BT-PABA and FCT should be performed. (2") BL may be useful in thture to co~t pancreat=c steatorrhea." Floor UCD Building, Daulby Street, Liverpool, L69 3CA, UK Intxoduction. Major pancreatic resection can result in steatorrhoea which is particularly difficult to control and may require high doses of pancreatm. The a=m of this study was to demonstrate equivalent efficacy of high {Creon| and standard dose (Creon o) pancreatin in treating steatorrhoea post-pancreatectomy. Patients and Methods. 42 patients, post-pancreatectomy, were assessed for a randomised, double-blind, cross-over study. Patients were stabilised on a suitable dose of Creon | during a two week run-in period. Following this they received either Creon| or Creon | at this dosage for two 14 day treatment periods. Criteria used to demonstrate efficacy of treatment were stool fst excretion, stool volume, stool frequency and clinical symptoms. Results. 39 patzents were random=sed and 37 completed the study. During the run-in period 22 (56%) patients had a stool fst excretion of > 7g/day, with a mean capsule intake of 19.4 (range 9-54). There were s~gnificant correlauons between stool fat excretmn and capsule intake (p < 0.02), stool volume (p<0.OO01), stool frequency (p<0.01) but not with clinical symptoms. Seth Creon| and Creon | demonstrated stat=stmally simdar efficacy in the treatment period. Conclusion. The use of Creon| for the treatment o; pancreatic insufficiency following pancreatectomy should significantly reduce capsule intake resulting in improved convenience and compliance rate. Our results however indicate further progress is needed to resolve steatorrhoea following pancreatic resectmn. Inu'aductal mucin-producing tumor of the pancreas xs known as a pmcm.adc minor assocxaZed with a mla~vr good prognosxs even when the histological diagnosis is ade~ucaxcinoma. However, once it infiltrates r162 pancremic parenchyma it is known to and follow a cIimcal course similar to chat of usual infiltrative pancma~c carcinoma, and thus its early detection is vital. The purpose of this study is to evalua~ the usefulness of MR cholangiopancrea~ogsaphy ('MRCP) and virtual MR creatosonpy in the diagnosis of intraductal mucin-producing tumor. ents and Methods. The subjects comprised I 1 panents wtth intraducral mucin-producmg tumors of the pancreas (5 mare pancreatic duct type, 6 branch duct type). All the diagnosis were proven by the s'uripcai specimen. Whh histopathological findings considered the gold standard the vi~,~li~=fion of dilated main pauct-..afic duct. 8rape-like clusters, and papillary tumor of MRCP and vizmal MR pancre=oscopy was compared with that of ERCP and EUS. Results. Of ~J~ 11 cases of the intraductal mucin-producing tumor a diagnosls was possible with each of MRCP, virtual .MR pancrcatoscopy, ERCP and EUS in five. On MRCP and virtual ,MR pancreatoscopy the dilated main pancreatic duct was depmted along tts entre length in aJ1 cases, whereas on ERCP becansr the dilated main panic duct was occluded with mucin a total image could be obtained only 6 of I I cases. With EUS an aucura~ diagnosis could not be made in one ~ with pancremc befida. Of the 6 cmns of tbe pencrcadc duct branch duct type, on grape-LLke clusters could be easily grasped by both MRCP and EU$, whereas with ERCP becau~ of the l~'et,r of the mucm total picm~ could not be depxc~ in any case, with only a part of thr Imuc~.adc duct branch visual/zcd m 3 of 6 cases. With regard to papillary tumor present wxthin the dilated pancreatic duct. on MRCP and virtual ,MR pancreatoscopy it was possible in 9 of I I to point out the presence of papd]ary tumor as well as on EUS, whereas on ERCP becansr of the presence of mucm it was difficult to depmt the enUre pancreatic duct. and so the papillary, tumor could be apprecmtcd m only two of the I I cases. Conclusion. MRCP and vu'mal .MR pancreatoscopy xs Lmpol~'mt u~agmg modalittea to diagnose intraductal mucin-producmg tumor, because Lt can grasp non-mvasxvely and easdy the presence of tumors wlti~n the dilated pancreWlc duel US VERSUS CT VERSUS MRI OF THE PANCREAS Patdce M. Bret, M.D. Radiolog=st in Chief Department of Medical Imaging University of Toronto Toronto, Ontado, Canada Thecurrent techniques used in ultrasound, CTand MRI of the pancreas will be reviewed, as well as their applications in various pancreatic diseases. Although major technical advances have recently occurred in CT (helical technology) and M RI (dynamic sequences braathhold imaging), ultrasound remains the first line examination in mast of the clinical situations. Most u nrese ctable panc reatic carcinomas can be dis gnosed with ultrasound and in these situations there is no need for further investigation, Contrast-en hanced CT remains the standard for the diagnosis and follow-up of severe acute pancreatJtis, although recent work shows that MRI could play a significant role in this clinical indication as it can diagnose choledocholithiasis accurately and seems to be at least as informative as contrastenhanced CT m evaluating the panereatic parenchyma. In islet-ceil tumors, MRI has the benefit of its superior contrast resolution to detect transitory enhancement of small tumors. Finally M R c holangiopanc reatOgraphy is the on ly non invasiv e method that can diagnose pancreas divisum accurately. J. Sin, J. Anyama* Department of Gastroenterology, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan Introduction. Recently, MRCP can be obtained with good spacial resolution within a few seconds using half fourier fast spin echo technique. Purpose of this study was to assess the accuracy of MRCP in the diagnosis of pancreas diseases. Patients and Method. From July 1995 to August 1997, 1000 patients suspected of having pancreatobiliary diseases were examined with MRCP. MRCP was performed with 1.5T scanner using FastAsymmetric Spin Echo sequence (FASE) . Results. Satisfactory quality of the main pancreatic duct were obtained in 98%, of Santodni's duct in 90%, and of uncinate process branch in 83%. Pancreas divism was accurately diagnosed. In the patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas, MRCP depicted stenosls and proximal dilatation of the main pancreatic duct in 89%, and in the remaining patlente no abnormalities were seen in the main pancreatic ducts because tumors were limited to side branches or Santodni's duct or distal end of the tad of the pancreas. Diagnosis of small pancreatic carcinomas (smallest lesson measured 10 mm in diameter) were feasible. In the patients with intraductal papdlaw neoplasms, dilatation of the mare pancreatic duct and cystic dilatation of side branches were depmted, and polypoid lesmn was detectable with source images. In the patients w=th serous cystadenomas, accumulation of the mJcrocysts were visualized. In the patients with chronm pancreatitls, dilatation and stenosis of the mmn pancreatic duct, as well as side branch dilatation was depmted dasplte overestimation of the extent of the stenosis. Stones tn the mare pancreatic duct were well wsualized as intraductal filling defects. Conclusion. MRCP is an effecl]ve imaging technique in the diagnosis of various pancreas diseases. From the theoretical point of x'le~x the anttproteolytlc therap.~ would seem to be rationale for acute pancreatltls management. Unfortunatel.', chnical human trials studying the role of antiproteasc tn the treatment of acute pancreatttts differ m several respects in terms of their baste design. As a consequence any form of homogeneous analysis of the reported data as a x~ hole is impossible. Constdenng the data emerging from memanalysts of five reals a rauonale use of ant(pro(eases may results in reduction of comphcattons requmng surge D" and of patmnt management costs only in selected cases, meaning by that severe and necrotic lbrms. As regards presumptive apphcatlons over 400 patients ~ ere prospecn~ el3 tested versus placebo m a double bhnd trial with the aim to prm ent acute pancrentms atter ERCP. The complicanon incidence was stgmficandy lower among the pre-treated panents, an xax ay, also m the field of protease inhibitor chmcal apphcatmn tt is necessary, to identify the patients ~ lth the greatest nsk to dex elop post-ERCP acute pancreatltts. In conclusion antlproteases can still play a role when proph~ lactlcall*, glX en or xx hen m the earl.~ phases of the disease, morem era" multtple drugs approach " (including for example statable antlbtoncs) seems to represent no~ ada x s the most mcrdern and rational treatment of acute pancreatlus. Our strategy in the treamaent of acute necroti7ing pancrearatis (ANP) is as follows: Imenstve medical care with continuous regional artenal infusion (CRAI) of protease inhibitor and antibiotic in the early phase, and agressive surgical debndement for the patients diagnosed as having pancreatic infection. Patients and methods:From 1988 to 1997, 88 patients with ANP were admitted to First Department of Surgery, Tohoku Umversity Hospital. 67 patients admitted wtthra seven days after the onset were treated with CRAI therapy prospectively. 22 patients received protease mhthltor Nafamostat via CRAI and antibiotic intravenously (group I) and 45 patients received both Nafamostat and Irmpenem via CRAI (group II). Results: The mortality rate m group II (13.3%) was not different from that in group I (13.7%). The incidence of infected pancreanc necrosis in group [1 (4.4%) was significantly lower than that in group I (22.g%). Surgical debndement was performed for pancreanc infection m eight patients m group I (36.4%) and in eight patients in group [I (17.8%) . None of the patients underwent surgical debndement following CRAI therapy dmd. The causes of death in the patients treated wlth CRAI therapy were related to multiple organ failure but not to pancreatic refection. The mortality rate m [7 patients mcewed both FUT and Irmnpenem via CRAI within 48 hrs of the onset (0 %) was significantly lower than that ra 28 pauents received these drugs v~a CRAI more than 48 hrs after the onset (21.4 %). Conclusion: lntenswe medmal care and early mtervent,on with CRAI of protease mhlbttor and antthmtlc x, tthm 48 hrs of the onset should have a sigmficant role in the management of acute necrotlzlng pancreatttts. H.Yokoi. l'.l~laganum, T.Higashiguchi. S. Isaji. Y.Ka~rarada. 1st l~t. of Surg.. Mie Univ. School of t~licine. Mie. Japan Introduction. Since July 1994, ~e have been conducting a prospective study based on a new lanage~ent protocol for acute pancreatit is. PatieffL~ and ~etheds. Between July 1994 and ~r 1997, 50 patients with acute pancreatitis were treated accordiag to the protocol, and their outcome ras assessed in relation to etiology and severity. The protocol was based on a retro-sT~ective study of 290 cases of acute pancreatitis, zncluding 63 cases of severe pancreatitis. The prognosis score (scoring of severity of acute pancreatitis based on the criteria of the ~linistry of Health and Welfare of Japan) and APALI~E II score are calculated on admssion. The protocol reco~ends early biliary drainage for severe gallstone pancreatitis. When the prognosis score is 2 or ~ore and the APACHEII score is 8 or more, peritoneal lavage or continuous hemoftltratzon plus intra-arterial infusion of protease inhibitor and antibiotics is e~ployed. Dynemzc CT suxhes and tree-needle aspiration of the pancreas are used to detect pancreatic necroszs and refection. When infected pancreatzc necrosis ~s diagnosed, necrosectomy with drainage is indicated. Results. l)Gallstone pancreatitis : Among the 25 patieats. 3 had a prognosis score of 9 or more. and 9 had an APACHE I1 score of 8 or ~ere. Early biliary drainage was ~formed m 11 patzentS, and all 11 patients had a good outcome. 2)Non-gallstone pancreatzt~s : Among the 25 patients, the 13 wsth a prognosis score o-f--l-ess than 2 and an APACHE I1 score of less than 8 recovered in response to conser-#atzve treatment. In contrast, 7 of the 12 patters wtth a prognosis score of 2 or more or an APACHE II score of 8 or more underwent peritoneal lavage or imra-arterlal lnfusxon therapy. Five of the 7 patients were salvaged, but one diea early without recovering from severe shock and the other died 4 months after the onset desptte necrosectomy w~tn draznage for infected pancreatic necrosis. Colx.'lusion. Our new ~mnage~ent protocol for acute l~eatitls based on the prognosis score and the APACHE II score appears to be. useful for accurately scoring severity and for selectzag the method of treatment. The role of the minor papilla in genesis of certain pancreatic diseases has been the object of anatomical studies, particularly concermng the calibre of the accessory duct and the patency of the minor papilla. The modem improvement of endoscopic facilities and techmques (biliary manometry, EPT, stenting) call for a more profound research on rmnor papilla's function. In order to evaluate the outflow capacity of the minor duodenal papilla we have conducted a pdot anatomical study based on 14 fresh autopsy specimens of human duodenopancreas The pancreases were placed in a specially modelled cradle in order to obtmn a normal anatomical position and adequate hydrostatic pressures which is about 10 mmHg..~er transecting the tail of pancreas, the upstream part of the major pancreatic duct and the major duodenal papilla were cannulated, and the suprapancreatic pan of the common bile duct ligated [Introduction] We expenenced a necrotizing pancreat~t=s after pylorus preserving pancreatoduodanectomy (PPPD) in the distal side of the residual pancreas, and managed by radiologic intervention. As it seemed to be a very rare complication after PPPD, we reported about the clinical course of this case. [Case report] A 68-year "old male admdted to our hospital compla=mng of jaundice. Ampullery carcinoma was suspected and PPPD wdh Traverso's method was performed on 26 February 1997. Pancreeto-jelunostomy was made by mucosa-to-mucosa anastomoses using 5-0 Vicryl. Pancreatic peranchyma was soft and pancraat=c duct was 2 mm in diameter. Amount of pancreatic ju=ca v=a a pancreattc tube was about 200 ml /day and there was no evidence of pencreatJc leakage. As body temperature elevated on 6 POD, CT scan was taken. Pancreatic enlargement wtth non-homogeneous pancreatic parenchyma in the distal pancreas and fluid collection in peripancreatic area were seen. Seventy by Ranson's score and by CT findings, we assessed the condition as severe pancreat=t~s. Total parenteral nutrition and =ntenswa theraptes using anteb~ot~cs, H2-blooker and protease =nhlbltor were gtven, but h=gh fever continued. Infection of pancreatic necrosis was suspected. Using rab=otog=c intervention ~ncluding CT guided puncture, drainage tubes were inserted to the appropnate places around the diastal pancreas. After drainage and irngat=on, pancreatic abscess disappeared gradually and the patient could d=scharge on 142 POD [Discussion] Distal necrotmng pancreat=t~s occurred only in one case among our 208 cases of PD and seemed to be a rare complicat=on Rad=ologlc =ntervent]ons were very useful tn thts case. H. Amano, T. Takada, M. Yoshida. First Department of Surgery, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. [Introduction] Gastric stagnation is one of the major problems after PPPD. Whether the suppressive effect of Proton Pump Inhibitor (Omeprazole) improved the gastric stasis after PPPD or not was assessed. [Patients and Method] Forty PPPD patients were divided into two groups through a randomized enveloped controlled study. Group I (n=22) received Omeprazole through jejunal tube. Group 2 (n=18) were given no medications to suppress the gastric secretion and served as controls. The daily volume and total acidity of the gastric juice, aspirated via nasogastric tube, were measured 1-7 POD after PPPD. [Results] In Group 1, the mean daily aspirated volume of gastric juice was 160.2 ml, and the mean maximum volume was 222.8 ml on 1 POD. In Group 2, six patients were withdrawn from this study due to large amount of gastric juice (exceed 2,000 ml) or gastric bleeding and received Omeprazole. The mean daily aspirated volume of gastric juice in remaining Group 2 patients was 787.4 ml, and the mean maximum volume was 1039 ml on 3 POD. Gastric secretion was significantly lower in Group 1 than in Group 2 (1o<0.05). The total acidity of the gastric juice was significantly lower in Group 1 than in Group 2 (p<0.05). [Conclusion] These results suggested that the administrations of Omeprazole significantly suppress the volume and acidity of the gastric juice and improved the gastnc stasis after PPPD, H. Amano, T. Takeda, M. Yoshld~L First Department of Surgery, Tetkyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. [Introduction] Clinical benefit of post.operative adjuvant chemotherapy for rasected pancreatic carcinoma has sometimes been unclear. Recently, we employed a new chamosansitivity test to decide the indication of post-operative chemotherapy and to choose the sensitive chemotherapeutic agents. [Patient and Method] A 47-yeer-old female was diagnosed as advanced pancreatic body cancer with splenic artery and splenic vein invasion. Distal pancreatectomy with lymphedanectomy was performed on 25 November 1996. CD-DST (Collagen Gel Droplet Embedded Culture Drug Sansltivi~y test) was performed using the resected specimen. [Result-,] 5-FU was found to be the first effective agent and CDDP, ADM and MMC were the second effective agents by CD-DST. The patient discharged after three courses of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy using CDDP+ 5FU. CEA level was normal at that time. In Apn11997, CEA increased to 9.1 ng / ml, four courses of CDDP+5FU and two courses of MMC+SFU were added. CEA decreased to the normal range after the chemotherapy. In August 1997, CEA =ncraased again to 14.7 ng/ ml. MMC+5FU was used in outpatient department and CEA decreased to 5.3 ng / ml in January 1998. [Conclusion] We expanenced an effective case of post.operative adjuvant chemotherapy for an advanced pancreatic cancer us=ng sonsJtive drugs by chemosenswlt'/test (CD-DST). Chemosensitiwty test seemed to be helpful for rational chemotherapy. [Introduction] We experienced a pancreatic metastasis from renal cell carcinoma indicating unusual spread patterns of portal vein and pancreatic duct tumor thrombus. We present radiologic and pathological findings of this case. [Case report] A patient was 70-year-old female. She had a past history of left nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma in February 1982. In Apn11995, pancreatic head tumor was pointed out incidentally by CT, but no further examination nor treatment were done. In September 1997, She complained of a back pain. CT demonstrated the growth of the pancreatic head tumor and another tumor in the pancreatic body. Dynamic CT, MRI and angiograohY revealed well enhanced pancreatic tumors. Dynamic CT showed well enhanced mass in the pancreatic duct also and ERP revealed tumor thrombus =n the pancreatic duct. On 22 October 1997, pylorus preserving total pancreatectomy was performed. By macroscopic findings, pancreatic tumors existed in the head and body, and tumor thrombus in the pancreatic duct and in splenic vein were found. Post operative course was uneventful and interferon therapy was applied after the operation. [Discussion] 54 cases of pancreatic metastasis from renal cell carcinoma were reported in Japanese literature.Three cases of pancreatic duct tumor thrombus and four cases of portal vein thrombus were reported. These spread patterns seemed to be rare but characteristics of pancreatic metastasis from renal cell carcinoma. [Purpose] Although pancreatogastrostomy has become a popular procedure after PPPD, long term results of this procedure were not clarified. [Patients and Method] Five patients were followed over ten years after pancreatogastrostomy, Three were ampullary carcinoma and the other were pancreatic cyst and chronic pancreatitis. Post-operative changes of pancreatic duct diameter and the pancreatic functions were compared with pre-operative conditions. [Results[ In four patients, pancreatic duct diameter did not dilate by CT and US. ERP was possible in three patients with no obvious findings. In these four patients, pancreatic functions, tested by 75g OGTr and PFD test, were reserved. In one patient, pancreatic duct was gradually dilated from 2 mm to 16 mm by CT. The anastomotic site of pancreatogastrostomy was covered by gastric mucosa by gastrofiberscope. As pancreatic functions became worse and the patient complained of a back pain, re-operation was performed under the diagnosis of anastomotic obstruction. Pancrteatolejunostorey was performed on 26 March 1~7. Back pain was relieved and PFD test became better from 47% to 69=,',, three weeks after the operation. [Conclusion] We analyzed long term results of pancreato-gastrostomy after PPPD. Pancreatic functions were reserved in paUents wdhout anastomotic stenos=s. Re-anastomosKs by pancreatojejunostomy was beneficial in one patient with anastomotic stenosts. BILIARY STONE AFTER PANCREATICODUODENECTOMY-REPORT OF TRREE CASES. K. Amikure, T. Naito, M. Koban, S. Matsuno The First Department of Surgery, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendal, Japan. Introduction. Stenos=s of hepaticojejunostomy (HJ) is one of the major late complication after pancresticoduodenectomy (PD), which may cause cholangitis or biliary stones. Three cases with bi[iary stone after PD were reported. Patients, The first case is 53 years old man, who had hepaticolithiasis on the hepatic hilus 7 years after PD for caminoma of the lower bile duct. Lithotomy was performed. Seven months later, he had recurrent stone at the same site and 5thotomy by pemutaneous transhepatic cholangioscope (PTCS) was successfully performed. However, histological finding of the biopsy resulted in carcinoma recurrence at HJ. He died 8 months after lithotomy. The second case is 55 years old man, who had hepatolithiasis 17 years after PD for pancreatic injury caused by traffic accident. Lithotomy and dilation of HJ by PTCS was successfully performed. The Third case is 63 years old man, who had hepaticolithiasis 5 years after PD for duodenal neurofibroma (von Recklinghausen's disease). Exc=sion and reconstruction of HJ was performed. Two of 3 patients had no recurrent stone or cholangltis 4 and 1.5 years after lithotomy respectively. Lithotorny and dilation of HJ by PTCS should be considered as a standard management of btlian/stone after PD. The indication for the excision and reconstruction of HJ can be discussed for the inflammatory stenos=s. m~lt/pie orgon-s'ystcm fatlm~ (MOSF) and infected pancrwZic nenrosis. The pan.antis of thee ozmpIications remains tmcleat, ~t e.xpenmental gudiea suggr 6wt Izansloeafion of bacleria and toxins via a "leaky" inter'real muc~ml bm~er may oanu'ibam. The pte~ent gudy invegigamd intesanal permeability in healthy controls and patients with acute poncreatitis, im relationship with seventy. and evidmce for mdotoxaemie. PATIENTS & METHODS: Polyethylene glycol (PEG) 400 and PEG 3350 were selected to determine micromoleculat and ma~amolecular intestinal permeability. PEG 400 (58) and PEG 3350 (408) were achninistered orally or via a naso~c tube. Urinary. PEG 400 and 3350 were measta-ed by high-pecformance liquid daumalography. Sa.mp|es were completed within 72 bore's of symptom onset. Attacks were classified as mild or severe by ~e Atlanta Cntcn& APACHE-II scores and C-reactwe prmcm (CRP) levels were measured dady. and endocoxm and anr annbadies determined at admission. There were I iO subjects: 2~ healey co~trots" 56 mild and 29 severe ==acks. Crimps were metered rot age and sex distribution, and mild and severe attacks for aerology. Median acamssion APACHE-II was 10 (range 4-27) m severe and 5 (range 1-16) m mild anack.~ median peak CRP 260 (interquartlle range 156-328) mwl m severe and 93 (interquamle range 24-163) rag/1 in mild attacks. RESULTS: Unnary recovery, of PEG 400 was similar in all Ooups. but that of PEG 3350 was sl~lficandy greater m sev~e ar, acks (median 0.6%. mterquanile range 0.26-2..-m/e) compared vmh todd attacks treed|an 0.09%. mterqa~dr range 0.06-O.[4%) and controls (median 0.12%, mtetquaruIc range 0.08-0.16%) (both p<0.0OOD, as was the ratio of recovery, of PEG 3350 to 400. Endotoxaerma was detected more frequently m severe compared with mild attacks (50% vs, 2.~/,). and at greater levels (median 0.035 EO/ml vs. 0.01 EO/mi: p=rLs.) and was slgmficamiy higher m non-stu'vwors than stg'v=vlors (median 0.1[3 vs. 0.015 EUtmh p'O.O2'L lgG am,-endotoxm levels were significantly lower in scvece compared ~qth todd attacks (median 65 8 vs. III OMU. p=O 02), indicating ~ea:ec prior exr to endotoxln CONCLUSION: inmslmal bamer function fails, and at an earl.v stage, m patients w~l s~'ere acute pancr~ons as evident by. endotoxaernla and a sigIllficant ino'eear in permeability, m macromoleeules. This may contrtbute bmh to the pa~ogenea~s of MOSF. and to secondary. Infection ofpanore~lc necrosis. (Gaso'oencemlogy 1996; 110:1919) . [n vitro data suggested that ductal epithelial cells might be local site of complement biosynthesis, and that several pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-ll~, TNF-ct and IFN-',) participated m the regulation of this local defense mechanism. In this study, we evaluated the interaction between fibrogenic cytoldnes (IL-I13, TGF-~ and PDGF), which were established as mediators of pancreatic fibrosm, in the regulation of pancreatic complement (C3 and factor B) biosynthesis. ~tt, P~. Two pancreauc cancer cell lines, Panc-1 and MIA PaCa-2. were used. Complement levels in supernatants were determined by ELISA. Complement mtLNA expression was evaluated by RT-FCR and Northern blot analysis. Results_ The C3 and factor B synthesis was induced by the addiuon of one of fibrogenic cytokmes, [L-I~, in two cell lines. TNF-a also induced a marked increase in the secretion of C3 and factor B m these cells. On the other hand. the addiuon of TGF-~ potently attenuated the effects of both IL-I~ and TNF-a on C3 and factor B synthesis. These effects were also confirmed at the mRNA levels. The addition of PDGF also down-regulated the IL-I~-and TNF-r factor B synthesis at the protein and mRNA levels. Conclusmn_ Fibrogemc cytoklnes (IL-I~, TGF-~I, and PDGF) differenually modulated complement bmsynthesls in the pancreatic cancer cell lines. [L-I~ and TNF-cr induced C3 and factor B biosynthesis in these cells, but TGF-~ and PDGF acted as potent down-regulators. It is [Lkely that complement btosyntheszs and fibrogemc potenual xn the pancreas may be closely linked by regulatory mechamsms mediated by fibrogenic c vto~nes. I. Arai ~ S. Amagaya, Y, Komatsu*L K. Shingu, Y. Hirai, T. Kajimoto, Y. Ida, T. Yamamoto=, K. Sasaki, S. Taguchi=, G. M. Green') ~) Tsumura Kampo & Pharmacog. Labs., Ibaraki, Jpn., = School of Pharmaceutical Sci., Showa Univ., Tokyo, Jpn. = 2nd Dept. Int. Medicine, School of Medicine, Showa Univ., Tokyo, Jpn., `) Dept. Physiology, Univ. "rex. Health Sci. Ctr., San Antonio, TX, USA. Introduction. Recently, it was reported that protease inh~bitors, which stimulate pancreatic exocrine secretion by the release of CCK and secretin, delay the accelerated gastnc emptying and improve postprandial hyperglycemia in diabetes by the release of CCK. Gosya-jinki-gan (T J-107), a herbal medicine, is used for diabetes in Japan and China. In this study, we investigated the effect of TJ-107 on pancreatic exocrine secretion, and the role of CCK and secretin in its stimulative mechanism in rats. Methods. Cannutas were inserted under anesthesia into the biliary and pancreatic duct, duodenum, stomach and jugular vein of male Wistar rats (280-320 g). Bile and pancreatic juice were returned to the duodenum continuously, and on the 3rd day, the following experiments were performed. 1) TJ-107 0.5 and 1.0 g/kg, i.g. 2) Loxiglumids, a CCK receptor antagonist, 50 mg/kg, i.g. 30 m,n before TJ-! 07. 3) In addition to Ioxiglumide, anti rat secretin serum 100 i~l/rst, i.v. 15 mm before TJ-107. Pancreatic juice was collected every 30sin and the volume and protein output were determined. Plasma CCK was measured before, and 30 and 60 sin after TJ-107 admin,strat=on by RIA. Moreover, the effects of TJ-107 (0.005-50 p.g/mg) on trypsm activity was estimated by Hesterine method in vitro. Results. T J-107 stimulated the volume and protem output of pancreatic juice dose-dependently and increased plasma CCK levels. The st=mulatton of pancreatic exocrine secretion by T J-107 was inhtb,ted partly by Ioxiglumide and completely by anti secrets serum combined with Ioxiglumide. TJ-107 did not ,nhibtt trypsm actiwty. Conr T J-107 stimulated the pancreatic exocnne secretion. Its effect is conmdered to have been mediated by the release of CCK and secrets from the duodenum without tnh,b=tion of trypsin activtty. clime of gastroenterology, Insdtut of pathology*, Chnical center Ni.~, YU l[ntroduction. Considering well-known anatomic and physiologic relation-ships between duodenum and pancreas we presumed pathohistologic changes of duodenal mucosa in chronic pancreatitis (CP). Patients and Method. Endoscopic guided duodenal hiopsies were taken from the second and the third portion in 30 patients with CP proved by means of imaging procedures (abdominal plain radiography, ERP, ultrasound and cr) and the measurement of faecal chymotrypsin. Results. Using HE and AB-PAS technique in all cases were found different types of chrome duodenitis: DUODEN1TIS CHR ATROPHICA GR I in I0, DUODENITIS CHR ATROPHICA GR II in 12. DUODEN1TIS CHR ATROPHICA GR Ill in 6, and DUODENTTIS CHR sUPERFICIALIS m 2 cases. PYLORIC METAPLASIA was found in 18 cases. Using specific PAP and non-specific Grimelius and Masson-Hamperl techmque special attention was focused on the changes of gasmn (G-) and cholecystokinm (I-) producing cells. The all of pauents had endocrine cell's abnormalincs in the form of ZYMOGEN HYPOGRANULATION. Decrease in the number of G-and i--cells was found m 28 cases and had correlanon with the degree of chrome atrophic duodemtls. Seven patients had the HYPERTROPH:[O of G-and I-cells. Conclusion. Pauents with CP obvmusly have the pathologic changes of duodenal mucosa which may be consequence of CP but also may have some etxopathogenenc role. DUODEN1TIS CHR ATROPHICA of various degree is the most frequent finding. The changes of mucosal endocrine cells, such as ZYMOGEN HYPOGRANULATION. decrease in the number or the HYPERTROPHIO of G-and I-cells may have some adaptable role m the development of exocrme pancreatm msufficxency.  Since 1.9r the Jap~, ese, Mi~ of health and Welfare permitteo ~e use or immobili/ea ,polymers, B fibers (PMX-.F) for me ueaunent at gram-negative se[~c saocz..we, nave r 9 such cases so tar, mm z cut o~ ~, ga.e surrereo .tyom .sepdc s uocx w upon. ~ve~ acute L39ncreadds..~mougn drainage sno~d oe pe~ormee ~ty atxerme ~iagnosis ~ three.don ia p~.eats wire severe a~.~ pm~..r 'ds, weomn nest.me m ao so .oecause or me poor .cou~..'dou wire multiple ~ failure ~o.r se~c snocX stan~xor difffcalt~ in diak, n~'. "ng ime~an, rue I!utpme or uns smoy is.tp re~e~w me c?tn'se or t~..-r m.empy in me .casm ~ ~yera acute mncreanns, r~-~ commn a~_~olr~ nemel~'gmwn tvtu') AS the PbIX-F absorbent column, Tremyxm (PMX-20R~[ w.m usefL. A~e~, m blood for .DHP with P MX-F ad~rb~nt .merap][ wm ~ viaa qoueJelumen cameter insenea into me remonu veifi oy ~eadinger's memm. tTrw was carried out for 2"-3 hrs at a flow rate of IID~12ffml/min. The anticoa gmlant was anfamostat insatiate. ~ RqmN Case I. ; 38 ylo nml. e su ..eLed from seve.re acute paocrealifis due m ~c~hol. On. admi'saiou, Cuuen anq ~re~-~urner~gu were Eosidve, At. a~tm U. score U. ~ ~o~ o ~u ~ v in 9x "&ya~ng. tmm em.atety ate. r,admissioa, .IFote~ !nmpitor ~rum~ w~ ~musee conunuoum z into .sp~.mc artery a~uogeum artery mr / aaD, men con~nuous nemodianlUanou t~t'uJPy an.a re?~ramr were ini~ateo, on 33th day after sdmi~ion he left resvttator =no onu muum began. However, on 57th day, he fell into sep~c shock, b k~l pressure a~reaseo m 30 mmHg and did not increase welt in spite or me do~n a drninisu'a~on (15 U g/xg/mip). B]cod endotoxin concenu~.on was 9214 pg~nu.. VM~-r meraj~y, was .anoRteo once, and blood pres.s..t..~, i~caroe stanlr w~m ross .~..~ount oraopamm (~ U g/xg/rmn), p,z'r.er s.tel~llZanon or ol.o~ p~sanrr t.t y.as taken and reve~ded tlie. R mcreagc a~sr Imm~'a~ty., cetiotomy ano aoscess drainage was careen out. t.'m uulmre was ,'VU~A posldve, r'osto~mdve co m~.was sad.~acto.ry unul 5 POD, wh.en he passed away aue to.pmmonar~ emooly ca u~ byme un'omous ot me ten to.tureen idac. vein. ~ase 2 : +.z y/omme suffe.reo tram severe acute p.anc~atitis aue to alcohol, un 67th da~ after onseL ttematemesis was noteo aria repeateo seve.r~, rimed so ~at TAE of the right and left.g~, ~c .ar~..P/ann c onUnuous arte~at, inn~ion 9r pretense inhibitor were neeaan, un s any a~er co.~t, ne rett mto se~uc snoc~ aria e~tA-t" merapy was carn ea ouL r.npoto.xm con.centradon aecreaseo, andblood pre~ure, increasea, imm.ediamly,.men cmiotomy was pe~ormea, rancreanc pse.ueo-cDtems.te..a " m me oursa omen r~is.ano penetrated the gasmc posterior wmL rrp. one!y, gastric jmce e.roqeo me wan o~ pancreatic .p.p.p.p~uo~.ysL suotouu gastrectom~, chotecystectomy, choledochotomy w~ T-tu~ drainage were penormeo. Postoperanve course was unevenifuL Srrmmt_r'y PMX--F ~erepy seems to be a .useful tool for seconctarypancreaUc ,mection as a bnoge unul the operatron or tar penoperanve enootoxenua. We assesed twenty eight cases of pancreatic endocrine tumors to find out if we can classify ~em cJeady from benign to malignant. Patients and method. Twenty eight pancreatic endocnne tumors were studied pathologically and various immunoh,stochem~cal staunmg was done to determine its character. Resulte. By routine pa~ological study, 15cases(54%) were diagnosed malignant, 5cases(18%) potentially malignant, and 8cases(29%) benign. Considering the maximum tumor s~ze, nine cases were less than 2cm and among them, one was potentially malignant, others were benign. Twelve cases were more than 4cm in maximum size and they were all malignant. We found eight cases (29%) clinically symptomatic, one glucagonoma, one somatostatinoma, six insulinomas. Ten cases were nonfunc~onal tuomors and others were class=fled as asymptomatic-functional tumor, which means there is an evidence of hormonal elevation but w~th no clinical symptom. Eleven cases were single hormone productive tumor, seven cases were multiple. Tumor marker such as CEA or CA19-9 staining were earned out and ten cases wre pos,tive. Pancreatic secretary tryps=n inhtb,tor (PSTI) were locally pos=tive in rune cases and they were all diagnosed mahgnant by routine pathological study. Pancreatic endocnne tumos are malignant when they are nonfunctional, when maximum tumor size is more than 4r when PSTI ~s found locally pos~bve. Introduction. The present study was ,rated on the detennmauon of elimeaJ effie=enLT and safety of Stilamm (somatostatme), conducted by the "a~res Serene" compmly, Switzerland, in pauents wtth acute panereautls (APt. Patients and mHhods, According to the protocol of multleenter $tilamin (St that , 5 patxeats were obtained: 2 men a.ud 3 women , me, m ~,e (62  8~years wldl the first attack of A.P. S was adnumstered widlin first minutes of hospttalizauou via continuous intravenous infusion at a rate of 250 mg, h during 5 days. Results. After 24 to 30 hours of S al.t'ustoll the pare signifi~, ' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' ,' antly dcweased and by tile r of the fourth day of tr~-atment ~t almost v~t~shed. Tile ~anptoms of dy~pepsaa were eliml~mted wtthin the first hours orS admmJstratzon.Durmg the n~t 24 hours m 2 patients (4r a moderate nausea ~md air belching were seen. ~lejaundice of ~km aztd scleras, mental ,hsorders ,mtl seizure-like ,Tndrome were cared m 32 hoar. ~te wo,~den belly seen m 100 % of eases at the beg.arumS of treatment. :dtltou*b relieved, remained m 6el ~b of patients tell the end of the fourth day.-By the huddle of the fifth day of treatment it was r reheved in gtl "" of patients. The mru'ufcst ieukotTto~ss with a ~httt of tile teuks.,cTtle tbrmuta to tile left eehably decreased after24 ho,rs of therapy from II fxl0 ^0 I re It~,-txlfPg'l .rod ;fl'ter 72 hottr~; of t.otltlallOUS lllJ.'tlSlOll alllOUllted to a nl~-A.ii Of 9.3 x 1(1"9 I. The high blood amylase level decreased by 21~ (330 U]/1 to 260 U[ t.respectwel}) ut as little as ~'2 to 96 hours after the b~ummg of tr~d[|lle11~' d]ld aornlalized at the e~ld tr~ltnlr &lid lactate deh),lrog~tase level -frum (613 -o.611 UI I to (520-g.-'~ UI,'I by the end of rr~xtme'nt. However. tt .:,}[otlld he mentioned that alter ternmmtton ors atfuston the ~.ontellt of autylane mid lactate deh}dr<~geua.semcr~,LSed again m 2 patwnts. The3.' were gtven S infilstua~; t;.~r addmonat 2a hours =rod th~al ~wttched to oral ome'prulolc T[l ,J dosage ot'411 ms.day. There were llO 51dr :fleets of S. C~ndu~t,m. The~rud~ ~l[ou,~ a t,gh et~fic~lc} ors *]~ ttta~a~ent~tt of AP. S has .m apparc~lt mhtbtttn~ ctTect ot~ the exocnne p~mcr~mc t'un~.ttou, mautl~ due to the reduchoit of busat ,utd ~ttululated sL%retton of pa~lerc-dtl~" CD2.ymes, that Jeeeel~T-Jle~ ~ohttloq o|" Inll.dlUl , tOll .LtII[SOCrCIOr3' drugs m [tie i"ortu el" rAbleL-; itla~ h~. ll$Cd ";UC!I Introduction: The treatment and prevention of infected pancreatic necrosis are a major goal in severe pancreatitis management, where anubiotic prophylaxis has recently yielded promisrag climcal results, with =raipenera significantly reducing the incldence of infected necrosis compared to an untreated control group. Theoretically, pefloxacra's spectrum of action and pancreatic penetration should make it a valid altematwe to irazpenera. Patients and Methods: In a raulticentre study, 56 severe acute pancreatitis patients with necrosis affecting at least 50*/0 of the pancreas were randomly allocated to two weeks' ratrvenous treatment with pefloxacin 400 rag b d.(27 patients) or ira,pencra 500 rag tad (29 paneras) within 120 h of onset of symptoms Age Sex, body weight, Ranson and Apache lI scores, C reactive protein, aetzology and tzrae from onset of syraptoras to treatment were well matched ra the two groups Results: The racidences of int'ected necrosis and extrapancreat~c rafectlons were 37% and 48%, respectively, ra the pefloxacra group and 10 3% and 206% in the iraipenera group, im=penera proving stgnificantly more effectwe (p<0 05) The mortality, due in all cases to sepsts, was not sigmficantly different in the two groups, but was lower on traipenera (10 3% vs 18 5% ) Conclusion: Desp=te its theoretzcal potential, pefloxacm xs not a valid alteraatz,,e to ~mzpenem in severe pancreatms UNDERESTIMATING ACUTE PANCREATITIS. S. Burchard-Reckert 1, D. Lehnick 2, P G. Lanklsch 1. 1Dept. of Medicine, Municipal Hospital, Laneburg; Zlnstltute for Statistics and Econometrics, University of G~ttlngen, G~ttingen, FRG. Serum amylase and lipase measurements, along w~th charactenstic signs and symptoms, are used worldwide to diagnose acute pancreat]tis. Almost all studies on the treatment of acute pancreat~s use enzyme levels above three times the upper limit of normal (>3n) on admission to indicate severe disease. This assumption Is questtoned tn this retrospective study. Patients and Methods. 248 patients with a first attack of acute pancreatitis were div=ded into 2 groups according to serum amylase (group A: _<3n = 88 patients, 31%; group B: >3n = 196 patmnts, 69%) and lipase levels on admission (group A: <3n = 51 patients, 18%, group B: >3n = 233 patients. 82%). Severe resp=ratory or renal fadure (indicatton for artifictal ventilation and/or dialys=s), development of pseudocysts, indication for surgical treatment, and mortality rate were taken as parameters of seventy. Results, The results are shown in the following Patients andMethods From 1985 to 1996 we observed 40 patients suffering from TIIM. All patients were submitted to preoperative assessment, consisting of routine blood examination, pancreatic raarkers, US and CT-sean, in 17 patients we carried out an ERCP and in 5 an USendoscopy. Pancreatic markers showed abnormal values in 40% of eases; in 70*/, of cases we achieved a correct radiological diagnosis, based on enlargement of the pancreatic head without jaundice (excluding 3 patients), dilatation of the main pancreatic duct in absence of calcificatzons and "bulging" of the papilla of Vater Results: 30 panents underwent radical resective surgery, 5patients palliative procedures, 3 cases were associated wtth other penarapullary turaours and 2 refused total pancreatectoray and were submitted to local atipical resection. Twenty seven patients are alive and free of disease at a mean follow-up of 22.5 months (range 4-809), one patient a.~er splenopancreateetoray presented with recurrence of the disease and underwent resectmn of the whole remaining gland Conclusion. The typical clinical onset of TIIM. characterized by "pancreatms like'" syratoras ra the absence of risk factors for chronic pancreatltis (smoking and alcohol habit) makes the diagnosis easier; in our series we reached a correct preoperative diagnosts in about 80*/, of the pattents. SINUS TRACT ENDOSCOPY FOR RETROPERITONEAL PERI-PANCRF~TIC NECROSIS R. Carter, C. McKay, C. W. lmrie Department of Upper GI and Pancreatico-Biliary Surgery,, Royal Infirmary., Glasgow, UK. Repeated surgical exploration in patients with retroperitoneal peri-pancreatic necrosis is often associated with an initial deterioration in organ failure scores prior to subsequent improvement and carries a significant mortality. It has been postulated that the severity, of this deterioration may be related to the magnitude of the surgical insult. We describe our initial experience of sinus tract endoscopy in the management of retroperitoneal peri-pancreatic sepsis. All five patients had previously undergone formal surgical drainage with post-operative tube drainage of the retroperitoneal cavity. Recurrent sepsis was suspected by a clinical deterioration or following sequential CT, and would normally have resulted in surgical exploration. Under general anaesthesia, the previously placed tube drains were removed and where necessary, the tract dilated digitally, A twin channel therapeutic gastroscope was then inserted down the tract and antegrade balloon dilatation performed as required allowing access to the abscess cavity. All visible necrotic material was then removed using endoscopic grasping forceps, brushes or snares followed by saline jet irrigation. A guide wire was placed under direct vision allowing replacement of the tube drain. All five patients recovered without further operative drainage. Our initial results with sinus tract endoscopy in these patients is encouraging, and we are currently undertaking a more formal appraisal of the technique. MUTATIONS AND W~8-5"I" PREVALENCE iN IDIOPATHIC CHRONIC AND _ACUTE RECURRENT PANs Casmllani C*, Sprbi D ~ Cavatlim, G ~', Di Francesco V ~ Bovo po Fndlom L ~ Vaorm B ~ Borazz=to A*, Bassi C", Falconi M ^, Ped=.zoli 1 ~ and Masteila G* *Cyme Fibrosis C.~ter, Ospedale Maglpore, V=.orm, Italy, ~ Umt and ^Sm'~cal Dept, Univ=.si .ty of V='or=, Verona. ITALY A high Eeqr=r=y of mutation in the Cymr Fibrosis Tremmembrane Co~","~ Regulator (CFTR) gene has been ~d m paUer~ not showing the full spectrum of C~nc Fibrosis (CF) climcal manifestation, but affcet~ by disord=.s that sh~r some f~tttats v, ath CF (i.e. congemtal absc~ of Vas deft~r~ brtxw.ineetasm, ckromc obstrar162 Imlmomwy ~). An increa~d CFTR mutanon Inmdence has also been rtcenfly reported in chrome panctv, ands. A~m of the stu@ was to verify, tins dam in a rejected consecutive popoian= of S0 patients (29 males, 21 fcma/r suff=.ing fi'Om chronic par=r~m (CP} (28 pts) and acute ro:un'tm imammatis (ARP) (22 pts), without my. known posmble ~aologtcal factor (in pm'dcul& alcohol and bile stones); they had been la'~'musly class*fled as ~ithopafluc'. desp,e in only a ~'w of them re.year test had been peKermed and CF ruled out. Each subject wes scmm=d for the 15 most ~=p~re CFTR mumnom m our posen: DFSO$. DI507. RII62X. 2183AA>G. 21303K. 3849+iOKbC>T. G54LX~ 1717-1G>A, R.~53X, Q552X, G85E, 711+5G>A. 3132delTG. 2789+~G>A. W1282X), whmh cover 85% of CF chromosomes m our area, plus the 5-thymtthne alk'le m iraron 8 oftbe CFTR germ (IVS85T). Among the 28 PC panems ~ found 4 bemmz~, or= and or= compound hct=.ozy, gote: amen 8 the ~ AP, P imecms 2 bet=.o . z. z. z. z. z. z. z. z. zygot es were demct~ and one compound het=.ozygom. The nvo compound ~gotes at a more thorough chock up showed mild rcsptrato~ symptom* and in the CP paUent thc sweat elecu'ol.,,xes w~ above 100Eq/Kg. The cam=" E'r was thee 1:5.6 for CP and 1:73 for ARP, stgmficandy Mgh=. than the ~xpr 1/32 for tested mutauorm, the prevalence of IVSS-ST was instead stmilar to that of the gtm~ral populauon (10%), Even though no dr162 cor=l~ton can be drawn fi'om our data. an xmprcsSlVe fzequemy of CFTR mutaaom has been d=tr Some of ~s panents may be not just cam=" but the may surf=" fi'om mild forms of CF. x~th CP and ARP but not major rt~ptrato~' ~'mptoms. b~ausr the pre's=.r of or= "l, oloxvn mutaeon on a chromosome and an u.dct~ted mutauon or r a DNA ~anam on the oth=" r Furth=" studies on larg=" popul~om and/or a more extensive analysis of the CFTR gone m these subjects should be able to ciar~.' this issue introduction. Acute pancreatitis may be accompanied w~th gastrointestinal motor disorders. We tried to study whether gastrointestinal transit was disturbed during acute pancreatitis and to identify which mechanisms might be involved in acute pancreatitis. Patients end Methods, Using non-invasive hydrogen breath test to measure the orocecal tranmt time (OCT'I') represented small intestinal motility, 24 patients (M/F: 21/3, age: mean*-SE, 61.5 + 2.1 yrs) w=th the clinical diagnosis of acute pancreatitts were enrolled into this study. All patients received twice OCTT measurements at acute stage and recovery, respectively, Meanwhile, blood was obtained to study the amylase, lipase, Creactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, endothelin-1 and nitrate/nitnte levels. Results. OCTT measured at acute stage was significantly delayed compared with this at recovery (130.0 -* 9.0 vs 80,8  7.4 ram, p<0.001). Plasma endothetin-1 levels exhibtted a pos=hve correlation with OCTTs in acute stage (r=0.509, p=0.011). When the recovered levels were taken into consideration, the percentages of altered OCTTs also correlated with the percentages of altered plasma endothelin-1 levels (r=0,751, p<0,001). Plasma nitrate / mtnte levels s~gmficantly decreased at acute stage compared with this at recovery (5.25 -+ 0.82 vs 10.20 " 1.24 M, p<0.005), whereas the=r levels did not cormtate with OC'l-rs. Conclusion. Intestinal transit ~s delayed cn patients w~th todd to moderate acute pancreatms and symptomat=c recovery is associated w=th normalized motility. Elevated plasma endothelin-1 levels m acute stage of these pattents may be one of mechamsms mediating intestinal dysmotflity. OBJECTIVE -To study the incidence and pattern of pancreanic diseases in a hospital (200 Indoor capacity) located in Central India. PATIENTS AND METHOD -A 12 month period (Jan 97 to Dec 97) was reviewed, when total of 4194 patients were admltted in the medical and surgical units of the hospital. All the clinical records of patients with pancreatic diseases were reviewed and all data regarding basic demographic, clinical, radiological and biochemical status wererecorded. OBJECTIVE -To evaluate the outcome of endoscopic drainage of pseudocyst of panceas. -In a patient of pseudocyst of pancreas (Alcohal induced pancreatitis) drainage of the cyst by Endoscopic Cystogastrostomy was performed. The bulging cyst wall was punctured endoscopically under vision and the opening was enlarged resulting the drainage of cyst in the stomach. RESULT -Follow up ultrasound done to evaluate the cyst showed complete disappearance of the cyst. There was no recurrence in follow up period. CONCLUSION -It shows that endoscopic drainage of pseudo cyst of Panceas is an effective and simple procedure. Though it needs a larger series to confirm the results. Introduction. Proinflammatory cytokines are involved in the pathogenesas of acute pancreatitis. The value of serum levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFu), interleukin-1 beta (IL-113), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interleukm-8 (IL-8) in predicting the outcome of acute pancreatltis was evaluated. Patients and Methods. In 50 patients with acute pancreatttis, the serum concentrations of TNFcL, IL-I~, IL-6, IL-8 and C-reactive protein (CRP) were determined on days 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 after admission. A severe attack was defined as one that was comphcated by (i) local pancreatic complications (necrosis, abscess or pseudocyst); (ii) systemic complications (acute resptratory msuffictency, renal failure, heart fadure, septicemia); or (iii) death. Results. Serum concentrations of IL-I~, IL-6, IL-8 and CRP on days 1 to 7 were significantly htgher in pattents with severe pancreatms than in patients with mild pancreatms. Patients w=th severe attacks had significantly elevated serum TNFcL concentrations on days 1 to 3 compared with those w(th mild attacks, but not on days 4 and 7. The median peak value of TNFr IL-1 [(3, IL-6 and IL-8 was reached on day 1, in contrast to the median peak of CRP, which was reached on day 2. Using cutoff levels of 12 pg/mL for TNFr 1 pg/mL for tL-I~, 400 pg/mL for IL-6, 100 pg/mL for IL-8 and 12 mg/dL for CRP, the accuracy rates for detecting severe pancrea(ms were 72%, 82%, 88%, 74% and 80%, respectively on day 1 and 78%, 74%, 80%, 76% and 80%, respectwely on day 2. Serum CRP on day 2 s=gmficanUy correlated wtth IL-6 on days 1 and 2 (r=0.62 and 0.85, respectively), but not wtth TNFct, IL-1 q3 or IL-8 on days 1 and 2. Conclusion. Among the promfta~nmatory cytokines, IL-6 =s the most useful parameter for early predmt~on of the prognosis of acute pancreatms. HM. Chert, Mt-[. Shyr*, ~ Chen. Department of Surgery and Anesthesia*, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Tatpei, Taiwan Introduction. We sought to evaluate the possible role of autonomic nervous system (ANS) on the cardiovascular response and regional flood flow (P,.BF) in the progression of acute pancreatitis and endotoxemic shock. Power spectral analysis of systemic arterial blood pressure (SAP) signals was used to evaluate the ANS funcuons Materials and Methods, Acute pancreatitis was induced by intravenous infusion of caerulein (15 p,g/kg/hr) in male Sprague-Dawley rats (200--250 gin). Endotoxemic shock was induced by intravenous infusion of lipopolyssacharide (Ecoli: 0111 94, 15 mg/kg/hr) Control animals received the same volume of normal saline. The nght femoral artery was cannulated to measure SAP and subsequently its spectrum continuously. A laser doppler flowmetry (LDF) probe was attached on the pancreattc surface to measure the relative changes of capillary blood flow Results. The activity of low and very low frequency (LF and VLF) components of SAP spectra decreased concomitantly m the early stage (1-2 Iv after caerulein or lipopolyssacharide infusion) which associated with decrease ofgBF in the pancreas The activaty of high and moderate frequency (HF-MF) increased However, in both experimental condit,ons, total autonormc activity (VLF-LF-MF~-HT) increased with parasympathetic deteriorauon (LF-VLF/VLF*LF+MT-HT) Conclusions. The deterioration of ANS function and systemic vasomotor tone were similar and correlated w~th rmcroorculatory insufficiency m the early stage of both caerulem pancreautis and endotoxemic shock Ti"us research was supported by a grant ('NSC87-2314-BI82A-033) from Nat,onal Science Council. Talwan. H-YChen, C-G leer, T-K Yuan. C-C Juan, H-W Lo, JS Chen*, K-T Lee*, P-C Sheen* Institute of Gastroenterology, Yuan's General Hospital, * Division of HBP Surgery, Kaohsiung Medical College Hospital. Kaohslung, TAIWAN Introduction. The term of primary pancreatohthias=s ts the calculi located and formed in the mare pancreatic duct or their branches. These stones were whitish and hard rn consistency which were commonly found and reported from the literature. If the stones, especially multiple calctum bilirubmate stones from bile dcutal stones migrating into the pancreatic duct called secondary pancreatolithiasls Patients and Methods 1. Pnmarv tvoe " There were 12 patients, male in nine and female =n three. All primary type patients had a history abdominal pain for 2.5 -17 years, alcohol consumption (83.33%) and diabetes (75%). There were five (41.67%) underwent operation: lateral pancreatico-lelunostomy (Puestow procedure) tn four and Whtppte operation in one patients. Two patients (16 67%) were found wrth pancreatic cancer confirmed one dunng operation and another one by post--operabve choledochosccp~c hthotomy for removal of retained stones m the pancreatm duct 2 Secondary type There were three patients of multtple bde duct stones: two treated wtth sphmcteroplasty and septactorny and another one treated by exc:saon of choledochal cyst with Roux-en-Y anastomos~s Results. 1 Pnmary type Follow-up study revealed pare were improved tn three (60%) after operation and 50% in non.-operattve patients treated by medicine The diabetes condition was of non-s~gn~ficant ~mprovement. Both pancreatolithmsls with pancreatic cancer were died wtthm six months after diagnosis. 2. Secondary Woe All stones natures were caloum bfl~rubmate tn nature and post--operatwe course was unevently but one with retained stones Conclusion. The pathogenes=s, and stone's nature and treatment of pnmary and secondary pancreatic stone were absolute different. The secondary type was brown stones m~grated from bde ducts esoecml ~n case of abnormal junction of pancreatic and bde ducts Dept. of General surgery, Univ. of Ul~ 89075 Ulm, Germany, Introducfien. Significant correladens between the systemic concentrations of ;,R~rrrmatory mediators and severity of acute pancreatkis (AP) were demonstrated. In a prospective clinical study, we have evaluated the concentrations of i~flammatory mediators in peripancreafic fluid (PF) and their relation to the developement of systemic complications of AP. Patients and methods. 19 patients (pat.) with necrotizing AP were included. The medians of R~nson and APACHE H scores were 6 (0-10) and 13 (4-22) points, respectively. Pancreatic necrosis was proeved infected in 9 pat.(47.36%). A~ites and (PF) were collected through fine-needle aspiration or intraoperatively. We measured Endotoxin (etox), using LAL-Test; Tumor necrosis factor (TNF-a) and interleukin-6 (IL6), u~ng an ELISA-tecfiniqun. Results. 1-The local concentrations of above parameters did not correlate with Ranson and APACHE 1]" scores on the first 48 hours. 2-Only etox in PF could s~g~ificantly differentiate between pat. with CT finding of pancreatic necrosis <30% of pancreatic paranchyma (7 pat., Median =0 16 EU/ml) and pat. with pancreatic necrosis >50% (5 pat., Median= 1.5 EU/ml) (P=0.02). 3-Etox in PF was signiflcandy higher in pat. who died. (I 1 Pat.. Median=l.5 v. 0.11 EU/ml, P=0 006). 4-local values of above mediators could act significantly differentiate between pat. who complicated with renal (7 pat.), or pulmonary, insufficiency (17 pat.), sepsis (10 pat.) and sepsis like syndrome (7 pat.) and pat. without these complications. 5-No significant differences of concemrations of above mediators between pat. v,ath sterile and infected necrosis. 6-Etox-and IL-6-values locally were significantly higher than their values in plasma measured on the same time [Median Etox (EU/ml): PF=I.5, Plasma=O. 12, P=0 009, Median IL-6 (p~ml). PF=2788, Plasma=446. P=O.O005)]. No significant difference for TNF-a. Conclusion. The concentration~adients of the measured parameter between plasma and PF show that the retropedtoaeum represents an ellectwe barfer, in that AP compartimenulized. The course of AP will be mainly, determined with the s'ystemtc reacraon, that does not cerrelate with the locol event. Introduction Acute pancreatitis =s caused by autodigesUon of pancreatic tissue induced by activated proteolytic enzyme, whose pathogenesis is not still completely understood. Recent evidence suggests that oxygen free radicals play an important role in pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis. In thin expenments, we evaluated the role of oxygen radicals and the effect of small molecular weight ant~oxidants (rebamipide. N-acetyl-cysteme, allopurinol, I}-carotene) m the development of cerulem-mduced acute pancratitis. Methods The male rats weighting 180-200g were diwded into six groups: Group I; iv infusion of a physiological saline for 3 5 hours; Group II; iv infusion of cerulem(lOl~g/kg/hr) for 3.5 hours; Group III, IV, V, VI were treated with rebamip=de(100mg/kg, ip), N.acetyl-cysteme(2OOmglkg,~v), allopunnol(2Omglkglhr, concomitant with cerulem), and !3-carotene (50mg/kg, ip), respectively. At the end of expenment, blood and pancreas were taken. Amylase actiwty in serum was assayed and pancreatic weight was measured. As indices of oxidative stress, malondialdehyde(MDA), glutathione perox~dase(Gpx), and total glutath~one(GSH) was determined. Histolog~c examination of the pancreas was done after H-E stain. Results Cerulem administration resulted in significant increase in serum amylase act~wty and pancreatic MDA. but not Gpx. The GSH content =n pancreatic tissue dramatically decreased. Pretreetment of N-acetyt-cysteme stgmficantly decreased hyperamylasemla by cerulem and maintained GSH ~n pancreas but MDA was slightly decreased. Also N-acetyl-cysteme ameliorated h~stolog~cal damage as well. Allopurlnol and I~-carotene attenuated hyperamylasem=a by cerulem, but hmtolog~cally there was no difference from control Conclusion N-acetyl-cysteme =s an effective antlox~dant that ameliorates the hyperamylasemm and tissue damage ~n carulem induced acute pancreat~t=s and the effect of anhoxtdant may need an evaluation of poss,ble therapeutic agent against acute pancreat~t=s. Shue-Shian Chiou. Chung-Huang Kuo. Cht-Sin Changchmn. Gastroenterol. Dept.. Chang-Gtmg Memorial Hospital. Kaohslung, Taiwan. Introduction. Pancreatic mucmous cysnc rumors of the pancreas iMCT) are rare diseases accounting tbr less than 10 % of all pancreatic cysts. Despite increased clinical awareness of this enUT, it continues to be confused with other panereauc cystic tumors. Accurate diagnosis is Important because of the different treatment options for benign and malignant lesions. Patients and Method. A review was performed of all patmnts with a histologic diagnosis of MCT surgically treated at our hospital between 1986 and 1997. 5 cystadenoma(CYMA) and 2 cystadenocarcinoma(CYCA) were. collected. The male:female ratio was 2:5 with a mean age of 5t .6 years (25 to 80 years). The mean follow-up time was 2.5 years (1.5 months to 4.8 years). Clinical Information. Site: 4 CYMA arised in the tat 94 The 2 CYCA and the other CYMA(3.5 cm m size) arised in the head. Size: 3.5-16 cm (mean 9.7 cm) in CYMA-5 and 8 cm in CYCA. Symptoms: The 3 nosed in the head presented with progressive jaundice. 3 CYMA arised in the tad presented with vague left upper quadrant pain and the other one presented for awareness of a mass..tssoc:ated disease: No patient was found to have diabetes mellitus or other major organ diseases. Comphcatton: t CYMA complicated with splenic vein thrombos*s and abscess in the tumor. Laboratory data The serum amylase was normal in the 4 CYMA checked. The serum CEA was normal in the 3 CYMA checked and mildly elevated (7 15ng/ml) m one CYCA. On the contrary, the serum CA19-9 ~as normal in the 2 CYCA. but elevated m 213 of the CYMA. ERCP was done in 2 ictenc patients (1 in each group). Both showed dilated pancreatic duct without communication with the tumors. ECHO failed to display the head tumor of the 2 Ictenc patients pertbrmed, but only dllared P and B ducts v, ere shown. Cystic rumor was seen in the tour talt tumors performed. CT detected all tumors but failed to make definite diagnosis preoperatr, ely. Whipple procedure was performed for the 3 tcterlc panents, distal pancreatectomy for I and plus splenectomy tbr 3 CY. The presence in the blood the factors of the pruteolytic enzymes inactivation are the one of the factors of the pancreas defense, a2-/V~cmglobulin and ~l-antitrypsin are the two major antiproteases in the plasma. These antiproteases belong to the acute phase proteins 1I type, which induced by the IL-6 and [L-6-Hke cytokines. Due to this, the serum levels of aTmacmglohulin, t~l-antitrypsin and [L-6 were measured in 32 patients with acute pancreatitis. Venous blood was sampled on the Hrst, third, seventh and fourteenth days after admission. The o~z-macro~tobulin level was below the normal value in most patients, while at-antitrypsin levels significantly exceeded it. The [L-6 levels were increased in all patients also. The levels of tx~macmgJobulin. ~l-antitrypsin and [k-6 were significantly highest in patients ~aded as severe (APACHE [[ score more than 7) compared with mild ~mlp. ~ximum rise ,)f [L-6 was noted in the first day after admission. The peak of cq-antitr~sin was observed on the third day after admission. Maximum decline of ~x T macroglobulin was observed 3-7 day after admission. Due to the low levels of ~x2-macroglobulln, the inhibitory capacity of remaining ct. I,n~oduction. Major features of pancreatic secretion stimulated by a meal depend on intestinal phase mechanisms. However. an mtrajejunal (i.j.) meal infusion Is widely used for the treatment of lm'lammatory pancreauc diseases, when the resting of the gland is desired. Thus study was undertaken to compare the effects of an intragastric (i.g.) and an ij. complete fluid (Lundh) rest meal on pancreatic enzyme secretion. Petienu and Method. Eight men (mean age: 43, range 31-48 yrs) free from pancreatic disease were studied. Pancreatic secretion was measured via a multiple lumen tube by aspiration of the duodenal juice After a fasung period, the Lundh test meal was placed in the stomach or the upper jejunum. After the i.g. administration of the test meal, the aspirated duodenal juice was relrL~sed into the jejunum. The effect of atropine inluston (0.5 /~g/kg/h) on the pancreanc enzyme secretion was studied. The pancreatic amylase, u'ypsin and lipase outputs were determined. The plasma levels of cholecystokmm (CCK) and of gasmn were measured by bloassay and radioimmunoassay, respectively. Results. The trypsin, amylase and lipase secretions increased significamly after either an i.g. or an i.j. test meal intake. The trypsin. amylase and lipase outputs were significantly decreased during the i.j. perfiaston as compared to i.g. administration (54.2__,6 1. 68,7 5 and 4.17.*.0.3 vs 80 4 99.4 2 and 11.9 kIU. respecnveiy). The gasmn levels increased significamly after i.g. (20 3-,-1.4 pg,ml), but remained unchanged after i.j. administration (16.4 pg/ml) The CCK release attained its maximum 40 and 60 rain following the ~ g. and l j. test meal. respectively (6 24 and 4.12_+0.6 pM). However. the integrated CCK release was sigmficamly lower during the i.j administration as compared to t.g. perfl~sion (285.4 1 vs 366.5 pM*mm). An atropine infi~sion s~gmficantly reduced the 1.g. and 1.j. zest meal-sumuiated enzyme outputs. Conclusion. An i.j, administered meal sumulates the pancreatic cot}me secretion, but thts effect is significantly lower than that which occurs on i.g administranon. The t.j. meal-snmulaied secretion of pancreauc enzymes ts subject to both cholinero.lc and peptidergic regulation. The deficiency of gastrm and the delayed7 and decreased CCK release are beheved to account for the reduced enzyme output This form of nument administration should not be applied m illnesses where pancreatic stimulanon is undesirable. Introduction. It has been recently reported that mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are rapidly activated by cholecystok~nm (CCK) in rat pancreas both in vitro and in rive (Da.bnawski A. et al., J. Biol Chem. 1996, 271, 5686) . It ts known that ROS play an important rote in the pathogenests of acute pancreat~tis induced by supramax~mal stimulation with CCK analogue -caerutein. The aim of our study was to evaluate whether MAPKs are activated by ROStn pancreaUc acini. Methods. The activity of both forms of MAPK, p~2map k and p44mapk was determined in isolated rat pancreatm actnar cells by means of Western-blotting, with the use of highly specific antibody which recognizes active, dually phosphorylated MAPK. Acini were stimulated with different concentrations of ROS ~onors -hydrogen peroxide (H202), menadione (MND) or irradiated wtth UV-light. Results. Incubation of acint with H202 rapidly and dose<lependently activated both forms of MAPK. Within 5 rain tt induced 8-fold increase of p42map k activity. At 30 rain p42map k activity reached a max=mum (12-fold increase), remained at a similar level until 60 mtn, and then signtficently declined. At 120 mtn it was only slightly elevated (2-fold) above the control. Incubation of actor with superox=de donor -MND also induced activation of both forms of MAPK. A shght activation (1.5-fold) was observed at 5 rain, and then =t slowly ~ncreased reaching a maximum at 120 mJn, when 7-fold increase of p42map k activity was noted. The actwtty remained elevated (4-fold) even at 180 m=n irradiation with UV-light caused a rapid but weak ~ncrease of 042map k activity with a maximum noted at 30 m=n Conclusion. ROS strongly activate MAPKs in pancreatic actnar cells. It may be of importance in the pathogenests of acute pancreat~t~s. Methods" The records of 68 patients surgically treated for APN were retrospectively reviewed to determine the influence of the time of surgery in the final outcome of the surgical treatment. Patients vath pancreatic abscess and pseudocysts were excluded Results The etiology of acute pancreatltis was biliary in 25. alcohol inl6 and postoperative pancreatius m 9 Proportion of males to females was 3 $ 1 and the average age was 46 years The APACHE [I score was calculated in all patients and it was higher than 9 in 48% (n=33) Thirty-three patients were operated before 14 days of illness onset and 35 after the second week of onset, at the appearance of evidences of infected necrosis The APACHE II scores for both ~oups were not different. The surgical procedure consisted of necrosectomy plus external drmnage Rr for persistent sepsis occurred in 87 8% (n=29) m the early operated patients and in 34 3% (nil2) in the delayed treated patients Infection of the necrotic pancreatic tissue, investigated m 61 patients, was present in 83 6% (n=5l), 72 5% of which were monomtcrobial and was relatec :o early laparotomy in 57% (n=29) The overall mortality rate was 26 4% In patients w~th severe pancreautis (APACHE H >9) undergontg delayed necrosectomy mortality rate was 18 70 compared to 76 5% mortality assocmted to early laparotomy Conclusion h ts concluded that necrosectomy delayed unnl the second ',',~k of illness onset may achieve a low mortality rate m patmnts with ird"r pancreatic necrosis Sphincter of Oddl Dysfuncaon {SOD) has been reported as a cause of acute recutrem imncreauus (ARP). Eadmcup]c or sur~caJ division of the sphincter was able to ttcusrt~c*s m rdm majonn." of these poaem.s. Ncverd~r pancr~uc ~c~ero-tom0." may. be followed by. were complicanons such as bleeding and nea-otmmg pancamanx C[osmdium Bntafiauta A Io,an ts a potent iatubnor of the relea~ of ac~.'lcholine fz~nt nerve ead~ng.s.lts v.~ m esophageal achalassa has been r m reducing lower es~hageal s'pamcter p'essurr and the applicaoon m paatmta with spluacter of Odd~ .d~ff~cuon Ms been mggcs1~L Aim of d~s study, was to =vaJuate the efficac? of ~c beadmum toxin mJecuon (IBTI) m pmienta vmh ARP Fwc pauents (4. females, l male,, mean age 36 4) *uffermg from ARP and SOD (dlagnused t~. the mean of a pathological US-Se~un to*t) emoted the study. Two had poor eadasco~c 'rahab/ qYau~erotomy v, qthout aw dimcaJ benefit, m rive cases the endoscopic anernp~ of dmdia$ the papilla faded. After an reformed cor~nt was oi~am=d paoer~ were sub-mzue~l to mwas#macttmc mjecoon of 166 U of Bondmum toxin Dyspon ([P~EN) m four mjr around the guneztauc s1~cter ~a a ~lemthentp" needle, passed t~'ungh the oporam, e chaund of a dmx~no~ope. None of the pauen~ pre~nied pain not em~'.' mr r foIMwmg the pnx~dure and m two ca.~s ~.~th ~ pm~cttaoc M.]x.:tm'ymaerata. te2um a~,'tasc and hpase drama~r fell afl~ the crcannem. The Pane~L5 were followed al I and 6 months a.f~r LBTI for ~'mptoms and ~bnutted to US-Se~x,'tm ~:aluauon. In one c~ the endo:~o~a ~ the mjr too s'uperfictai (tawamucosal) The same patient one month after referred a new episode of punch=me !ram and the US-Snore'an roll d~moostrated a delayed pancttanc duct emp~.~ng Thus the p=UCm was fftnted x~th endoscopic 5phmcterolom,, of beth the b|[tary and pancrmac ~r. In all the other 4 parents US-S reversed to normal at I month foltov,-up. Three !macros completed the first 6 month.* follow-.up and the' all reported the complete (~3"qOI or a SX/~'annni r~Ch/CUOII (one) of r,'m;~oms and US-Secrtnn test sall shov, md nonnaJ ~n4in~ In conclusion eveJ't tf p~lunary, out data show that [BT] tS a safe proctdm~, and seems io be effe~uve on co~g SOD m .-L~LP paac"nLs If Mnger follow-up data will confu'm also an et~c~c,," on cono'ollmtc ~ptoms. ~'R may be pt'ot0osed as a ~alid aJtmmam, e to 5phmctemtntrrv tn pauems ~th -XRP ~ t.lus stage tt may be suggested far them cuses "~ath a dafficuit or contraind*cate endo-scuptc approach to tt~ papdta (I e. da'=fictdi ~UO~ minor palmtl,x paaents ~,.'tth se~ert coagulation pt'~4r Futthr since the iovan as a median length of acuon of one } ca.r IET[ be also s'uggested, as tn the pust cedo~opic stentmg, as an ex-adju~anntms tcra~ra~" tn order to evaluate the tlTe~ of rtducmg panc'r~uc outflov, obs'tnmtton_ Severe acute pancreatitis may be protracted and some form of nutritional support is frequently required to maintain the patient's status. Recent work has suggested that enteral feeding may reduce the magnitude of the inflammatory response. Insertion of nasojejunal tubes in the patient with severe acute pancreatifis carries procedure-associated risks and involves both delay and inconvenience. Therefore, we undertook a Phase I study to assess the safety of nasogastric feeding in patients with severe acute pancreatitis. 27 patients admitted to our unit with severe pancreatitis received nasogastric feeding within 48 hours. Aetiology was identified as cholelithiasis (20 patients), ethanol (5) and miscellaneous (2). The median Glasgow score was 3 (range 1-7), APACHE II score 8 (1-28) and C-reactive protein concentration 195.5 m~l (79-385). Seventeen patients had pancreatic and / or peripancreatic necrosis. Nineteen patients underwent ERCP, five necrosectomy for infected necrosis, and three patients internal drainage of a pseudocyst. Ventilatory support was necessary in nine patients, five of whom also required inotropic support with two also having renal dialysis. There were three deaths (11.1%). The feed was well tolerated m all but three patients. There was no evidence of clinical or biochemical deterioration on commencing nasogastric feeding. [t would appear that earlx nasogastric feeding in severe acute pancreatitis ts safe. well tolerated and worthy of further study. Interteukln 12 (IL-12) was proved to induce a potent ant=tumor and antlmetastasis ~mmune response ~n different models. It has been also reported that IL-12 possesses antf-ang~ogenesis effect. The aim of this study is to clanfy the antl-angtogenesis effect of IL-12 on human pancreatic carcinoma using a wtal microscope system. Furthermore, we ~nvestigated the efficacy of tL-t2 Iocat delivery system using genetically engineered fibroblasts. Materials and Methods. We used severe combined immunedeficient mice (SCID). Skinfold Chamber models was used to evaluate tumor growth and angiogenes=s after implantation of PK-t (pancreatic carcinoma cells) or IL-12 genetically engineered PK-1 (IL-12/PK-1). Local and systemic levels of IL-12 and IFN gamma were measured by ELISA. Images of neovascularizatlon were recorded through intravital m~croscopy and analyzed off-line. The effects of anti-IFN gamma and anti-lL-12 antibodies were investigated. Anti-as~alo GM1 antibody was rejected to block the natural ~mmumty. We implanted PK-1 w=th e~ther w~ld type fibroblasts (NIH/3T3) or IL-12 transfected fibroblasts (IL-12/3T3) and compared in wvo tumor growth. Immunohtstochemestry was performed. Although there was no difference in growth curve m wtro between PK-1 and IL-12/PK-1, the growth of tL-12/PK-1 was inhJb=ted significantly as compared with PK-1 ~n vivo. Skmfold chamber studies showed a strong inhibition on tumor angiogenesls of IL-12/PK-l. IL-12 antibodies admrmstration allowed tumor development after I L-12/PK-1 implantation. Tumor growth of PK-1 was also prevented by co-moculatton with IL-12/3T3. No side effect was observed. Conclusion. It =s demonstrated that antl-angtegenesis effect of IL-12 prevented the growth of pancreatic cancer. Local delivery system of IL-12 ~s expected to be a new strategy for pancreatic cancer. Introduction The extremely poor prognosis of pancreatic cancer urges us to develop a new modality of treatment for this disease. Recently, angmgenesis has been proved to play a crucial role in the growth, invasion and metastasis of various kinds of tumors, in this study, the angiogenic properties of eleven human and one Syrian hamster pancreatic cancer cell lines were analyzed and experimental anti-anglogenic therapeutics were adoped in vivo. Methods / Results. The conditioned media of these cell lines promoted the proliferation of endothelial cells in vitro. Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses revealed that all twelve pancreatic cancer cell line express vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and with a high frequency of overexpression (7 out of 12) w=thout any hypoxlc conditions. The hamster pancreattc cancer cells also expressed acidic fibroblast growth factor, transforming growth factor-,? and an excess amount of transforming growth factor-a. TNP-470, one of the first generation anti-angmgenic agent, inh=blted the growth of syngenmc subcutaneous tumors of the hamster cell line although ~t did not have a direct cytotoxic effect ~n vitro. The histological secttons of the tumors revealed that the amount of interstitial tissue and vessel densities (p<0.05 vs control) of the treatment group were significantly decreased w=th detenorated cancer cell v,abdittes. Conclusion. These data suggest that ang=ogenes~s plays an tmportant roles in the tumor growth of pancratic cancer and the ant=-anigogenic treatment can be a new powerful med=cal treatment modalittes against thrs fatal dtsease. Introduction. The combination therapy of all-~ans-retinoic acid (ATRA) and Interferon 7" (IFN "r ) inhibits growth in some cell lines. In pancreatic cancer cells, this effect has not been investigated so far. Methods. Three established human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell lines, PT45, Colo 357 and A818-1, were used. They were treated with ATRA (1 ~. M), IFN 7" (5U/ml) and the combination of these two agents. After the continuous ~'eatment for four days, changes of cell growth, morphology and immunocytochemistry (CEA, CA19-9, p53, Bcl-2 and Ki-67) were studied. Detection of apoptosis was also carried out at day 4. Results. Cell growth was inhibited in all three cell lines followed in order by the combination b'eatment, IFN 7" and ATRA. Synergistic effect was seen only in A818-1. Morphological changes were found in all cell lines, especially after the treatment with IFN 7 and the combination. They included increases of m~crovilti or mttochondria. Coio 357 showed increasing Ki-67 labeling index after each treatment. However, the other cell lines did not reveal any changes of immunocytochemistry. Apoptosis was detected in all the cell lines. Despite possessing mutant p53, PT45 disclosed prominent apoptosis. Th~s indicates the existence of p53-unrelated apoptosis in the pancreas cancer cell lines. Conclusion. The comb=nation therapy of ATRA and IFN 7" may be an effective strategy for pancreatic carcinoma. Introduction. On the basis of light-microscopuc reconstruction of pancreatic tissue, Boci<man reported that the ductules and acim were arranged in a complex, branching system of tubules, wh,ch anastomose and end blindly, whereas Takahash~ ctaJmed that there was no anastomosis among the intercalated ducts and acim. However, it is impossible to recognize the three-dimens~onal structure of the mtra-acinar secretory canaliculus and the peripheral intercalated duct by light m~croscopy, since their lumina are less than 1 ,,~ m in diameter. Method. The common hepatic duct of the ratwas ligated proximal to its entry into the pancreas, and the common b~le-pancreatlc duct was also hgated near its junction with the duodenum. A specimen of pancreatic tissue taken one day after ligation was fixed in buffered 10% formaldehyde solution, embedded in styrene, and serial sections 0.5 ,#. m thick were cut and observed by scanning electron microscopy (a new method devised by Naora). The intra-acinar secretory canalicuh and the peripheral intercalated ducts in each section were then reconstructed. Results. In some aclnL two intra-aclnar secretory canaliculi joined a canaliculus, which ended blindly. A few non-branched intercalated ducts interconnected two adjacent intraoaclnar secretory canaliculi. However, all the intra-aclnar secretory canallculi ended blindly close to the basement membrane. Conclusion. The intercalated ducts and the ]ntra-ac~nar secretory r are arranged ~n a complex branching system, but the latter, wh=ch are the most penpheral pancreatic duc;s, end blindly. Studi -Padova -ITALYthtroduction Ki-67 antigen allows to determine the proporoon of prol=feratmg tumour cells and ~t ~s a useful prOgnostic =ndicator for several turnouts such as lung, breast cammoma, NK lymphomaa and melanoma. The aims of our study were to evaluate 1 the expression of th=s anbgen tn pancreatic cancer, 2. the correlation of Ki-67 expression w=th the h~stolog=cal features of the turnout and the outo~me of pabents Patients and Methods. The surg=cal speclmecs of ductal pancreatic carcinoma were collected from 14 pabents who underwent to radical surgery, rn three of them the lymph nodal metastases were also evaluated. 8 b~opsy were obtained from liver metastases =n subjects submttted to palhat~on 5 spec=mens of normal pancreas were obtained from organs donors (control group) KJ-67 antigen was determined ~n pancreatic tissue by =mmunoh=stochem=stry (MIB 1, DBA Italsa) and expressed as percentage of pos=tnrely stained nuclet/total number of nucte= counted. Ki-67 antigen was related to patients survwal (< 12 months=slaort-term survivors and >12 months=long-term surveyors), stage, archttectural and cytolog2cat gredmg and vascular, lymph node, penneural invasion by Student's t test for unpalrod data and hnear regress=on Results. Antzbedy binding was only rarely (<5%) observed ~n the nucle= of normal pancreas The percentage of pancreatic cancer pos=tJve cells showed a mean value of 12.8% =n pnmary turnout, in 2 lymph nodes the percentage of cellular nucle~ stained was h~gher than ~n the corresponding pnmary tumour, whereas the percentage was similar =n the third case. All [~ver metastases ware pos=tlve for KJ-67 expression, The KJ-67 staining =n pancreabc cancer tissue (mean 1;'.8%) was lower than in the metastases (mean 32 5%) (p=0 02). Sign=ficantly tower values were found m long-term survqvors (3 8%) as compared to the short-term surveyors (18 1%) (p=0 008) The express=on of K=-67 was not correlated with ammtectural and cytolog=cal grading A pos=bve relatzon was demonstrated between the express=on of this anugen and stage (p<0 05), lymph node state (p=0 04) node penneural =nvas=on (p=0 0001) Conclusions They are not conf'med to the pancreas where they promote tassue injury but can also be observed at other organs (e.g. colon, lung, hver) conmbutmg to multlorgan dysfiancnon. One me&ator believed to play a key role at the pathogenesxs of these mlcroca'culatory disorders is endothehn and we have previously demonstrated that endothelat receptor blockade slgnzficantly reduces mortality at acute necronzmg pancreanus (A~N'P) at the rat. The aim of the present study was to further characterize the effect of a specific endothelin-1 receptor antagonist CET-RA) on mtcrocu'cu]aUon both at and outside the pancreas Methods: ANP was induced at 16 rats by a standardized attraductal atfuston of bile salt fo[lwed by iv cerulem over 6 hrs. Thereafter, animals were randomized for therapy wlth ET-RA (40rag/ks LU-135252) or NaC10.9% (vol.equw). After 24 hrs of flu:d resuscztataon (6ml/kg/hr Panger's lactate) animals were relaparotomlzed for attrav~tal mlcroscoplc determmataon of capillary, blood flow (CBF) and density (CapDens), leucocyte-endothelial mteracnon (LR) and capdlary permeability (CapPerm) in the pancreas, the mesentery and the colonic mucosa using fluoresceat labelled erythrocytes and leucocytes or the plasma marker FITC dextran 150. Analysls was performed using computer-assisted teehmques. Addmonal monitonng included cardloresptratory and renal parameters and fluid sequestranon atto the third space (data not shown) Conclusions: Endothehn receptor blockade significantly improves various mlcroclrculaatry parameters not only in the pancreas but also in the mesemery and colon. Thls is at accordance with our pre;'lOUS observation that endothehn receptor blockade improves outcome at the same model of ANP by counteracnng systemic mlcroclrculatory disorders, pamcularly caplllar'y leakage which is believed to conmbute to early organ dysfunction in experimental as well as in severe human pancreanns The slg'm/~cance of these findings is underlined by the obse~'atlon that mlcroclrculaatr3: disorders could be obser,.ed at the presence of stable systemic cardloresplratory parameters and up to 48 hours after pancreantls mducnon in rats. suggesting that endothehn receptor blockade may even be e ffecw,'e when therapy is delayed IFOSFAMIDE CHEMOTHERAPY FOR ADVANCED PANCREATIC CARCINOMA -T. Fujiki TM, K. Yamaguchi, K. Yamamoto, S. Akazawa, Y. Kanda, K. Futatsuki, Y. Suda 2~ 1) Dept. of Gastroenterology, 2) Dept. of Abdominal Surgery, Saltama Cancer Center Hospital, Saitama, Japan. Introduction. Standard chemotherapy for pancreatic carcinoma has not been established, lfosfamide, an analogue of cyclophosphamide, has therapeutic activity against a wide variety of human malignancies. We treated the pancreatic carcinoma in a phase II trial of ifosfamide. Patients and Methods. Patients with histologically or radiographically proven measurable locally advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas were entered in the tdal. Ifosfamide was administered at a dose of 1.2 to 1.5/m2/d by intravenous infumon dunng 60 minutes for 5 consecutive days every 3 to 4 weeks. Mesna and N-acetylcystein were not used for prevention of hemorrhagic cystitis due to receive with adequate hydration and urine alkalization. Results. Twenty patients were entered into the study between August 1992 and January 1996. There were five men and fifteen women with a median age of 63 years (range, 43 to 77 years). Results achieved were as follows : PR m one patient, NC in 9 patients, and PD in 10 patients. The response rate was 5 % and the median survival hme was 17 weeks. Toxic effects included anorexia (80 %), nausea and vomtting (65 %), alopecia (20 %), mental disturbance (20 %), granulocytopenia (20 %), thrombocytopema (5 %), and no renalurological disturbance. Conclusion. Ifosfamide was not effective for chemotherapy of advanced pancreatic carcinoma. which almost equally bhads to retinmc acid receptor (RAR) a, ~3 and ?", inlmbits pancreatic carcinoma cell growth. In this study, we used a novel PAR ot-selective retinoic acid (TAC-101) as a probe to invesu~te the molecular mechanism of retinoid receptor function and found that TAC-101, which selectively brads to RAR a, has the ~'owth-inlub~tory effect on pancreatic carcinoma cells. To obtain informattons re~xding the growthinhibitory effect of TAC-101, the induction of apoptosJs and the intubition of cell cycle progression were analyzed, and furt~ea~ore, the e~ression of Gl-phase cell cycle-regulating "factors (p21 ,avi, p27~,tr= and the retinoblastoma gone product (pRB)) and thytrudytate synthase (TS), one of S-phase ~ene products regulated bv E2F were studied. Material's and Methods. TA(2-101, molecular formula C20H27NO3Si2, was kindly gifted from Taiho Pharmaceutical CO.. LTD. and used in the studies ret~orted here. The cell growth inhibition mediated by TAC-101 in foutpanernat~c carcinoma cell lines (BxPC-3. MIAPaCa-2. (~FPAC-I, and AsPC-I) was determined by measuring the number of ceils using Coulter counter. Induction ofapoptosis was confirmed by DNA get electrophoresis and Hoechst staining Cell ~.wcle progression and levels of e~ress~on of p21, P27. pRB and TS proteins were analysed by flow cvtometry and Western blotting, respectivelv. " " Results. (1) Growth inhibi'tton bv TAC-101 was observed in a time-and dose-dependent manner in three'cell lines. BxPC-3. MIAPaCa-2. and CFPAC-1, whereas AsPC-ces showed no mhtb]tory effect. Table. The inhibitory effect of TAC-101 after a 6 dav incubation period. BxPC-3 MIAPaCa-2 CFPAC-I AsPC-I ICs0 (,~ M) 13 -'-4 24--0 40=7 >100 (2) In TAC-101 senstt,ve B~C-3 cells. DNA laddermgand fragmentation were observed at 24. 4"8 h after TAC-t01 treatment with 20 ,~ .'ql (3) In BxPC-3 cells, the populatton of G lphase cells markedly increased at 48 h after treatment Icontrol. 35.3 % andTAC-10I. 81 6 o/,). (4) In BxPC-3 cells, a strong increase of p27 protein was detected at 24 h. and a moderate increase of p21 protem was observed at 9 h after treatment. (5) The retinoblastom'a protein showed h~pophosphor~lated tbrm at 24 h after treatment. (6) A decrease of TS pro'tern was also ;:letected at 24 h. Conclusions. This studv shm~s that EAR a-selecu~e retinoic acid induces an aooptottc cell death andoroduces a GI cell-cycle arrest by upregulatmtz p'17 and p21 protems andbv preventing, pRB" phosphorv[atton. and leads'to growth inhtbiuon in pancre';tic carcmom'a cells. Introduction. The extremely poor prognosis of the patients w,th pancreatic cancer urges us to develop a new modality of treatments. In order to establish an in vivo transduct~on of therapeutic genes against pancreatic cancer, the transduction effioiencies of newly developed non-viral vectors were examined. Materials and Methods. In vitro transfection efficiency of s=x kinds of cationic liposome and that of a Fusogemc liposome. which is a hybrid vector made from liposome and inactivated Sendal Virus. were examined. Purified expression ptasm=d that consists of LacZ gone driven by an actin promoter or a CEA promoter were used as a reporter gene. LacZ plasmlds were incorporated into the fusogenic liposome and the resulting complexes were purified using glucose gradient. Two CEA pos,tive human pancreatic cancer cell lines. PK-1 and AsPc-1. were transfected in vitro using these liposcmes. After 24 hours incubat,on, the transfectwon efficiency was est,mated by betaalectosidase staining. esults. Catiomc liposomes transfected the reporter gene into the cells at various efficiency ranging from 2 to 20% which differed between the cell lines. For PK-1. the efficiency of each liposome was as follows: SuperFect~': about 20%. DMRIE-C*: about 15%. TRANSFECTAM*: about 9%. CelIFECTIN* about 8%. LIPOFECTIN'D: about 7%, LipofectAMINE~': about 0.2%. Wh,le the Fusogemc liposome uniformly transfected at more than 30~ In vitro and ,n vivo anti-tumor effect of suiczde gene therapy using these vectors will also be discussed. Conclusion. Liposomes are cons,dered to have some super,or aspects to adopt a su,c=de gone therapy ,nto ctintcs because of =ts easy maneuverabdity. In th=s study, although none of the cat,ohio liposomes could not transfect the reporter gene into the pancreatic cancer cell lines effimently, our data suggests that newly developed fusogentc liposome can be a new modahty of treatment against pancreatic cancer Introduction. Octreotide ~s a synthetzc long-acting somatostatm analogue that mhtb=ts exocnne pancreatic secretion. Th,s property has led to ,ts clinfcal use ,n the management of acute pancreat]t=s. Here we report on the use of octreot~de in s~x pat,ents w=th acute pancreat,t~s. Patients. The cause of pancreatitls was alcoholism in 4 patients. cholelith,as=s ,n 1 and complication of endoscop,c sphmcterotomy in 1. Four pattents received correct]de to relieve severe abdominal pa=n and to prevent progress=on to severer pancreatltls Two patients recewed octreotide to treat pseudccysts Management. Octreottde was ,njected subcutaneously ,n a daily dose of 400 or 200/Jg. for 3 to 10 days. All patients were also given a synthetic protease ,nta=bttor gabexelate rues=late (FOY). Result. Four patients became free of severe symptoms 1 or 2 days after starting treatment wath octreotide. In two patients w,th pancreatic pseudocysts, computed tcmograph,c scans showed that the les,ons had d=sappeared or decreased ,n s=ze after octrect=de adm,ntstrat~on No case did progressed to severer disease. Conclusion. In th=s study ,t was difficult to assess the effects of correct]de on the overall course of acute pancreat~t=s, because all patients concurrently recewed a protease mh,bttor However. octreotide markedly ,reproved symptoms and prevented pseudocyst formation Introduction. h has been well documented that male Wistar Boan/Kobon (WBN/Kob) rats spontaneously develop pancreatitis when they are young, and also suffer from a diabetic syndrome before 1 year of age. Lipid peroxidation has been suggested to be a possible r factor In order to elucidate the mechanisms of development of the pancreatic lesions, tissues from WBN/Kob rats of various ages were immunohistochemically investigated for the lipid peroxadation products 4-hydroxy-2-nonanalmodified protein (HNE-P), 4-hydroxy-2-hexenal-modified protein (I-B-IE-F) and malondialdehyde-modified protein (MDA-P). Materials and Methods. Male 4-to 30-week-old WBN/Kob rats were sacrificed to allow sampling of pancreatic tissues, which were fixed in cooled acetone and 10% neutral-buffered formalin and then processed for routine histopathology as well as ]mmunohistochemistry Results. Although no remarkable changes were noted in younger animals, edema, hemorrhage, inflammatory, cell infiltration, fibrosis, vaeuolation of acinar cells and ductular proliferation were observed in the exocrme pancreas at 10, 13 and 15 weeks of age At the ages of 20 and 30 weeks, the lesions had remarkably progressed and deposition of hemostderm was apparent m fibrosmg pancreanc tissue Immunohistochemtcal examinauon for liptd peroxzdation products showed HNE-P and MDA-P to be negative in all pancreatic tissues, but HHE-P was positive in the areas involving atrophy of acmar ceils and fibrosis m the ~slets Conclusion. The results of the present study suggest that hptd peroxtdatton may be parttally involved in the processes underlying spontaneous pancreatms m WBN/Kob rats This work was supported by the Pancreas Research Foundanon of J'apan Pancreatic cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths in Japan as well as in western countries. Molecular mechanisms of pancreatic carcinogenesis remain largely unknown. To study pancrea~c adenocarcinoganasis, allelotypes were studied in pancreal~c cancers. This study led us to find frequent aUehc losses in several chromosome arms mctuding 6q and 12q. Ninety-s=x pancreatic cancers and 20 pancreatic cancer cell lines were analyzed by means of mlcrosatellite analysis, comparatwe genomic hybridization, and fluorescence in srtu hybridization (FISH). To charactanze regions that we focused on, yeast and bactenal artificial chromosomes (YAC and BAC) were employed to construct contigs to clone the deleted regions. Frequent allelic losses were detected tn 1 p, 3p, 4q, 6q, 9p, 12q, 17p, 18q and 21q, and frequent gains were detected m 8q and 20q. Allelic losses in 9p, 17p and 18q could lead to reactivation of p16, p53 and DPC4, respectively. However, none of the candidate genes have yet been known on 6q and 12q. Detaded analysis employing m=crosatellite markers spanning the entlre chromosome arms 6q and 12q revealed three and two regions of common allelic loss on 6q and 12q, respectively, as follows; region A on 6q21 (<l-cM, 38/55, 69%), R on 6q23-q24 (7-cM, 33/55, 60%); C on 6q26 (13-cM, 28155, 51%); D on 12q21 (<l-cM, 27/40, 68%), and E on 12q22-q23.1 (1-cM, 24/40, 60%), FISH analysis confirmed LOHs of these loci in pancreatic cancer cell lines and primary tumors. Regions A on 6q21 and E on 12q22-q23.1 were found to be completely covered wrth single YAC clone of 500-kb and 650-kb =n size, respectively. These regmns were also covered by BAC contzgs, and mutatxon analyses of candidate genes ~n these regions are on the way. Putatwe tumor suppressor genes responsible for pancreatic carcinogenesis are very likely to exist on chromosome arms 6q and 12q. As we have recently shown cyclin DI is overexpressed in human pancreatic carcinoma cells and this overexpression correlates significantly with poor prognosis (p < 0.01). Recent reportes linked rmtogenic signalling to the act'vation ofras which integrates growth factor signaling to the induction of cyclin DI. We assessed the role of EGF, EGF-R and cyclin DI in pancreatic carcinoma tissues. Immunhistochemically we examined 42 adenocareinoma ~es on the expression of EGF, EGF-R and cyclin DI and could demonstrate an overexpression in the tumour cells in 51%, 54% and 62,.3% respectively, whereas normal human pancreas stained negative for all of the three factors. [merestingly EGF as well as EGF-R expression correlated significandy with the cyclin D1 expression in human pancreatic tumour cells (p < 0.00l and p < 0.05). Cell cycle analysis in pancreatic carcinoma cell lines (BxPC 3, AsPC 1) revealed an increase of cells in S/Gl-phase between 18h and 30h after stimulation with 50 ngtml EGF. Cyclin DI mKNA increase after 2h was shown by R.T-PCR corresponding to an increase of cyclin D1 protein with the maximum level at 7,5 h following stimulation which was demonstrated by Western blot analysis. Similar results were obtamd with TGF--r By means of BrdU incorporation assays the dose dependent proliferation of the cell lines was confirmed Conclusion. These results demonstrate that cyclin DI overexpression in the turnout cells of pancreatic cacrcinoma tissue is at least m part dependent on the mitognnic effects of EGF or TGF-<x signalling through the EGF receptor In contrast to the EGF and EGF-R expression cyclin DI expression correlates significantly with poor prognosts suggnstmg that beside the sumulatory effects of EGF or TGF-ct, cyclin DI expression is mlluenced by other factors or by actwated ras =tself National Cancer Center Hospital East, Chtba, Japan. Introduction. For patients with locally advanced pancreatic carcinoma, more intense irradiation with a combinabon of intraoperatwe radiation (IORT) and external-beam radiation (EBRT) has been used ~n an effort to improve the efficacy of radiation therapy, but the effectiveness has not been established. IORT and conformal EBRT basically deliver the radia0on dose mainly to the tumor and these combination therapy is anticipated to achieve optimal dose distnbutions. Then the combination therapy were performed to clarify the efficacy and safety of intense radiation therapy alone. Twenty-four patients w=th unresectable advanced pancreatic carcinoma localized to the pancreatic region were enrolled a phase II study of treatment with initial IORT (25 Gy) followed by conformal EBRT (40 Gy). The tumor reduction rate, as revealed by the early phase of dynamm CT, toxicity, failure pattern, and survival were evaluated. Tumor spread in the abdominal cavaty was observed in 9 of 24 patients (37.5%) at laparotomy. EBRT was carried out tn the other 15 patients w=thout tumor spread. The full EBRT dose of 40 Gy was used =n 12 of the 15 patients (80.0%). One patient showed a complete response, 5 parttal responses (response rate: 40.0%). As to acute complications, grade 3 or worse toxicity was observed =n 4 patients (26.7%). As to late comphcat~ons, 1 pattent had a grade 5 gastnc ulcer. Hepatic metastases and local progress=on were observed ~n 9 patients each. The median survwal t~mes were 9.0 and 11.1 months, and the 2-and 4-year survival rates were 8.3% and 13.3%, 4.2% and 6.7% for all 24 patients and the 1S patients w~thout tumor spread =n the abdominal cavity, respectwely. Conclusion. The intense radiation therapy alone showed moderate ante-tumor actwlty with an acceptable tox~c=ty level. Neoptolemos (c} Department of Surgery, Royal Lzverpool University Hospital, 5 = Floor UCD Building, Daulby Street, Liverpool, L69 3CA, UK Introduction. Pancreatic cancer demonstrates high rates of tumour suppressor (TS) gone mutations; p53 (76%), p16 (82%) and loss of TS function. P53 and p16 both promote G1 arrest and p53 is also involved in apoptosls. The aim of this study was to replace wdd-type p53 and p16 into pancreatic cancer cells. Methods. Human pancreatic cancer cell lines; BxPc-3, Pancl, MIAPACA2 (p16-, p53-), CFPAC1 (p16+, p53-) and Capan2 (p16-, p53+) were used. The wdd-type p16 expressing SW620 and wdd-type p53 expressing Hep2 cell lines were also used. Therapeutic vectors were AdSCMVp 16 and AdSCMVp53. The reporter vector, Ad5CMV~-gal, was used to assess transfectlon efficiency and for control infections. Therapeutic gene expression was confirmed using PCR, rt-PCR, western blotting and immunofluorescence. G1 arrest was demonstrated using flow cytometry. Apoptosls was assessed using DNA laddermg and TdT labelling. Cell counts were used to plot growth curves following mfectmn. Results, P53 resulted ~n mean growth mh~bmon rate of 91% SD_+B (n =3 +3). P16 resulted m mean growth mhibmon rate of 83% SD_+I 5 (n =3 +3). The G1/S ratio was s~gmficantly higher fotlowmg p16 transfer (p<O.O01). The apoptos~s index was significantly increased for p53 (p<0.O04) and p16 (p<O.03). Conclusion. Adenov~ral transfer of wdd-type p53 and p16 results =n s~gmficant growth inhibition and increased apoptosls =n pancreat=c cancer cells. This should represent a novel therapeut=c approach. Introduction. In an attempt to identify clintcally relevant and cheap prognostic factors for patients with unmsectable pancreatic cancer we have investigated ~f a standardized measurement of pare can help. Patients and Results.The prospective study compnses 49 consecutive patients with newly diagnosed non-msectable ductal pancreatic adenocarcinoma. There was a significant negative correlation between pain at the time of diagnosis, evaluated with a Visual Analogue Scale. VAS, and survwal: the morn pain the shorter survival. There was also a shorter su~val for those patients with pain ~n the upper right part of the abdomen (p=0.02) or epigasthum (p=0.02) compared to patients without pain them, whereas pain =n the upper left, lower right, and lower left parts of the alxlomen as well as pain in the back or overall gave no prognostic information. The patients not using analgesics at the time of diagnos~s did not live longer than those who took analgesics, and patients on morphine did not live significantly shorter than those without morphine. The type of pain (dull or coUckly) and if the pain was aggravated by certain factors was of no prognostic importance. The regression analysis showed that only the size of the pancreatic tumor (tumors 2 cm or less), the type of pain (dull or colickly), and site of the pain (epgastnum) could explain some (58 %) of the correlation of VAS to survival and pain at diagnosis was an independent factor for survival when compared to stage, s~te, and grade of differentiation of the tumor, gender and age. Conclusion. The measurement of intensity and extension of pain expanenced at the ttme of diagnosis by the patient w~th an unresectable exocrine pancreatic cancer can be used for prognostic purposes. From th~s point of wew the pain experienced reflects something different than the analgesics consumed. Introduction. The morbidity of chronic relapsing pancreadtis (C?,-P) has become considerably increased at the last I0 yeats. However, high probability of diagnostic mistakes remains. We decided to increase the i~'ormadon capacity of some existing diagnostic methods. Patients and Methods. 220 CRP patients at the exac=rbauon stage and 30 non-patients were observed in our clinic. We studied their bIood levels and duodenal debit part of amylase, lipasr and .trypsin and level of soluble fibrin-monomer complexes (SFMC) in the blood serum. Results. 82% of the patients had normal blood levels of enzymes as their rise during the exacerbation occurred on the ground of thetr iniually decreased concentration. With the aim m increase the sensibdity of tests we were calculating indices of the enzymes deviation to the blood in relation to debit part of the enzyme in duodenum to its blood concentration. The deviation radices of CRP patients were considerably lower than in healthy people. As a result the sensibility of deviation radices reached 92% and specificity-94%. Trypsin. entering blood stream, inhibits the formation of fibnnogen from SFMC. This results in increase of the level of SFMC m the blood serum. The level in examined pauents reached 0.62_-)'0.18 Opucal Units and in healthy people --0.38_-+0.16 Optical Units. It is important that blood level of SFMC stay high more than increase of act1'.l .ty of immunereactive trypsin. Determinauon of SFMC in the blood Reeds simultaneous study of thromboc)tes, as the combination of increase of SFMC index ~v=th thrombocytopcnia =s characteristic for consumpuon coagulopathy, which was diagnosed earlier with the help of SFMC determ,nauon. Conclusion. Using of mathematical methods s~gmficandy increase the mformauon capacity, of exammauon of activity, of pancreatic enzymes m blood and duodenum. So determinauon of SFMC can be used in diagnose of CRP, Background. Weight loss is the clinical sign most often present at the time of diagnosis for patients with pancreatic cancer Method and results. The weight loss in 59 consecutive patients wdh exocrine pancreatic cancer was prospectively registered. The patients had an absolute mean weght loss of 6.8 (6.1) kg {range. 0-30 kg) correlated to the weight three months before the diagnosis and a relative weight loss of 9 (8) percent (range: 0-40 percent). There was no significant correlation between weight or Body Mass Index, BMI, and weght loss. There was a correlatton of pain to weight loss when companng patients wrth pare zntenslty of 2 or less on a Visual Analogue Scale and a weight loss of 2 kg or less. There was no difference between the weight toss for those who were possible to operate radically in=9) compared to the other in=50). Two of the radically operated patients were without preoperative weght loss versus nine of the others (p=0.76). There was no significant correlations between the patient's weight, BMi, and weight toss on one hand and ongzn within the gland, s~ze, stage, and grade of differenbation of the tumor, presence of liver metastases, over-growth on the large retropentoneai vessels or presence of diabetes or jaundice at the time of diagnosis on the other The not radically operated patients without a preoperative weight loss (n=8) lived s~gmficantly longer than those wdh a weight loss Concluaion. In a prospectlvely collected consecutive senes of patients with pancreatic cancer a smaller weight lOSS than earher reported. The weight loss correlate tO the pain =ntens=ty at the time of diagno,~s and the absence of weight loss as a prognostlcally pos=twe factor for survwal. To descnbe changes in body composition, physiological function and psychology in patJeRts undergoing operative treatment of hepatic or pancreatic disease consequent upon recmwng total enteral nutntion (TEN) in the post-operative peneq. Methods: Body fat was measured using anthropometry and Dual Energy X-Ray AbsollPtiometry (DEXA) scanning, respiratory function ~th vitalography and spimmetry, muscle function with dynamometry, psychology with the Hospdal ARXJe~ anti Depressmn Scale (HADS), and fatigue was measured using a visual analogue scale. Results: 30 patients were studied (15 TEN) Conventional management of predicted severe acute pancreatit=s (SAP) includes intestinal rest and often requtres the pmviston of numbonat support in the form of total parenteral nutntion (TPN). Total enteral numtion (TEN) is known to ameliorate many of the deleterious effects of seriOUS sepsm and may be of value in SAP Data on the use of early TEN in SAP m pmsenUy lacking. Our a=m )s to assess the safety and efficacy of routine early TEN support =n patients w=th SAP Methods: Psttents wRh SAP (APACHE tl score >_ 6 on admiss[ofl) were random~se~ to receive TPN (n=8) or TEN (n=7) wdhm 4 hours of dmgnos)s by central line or naso-)e}unal tube respectively Resp)ratory functmn was measured by vltalography and sp=rometry (FVC, FEV~, PEFR), muscle functmn by hand held dynamometw, body fat by Dual Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry (DEXA), psycholog)cal state w~th the Hospdal AnxJety and Depression scale and fat=gue was measured using a wsual anal~jue scale Results: Introduction. The exaCt immune mechanisms undedying alcoholic chronic pancraatitis (ACP) remain a subject of discussion. Recent data provide evidence, that TNF-a is involved in the pathoganas~s of severe alcoholic acute pancraatitis (AAP). Specific receptors regulate the biological effects of TNF-r To define the role of cytokines we analyzed the gene expression of TNF-a and TNF-a receptors (TNFR) in isolated pedpheral blood mononuctear cells (PBMC) of patients with ACP. Patients end Methods. mRNA synthesis of TNF-a, TNFR-p55 / -p75, IFN--f, ~L-10 and "~ndL~cible nitric oxide synlhetase (iNOS~ was determined by RT-PCR in PBMC of patients with chrome alcoholic pancreatitis. The sevedty of pancraatitis was evaluated according to the CT seventy index (Balthazar sconng system: CTSI=I-3 n = 10; CTSI=0 n = 8); calcifications were demonstrated in 11/18 patients. 8 healthy individuals (HC) served as controls. Results. A strong upregulation of TNF-a, TNFR-p55 and -p75 specific mRNA was found m patients with ACP compared to controls (p<0.01). 6/10 patients w~h AAP (CTSI 1-3) and 448 patients with CTSI=0 demonstrated an enhanced expression of the mRNA synthes=s of IFN-y (p=0.02). In contrast, the expression of IL-10 was not enhanced in advanced ACP; =NOS was not detectable. Conclusion. The marked expressmn of TNF-m TNFR-p55 and -p75 )n PBMC suggests, that ACP provokes a systemic enhancement of inflammatory mediators. Introduction. We have demonstrated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) that in animal models of spontaneously developing chronic pancreatRls (WBN/Kob rat, stroke prone spontaneously hypertensive rat, OLETF rat), tortuous ductal channels or helical deformities of ~e pancreatic ductal lumlna occur, and that tl~etr inner surfaces have long c~Ua and crater-like depressions. These changes are thought to be caused by ~ncreased pancreatic duct pressure. Method. The common hepatic duCt of the rat was ligated proximal to )ts entry into the pancreas, and the common bale-pancreatic duct was also hgated near its junction with the duodenum. Using SEM, we then observed the tuner surfaces of )nterlobular ducts =n convenUonaUy fixed pancreatic tissue 1,2, 3, or 5 days after ~igat~on, and corrosion casts of the pancreatic ducts 2 days after ligation. Results. In the rats without ligat)on, the ductal lumma were cylindncal and their smooth tnner surfaces had short c;I)a. At 1 day after ligatlon, the inner surfaces had long cilia and crater-hke depressions, and at 2 days, tortuous ductal channels or helical deformities were ewdent. In some ~nterlobular ducts, each eptthelial cell had a bulging ap,cal surface w~th a long odium at 2 or 3 days a~er ligat]on, and at 5 days, their tuner surfaces had long ctlia and large crater-like depressions but no epithelial cells w,th bulging ap)cal surfaces. Conclusion. The increase of pancreattc duct pressure causes the pancreat)c ductal lumen to become tortuous or hellcat, and the inner surface to have long c~lia and crater-hke depressions. Pancreabc duct ceils w~th a bulging aptcal surface are present temporanly at the early stage of increasing pancreatic duct pressure. Introduction: Mucin producing pancreatic tumor (MPPT) is increasingly rceogntzed in clinical entaty and attention has been focused because of its unique morphology. However, there are di~culity in discrenunanon of the benign MPPT from the malignant, and in evaluation ofxts progression. Material and Methods" Forty-seven cases were histolo~r confirmed as MPPT. (14 cases as mvasive carcinoma , 12 cases as non-invasive carcinoma, 17 cases as adenoma, 4 cases as hyperplasia ). All of them were underwent peroral pancreatoscopy (POPS) and / or mlra-ductal ullrasonoiraphy (IDUS) BP30 (Olympus Co., Ltd) and OpUscope (Clinical Supply Co, Ltd ) were used for POPS, SSD550 (Aloka Co, Ltd ) and 6Fr probe (20MHz) were used for IDUS Results: POPS was performed on 47 cases. Protruding lesions were detected in 29 cases (62%) Acording to the shapes ofprolruding lesions, 29 cases were classified into 5 ~oups ( ~anuiar type, so-called "fish-~ " type wlthout capdlary vessels, "fish-eg~ " Lype ~th capdlary vessels, villous type and nodular type ). "Fish-eggs " type with capdlary vessels, villous type and nodular type were indicated of mali~ancy If the posmve findm~ of these three types were regard as mali~ancy, the sensmvlty, spectficlty, and overall accuracy, were 62.'/,, 33% and 70%. resepccnvely IDUS was performed on 26 cases The protruding lesions over 2 mm m diameter were detected m 17 patients (65%) Hel~ts of the protruding lesion were correlated with 6ode of mah~ancy Parenchymal mvasmn of the tumor was evaluated by IDUS from d~sappesrance of the pancreatac duct structure together wth contmmLy of the tumor to the parenchyma The senslWciW of IDUS t'or parenchymal invasion of the tumor was 80%. specificity was 76% and Overall accuracy, was 77*,:, Conclusion: Both POPS and 1DUS are ~ou~t to be useful for discnml~l)on of the bemgn MPPT from the mah~aut [Introduotlon] Metestabc pancrsesc cancer ~s rarely rel~ortecl as ddficuit case of preopamave diagnosis ~ had expenencad a =multaneously ohorated case Of metio'lronous metastaSr pancreas cancer from renal cancer deleted 12 yes, is later fotld'~ng nephrectomy, and another metachmnoca matastasr liver cancer from breast cancM detecled 4 yeats [ate*" folld',~ng mestectomy. Post operave ~nrtt.mo hlstOC~lemlo~J study ms useh~l to tinily diagnose the metastal]c Io..~ons from different metactlmnous cancer origin. [Patient and Result] A patient ( 72 yeais old female) was adm~ed ~ enact complaint of liver tumor She reoaver light nephrectomy for ngnt retlal cell ca/~noma tn 1984, and lllstologJc~l findings showed dear cell type In 1~ she i*oGaveo left maste~omy for loft breast cancer (tln0 M0.staga I), atld histological findings showed solid tubular caronotr'~. Estrogml and progesteron receptor were poslSve In 1993 folloW Up CT Showe0 sgace c~upymg te=on in ~a Itver (S5) Sugg~ng metas'=~c tumor Cllemotherapy (OAF .UFT and Tamoxypi~en) was corned out and complete r~lSSlon Wss Observed In 1995 follow up CTshowed newspacs ocoupymg lesion ~n the panctses head. but no deffimta tumor ~e 0 nsarved )n the liver ~he tumor of the pancreas head increased r and tumor in the liver appeared again ~ 1~ Laboret~P/examlnason showed rn~k::l elevabon of slmJm CEA(80 ng/ml) and severe elevnon of DUPAN -II(lt00 U/m0 I~ut no elova~on of CA19-9,AFP and PIVKA-II The tumor Of the pancreas head was detectea as round low echoic mass by US and hyper vasCUlar mass by angmgraphy Main pancreasr duct S~owerl SmoOth narrowing with tnld d=lataSon Of distal duct in the head Of the pancreas by endOScOpe reffogreds banc'reaSr (EF~P) On the other hand the liver tumor was imaged in'eguler sllao~gt and low e~lom by US and hyper vascular by anglography MRI stlowed almost same i:~nem of T1 and T2 image m both lesions Patient was operated, and exOrpa~on ot the tumor of pancreas head and subseoj'nentectomy (S5) A pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy (PpPD) has been widely employed for periampullary benign disease, however, it is still too much burden for some patients with smaJl lesion who requires pancreatic resection. This study concerns the operative procedure of our duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection(DpPHR) and its postoperative results. Patients & Method. A DpPHR was carried out in 23 patients with periampullary benign disease. Twenty patients received duodenum-preserving total resection of the pancreatic head and other tree patients had a resection of the inferior pancreatic head, a resection of the ventral pancreas or Beger's method. The post operative results of DpPHR were assessed in comparison with the results in a control group of 20 patients who underwent PpPD, Results. In the patients with DpPHR, complications developed in 5 patients(22%) and there was no mortality during hospital stay. The mean postoperative hospitalization pedod was 38 days, and postoperative weight gain at 6 months in comparison with preoperative one averaged 99.5%; 91% of the patients were professionally retlabilitated. These early postoperative results were acceptable compared with that of PpPD. The postoperative secretin secretion test in response to a test meal and the postoperative pancreatic function diagnostant(PFD) test ~n the patients with DpPHR were higher than those of the patients w,th PpFD. Conclusion. These data suggest that preservation of the duodenum contributes in part to maintain the exocnne function of the pancreas in the late postoperattve course and DpPHR ~s feastble ~n some patients with benign disease who requires pancreat=c head resemzon. TECH~ETIUM-99m-LABELED CHEMOTACTIC PEPTIDE. A NEW METHOD TO DEFINE "H-IE SEVERITY OF ACUTE EXPERIMENTAL PANCREATITIS AND THE ASSOCIATED LUNG INTD~KY l~ RATS W. Hartwig, EA Carter, C Femandez-del Castillo, .l Babich, AJ Fischman, AL Warshaw Departments of Surgery, Radiology and Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, and Shriners Bums Institute, Boston Leukocyte activation and infiltration are critically involved in the progression from mild to severe pancreatitis and in the development of pancreatitisassociated systemic complications such as ARDS. We investigated whether ~rc-chemomcdc peptide that binds to high affinity receptors on white blood cell membranes can determine the level of leukocyte accumulation in the pancreas and the lungs during acute experimental pancreatitis. Methods: Pancreatitis of graded severity was induced in rats with intravenous cen~tein (5~g/kg/h, mild edematous pancreatitis) and a combination of cemlem and comrolled intraductal infusion of glycodeoxycholic acid (GDOC [0retool/L, necrotizing pancreatitis) Saline was infused in controls. At 3 hours of infiJsion, Z~Tc-chemotactic peptide ('~'Tc-For-MLFK-H'YNIC) was injected intravenously At 6 hours the pancreas and the lungs were removed and radioactivity was counted In addition, leukocyte accumulation in both tissues was assessed by myeloperoxidase-activity and edema was determined by wet/dry ratio. Results: The uptake of ~'I'c-chemotactic peptide m the pancreas was increased in both the model of mild (p=0 04) and severe pancreantts (p<0 00l) compared to controls. Pulmonary uptake was only increased in severe pancreatitis (p=0 04) While there was only a minor increase of myeloperoxidase in the' pancreas of edematous pancreatms, a significant increase was found in necrotming pancreatitis (p=0 003) Myeloperoxadaseactivity in the lungs was increased only in severe pancreatitis (p=0 006) Pancreatic edema formation was higher in mild than in severe pancreatitis (p=0 002), and no significant differences in edema were found In the lungs Conclusions: Determination of~Tc-chemotactic peptide uptake is a novel approach to differentiate acute pancreatitis of graded seventy, and may be preferable to labeling leukocytes ~th Tc ~" ex vwo An increased pulmonary. uptake of chemotactm peptide in severe pancreatitis indicates leukocyte accumulation m the lungs which may contribute to assoctated lung injury 226 IAP'98 OF pANCREATICOENTEROSTOMY AFTER WIt~PI.,~S OPI~ATION N_~ashimoto,N.Nomura,H.Ohyanagi Department of Second Surgery,Kinki University~gayama, 0 osaka, J~p an Entroduotio~The aim of this study was to --~m~ne the long-term patency of the pancreaticoenterostomy in vivo.~atients and mmth o~Evaluation of the patency of the pancreaticoenterostomy was conduced in twelve patients who had undergone Whipple's ope. After intravenous infusion of secretin(l~g/ kg),the d4ameter of pancreatic duct was taken at I~5,10,20 end 25 sinute by means of ultranonography.We estimated the degree of a~astomotic stricture by the ~*~mal m~tation rat.io(MDR). 0/~DR:a, arlmal value (Dmax)/ basel value(D0)l The patients underwent PFD test before and l-2years after ope. ~esul~pancreatic diameter after secret/n: Maximal ductal dilatation wan noted from 3 to 15 rain after secretin infusion,thereaf'tar ductal diameter gradually d~m~nished and returned to its basal value at 25 gin. 9 DR was ranged from 1.3 to 2-5,1.7~0.12. Relationship between HDR and PFD:there was a good negative relationship between MDR and PFD~%ccording to Z* analysis,we interpreted anastomotic stricture in two patient~ MDR more than 2.0.In two patients peroperative value of PFD was 69,48~ respectlvely ~uL postoperative value of PFD was 13.8,18 T~Except these two cases,there was no difference between pre and pOSt operative value of PFD. {Conclusion) These data suggest that the present method allows a safe and noninvasive evaluation of the 9atency of pancreaticoenterostomy. We performed SMA(superior mesenteric artery) denervation for the purpose of radical operation for perinmpullary ca-ncer~ut'we have often post-operative malnutrition and diarrhea due to SMA denervatio ~uThe aim of this experimental study was to clarify the pathogenesis of malnutrition due to SMA dener'uatiom ~aterial and Methods}Two group of mongrel dogs ilLi~3~y weighing 10-15kg were used in this study.The first group of eight dogs was denerwation model SMA wan isolated distal to the common colic and inferiorpancreticoduodenal arterles.The second grou p of six dogs was sham operated control Enoup.ALI dogs were allowed a regular l~bo-rator~ diet. At 4 weeeks postoperatively, tissue level of Substance P and mucosal weight,protein~%ip,T-GTP of small intestine were measured. (Result.) In mucosal weight, protein,.Alp and r-GTP activity, the denerva-Lion group was slgnificantly decreased compared to control.But,/n the tissue level of Substance P,the denervation group was sig nificantly higher compared to control. (Conclusion}These finding indicate that the imparement absorption follow~ng dener-9 ,ration was largely due to the decrease activ ity Of membrane enzyme and increase of tiss ue level of Substanoe P. . PBP was carried out using the 21 gauge aspiration biopsy needle under ultrasonic guidance. The specimens were tested by rapid nuclear damage assay (RNDA). The judgment of the test was based on the morphological changes of the tumor ceils nuclei after incubation in a certain conctmtration of anticancer drugs for 4 to 8 hours. 21 patients were enrolled in this study. 16 patients were treated with such anticancer drugs that had been determined positive chemosensitivity in the test (posinve cases), and 5 patients, who had no sensitive anticancer drugs in the test (negative cases), were treated wtth 5-FU. Results. Clinical assessments of the chemosensitivity for the positive ffoup and negative group were as follows: Them was an increased tendency m duration of survival for the positive cases. Conclusion. This chemosensitivity test was thought to be useful for selecting anticancer drugs in chemotherapy of the patients wtth unresectable pancrenuc carcinoma. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) has made the dmgnosls of the pancreaac diseases much easier, but many cases are sull difficult to diagnose. As for computed tumography (cr) and magn~c resonance ,magmg ('IvlRI), combined evaluation of plan and enhanced ts cons,dered important. :dbunex ( St-IIONGGI. OSAKA, JAPAN ) has been applied to dmlcal use as the contrast agent that can enhance US B-mode tmage from the inva-venous injection. Here we report the usefulness of contrast-enhanced E'US ( CE-EUS ) in the pancreaac disease. :[.Subjects and methods} Thlrty seven patients were ~xamined, including I i ductal call carcinoma , 10 mutinous cysuc tumor. 4 tslet cell tumor. 3 serous cystedenoma, 4 chrome pencreatius end 5 pseudocyst. All cases were confirmed hlstolo~cally e~ther through surgery or autopsy. Lesions were examined m de~l by EUS. then Albunex ( 0.22ml / kg ) was injected to the paUant intravenously. We compared the EUS image between before and after inject.on of Albunex and evaluated the enhanced effect of parenchyma and lesions. The apparatus used was GF-U,'M20 (l~'vlHz) (OLY.'v~US. TOKYO, JAP.M',,T). { Result} In all cases, EUS images of paranchyma were immediately enhanced wtth the mjectton of Albune.x, reached to the peak m about 3 minutes 1) M.el.ous eystte tumor;, The images of cyst-wall were more strongly enhanced than parenchyma, so the outhne of the disease became clear In all malignant cases. mural nodules m the lesion were emphasized m CE-EL'S images. 2) D.etal cell carcinoma; EUS images of lestons were not enhanced, so (true) tumor outline were deahzed, tn ~vo case out of l 1. pre-operauve tumor stamng changed to other stage by CE-EUS image. 3) Islet cell tumor:, EUS Images were more strongly enhanced than parenehyma m all cases, and tumor was confirmed as islet cell tumor w~th the combmauon of plain EL'S and CE-EUS tmage proving hypervasculanty 4) Seruus eystadenoma: All cases were enhanced m the central rmcrocysac area m CE-EL'S image.S) Chronte p=ner~atltis; All cases were enhanced as same as parenchyma. 6) Pseudo cyst; The wall images were enhanced to the same deuce as parenchyma. In one case. there was mass lesmn m me cyst. CE-EUS tmage revealed the mass hvpovascular and it proved to be pseudo-tumorous sludge. ( Introduction. Although mutations of several genes, such as Kras, p53, APC or DPC4, have been frequantly identified in human pancreatic cancers, the mechanisms of carcinogenesis, which may involve loss of function of thesa genes, have been poody understood. To understand a mechanism of carcinogenesis, we established a mouse model of human pancreatic cancer by conditional pane targeting in mice. Methods. Wa generated a conditional mutant mouse of APC gana (APCS80S) by inserting a pair of IoxP sites. Recombinant adanovirus carrying Cra recombinasa gene (Adex-Cra) was also constructed and used to induce a specific deletion of APe gene by injection of virus preparation directly into pancreas of APC580S. P53 mutation was also introduced by breeding APC580S with p53 deficient mice. Tumor formation was analysed by macroscopically and microscopically at certain intervals after infection. Results. Infection of pancreas of APC580S mice by Adex-Cra induced no tumors, suggesting that loss of APC gene function may not be enough to imtiate carcinogenesis. On tha other hand, multiple tumor formation was observed in pancreas of APC580S mice carrying mutation of p53 pens at high ITequency, when infected by Adex-Cra. Thesa tumors were diagnosed as adenocarcinomas, Precise analysis of the process of carcinogenesis is currently under way. Conclusion, Our results suggested that APC gene mutation may cooperate with that of p53 to induce pancreatic cancers m mice and this system may serve as a mouse model that enables us to perform precise analysis of carcinogenesis in vwo. Introduction. We describe here out experience ia a u'ial of prophylacuc hepatic irradiation (PHI) in patients with resectable pancreatic cancer to improve survival by reducing the mcideuce of liver metastasis that is one of the major facto~ of r=cmren~, Pztieats and Methods. Fourteen patxems with pancz~atzc cancer have re:sired.PHI after curaave resection with mtzaopcrauvr radiothcraw. The cmire liver was irradiated to s dose of 19.8 to 20.0 Gy wi~h mu-avenenus 5fluorouracil. As a control, the 24 patients undergoing cumuve resecUon wTth adjuvant radmthcmpy to the tumor bed were used to comp~ed their survival. Results. AJl but one p~ent, in ~ PHI "was discontinued because of severe fatigue, ~ able to complete the planned PHI. Two m-hospi~ deaths were caused by bleeding due to inwaabdominal abscesses. The remaining 12 patients were discharged wzthout major complicsuons. Eight patients, one of whom has developed liver metastasis, are currcndy alive 32, 32, 31, 23, 8, 5, 4, and 2 months after surge~. Three patientS, including one m whom PHI was disconnnued, died of hves metastams aad pentoncal spreacL O~e pauent died ofmyocacdiaL mfarctmu wakout liver metastasis. Overall 4 of the 14 patients have develop~J liver memsms~s. However, at present, the panent group v~th PHI shows a s~gmfic.~ndy longer survwal ume than the cons'el group. Coadusios. It ~s too early to draw conclusions ~s to the safety, and effe~veness of PHI becau.~ of the small number of panents and the short follow-up parted. Nevertheless, our sr,:dy suggestS that PHI ~mproves survival a~er cumnve resec~on. Acute pancroatltls ts a potentially fatal disease. The major cause of death in acute gancreat=tls is multiple organ failure {MOF) It has been proposed that a prolonged and/or excessive inflammatory reaction by cytoklne product=on may be one of the mechanisms whereby patients develop organ failure. In the oresent study, the concentratlon of cytoklnes and their modulators =n the plasma of pattents w~th severe acute oancreatltls and its relationship with NOF have been investigated. Patients and Methods. Fourteen patients with severe acute pancreatltis were further subcategorlzed into two groups based on the number of organs with dysfunction: Group A: severe pancreat~tis with dysfunction of three or more organs (n=6), and Group B" with dysfunctzon of less than three organs (n=8). Plasma was sampled on the days 1. 2. 3. 5, 7, 14. and 21 after admission, The concentration of cytok~nes and their modulators was measured by ELtSA. Results and Discussion, 1) Plasma concentration of all cytokznes was higher in Group A than =n Group B. Especzaily, that of cyt0klne modulators was szgnificantly higher in Group A zt admission. ZJ Plasma concentratLon of TNF~ and IL-I~ was overwhelmed by that of their modulators (sTNF-R and IL-ira) at admsslon, Hence. the action of TNFr and IL-I~ might almost be suppressed ( Introduction. We studied the trophtc effects of a new synthetic pancreahc protease inhibitor (ONO-3403) on damaged pancreatic tissues by ligation of pancreatic duct of splenrc lobe companng w~th other pancreatic tissue without hgat=on in the same rat. Method, We performed the ligation of pancreaUc duct of splemc (S) lobe by 6-0 absorptive suture. Thus, gastroduodenal (GD) lobe in the same rat was left an intact. These rats were divided into two groups. Group A were fed on basal diet for 4 weeks after operation; Group B on basal diet for the first three weeks and on the diet including 0.05% concentration of ONO-3403 for the next one week Pancreat(c weights in S and GD lobe were measured separately. And then the contents of protmn, DNA and amylase ~n pancreatic tissue of each lobe were also measured 4weeks later Result, In Group A, pancreatic weight and the contents of protein, DNA. and amylase =n the S lobe decreased significantly compared with the GO lobe. In Group B, pancreatic weight and protein contents of each lobe increased compared with that of each lobe of Group A. Although DNA and amylase contents of the S lobe either in Group A and B showed no dLfferencas, DNA contents in the GD lobe of Group B ~ncreased compared with those of Group A. Conclusion. These findings indicate ONO-3403 have a trophlc effect on damaged and normal pancreat(c tissue ~n the same rats. Moreover, thin effect was rather hypertrophic change than hyperplas=a. A. Hiura', K Satake = Uepartment of Surgery, Osaka Municipal Juso-Shimm Hospital', 1st Department of Surgery, Osaka City Unlversdy Med=cal School =, Osaka, Japan. Introduction. The ep~demiologir studies have shown defimte correlation between smoking and lung cancer as well as pancreatic cancer. In addition, K-ras mutahon has been observed at h~gh frequency in both cancers. However. it has not been investigated whether smok=ng promote the pancreatic carc:nogenes=s or not. We studied the effect of oral administration of mcot=ne on experimental pancreatic cancer in hamster. Method. Pancreatic carcinogenesis was =nduced by BOP in female Syrian hamsters. The hamsters were divided into three groups, The group A were maintained on basal diet and tap water, The group B on basal diet and nicotine sol~tion at the concentration of 0.5ml/L The group C on basal diet and nicotine solution at the concentratson of 2.0ml/L. All hamsters were sacrificed after 16 or 24 weeks from the first injection for hlstopathological studies of pancreatic les=ons, i.e. carcinoma (CA), carcinoma in sltu (CIS), and atypical ductal hyperplasm (ATH) Results. The rnc~dence of CA and CIS after 16 weeks from the first inject=on ~n the group C was stgntficantty higher than ~n the group A. The inc;dence of CA and CIS after 24 weeks ~n tha group C, however, was the same as ~n the control group l~ere were no slgmficant d=fferences tn the mc=dence of CA between the group A and B. Conclusion. These results ~ndicate that necot=ne has the progressive effect of pancreatic cancer =n hamsters, and suggest that smoking =s the one of the risk factor of pancreahc cancer. Introduction. Mechanism for remote organ failure in acute pancreatitis remains unclear. The aim of this study was to assess the significance of macrophages, such as peritoneal macrophages (pNN~s) and Kupffer cells (KCs) on liver dysfunction associated with acute necrotizing pancreatitis. Methods. In male Wistar rats, KCs and pMq~3 were eliminated by the intraperitoneal administration of liposome-encapsulated dichloromethylene diphosphonate (MDP). After 48 h, necrotizing pancreatitis was induced by the retrograde inlection of sodium deoxychoIate (DCA) into the pancreatic ducts. T~ert 5 h later, blood and peritoneal exudate (pancreatifis-associated ascJbe fluid;PAAF) were collected. Firstly, the effects of depletion of KCs and pMOs on liver and pancreatic functions were examined. Secondly, the cytotoxicity of the PAAF on rat primary-cultured hepatocytes were evaluated in vitro using MTT ceUular proliferataon assay. Results. In the rats treated w~th liposome-encapsulated MDP, KCs were eliminated completely, and the number of p/vl,l~'S was reduced to 10%. Elevated levels of serum AST, ALT Muluple organ dysfuncuon (MOD) ts a common cause of death assocaated with acute pancreauus. Lwer dysfuncuon m acute pancreautis may be an intermediate step m the development of MOD or ~t ts an end result of MOD. Methods. We used a 23 Na and 31 P double-tuned NMR surface cod to continuously measure the in-vtvo changes m hepatac mtracellular Na, pH and high energy phosphates. Dysprostum-'fTHA (250riM) was used to measure intracellular Na. Rats were prepared by laparotomy, wtth a vascular oucluder around the hepatic artery and portal veto. and the surface cod on the dome of the liver. The rats were then randomized into 4. groups: control (n=4), tO-rain ischemla (n=5), 20-rain tschemia to=5) and DCA-mduced pancreauus (n=5). Results. In rat liver. 20 minutes of total hver ischemta resulted m severe intracellular aadosts and irreversible depleuon of ingh energy phosphates. Conclusion. Acute pancreauus depletes hepatocellular energet,cs and induces profound mtracellular sodium accumulauon and actdos~s early in its course. The seventy, of such changes ~s stmtlar to that induced by trreverstble total hver t..~hemla. Lwer dysfuncuon may be an early event of MOD m acute pancreauus. Preservauon of the liver ~s therefore as important as resuscttauon of ~e car~kopulmonary s~stem ~n the mmal managemem of acute pa~creauus. We reported an operated ca-se of the external pancreanc fistula followrag waumauc panc'reauus. A 23-year-old man was m~ohed m traffic accident at about 12:00 mtdmght on December 13, 1995. He was transported to a local ph)slcmn by ambulance, and was transferred to our hospttal on December 15 with suspected mjuD" of the pancreas by blunt atxlommal trauma. The panent's abdomen ~as noted to be severe tender and muscular defence. Abdominal CT scan at admlsston mvc.~lcd ascttes and a laceraUon of the head of the pancreas. There was no worsemng of the patient's anemia, but his vltal signs remained unstable and his alxIommal manifestanons were severe even several hours after the admtsslon. The pauent was diagnosed tnjuD' of the head of the pancreas Emergency laparotom} was performed to him on the same day The peritoneal and retropentoneal (pancreauc bed) drmnage was perlormed . l(300 ml of bloody ascttes was drained out from the alxlommai ~-,~'~tt~ and retropentoneum. Postoperau~e endoscopic retrom-ade pancreatogmph~ re~ealed obsmactton of the m~an pancrmuc duct of the body. Postoperaove fistulography vta drainage tube revealed m-'-n pancreaoc duct on 28 davs after operauon. We succeeded in cannulauon to m.'-n pancreatic duct from fistula. The second operauon ~las perlormed. End to side anastomosas of pancreatic fistula to a Rouxen-Y hmb of the jejunum ~as performed. The patient discharged on i:,t+,;toperat:+e 6 months. As pancreanc body carcinoma has an invasion to common hepanc or splemc men., the postoperatton outcome of these patients has been poor because of the low resectabihty, rote. In such a cases it is sometimes &fficult to complete an usual distal pancreatectomy techmcally and oncolomcally. Then we have performed radical distal pancreatectomy in 7 cases with the resecnon of cehac and common hepatic arten.', v, tuch resembles the Appleb'!'s techmque for advanced gastric cancer. From March 1982-to March 1996, a total of 23 pauents with pancreatic Ixx.l,, carcinoma ~,.ere admmed to our department, 13 of whom under.vent resection, gtvmg a resection rate of 57%, Of the 13 patients, 7 underwent Appteby's operation, in the remammg 6 patients, distal pancreatectomy was performed. Appleby's operaUon with resection of the portal veto m 4. and because l patient had not cavernous transformauon , reconstruction using, the extra lilac veto.This operation x'.lth total gastrectomy was perl'ormed tu 3 pauents, because of direct mvamon of the stomack. 1 of the 7 pauents who underwent tbas operation, reconstrucUon of the common hepauc arten, using mfenor mesentenc ,,em, because of avoidance ol the postoperati',e complications. Postoperau'.'e complications were acute cholecystms tn t case, AGML in 1 ca.~ that preserved stomach, acute pancreamts m t case. MortahD was not found. According to the General Rules for the Stud 3 of the Japan Pancreas Stxaet,,. All were more than TS3(Tumor a hose greatest dimension LS more than ,.t.0 cm but no more than 6 0 cmL In antenor pancreauc capsule, s2(Deftmte m,,aston) ~.as obser'.ed m 3 patients, s.3(mvaston of adjacent organs) in 3 In arterial s'.stem, a2(m,.aston to the media) was observed m 4. Conclusions: These results suggest that Appleb.,.'s operation ts recommended Ior adxanced pancreatic carcinoma In order to obtam surgtcall3 curative resection and better surgical outcome and prolonged sun a'~ ,,11 x~ ;th better qu',dtty ol tile. Introduction. p27 m*+, known as a tumor suppressor, has a negative regulating role of G1 progression through the ceil cycle. Although abnormalities of p27 ~t, including deletions and mutations, have been rarely detected, a correlation between the expression of p27 m*~ and the degree of malignancy has been reported in many human cancers. However, to date nothing is known of the expression of this protein and its clinicopathologtcal significance in pancreatic carcinoma (PC). The present study is to investigate the status of the expression of p27 ~*~ in human PC and assess the role of altered the expression of p27 mD~ in the development and progression of PC, Materials and Methods. Six human normal pancreas 22 benign pancreatic lesions (18 chronic pancreatitis and 4 cystoadenomas), and 54 pancreatic carc=noma (46 adenocarcinomas, 6 cystoadenocarcinomas, and 2 adenosquamous carcinomas) as well as four PC cell lines were analyzed for the expression of p27 roD' by immunohistochemistry (SABC) using a polyclonal antibody (C-19, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Lnc.), with a concentration of 10 ~gJml. Results. Normal human pancreas and all except for the two cases of benign tissue showed negative-staining for p27 '~0' protein. Detectable expression of p27 mp~ was found in 13 cases (24.1%) of PC as well as 2 PC cell lines. We observed various staimng of p27 mm existed among different degree of tumor differential=on, even most sampies with p27m*'-negative staimng having very high levels of p27 m~ in welldifferentiated tissues areas compared to negligible or ve~ low tevets of p27 mot in moderately or poorly differentiated areas. Moreover, the lack of the expression of p27'~D'was cons=stently increased with increasing tumor grade (G1 & G2 vs. G3) and climcal stage (I & II vs. 111 & IV), respectively, and each relation had a stattstmally significant difference (p < 0.05), Conclusion. The above results suggest that the absence of the expression of p27 m=~ =n PC ts very common and this alteration may play a role in contributing malignant progress3on of this d,sease. PANCREATITIS  SHOWING DIFFUSE IRREGULAR NARROWING OF THE  PANCREATIC  DUCT  BE  TERMED  AUTOIMMUNE  PANCREATITIS? A. Horiuchi', S. Kawa, K. Mukawa, Y. Ochi, N. Arakura, S. Maejima, T. Akamatsu, K. Kiyosawa Second Department of Internal Medicine and Department of Endoscopy, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto 390, Japan Introduction. Although pancreatitis associated with autmmmune and related diseases has been known since Sarles and colleagues' report, autoimmune pancreatitis has not yet been defined as a r entity. We report 13 patients, who present an autoimmune background, with idiopathic chronic pancreatitts showing irregular narrowing of the pancreatic duct, and notify unique clinical and radiological characteristics that are remarkably distinct from those of alcoholic pancreatitis. Patients and Methods. Over the past 5 years we have encountered 13 patients (9 men, 4 women, mean age 62.2 [range 38-75] years) who, based upon thew climcal and radiological features, were diagnosed with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis showing an =rregular narrowing of the pancreatic duct. We evaluated the climcat outcome of the 13 patients before and after steroid therapy. Results. The charactenstics of this type of chromc pancreatitts are summarized as follows: 1) jaundice or only todd symptoms; 2) elevated serum IgG levels; 3) swollen pancreas; 4) diffuse (or segmental) irregular narrowing of the pancreatic duct; 5) the stncture of the lower bde duct; 6) early onset of diabetes mellitus; 7) not necessarily associated w=th other autoimmune diseases; and 8) the functional and morphological improvements m response to steroid therapy. Conclusion. In order to avoid unnecessary surgery, we propose that steroid-responsive pancreatltis showing diffuse irregular narrowing of the pancreatic duct should be established as a new clinical entity of chromc pancreatttis, even if it can not be termed autoimmune pancreatths. Introduction. PD relieves the pancreatic duct obstruction secondary to the periampullary tumor and partly elimmates the neurohormonal control on the exocfine function In this study, analyzing the pancreatic secret'on in the early period after PD is to study the differences m the rec.~ ,cry of pancreatic exocrine function in patients with narr.ox: and dilated pancreatic duct Patients and Method. Four patients with narrow pancreatic duct, less than I 5ram m diameter, N group, and mx patients with dilated duct, larger than 2ram in diameter, D group, under aem PD were studied The volume of pancreatic juice, electrolytes, bicarbonate, LDH, amylase and the total protein were measured in the first 6 weeks after PD One-way ANOVA is performed for evaluating the time-related changes of these factors m the N and D groups of'patmnts Conclusion. A larger volt:.ne of pat~creatic juice, p=0 001, and a higher dady output of amylase, p value is less than 0 05, in N group were found Higher calcium concentration and elevated LDH in D group and a quick :r recovery ofb~carbonate secretion and higher protein secretion m N group were observed [nlroduc~on. Although interleukin-6(IL-6) is multipot~nt cytokine which regulates proliferation and defferon~tion of certain kinds of cells, its effect on tumor invasiveness and metastasis are not clear. Using human pancratic cancer cell line PSN-1, we investigat=l the eff-~t of IL -6 on/n ~ tumor-cell invasion. Methods and Pa~'dt, The tumor-cell invasion was ~sayed using Tram'well chamber with 8-,,2.m pore-size polycarbonam membrane coated with Matrigel.The addition of 11-6 to the assay ~m increased the minor-cell migration through the membrane. To characterize the migrated tumor ceils, we selected two sublines derived fzom PSN-1 cells by chemoinv~sion with 1I-6, one migral~ through the membrane during the first 4 h of the assay(H cell) and the other remained in upper chamber und 24 h(L cell). We performed the same selection five times and isomted two clor,.r and SL). TI~ invasion of 5H cegs was an approximately three times as high as that of cells. In morphological observation of 5H cells, typical cells were fusiform shape and extended processes. The addition of condedoned medium(CM) prepared fi'om 5H cells potentiated the invasion of ~ and 5L ceils, however, the effect of CM from 5Lwas lesser effective. CM prepared f~m 5H also caused a monphological change in patent PSN-1 and 5LcHls to 5H cell like formadort The growth rate of these tumor ceils was not affected by the incubation with CM from 5H cells. The level of 11-6 ha CM prepared from 5H cells measured by ELISA method was .-"/.7ngml. which w~s an appmxymately 16 dines as high ~ that from 5L cells(1.69ng, mi). .Male Wistar rats were used. Group A: AP Induced by injecting of trypsin-taurocbolate mixed solution into the pancreatic duct; Group B: OK'Y--046(lO0mg~.g) injected subcutaneously(SC) every 12 h beginning immediately after the reducing AP;, Group C: OP-~07(100/.z~kg) injected SC every 12 h beginning immcdiateiy after the inducin~ AP: Group ~. ONO-4057(100mg/kg) given orally 30 rain bctbre the inducein~ AP. 2Waram~tters investiaated_'Surwval rate (all groups:n = 12), and be serial sacrifice and necropsy (all~groups:n = 8), determination of plasma phospholipase A: (P[..A:) activity, determination of TxB:, 6-kelp prostagiandin FIa(6-KF) and LTBa in plasma, pancreas, lungs and kidney tissue, and investigation of histological changes m the pancreas, lunas and'kidneys. Resultsl)Survival rate: The rotes 24 h later were: Group A33.3%; Group B 83.3%: Group C 58.3%; Group D 66.7% and the survival rate in Group B was significantly better than in Group A. 2"~Plasma PL..-~ activity: ,,k:tivitv increased in every ~oup after induction ot .~P. but was, s~ificantly lower in (3roups B and D fhan in Group A. 3)TxB'-_ -KF. LTB,, ,,..: ..~Chan,,es in plasma: .Mlqevels increased in every ,group. but after 12h TxBz was si,.=m~ficantlv lower in Group B than in Groups A, C and D~and LTB.* was significantly lower in Group D than in Groups A. B and C. ~Changes in tissue: After 12h. TxB: (p~mg protein) in pancreas and lun,.z tissue was 66.5 and 948.4 in Group B. si~ificantlv lower than in Group A (l'41.h 1780.1), but the values in Groups C':and D wire almost as high as in Group A. LTB.* was similarly hi,'.zh in Groups A. B and C. but si~ificantly lower in Group D(42.3; 92.6) them in Group A(87.0: 169.0). 6-KF'valucs in lyancreas and lun,.1' tissue were hi~ in 'all ,'rouos. and the chanaes in TxB:. 6-KF and LTB-~ in~idnev tissue ".v~re sli,.zhi" in ~1 ~zroups. 4) Pancreatic hemoh'ha,.zic necrosis-and pulm~marv alveolar degeneration were most ~vcre in Group. A'. and mildest in Group B." Conclusion An adequate suppressive effect was nol obtained bv administration of PGI2. which possesses a cvtoprotective action, or the LTB.*'receptor anta,.z'onist alone.However, Tx..~ pl;Jvs the lar,'est role in the pro,'n:ssion of lure, iffjury and administration of O1~Y4}46 reduced TxAz production and reproved the survival rute in severe pancreatitis. Introduction. Prognosis of pancreatic cancer is one of the poorest among vanous cancers. This is, in part, due to lack of a dignostic tool to detect pancreatic cancer earlier although radiological imaging has made marked progress. We analyzed K-ras mutations in the duodenal juice(DJ) in order to evaluate its usefulness as a diagnostic tool for periampullary cancers. Patients & Methods. One hundred and fifty-one patients admitted to the National Kyusyu Cancer Center were studied These include 33 pancrea'0c cancer, 3 bitiary cancer, 2 ampullary cancer, 7 pancreatic cyst. 77 chronic pancreatitis and 27 other benign disorders. DJ was collected under a 50-rain intravenous infusion of t00U secretin. DNA was extracted from the pellet niter centhfugation of D J. and mutations of the K-ras codon12 were analyzed using ennched I=CR by Bat-N1 digestion (Gastroenterology 110: 221, 1996) . Results. In the patients with pedampullary cancers, mutations were detected in 22(63%) of 35 pancreatic cancer, 2(67%) of 3 biliary cancer and 1(50%) of 2 ampullary cancer. Whereas such mutations were detected only in 8(7.4%) of 111 benign disorders(l(14%) of 7 pancreatic cyst, 5(6.5%) of 77 chronic pancreatitis and 2(7.4%) of 27 other benign disorders). Conclusions. K-ras mutations are identified in non-cancerous lesions of the pancreas, and in the analysis using pancreatic juice(P J), in fact. mutations are detected even in benign pancreatic disorders with relatively high frequency. In the present study, a positive rate for the K-ras mutations is 63% in the periampullary cancers, while it is less than 10% in the benign disorders. Further. collection of DJ is less invasive to patients than that of PJ. These results suggest utility of analysis of the K-ras mutations in DJ to differentiate per)amputlary cancers from benign conditions.  It is known that neutrophil (PMN) elastase induces tissue damage of remote organs in acute severe pancreatitis. Therefore, in this study the therapeutic effect of ONO-5046 on the lung, liver and kidney in addition to the pancreas was examined in severe hemorrhagic paacreatitis in dogs. Materials and Methods. Eleven adult beagle dogs were used for the study. Under general anesthesia, acute hemorrhagic pancreatitis was induced by injection of a mixture of autologous bile and porcine trypsin into the main pancreatic duct. Additionally, lipopolysaccharidr was administered intravenously at 2 hrs after induction of pancreatitis. For one group, continuous i.v. infusion of ONO-5046 (50mg/kg/hr) was started prior to the injection of LPS (ONOgroup). For the other group (control), saline was infused instead. Over a 6-hr period, blood samples were taken from the femoral artery and the blood pressure was monitored. Finally, the pancreas, lungs, kidneys and a lobe of the liver were removed, weighed and used for "histological examinations. Results. There was a large amount of bloody ascites. WBC count was markedly reduced in response to induction of panereatitis, and decreased further by the septic attack in the two groups. Serum levels of amylase and a2-macroglobulin-trypsin complex increased similarly in both groups. Wet weight of the lung was slightly heavier in the controls. Microscopically, the pancreas showed interstitial hemorrhage accompanied by extensive edema in both groups. Mild inflammatory cell infiltration and bile stasis occurred in the liver of the controls. The tung demonstrated mild inflammatory cell infiltration in the two groups. Conclusion. It is presumed that severe hemorrhagic pancreatitis can not be alleviated by administration of an inhibitor of neutrophil elastase alone. though it tended to lessen the damage of remote organs such as the liver and lung. OF CYSTIC LESIONS OF THE PANCRE?6 K. Inui*, S. Nakazawa, J. Yoshino, K. Okushima, Y. Nakamura, T. Takashima. T. Hat~ori ' and H, MisyosbJ ' Dept. of Internal Medicine. Fujita Health Umversity, Nagoya, Japan. t Dept. of Gastroenterology, Yamashita Hospital, Ichinon~ya. Japan Introduction. Intraducml ultrasonography (IDUS) is expected as a precise diagnostic method for diagnosis of pancreatic diseases. We evaluate the usefulness of differential diagnosis for pancreatic tumors, including mucin producing tumors. Patients and Methods. We performed IDUS on 71 padents revealed pancreatic ~'st. dilatation or stenosis of the main pancreatic duct with extracorporeal ultrasonography (US) or endoscopic uttrasonography (EUS) from t993 to 1997. We inserted miniature probes into the main pancreatic duct O, IPD) through a biopsy channel of a duodenoscope atter endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERCP). We used the ultrasonic probe L,'M-3R (20 M.Hz, 2.4 mm in diameter) and L,~I-4R (20 MHz, 2.0 ram), developed by Olympus. We studied the usefulness of tDUS in differential diagnosis of the pancreas disease Results. 71 patients were diagnosed clinically with ~'RCP, EUS, follow-up study or surgery"; 4 patients had pancreatic cancer (common type), 7 pancreatolithiasis. 12 chronic pancreatttis, 4 duodenal papilla carcinoma. 36 pancreatic cysts, and 2 miscellaneous. Six patients were diagnosed as normal lesions with IDUS. Ten of 36 patients with cysts undenvent sur~cal resection, 4 patients were adenocarcinoma, 2 adenoma and 2 hyperplasia. [DUS revealed mural ntxtule, mucus ethos, and solid tumor with mixed pattern in patients with intraductal adenocarcinoma. These findings were helpfiat to distinct mucin producing pancreatic cancer from adenoma or hyperptasia. Conclusion. [DUS is very usetul for dilierential diagnosis of pancreatic cysts, and for dia~nos~s of cancer extension of mtrnductal papdlay tumor of the pancreas. [13s is recommended as the third examtration for cystic tesions o~ the pancreas a/tot EUS or ERCP. Introduction. Administration of Nicotinamide(NA) prevents NOD mouse from overt diabetes and the trial of NA tn recent-onset IDDM has started. As to islet transplantation(Tx), the survtval rate of islet ~ra~ ;s not satlsfiad, So we examined wh~ther NA ~s protectab~e for the survival of syngeneic islet grafts. Non diabetic and 65mg/kg streptoZotocin-induced diabetic rats were transplanted 1000 syngeneic =slets under the renal capsule. They were treated with 0.5g/kg NA or saline intrapedtoneally for 7 days. The blood glucose (BG) levets at 0, 3, 7, 14 days after "Ix were compared in these 4 groups. Oral glucose toleranse test (OG'7"~ was performed at day 14, Grafts were removed at day 3 for the tletection of DNA fragmentation, and at day 15 for the measurement of insulin contents and morphological examinations. Results. Non-fasting BG levels of diabetm with NA group is sigmficantly lower than those of diabetic w=thout NA gruop at day 7 and 14 (78=4rag/all vs 246=54.Imp/all at day 14). BG levels of diabetic with NA group after glucose loa~lng were also lower than those of diabetic w~thout NA group. Insulin contents of diabetic with NA, diabetic w~thout NA, non cliabetic w~th NA, non d~abetic w=thout NA, freshly isolated 1000 ~slets were 29=7, 7=2, 6=1,5=1,22=3 pg, respectively. Morphologically, vacuolated degeneration and apoptotic change were observed in the grafts of diat~etm w=thout NA group. Conclusion. NA has the beneficial effects on the islet graft aspemally =n diabetic state, and mtght be a useful tool for tslet Tx. Bes}des the presence of necrosis, organ fmlure (OF)tmulu organ failure (MOP) is an m2portam factor for the seventy determmataon of acute pancreauns As the relauoaslup bet~een OF~.%IOF and both the extent of necroms and the incidence of mfeeuon of pancreanc necrosis has not been well defined. ~se a~med to address flus msue m the present study Patients and methods: 300 pats ~lth contrast--enhanced CT (CECT) and/or inwaoperauvel~ proven NP treated at our hospital during 05/':~2 to 1Lv96 x~ere anal)xed for the occurrence of the following comphcattons' puimon~', renal and catcbor msuffac~en~y, sepsisisegs~s-lff, e s','n~ome (SLS'L and r The extem of trttrapancreanc necrosis demonstrated by" CECT ~as graded rote < 30% (group A), 30*/,-50% (group B), and > 50% (group C) lateen of pancreanc necrosis x~as tdenufied by either fine-needle asptranon and/or mtro.operan've smem's R~ults: Out of 300 pats claucai and radmlogmal data x~ere ob~ned from 225 pats (15tin. 74f. mean age 51.4 3e3rs) ~Lth necronzmg pancreantts. ~ho had a mean adrmssmn Ranson-score of-/, (range O-tO) Infecuon of uecroms ~a.s tbund m 73 13Z%) pats Mor'2.'ut~ ~as ]5 4%, m the infected and ~.3 0% m the ster~,e group The o~r incidence of OF ads s~gmficanfly higher m pats ~t~th infected compared to those v, ath stenle neeros~s {90% vs 73%. p=0 003) as ~ere the foilm~mg orgaWsvstemm comphcat~ons pulmonary, insufficiency (73~ ~s 58%. p--0 02). sepst~'SLS (57% xs 38~ p=0 006). and coagulopath, (5,t% ~s 36%. p= 0 003L respr Wuh respect to the extent of mtrapancreanc necrosis demonstrated by CECT OF occurred more frequently m pats of group C compared to group -k or B (.97% ~s 31% and 21%. p=O 005) [n instances of sterile aecrosts a correlatlon ",',as found bet',~een the incidence of OF and the extent of mtr'~pancreauc necrosis lgroup A: 36%, group B 74%. group C 96%. p< 0 05"1. ~hereas this x~as not obseraed m pats x~lth infected necrosis tgroup -X. ;~8"k group B 86%,. group C 06%) Methods. Isolated ducts wer~ p~parcd from guinea-pig pancreas and their ends scaled spontaneously dunng overnight culture. The lumen was punctured with a double-barreled ptpcne, and the luminal fired was replaced with a solution contalmng the pH-sensnive dye BCECF-dex~an. pHL was measured by rmcmfluommetry and V~ by parucle analysts of fluorescent images. Calibration of Vk.was performed using a nanolitersyringe driver (Suitor Instruments). Iiae rate of fluid secretion was esnmated from the changes m V L and was expressed as secretory mm per unit area of epithelium. The flux of HCO; to the lumen was calculatect fzom the rate of change of pHL. the luminal buffenng capac~ .ty and the secretory rate. Results. When ducts were superfused with a HCO,-buffemd standard soluuon (pH 7.4, 25 mM HCO,75 % CO..) and the lumen was t'tUcd with a soluuon contatmng 125 mM HCO," and 23 traM cr (pH 8.2, 5 % CO,), spontaneous fluid secreuon was 1~03 + 0.20 hi/ram/ram: ~mean _+ S.f:.M., n = 4) and pHi. decreased slowly from 8.12 + 0.05 to 8.0,/,  0.03 in 5 mix. The calculated HCO," flux'm the final n~mute was 0.02  0.01 nmol/mm/mm" and the esUmated concentration of HCO, m the secreted flmti was 24 =2 9 raM. When 10 nM secretm was applied, the secretory rate increased to 1.89 +_ 0.33 rfl/mm/mm" and pHI. increased to 8.21 4-0.04 m $ man. The calculated HCO( flux at the end of this period was 0.32 _* 0.07 nmot/mm/mm: and the estimated concentrauon of HCO( m the secreted fired was 149  13 m_' Vt. Conclusions. when the duct [umen was filled tmtrally with a HCOfnon soluuon, a Cr-nch fluid was secreted spontaneously On snmulanon with secretm, the secretory rate increased and the compostUOn of the secreted fluid changed from CI'-nch to HCO, -rich. The ability to quannfy HCO, secretion m isolated mterlobular ducts will be useful m studying the mecha/usm of HCO( secretion m panereaoc duct cells. Inb~duction. The progression of fibrosis in chronic pancreaUtls as still obscure. To reach a better understanding of this problem, we invesUgated the immunoiocalizations of 'type IV collagen (Col-IV) and lamimn around pancreanc ducts, and those of m~"u,~ metalloprotema.se-2,9 (MMP-2,9), tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase-l,2 (TIMP-t,2L and transforming grow~ factor I~ 1 (TGF~ I) at the duc~al epithelia m chronic pancreatitis. Methods. This study included 20 surgical specimens of fibrouc pancreas from patients wath chrome pancreatatis and 5 normal samples from autopsy cases. Immunostaining was performed by the streptavidin-biotm method after antigen retrieval. We evaluated the staining panems and the percentage of positive cells of each antigen. Results, In chronic pancreatids, the immunostammgs of Col-iV and tamimn along the basement membrane (BM~ of pancreatic ducts were disrupted an 11/20 (55%~ arid 8/20 (40%) respectively, whereas no disroptmn was detected in normaJ pancreas. Positive immunostainiags for MMP-2. MMP-9, ThMP-I and TIMP-2 in ductal epithelia were 15/20 (75%). 5/20 (25r 4/20 (20%) and 10/20 (50%) respectavely, whereas no mamunostmnmg was seen in normal pancreas. The staimng intensity of MMP-2 in ductal epithelia was associated w~th the staining mtensaty of Col-IV around the pancreauc ducts. Also, the stmmng intensaty of MMP-2 was progresswely increased in proportion to the stmnlng intensaty of TGF~ 1. Conr ion. These findings suggest that TGFI~ 1 induced in pancreatic duct ceils also reduced MMP-2 in an autocrme or pamcrme m~ner, and dnat ',his MMP-2 decomposed Cot-IV of the BM of pancreauc ducts in chronic pancreaUtis. The disrupOon of Col IV of the BM may relate to the injury, of pancreauc ducts, and finally cause the progresslon of the mflammauon and the fibrosas. O. Ishlkawa, it. OhlgashL H. Nakano, Y SasakL H. Furukawa, S. Imaoka. Department of Surgery, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan Introduction. Dunng the pancreaticoduodenectomy for adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head, we frequently encountered cases in whmh the supedor mesentenc-portal venous confluence (SMPVC) was involved wdh cancer. With regards to the indication of the concomitant SMPVC-resection, as suggested by recent papers, a better long-term outcome would be expected ff the cancer ~nvasions are limzted to the tunlca adventJtia or media of the SMPVC wall. Th=s raised fears whether or not such a small SMPVC-mvas~on mtght have always been detectable by a macroscopic inspectmn alone. Patients and Results. We have performed an mtracperalive cytology on the touch smear of the exposed SMPVC wall for 23 patients w)th pancreatm head cancer. All of the=r SMPVCs were separated from the pancreatic head and appeared to be Lntact at a macroscopic level. As a result of this examination, 7 patients (30%) were newly ludged as hawng cancer cells on the SMPVC wail and they rece)ved an additioal resection ofthe SMPVC Postoperat=ve histology indicated that cancer =nvas=on into the SMPVC wall was present m 6 out of 7 pat~er~ts, and ~at t~etr cancer invasions were bruited in the tumca advent]tin (5 patients) or tumca media (one patient) of the SMPVC wall. Conclusion. In order not to rams the chance of a cure by SMPVC-resect:on, our mtraoperatwe cytology for the touch smear of the SMPVC Ls worth performing more actively for the intact-looking SMPVC during the resection of pancreatm cancer. Method=-An anti-angiogenic agent, TNP-470, 30 mg/kg, or vehicle solution only was administered to immunodeficient mice. Animals had been inoculated lx10 ~ of pancreatic carcinoma cell line, PCI-43 into the spleen. Animals were killed 6 or 10 weeks later, and numbers of metastatic nodules per liver volume were calculated by the formula by Enzmann et aI.The proliferation and apoptosis of tumor ceils were estimated by PCNA staining and TUNEL method. In another experiment, a dissemination-prone PCI-43 subline (PCI-43p3) was established by a repetitive selection of peritoneal implants. TNP-470, 30 mg/kg, or vehicle solution was administered in animals that had been inoculated lx10 T PCI-43p3 Lp., and disseminated nodules in the peritoneum were grossly and histologically examined 4 weeks later. Re=all=, Numbers of metastatic liver nodules were suppressed in theTNP-treated groups of 6 (370_-284 vs 23--9) and 10 (197-99 vs 36=27) weeks-observation, when compared with control mice. Suppression of proliferation and increase of apoptosis was found in the TNP-treated groups. Peritoneal dissemination was also suppressed in the TNP-treated animals (11.1--2.6 vs 1.3_-1.0).TNP-inoculated animals exhibited a weight loss. Anti-angmgenic treatment exh~bded a suppressive effect on blood-borne and disseminated metastases of pancreas cancer in ammal models. The transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-13) family consis~ of a large group of potypeptides that includes ] mammalian TGF-13 isoforms, ac~vim, inhibira and borne mor?hogene~e proteins (BMPs). These polvpeptides play an important regulatory, role in tassue growth and development. TGF-13s are known to be overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer and this overexpression has been correlated with enhanced tumor aggressiveness. It is not known, however, whether other members of this supeffamily also contributes to disease progression in this disorder. Therefore. in the present study, we characterized the expression of BMP-2 in pancreatic cancer cell lines and tissue samples, and correlated the presence of BMP-2 in the cancer cells with patient survival. Northern blot analysis revealed the presence of a single 3kb BMP-2 manscdpt in all five tested pancreatic cancer cell lines. Furthermore. BMP-2 enhanced the growth of two cell lines (CAPAN-I and ASPC-t), inhibited the growth of one cell line and was without effect in the other two cell lines (PANC-I. T3M4). Densatometric analysts of Northern blots using RNA samples from 24 cancers and lg normal pancreattc tissue samples revealed a I0fold mcrease (p<0.0Ol) in the 3 kb BMP-2 transcnpt an the pancreatic cancers in comparison to normal controls. The mean survwal of patients whose pancreatic cancers expressed BMP-2 m the cancer cells was 10 months. In contrast, the mean survival of patientS whose pancreanc cancer cells were negative for BMP-2 ammunoreacttvtty was 16 months. These findings indicate that BIvIP-2 ts overexpressed m human pancreatic cancer, that BMP-2 has the capacgy to modulate pancreauc cancer cell growth, and that 8MP2 might conmbute to disease aggressiveness an human pancreanc cancer. (Kato, etal Surgery, 1997) . In the present study, we testified whether CaR plays a s=mllar role in human gastnnoma cells. Methods. Human gast~moma cells were taken from mechamcally minced gastnnoma t~ssues which were obtained at surgery. Following stud=es were performed. 1) Gastnn secretory dynamtcs in response to the increase +n the concentration of extranellular calcium ([CaZ+]o) from 2 54 to 10 mM were observed m the perifumon system 2) The change of the concentrat=on of cytosohc free calcmm ([CaZ*],) was momtored by fluorometry umng fura-2, when the [CaZ*]o was changed from zero, 2 54, 5 to 10 mM 3) Total RNA was exVacted from frozen human gastnnoma tmsues, and was Sublected to RT-PCR w~th CaR-specific pnmers followed by Southern blot hybndtzatton Results. 1) Htgh [CaZ  evoked a drastic increase m gastnn release from gastrmoma cells and the peak secretory rate was 2-fold of the basal level. Introduction. Gastrointestinal neoplasttc t=ssue has been reported to exhtbit mtnnsic autofluorescence that differs from the autofluoreacence of normal tissue when exctted w~th blue or v=olet light. A endoscop=c autofluorescence =magmg system (LIFE-GI system; Xfllilx technology Corp., Canada and Olympus opt=cal Co., Japan) that uses mercury hght for excitation has been newly developed for imaging lesions of dysplama and carcinoma tn the gastrointestinal tract. However, =n pancreatic duct, tt has not been apptied to pancreatic duct. This cs the first report on auto-fluore~nce endoscoptc =magmg system in the pancreat=c duct. Patients and Method. Two cases of pancreas cancer and chromc pancreatttm are presented. After pancreatectomy, we put endoscope (12 Fr,) in the pancreatic duct of resectes pancreas. Then, the =mages were obtained by the LIFE-GI system (exc=tatton. 437 nm). Results. In a pattent of pancreas cancer, the ~mage of cancer les~on ;n pancreatic duct was seen m dark red m com0ans~n w=th light blue of normal lesmon, and we could easdy recogmzed the cancer lesion On the other hand, ~n a patient of chromc pancreatttts, the =mage of stenottc les~on m pancreatic duct was seen m light blue, and we could not recogmze the d=fferent color between stenottc lesion and normal lesion. Conclusion. In prev=ous studies on the gastrointestinal tract and bronchial tree, cancer les~ons appeared dark red when examined by the LIFE-GI system. In pancreatic duct. the cancer temon was detected =n dark red =mages, too In near future, autofluorescence gancreatoscopy mtght become useful examination for the detection of cancer lesion of pancreat=c duct. The obstruction of the pancreatic duct causes atrophy of pancreatic acini through apoptosis in rats. This study investigated the effect of OI on this change. Methods. Three kinds of total pancreatic duct obstruction models were made in male Wister rats; Group A: The duodenal cod of the bilcpancreatic duct (BPD) was ligated, Group B: In addition to group A, BPD was llgatcd at the hepatic hilus, Group C: In addition to group B, bile was drained into the duodenum (without O J) and Group D: Sham operated. Rats were sacrificed on day 1, 2, 3, and 5 after the treatment. Body weight., diameter of the BPD. pancreas weight, dry/wet ratio of the pancreas, serum amylase and serum total bilirubin were measured. Result. Total hiiirubin were higher in group A and B than group C and D throughout the study. Pancreatic wet weight/body weight increased in group A, B, and C until day 2. Then, in group B and C, it decreased to be lower than group D on day 5, whereas it did not decrease in group A. The dry/wet ratio decreased in group A, B and C. Serum amyla.~ increa~d on day 1 in group A, B and C and, then decreased. On day 5, it was still elevated m group Athan group C and D. BPD diameter continuously increased though the study in group A, B and C. However, on day 5, BPD waS less dilated in group C than group A and B. Histological findings revealed that fibrosis around the interlobalar ducts developed in group A and B but not in group C and D.Tablr shows the results on day 5 (value: mean-+SE. ": p<0.05 vs Group C 7.5---0.6 * 6,2 4.5+0.4 0.5-+0.], Conclusion. BPD diameter and histological findings suggested that the ~ttraductal pressure was higher in the grroupS with OJ (group A and B). On the other hand. serum amylase suggested that the atrophy (presumably due to apoptusis) of the acim was disturbed by OJ. Therefllre. OJ ~ccms tu inhibit self defense mechanism against pancreatic duct obsttuction. Insulinoma is the most common fimcttonal endocrine tumor of pancreas even though its prevalence is relatively rare. In general, the tumor is a single and has a bemgn nature, so that the potential for surgical cure is very high.Patients and Methods. We retrospecuvely analyzed 50 including our own 14 patients who were diagnosed as insulinoma and underwent operation during a 25 year period from 1973 to 1997 at mutiple centers in Korea. Results. There were 14 men and 36 women in this study .The mean age of the patients was 45 years(17-69years). The most common clinical manifestation was loss of consciousness (86%) and all the patients had symptoms of Whtpple's triad. The mean duration of symptoms before diagnoses was 46months(t month-20years). The minor can be localized in 37 paUents (74%) preoperatively. The accuracy of tumor localization by ultrasonogram. CT scan, angtography and percutaneous tmnshepatic portal vein catheterization was 12%. 28%, 41% and 79%, retrospectively. [ntraoperative ultrasonography was performed in six patients (12%). Multiple eodocrine neoplasta type 1 (MENl) was detected in three female patients (6~ Enuclention was performed m 20. pancreatic resection in 31 patients, among v, hich segmental resection in 2. distal resection 20. subtotal resectionlS0%) in 2, near total and total resection one each and pancrenticoduodenectomy was perfomed in 5. Reoperanon was done m three cases due to improper detection of primary tumor, diffuse islet hyperplasia, and low grade malignancy each. The tumors ~,,ere located at head (38*,],). body (26%). tail (30%) or multiple sites (6%~ of pancreas. The size of the tumor ~*as l.ScmlO 5-6cml. The mcidertce of malignancy x~as 10%(Scases). Operatlxe mortality occurred in one (2%) of the 50 patients, v, hde major morbidity dexeloped m 5 patients 110%) such as a pancreatic fistula m 4 and a gastrointestinal bleeding in one. S.~mtoms of h.~pogbcemia and laboratot3.' ~alues ~,ere normalized in all the patient after operation. Conclusion E',en though msulinoma is kno,.,.n to be a mosd.~ benign and single lemon, preoperauxe and intraoperati~e susptcmn and accurate localization are mandato~ to rule out the muluplictty and malignanc~ [or the control of this curable disease. Nesidioblastos~s and islet-cell hyperplasm v, ith hypeinsulinemic hypoglycemia is a primary, childhood disease and reported rarely in adults. Nestdioblastosis has been defined as a diffuse islet cell hy~rplasia accompanied with a differentiation of islets arising from the pancreatic ductal eptthet~um. Patients and methods We retrospectively e~aluated ten cases of adult onset nesidioblastoszs and one case of tslet cell hyperplsia including our own 3 cases Results There were 7 males and 3 females in nesidioblastosis and one female in islet-cell hyperplasm.. The average age was 47 years (22 -67years). The mean duration of hypoglycemic symptoms was 5months (7days -84months}. The common clinical manifestations were neumglycopenic symptoms (100%) and adrenergic symptoms (80%) such as loss of cortsciousness, s~eatmg. dizziness, abnormal behavior and confi~s~on in descending order of frequency The average fasting blood glucose level ~as 3lmg, dl. Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia was confirmed dunng prolonged fasting test. In tx~o pauents a combination of a negatixe ang~ography and a lack of difference in insulin concentration gradient in THPVC would suggest nesidioblastosis preopemt~el.x. Distal pancreatectom~(40%) ~as done m I. subtotal pancreatectom~ (70~85%) in 8. ~h~pple's procedure t70%) m 2 and near total pancreatectomy (95%) m 1 patient. The surgical treatment resulted in the nomaaiization of serum glucose levels and d~sappearance of h.xpoglycem~c symptoms in 7 patients ~63.7%). In remaining 4 pauents (36.3*,%) one pauent can tolerate x~ithout an) medicanon and three patients t~ere treated x~tth somatostatin analogue . stermd, and diazoxide with somatostatm analogue each Conclusion. In nes~diobla.stos~s preoperauxe suspicion and proper diagnostic tools and prudent operatwe diagnosuc procedure ~dl enhance the diagnostic accuracy. In diffuse islet cell h}perplasia. ~ttde surgical ex~sion (75%-85%) of pancreas ~tll denote the best treatment option for the control of postoperaux e h. To measuxe fecal fat m time-consuming, unpleasant and complicated for sm'eening test on diagnosm of steatorrhea m pancreatzc msut~meney. So we stuched whether or not serum pancreav.e enzymes measnmment, which is oonststed of sux kinds of pancrealac enz37nee and PFD test, is useful for screening of eteatorrhea Sub.lectts and Methods Subjects were eonszsted of 78 normal controls and 22 pancreatic msum~eney pat*ents with steatorrhea ( fecal fa& e.xcx~tmn > 5 ~' day ) We measured senna amylase (4,). potype amylase (p-amy), lipase (L), t~'psm (T), phoaphohpase .~2 (P), alastase t (~'), and PFD test ( 500rag, 6houm ) , and obtained sensluwty and speoficlty for diagn~mg steatorthea. We judged mean ")'2SD as normal The sens,tlwues and speofitatles were t~leulated from them Results. D For pauents with steatorthea, the sensttr, aues of PFD. p-amy. T. P E. L and Awere 85 7%. 81% 78 9%. 73 3%. 667%. 60%and 13 6% respeetwely 2) The speetficmes of p-amy. P. A, T E. L and PFD te~t were 100%. 100%, 98.7%. 97 6%. 06.7%. 88 .5% and 87 5%. respec~vely Ahhough serum amylase measurement =s not usefial for sct~nmg test to dtagn~se pancreatic steatorrhea, serum p-amy meaaurement, judging I~rom tts stmphtaty, g~xxl senstt*vary and spec~c*ty, ts most useful test for sereenmgofateatorrhea In additton. the other penchant enzymes measurement e~'ept for serum am.vlaae are also useful for screening of steatorrhea due to pancreanc msu~c~en~" gonadotropm ~]-subumt (hOGS), is a new tumor marker in pancreatic cancer patients and that it is clinically useful for diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and differential diagnosis of chronic pancreatffis. We examined gene expression and production of hCGI3 in the resected tumor tissue and cell lines of pancreatic cancer, and also compared with those of mutant p53 protein. Materials and Methods. Total of 42 pancreatic cancer surgically resected were studied. Three human pancreatic cancer cell lines (KP-1N, KP-2 and KP-3N) were used for subcutaneous transplantation in nude mice. After 1 month urine was collected and tumor was exczsed. Xencgrabhted tumors were immunostained for p53 and hCGB. Activities of hCGI3 in the culture media and UGP in the unne of the nude mace were measured. UGP was measured by an EIA kit (ELNAS) using a specific antibody (B2102). Gene expression of hCGt] was evaluated by the RT-PCR followed by Southern blot hybridization. The prognos=s of pancreatic cancer were evaluated by UGP and mutant p53. Results. The UGP-pos=tive rates were htgher for poorly differentiated carcinoma ceils (61.1-100%) than well differentiated cell types (33.3%), although the mutant p53 protem-poslbve rates (42.9%) did not depend oh carcinoma cell differentiation. The culture media showed high hCGf] activ=ty and unnary UGP was detected in tumor bearing nude mace. Gene express=on of hCG~ was confirmed. The abnormal high levels of UGP, but not mutant p53 express=on indicated the poor prognosis (< 6 months death) of the patients. Although there was no significant difference m the survival of patients w~th PD or surgical bypass (median survival of 9 month and 7 month, respect=vely), HFS for 3 month or longer was achieved =n 84.6% of the pat=ants wcth PD, whJch was slgn=ficantly htgher than that of the 53.1% m patients with surgtcal bypass (p<0 05). Among TNM stage III patients, the median surv=val of the surg=cal bypass wfth tORT was 10 month, whde that of the bypass alone was 5 month (p<0.05). In add~tton. HFS of 3 month or longer was achieved m 83.3% of the patients who underwent bypass w~th IORT, but ~n only 25.0=.% of the patients who rece=ved surgery alone (p<O 01). The addlhon of IGRT to palliative PD neither prolonged survwal nor ~mproved HFS Conclusion. These rusults show the benefical effect of palhative PD on QOL, and the efficacy of IGRT for both survtval and QOL was demonstrated rn cases with stage III patmnts who underwent surgical bypass. However. for patients subleCted to palliative PD, IORT =s not consadered to be benefioal for eRher survwal or QOL Introduction Patency of the accessory pancreatic duct (APD) in the usual pancreatic duct system is about 40% as determined by dye-injection endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP). Patients and Method We examined the function of APD in 58 cases of the pancreaticobiliary maljunction (PBM). Ex.istence of APD was examined roentgenograpbscaUy. We injected contrast medium containing indigocarmine through the catheter in the main pancreatic duct and examined the excretion of the dye from the minor duodenal papilla endoscopically. Results APD existed in 11 of 26 cases of the congenital choledochal cyst. Patency of APD was detected in 5 of 9 cases examined by dye-injection ERP APD existed in 15 of 30 cases of PBM without biliary dilatation, and APD was patent 4 of 13 cases examined. There was no sign~cant relationship between patency of APD and associated bLl.iary carcinoma, but 5 cases of the congenital choledochal cyst with APD bigger than 2 mm in diameter had no biliary carcinoma..Amylase level of the btle in cases of PBM with patent A.PD was frequently lower than that of cases with nonpatent APD Conclusion It is suggested that in cases of PBM w~th patent APD. the incidence of carcinogenesis of the biliary tract maght be lower, as the reflex of the pancreatic juice to the bile duct might be reduced by the flow of pancreatic juice from the upper dorsal pancreatm duct into the duodenum ~aa the manor duodenal papilla. We reported a new embryologic hypothesis of annular pancreas which can account for the developmental mechanism of three types of arrangement of annular ducts, by reference to Odger's model. In annular pancreas with annular duct opening to Wirsungs duct. the tip of the left ventral bud proximal to the bile duct becomes fixed to the duodenum during atrophy of the left ventral bud. The left bud persists and then forms the annulus during rotation of the duodenum, while the right ventral bud develops into the ventral pancreas. [n annular pancreas with annular duct opening into the major duodenal papilla w~th absence of Wirsungs duct-annular pancreas develops in the same mechanmm as above, but the ventral pancreas ~s hypoplast~c [n annular pancreas with annular duct opening into the common bile duct w~thout commumcation with Wirsung s duct. the tip of the left ventral bud distal to the bile duct adheres to the duodenum and forms the annulus. OF THE PANCREATIC DUCT SYSTEM T. Kamisawa*, Y Tu, N. Egawa, N. Sakaki J. Isl~wata l) A. Okamoto -~, H. Baba, M. Koike ~) Department of Internal Medicine D. Surgery 2) Patholog~ ) Tokyo Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, Tokyo, Japan Introduction The human pancreatic duct system, the main pancreatic duct (MPD) and the accessory pancreatic duct (APD), is formed by fusion of the main drainage ducts of the ventral and dorsal pancreatic primordia. Patients and Method APD shows two di~erent patterns in pancreatograms; long and short type. APD of the long type fornls a straight line and joins N~D at the neck of the pancreas. APD of the short type joins MPD near its first inferior branch. Two hundred fifty-five pancreatograms of normal pancreatic head were reviewed. Results We found long inferior branches exceeding 2 cm fzom APD m 74.6% with long type, sign~cantly oftener than 30.2% with the short type. Patoncy of APD of the long D'Pe was 74.5%. sign~cantly ~eater than 36.2% in the short type. Immunohistechem~cally, we found .N[PD between the junction with APD and the neck portion of the autopsy pancreas in the short type lay within the ventral pancreas. characterized by pancreatic polypeptide rich islets. Conclusion The long type represents a persistent main duct of the dorsal primordium. The short type likely m formed by the proximal main duct of the dorsal primordium and its long inferior branch, with the mare duct of the dorsal primordium at the point of connection w~th the main duct of the ventral prunordium being obliterated and replaced by th~s additmnal communication. Introduction. The prognosis after resection for pancreatic cancer remains poor. Even if extended operation was performed, the results have not been shown to be superior to lesser procedure. Therefore, we examined micrometastasis in resected lymph nodes, especially in patients with negative lymph node involvement, to evaluate rationale of extended operation and necessity-of Intraoperative Radiation Therapy (IORT) as adjuvant therapy. Method and Material. Resected lymph nodes in patients with negative lymph node involvement by Hematoxylin Eosin (HE) staining following extended operation combined with IORT were examined by immunohistochemical staining of cytokeratin. Lymph nodes of 132 of the peripancreatic node and 107 of the paraaortic node were examined. Result. Immunoh~stochemtcal cytokeratin staining was positive in 13 nodes of the 132 peripancreatic nodes and in 2 nodes of the 107 paraaort~c nodes. Five of seven patients with negative lymph nodes b v HE examination had micrometastasis in per~pancreatic nodes, and two of the five patients were positive in the paraaoruc nodes. Conclusion. Five patients (71.4%) of seven with negative lymph nodes by HE examination haa m~crometastas~s. Th~s suggests that extended dissection of regmnal lymph nodes and IORT for advanced pancreatic cancer is necessary to control local recurrence, but tts survival resutts ts hmtted for hepatic metastases. Introduction. Three-dimensaonal recognition is essential for the diagnosis and surgical treatment of pancreatic tumor. The clinical usefulness of new 3 dimensional CT,Shaded Volume Rendering(SVR) was evaluated ~n patients with pancreatic diseases. Patients and Methods. 25 patJents w~th pancreatic diseases were enrolled in this study. Helical CT (Xpress/ SX;ToshJba)was used for the collection of 3D data w=th a slice thickness of 3mm, a table movement of 3-5ram, a reconstruction pitch of 1-2ram. Shaded Surface Display(SSD), Maximum Intens=ty Prolect~on(MIP) and were made by 30 Processor of CT(Real-Render ) and utilized high quality 3D W/S(X-tens=on,Tosh=ba). SVR was performed using new 30 W/S. A non-~onJc contrast medium was admJn=stered intravenously (3-5ml/sec, total 120-150 ml). Delay t=me was 20 sec for artanes, 70 sec for the portal veto. Results. Three-d~mens=onal CT made ~t poss=ble to demonstrate clear anatomr relat]onsl~=ps between pancreatic tumor and the portal or splenic ve=ns by intravenous contrast mject~on. SVR was super=or to SSD for delineating vascular and bde clucLs structures, but was inferior to cine MIP image of vessels ~n quality. Conclusion. From these results, =t ~s reasonable to conclude that these devices contributes cons=derably to the =mprovement of the 3D CT image of the pancreatic d=eease Pancreatogram and computed tomogram (CT) has been crucial to make a diagnoszs of the pancreatic carcinomas It ~s well known that irregular stenosJs or Jnterruptlon of the mare pancreatic duct (MPD) and avascular mass are the characteristic findings. However, here we report a T1 mvaslve ductal carcinoma which showed unique findings with pancreatogram and CT arteriography. Pancreatogram demonstrated mdd stenos~s due to a fflhng defect m the MPD, slmdar to mtra-ductal papillary tumor. On the other hand, CT artenography clearly showed an avascular mass surrounded with weaker enhanced area than normal pancreatic parenchyma, although this finding was not detected completely by convenhonal enhanced CT It was proven by hJstoioglc analysis of surgical resected specimen that the ~hng defect was corresponded to the mvaston of carcinoma into the MP0 and not only the avascular mass but also the weaker enhanced area were equwalent to the carcinoma tissue SJnce these finding are not common to the irtvasive ductal carcinoma, further analys~s regardrng the finding of CT artenography and h~stologacal evaluation of small pancreatic cancer en a Fargo-scale study ~s required COLOR DOPPLER IMAGING OF PANCREATIC TUMORS WITH A GALACTOSE-BASED CONTRAST AGENT E Karasawa, A Yamada*, M Tenma, T Hatori, T ImaizumL K Takasakt-, N Hayash='**, M Ohto "-"Oept of Radiology, -Dept of Surgery,'-Dept of Internal Medicme, l nstztute of Gastroenterology, Tokyo Women's Medical College,Tokyo,Japan. ~Researoh Center of Charged Particle Therapy,NIRS The purpose of this study was to evaluate the chn~cal usefulness of a galactose-based and tranpulmonal sonograph~c contrast agent using color Doppler imaging for assessing tumor vasculanty of pancreatic tumors. Patients and Methods 10 patients wtth pancreatic tumors(two serous cystadenoma, two muczn produczng adenocercmoma, three ductal carcinoma, two non-functional =slot cell tumor and one tumor forming pancreat~tzs) were enrolled in thts study to evaluate detection of vasculanty using intravenous contrast agent(300, 400mg/ml ,Shenng co ). A conventzonal color Doppler sonography system (3 75Mhz.PRF4-4 5Khz) was used Results Blood s~gnals of the pancreatic tumors were enhanced tn 6 of 9 patients w=th pancreattc masses using this transpaulmonal agent. The signal enhancement was negative in 3 and equ=vocal m one case No severe adverse effect was ensued dunng and after th=s procedure. IINTRODUCTION ; NAD(ntcotinamide adenine dinucleotide) is an essential substrate for the mitochondnal electron transport and intraceilular ATP level. Ox=dant and radiation are known to deplete intracellular NAD, resulting m the induction of cell damage. Depletmn of NAD can be prevented by an addition of nicotinic acid (niacin). Because it has been reported that niacin-supplement improved lung injunes caused by paraquar or LPS (lipopolysacchande), we anticipated that macin treatment might attenuate acinar cell injuries during acute pancreatitis through the inhibiuon of NAD--depletmn. To investigate this hypothesis, the present study was carried out to examine the effects of niacin on the rat caerulein-induced pacreatitts. METHOD ; Niacsn (NA group) or saline (SA group) was i.p. injected 12hrs before the induction of pancreatitis. Pancreatit~s was reduced by single i.p. injection of caerulein at a dose of 50 pg/kg to consc=ous rats. Six hrs after the induction of pancreat=tis, the ratS were killed by decapaatmn and the NAD level of pancreatic nssue was determined. To evaluate the pancreatit=s, serum amylase acnvay, edema index [pancreatic wet weight (rag) / body weight (g)l and histology of the pancreas were examined. RESULTS ; Administratnon of macro to normal rats at a dose of 500mg~kg BW increased the pancreat=c NAD level to 177 12% (P<0.01), In SA group. NAD level of pancreatsc tissue was reduced s gmficantly (79.5-,-0.8% of norreal rats ; P<0.01 ). whereas the decrease was prevented m NA group rats ( I01.3 2.8% of normal rats ). In add=tion, both the serum amylase (6487 106 IU!ml vs 27676= 1636 IU/ml : P < 0.01 ) and edema index of NA group rats (4.59r 0.08 vs 9.39 0.60: P< 0.01) were s=gmgecantly lower than those of SA group rats. and the hnstological changes were more slight =n the former. CONCLUSION : pretreatment of niacin attenuated rat caerulem-mduced pancr~atms, probably by preventing the reductton m the pancreatic t~ssue NAD. The data suggest that macro may be a potenttal therapeuttc agent for acute pancreatms. Introduction. The pancreaUco-Jejunostomy (P-J storey) has been termed the" Achilles heed of the Whipple operatton" The incidences of morbidity and mortality following P-J storey depend largely on the entegrtty of the pancreattc anastomosis The numerous reconstructuve techniques dewsed =n attempts to tmprove the safety of the P-J storey have been revtewed recently. Patients and Methods. There were 385 patients who underwent a standard or modified Whipple operal=on for penampullary cancers in seven teach~ng hospitals distributed =n Ta=wan. The anatomosis method for the restdual pancreas and a limb of lelunum are mainly diwded two groups Group I =s endto-end (n=82,21.30%) and Group II ~s end-to-s=de (n=305. 76 70%). Results The mc:dence of leakage from the P-J storey were noted 11 (1341%) and 19 (6.27%) for the group I and II respectively (P,:0.05) Re-operation requcre~l for these comphcatton were found in 2 and 5 patients of group I and II but all fall except two of group II. The total hospital mortahty of group I and II were 5 (6 10%) and 19(6 27%) respectwety (P>0 05). Conclusion. A end-to-s=de, duct-to mucosa =solated Roux loop P-J stomy following pancreat=co<luodenectomy has a lower leak rate than the method of end-to-end Whereas. the post-operaUve hospital mortality was of non-s=gntficant defference S. Kawa ~ T. Nikaido, K. Yoshizawa, Y. Aoki, Y Karasawa, K. Funhata, K. Kiyosawa. The Second Department of Internal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Laboratory Medtcine, Shmshu Umversity School of Medicine, 3-1-1 Asah=, Matsumoto 390, Japan. Introduction. Antt-proliferative actiwty of noncalcem=c vitamin D3 analogues, 22-oxa-calcltnol on pancreatic cancer cell lines was compared with that of calcitriol with analysis of vitamin D receptor (VOR) status and the Gt-phase cell cycle regulating factors. Methods. Antiproliferative effects of both agents were compared by the M'IT method and the measurement of the tumor size of xenograff inoculated rote athym=c mice. VDR contents by Scatchard analysts and mutational analysis of receptor eDNA were performed. Gl-phase cell cycle regulating factors were analyzed by Western blotting. Results, (1)In vitro, 22-oxa-catcltnol and calcitnol markedly inh~btted the proliferation (3 of 9 cetl lines) and caused a GI phase cell cycle arrest by the appearance of numerous domes (2)In vivo, 22-oxa-calotnol inh~bited the growth of BxPC-3 xenografts more stgnfficantly than calcltnol without inducing hypercalcemta. (3) Hs 766T. show=ng no response to ecther agent, had the second htghest receptor contents w=th no abnormalities in its primary structure. (4) In the responsave cells, s~gnificant up-regulation of p21 and p27, a shift of retmoblastoma pro:era rote the hypophosphorylated form, and suppression of kmase activity of cdk2 were observed after 24 hours of treatment, S=gnfficant down-regulation of cyclins, cdks and cdk =nh~bitors were observed after 7 days. In nonrespons=ve cells, no such changes were observed. Conclusion. 22-oxa-calc=tnol may provtde a more useful tool for the chemotherapy of pancreat=c cancer than calotnol. In responssve cells, these agents up-regulate p21 and p27 as an early event, which =n turn could block the G1-S trans=uon. Transforming growth factor (TGF)-g and extracellular mamx (ECM) are known to play an important role on the process of wound healing of the pathological diseases. On the other hand, several matrix metalloprotemases (b,,~vlP) are known to degrade ECM. [t is recognized therefore that ussue repair represents a balance between synthesis and degradation of ECM components. The aim of thts study was to elucidate the rote of TGF-131, ECM and MMP in wound healing following argimne-mduced acute pa'ncreatius. METHOD. Acute pancreauus was reduced by mtraperitoneal injectxon of L-arginine (500 mffl00 g body weight) in male Wistar ratS weighing 150-160 g. Ram were killed by decapitation at 24. 36, 48.60, 72 h. and 5 and 7 days after the mjecuon. Expressmus of TGF-rq, fibronecnn, type I, I]I and type IV collagen mR.NA were deternuned by Northern transfer analysis and that of,'VDvlP-I and ,'vLMP-2 mR.NA was examined by RT-PCR. Immunoreactiv~ty of fibronectm m the pancreas was assessed by using monoclonal anubodies against rat fibronecUn. RESULTS. TGF-BI mRNA expression was detectable at 36 h. reached the peak value at 48 h. Type I and [V collagen rnI~NA expression was elevated at 36 h, whereas fibronectm and type if[ collagen m.RNA expression was increased at 48 h. Fibronectm. type [, I'1] and IV collagen reached the peak values at 60 h. Thereafter. expressions of these ECM mRNA gradually decreased, but remained elevated untd 7 days. MMP-2 mRNA was sigmficantly increased at 72 h, and reached the peak value at 5 days. MMP-I mR.NA levels dnd not alter. Marked depusmons of fibronectm were observed in the mterlobular and intralobular space at 72 h. but they disappeared at 7 days. CONCLUSION. The peak value ofTGF-I31 mRNA expressLon was followed bv that of ECM mRNA expressmn, Furthermore, the increased level of .MMP-2 transcrtpt was followed by disappearance of deposmon of fibronectm. These findings suggest that TGF-FIl plays an important role on the prodocuon of ECM and that ECM degrading proteases ts xnvolved m the healing process of acute pancreatltls. Methods. Gene expression of five somatostaun receptor subtypes (sstr-I 5) in eight human pancreaUc cancer cell lines (MIA PaCa-2, Pane-1, PSN-1, FA-6, SUIT-2, BxPc-3, Capan-1, Capan-2) was first exammed, uslng a reverse transcnptase polymerase chum reacuon (RT-PCR) method. The same method was then applied to pancreauc cancer tissues and normal surrounding pancreauc tissues which were surgically msected In ten pauents. Anttpmhferatwe effects of somatostaun and its two analogs were exammed with MTI"assay for three human pancreatic cancer cell lines and hsstr-2A gene transfected NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Results. All cell lines, human pancreatic cancer and normal surrounding pancreauc tissues expressed mRNAs of more than two sstr subt}pes. Six of eight cell lines expressed sstr-t, 2, and 5, and two cell lines expressed sstr-2 and 5. Seven of ten pancreatic cancer tissues expressed sstr-I and six of ten pancreatic cancer tissues expressed sstr-3, sstr-5 was not detected except one case of pancreatic cancer ussue. Six of seven normal surrandlng pancreatic tissues expressed sstr-I and all cases expressed sstr-3. All cancer cell lines, pancreaUc cancer tissues and normal surrounding pancreatic tissues expressed sstr-2. Somatostatm and ~ two analogs mh,b~ted EGF stimulated pancreauc cancer cell prohfemtlon. Oxidative stress is regarded as a major factor in the pathogenesis of both acute and chronic pancreatitis. The mechanmms by which free radicals damage the acmar cells are not to be clarified. Present study aimed to determine an adequate model of oxidative stress by investigating the susceptibdity of isolated rat pancreatic acinar cells to oxygen radicals and by explonng the potential of small molecule antioxidants to prevent such injury. Method. Pancreatic acmar cells were isolated from male Sprague-Dawley rats, 180-200g, and exposed to oxygen radicals generated by iron/adenosine diphosphate for 30 mm at 37"C. As omdative indices, lip,d peromdation and cellular levels of superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH) and GSH peroxldase were determined. Small molecule antioxidants, ranging molecular weight, 163-536, such as rebamip,de, allopurinol, N-acetylcysteme and ~-carotene, were treated to the ceils s=multaneously w)th oxygen radical generating system. Result. Small number of acmar cells in the reaction m~xture were more susceptible to oxidative stress than large number of the ceils in the mixture. Antioxidant defences within the acinar cells easdy disturbed by oxidative stress; increase in lipid peromdatton, and decreases in cellular SOD, GSH and GSH peroxtdase. Small molecule anttox,dants s,mdady prevented these cellular alterattons caused by ox=dative stress even if they are reported to scavenge different oxygen rad=cals. Present iron/adenosine diphosphate system could be used for the studies on the mechantsm of oxidative stress-induced pancreatic diseases, and therapeuhc approaches to pancreatic disorders using small molecule ant~ox=dants capable of leawng the circulatton and readily crosmng cell membranes. Introduction: It is generally accepted that bdiary SPT is mandatory, to avmd possthle cholestasis and mfectmn due to edema after pancreanc SPT (Cremer M. Endoscopy "3:171,199 l ). However, above claim on dual SPT has not been proven by prospectwe randomized study. The aim of our study is to determine whether eholangitis develops more frequently when the patients have not undergone concomitant biliary SPT during the endoscopic pancreatic SPT Patients/Methods: Sixty panems (M:F=38:22, 15 to 34 yrs) with nonalcoholic chronic calcifying pancreatitts were enrolled. The patients with jaundice (bihrubm >3 mg/dl), cholangltis, or parenchymal liver disease were excluded. The patients were randomly subjected either to dual SPT (group h n=30) or to pancreanc SPT alone (group II: n=30). In group I, the pauents with both dilated choledochas and elevated alkaline phosphatase were categorized as group IA and the patients with normal liver function as group IB regardless of the hde duct diameter. The pmsa-m of pleuml effumon has been ~ as a rmrka" fcr sev~e I~a-xm~ilia ~ is a cu~va'sy ahxt ~heth~ ~a~-A ~'asion in acute ~cr~tis is associated v~th re:re ~e ~sease The ~n d this ~ was m ~ the associa~cn be~een ~euml effumon seventy in pmie~s ~th acute mncmmi'&~ ~ ~,~,~ evah~d .=ucev~--uvely for 216 pmients ~I;1.3Z F:7/) with acute ~-~atias ~kritted m o~ bos~ml ~ last 5 ~ The ~ of acute ~a-n~atis ~s ~ ~n ~ t,A:ical ~ns md sS~Xc~m ermrre etev'~ia~ and rad~ trdr~ AP.~:HE II and ~ smm at ~ITiSS~ ~ used far se~ity. The lammts ~e subdivided mm fmr etidcgical alcahct, ffallsta-es, ~do~c ~ o~ l~sults. Re.ral eff~ was sere in .1N213%) of 216 of patienm Alcohd was the rmst ca-rrnon etiology (Lq27.1~, follow by gallstmes (~6~ idiopathic (8t7.4%) and otN~ (,1:8~4). 7he effumors v~e ~/hrm-al in 21(47.8%), Idt-'ided in 19(39.~_/~, md fielded in 6(1~. Results d relmcr~p bemem ~he etidc~V" and sev~ .ty of mum grn-em~ ~th m:l ~tixax ~eral ~uaon ale as fdlov~ Pleural effumon ~s indeI:endeat of the euolog3" of the disease and the location ~as also apt correlated ~u~n ~'~mt3" of ~mcre~nns. Introduction. PancreaUc growth induced by feeding raw soybean rapidly regressed in size when the diet was changed to chow diet. The morphological changes of pancreas during involution indicate that cell death occurred by the process of apoptosis, but little is known about the pancreaUe functional changes whch accompany the morphological alteratmns. This study was designed to comlmm the response Of pancreatic exocrine secretion according to the mor0hological changes during and after raw soybean feeding in the rm. Mmtxxis. Tv, enty ~ght male S-D rat(XD-2g0g) ~ used. ~=e far grrx.ps fed crtffe4ng diets as follow~ grcup l(contml, n=~ v, em given chow cr~ gro~ 2(n=7) ~ gi~m raw soybean diet for 2 week, group 3(a=7) were given raw soybean diet for 2 week and then chow diet for 1 week. group 4(n=7) were given raw soybean diet for 2 week and then chow diet for 2 weeks. Pancreaac juice was collected for 15 rain. via PE-10 tube placed in the pancreatic duct For a .resting or CCK sumulated state, each rat received an intravenous iafumon of 05 M Ned (1.56 rd/hr) er C, CK (5). 10D m-d 200 ng/k~l'r), tNrx:reas was ~ for l~stolegy after ~:imSrr~ta Re~ts. I%x:re~c ~e~ght ~,as sifraficandy t~,'l~" in mt fed soybe~(~ot~ ?) compared ~ath those fed chow diet and pancreauc e.xocnne function was also increased according to durauon of raw soybean feeding(group 1). But enlarged pancreas reduced by feeding raw soybean for 2 weeks mptdiy regressed in weight after chow diet (group 3A). Also pancreatic exocnne funcnon was decreased after chow diet. But. there was no chfference in the response of pancreauc exocnne secretion to exogenous CCK stimulation in all four groups. The bastological results revealed that the l:~ncreaac revolution may be a form of programmed cell death. al~tosts. Conclusion. Pancreatac growth was assocmted wath increased lmncreanc exocnne funcuon. Al:optosis during Imncreauc involuuon did not disturb pancreauc exocnne inncuon. In the rat fed raw soybean, the ~mncreatac reslmnse to exogenous CCK s~auon was not different from normal pancreas. I<I-I lqm CD Era', HS Le~ SJ Le~ FU Park YT Jee~ HI Chu~ CW Song, SW Lee, SH Urrt JH Choi. I-IS Ryu. JH Hyun. ~nt of Internal Mediane. Institute of Digesuve Disease and Nutri6ort, Korea University College of Medicine, Seed. Korea Introduction. Gallstone pancreatius has showed higher mortality and morbidity rate as con-~ to other causes of ~acreadtis, and the lrolxn" timing of endoscopic retrograde cholan~opancreatograt~y (ERCP} and endoscopic sphincterotomy (EST) is still controversial. But recent several trials reveals that early ERCP/EST is safe l:rocedum and can reduce mortality and complication rate in gallstone pancreatitis. Methods. To assess the safew and effectiveness of early ERCP/EST. we perfomed ERCP and EST, if necessary, in 52 cases of acute gallstone pancreadtis dunng recent 4 years. The diagnosis of gallstone pancreauus was based on the typical signs and symvtoms, enzyme elevation, and radiolngical findings. Ranson criteria at adrmssion were used for seventy. Results. Early ERCP group (in 72 hours) were 33 cases and delayed group were 19 cases. Early and delayed FAT group were 22 and 1.7 cases, respectively, No stadsdcaUy sigruficant difference was found bet~veen early and delayed groups in blood chermstry and the sevent3" of l~ancrearaus according to Ranson cntena. Duedenoscol~c findings show normal ~ptUa m .~ cases, mpdlary edema in 24 cases, and hemorrhagm and lacerated papilla in 8 cases. No remarkable complications according to ERCP or EST were noted. The hospital days of early ERCP'EST group were sigruficantiy shorter than deia.ved group. Conclusmn. This result suggest that early endoscopic procedures on the diagnos~s and treatment were considered as a sa/e and effecnve treatment medality in the gallstone pancreatius. For identify, the t~ssue injury by ox3"gen free radical (OFR) in e.xtxrtrrental tmncreat/tis, rmastrerent of lipid ix~ro,,ddaaon lmXtmts has been used However. the antio.~dant defence inte.mc~ to form as inL-~ system, daerfore, it rray be maPla'ol:a-iate to rely on measurement of a single corrvonent as an indicator of the funcuoning of the entzre systan Recently, Total Andoxidant Status (TAS) is deveklxd for evaluating the overall lxrfornmce of the antio.,ddant system ~]~is study was to assess whether T-iS is a useful indicator for evaluatin~ the role of OFR as patho~enesis of e.'q:edn-en, M pmx:matitis. Methods. Twenty-one male S-D rat (200-250g B.wt) were used. There were three groups: Ca-oup 1(n=7, control), Group 2 (n=7, ceru]ein), and Group 3(n=7, taurocholate). Each rat received an iv infusion of cerulein(5ug/kg/hr) for 4 hours or intraductal taur~r..holate (5~ 0.1ml/100~ B.wt) injection. After #ancremids was induced, blco:l samoles for b~cher~cai chanses including TAS (P, andox Lab. Ltd, C.n.matin, L,~4J and glutathion pero.,ddase (Gl:'x) were taken. Pancreas was ~ for histology Results. Edematous and necrouza'N pancreatads were induced by cerulean and murocholar~, respeclavely in rat. The b~echerracal changes including TAS and CA:'x were as follows: Background: Serous cystadenoma(SCA) and muclnous cystic neoplasm(MCN) are the most common cyst;c neoplasms of the pancreas. It ~s very imoortant to d~fferenttate between these neoplasms because almost all of SCAs are benign but many of MCNs are malignant. Previously it has been shown that these tumors could be distinguished by racholog~o studies or cytologzc features and tumor markers ~n the cyst fluid. But there are significant rates of ovedaps in thetr findtngs and suffictent eptthetial cells could not be asp~reted to be examined. So other preoberattve confirmative diagnostic test should be develooed to be abte to determine whether the cystic tumors must be resected or not. Aim: The purpose of th~s study ~s to examine whether toucan staining of FNA espectally for background fluid matenal which ~s secreted from tumor cells can differentiate MCN from other cyst;c lesions. Methods: Seventeen FNAs were obtatned from 4 SCAs. 5 MCAs. 1 muo~nous ductal ectas~a. 2 paptllary cystlc tumors, I adenocarclnoma and 4 pseudocysts. Cytologic analysis was performed and muc~carmlne staining was done to see whether toucan ~s contatned ~n the cytoplasm of the cells or tn the background flutd matenal aspirated from the cysts Results: Epithelial cells were ol3served ~n 7(.58%) from 12 cystic tumors. But morohologlc features of the el3~thel~al cells could not allow definite charactenzatlon of cystic neoplasms. No muc:carrnme positive cells were found ',n FNAs from ~stlc neonlasms. On the contrary, background fluid matenal was statned ~os~tzvely w~th muc~carm~ne ~n 4(80%) of 5 MCNs and ~n 1 of 1 edenocarc:noma but not Jn cases of SCAs. 13ap~llary cystic tumors and 0seudocysts. Results. Female ~,,as predominant(M:F = 4:75), and mean age was 27 5 years . Chief complaints were abdominal pain (50.0%) and palpable mass144 9%). A,,erage size of the tumor was ~ 5cm(range 9 3cm -20cm).and roam Iocatmn was tail or body & tal(70 5%). In 4 cases, local zn'. asion to duodenum, spleen, colon, and portal vein were present. Distant bepatzc and peritoneal metastasis ~,,as tbund in one case. Most patients ~',ere treated wtth pancreatico-duodenectomy.distal pancreatectomy or local exc~smn. One patient ~,tth head lesion undertsent Rotz.,-en Y cystojejunostomy. At~er resection, there was no local recurrence man) case during mean follow up of 30monthtrange'lmonth-qyears) sa',e one panents v, ho died fi'om hepatm metastas~s after 2 ~ears. Conclusion. We conclude that PCN of pancreas can be regarded as an redolent, slo~l~ grov, mg tumor ha',mg a good prognosis after complete resection . but close obser-,auon is needed because of ~ts metastattc potenttal.ahhough tt is rare. Introduction. Mutations of K-ras are detected ~n 80-s of human ~ncreat~o cancers. So K-ras ~s believed to play a very tmportant role ~n cellular proliferatton of pancreatic cells. In many kinds of cells Ras traneduces s~gnals throug~ Raf, MEK (Mitogen activated ERK activating Kinase), and ERK (Extracellular s~gnal Regulated Kinase) ~n a low. Recently ~t Js known that PI 3-kJnase (Phosphat]dyhnos~tol 3-kJnase) ~s also very ~mportant Jn medtatlng Res signals and can regulate s~gnats of proliferation. Though Ras ~s thought to be the most ~mportant protein ~n Ioancreattc cells, the down stream 13athways ~nvolved ~n Ras signal is not known well ~n these cells. Aims. The pu~ose of th~s study JS to see whether ERK or PI3-k~nase are ~mportant ~n med~attng s~gnals for the proliferation of Res-mutated pancreatic cells. Methods. M~apaca-t. Panc-1, and Capan-2 cell I~nes were ~ncuoated ~n comolete media for 24 hours. Med~a was changed ~nto serum-free DMEM and ~ncubated for 6 hours. Then MEK ~nh~b~lor IPD980,5.9) or PI 3-ktnase tnh~b~tor {wortman~n) were added at the concentration of 0. 5. I0, 20. 50 uM, or 0. 50, 100, 200. 500 nM resaect~vely and cells were ~ncubated for 2 hours. Then Cells were stimulated w~th EGF or FBS rfetal bowne serum) for 48 hours and methyl 3H-thym~dtne was added. Degree of DNA synthes~s were measured with ,3 counter. Results. In all cell I~nes DNA synthes~s were suot3ressed by MEK inh~b~tor but not by Pt 3-k~nase ~nh~b~tor. One of [he results using Miacaga-1 cells are 0resented be!ow. Radtoact~wty/CPM) of S 0hase fraction of M~anaca-1 cells. Conclusion. Proliferation stgnal ~n K-ras mutated cell t~nes ts transmitted through ERK 0athway not through PI 3-k~nase. The Third Department of Internal Medicine, Tohok~ University School of Medicine, Sendal, Miyagi, Japan Introduction. We previously reported that activation of the hypothalamue-pituitary-adrenal axis may work for preventing the progress of acute pancreatitis. In order to further clarify the mechanism, we examined the role of endogenous glucocorticoids(GC) in pancreatic acinar cell death in vivo and in vitro. The rats undergone adrenalectomy(ADx) or sham-operation(Sham ope) were investigated for apoptosis(APO) in the pancreas and in various other digestive organs. In addition, the occurrence of APO in the pancreas during caerulein(Cn)-pancreatitie was studied in these animals. Rat pancreatic acinar cells, AR42J cells, were used to ~nvestigate the direct effect of RU38486(RU), a GC receptor antagonist, on the acinar cell APO. ADx caused increases in the labeling index of TUNEL only in the pancreas. Characteristic features of APO were confirmed in the TUNEL positive pancreatic acinar cells by the electron microscopy. In Cn-pancreatitis of ADx rats, the TUNEL labeled acinar nuclei increased remarkably wlth time after Cn-infusion. RU induced dose-dependently the APO of AR42J ceils, and administratlon of GC blocked the occurrence of APO in these cells. In RU-treated AR42J cells, Ca" influx into the nuclel was shown by the confocal laser scanning microscope. Wild type p53 mRNA was expressed in RU-treated AR42J cells. These results suggest the dependency of pancreatic acinar cells on endogenous GC for the survival. Endogenous GC may therefore work as a safeguard of acinar ceils by decreaslng thelr sensltivity for cell death during acute pancreat~tis. CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL STUDY OF NON-ALCOHOLIC, TUMOR-FORMING PANCREATITIS. S Kiriyama, S Nakano, I Takeda, T Kumada, Y Sone, A Mtyata, A Yamamoto, K Hayast, H SLmtzu, A Tamoto Department of Gastroenterology, Ogakl Municipal Hospltat Introduction. Pathophisiology of tumor-forming pancreatms, especially non-alcoholic, has not been enough known. In this study, tumor-forming panoreat~tts was climcopathologically investigated. Patients & Method. In 7 patients with non-alcoholic, tumor-forming pancrea'dhs, operated because of difficulty ~n differential diagnosis from pancreatic cancer, clinical features, imaging examinations and pathohistologml findings of the pancreas were retrospectzvely investigated. There were 3 men and 4 women, and the mean age was 56  12.5. Pathohistologtcally, the degree of intra-and interlobular fibrosis, infiltration of inflammatory cells, and disappearance of the acinar tissue was examined. Results, 1. They had rarely an abdominal pare, charactenst~o of pancreatltls; only one had a lower abdomtnal pron. Three patients had an immunological abnormality; pnmary sclerosing cholangms, ulcerattve colitis, and Sjogren's syndrome. 2. Imaging d~agnoms: Complete oiostructton and localized stenos~s of the mare pancreatic duct by ERCP were observed tn 6 patients and one, respectively. Enhanced CT faded to demonstrate central low dens=ty area, often charactenstic for pancreat=c cancer, tn 5 of 7 patients. 3. Pathohistologtcally, the charactensttc change was a remarkable infiltration of =nflammatory cells =n the pancreas rather than mter-Iobular fibros=s w~th disappearance of the acmar t~ssue Inflammatory cells, mmnly composed of lymphocytes, inf,ltrated remarkably =n four, and moderately ~n two pat=ents. Conclusion. Patients w=th tumor-forming pancreatms had rarely typ=cal complaints as pancreatms, w=th complications of ~mmunolog=cal diseases ~n some cases, and have been often d=ff~cult to make a differential dtagnoscs from pancreatic cancer Ncn-alcot~olic, tumorforming pancreatms ~s a spec=al type of chron=c ~nflammat~on of the pancreas, and ~n some cases, may be a Iocahzedly revolved pattern of chromo pancreatms w~th diffuse narrowing of the mam pancreatic duct, wit~ remarkable tnfittratton of inflammatory cetts, and suspected to be related closely to autotmmun~ty However. further mveshgatlons should be Oone ~n more dermis. T. Kinosh=ta, M. Konish=. K. Indue, M.Ryu. Department of Surgical Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Chiba, Japan Because of the common mode of pennural invasion of pancreatic cancer, extensive clearance of the nerve plexus becomes popular in Japan. However quality of life of the patient who received complete removal of nerve plexus especially around the superior mesenteric artery ( SMA ) is miserable. Most of patients suffer from severe diarrhea and malnutrition. In resecting pancreatic cancer, right or left half of the nerve plexus around the SMA is usually preserved in our institution. Intraoperative radiation therapy ( 20Gy of electrons ) is also applied after curattve resection. This procedure and pylorus preserving pancreahco-duodenectomy gives acceptable quality of fife of the patients. Patients and Method. Twenty eight patients received pylorus preserving pancreatlco-duodenectomy and 8 patients recetved distal pancreatectomy for cancer of the pancreas ( usual ductal adenocarcmoma ) with above mentioned preservation of the nerve plexus and with intraoperative radiation therapy ( 20Gy ) from July 1,1992 to December 31,1997. Quality of hfe of these patients were analysed by the change of body weight, performance status, food intake and a control of diarrhea. Result, All patients recover to the normal performance status, gain weight as before and can take foods as before w=thm 6months after operation. Dmrrhea of the patients was well controled by drugs in outl~atJent clintc. No patient needed readmissicn to control diarrhea and malnutntion. These results indicate mimmally acceptable quality of life after our way of radical resectmn of pancreatic cancer. Especmtly preservation of half of the nerve plexus can prevent uncontrollable diarrhea and malnutntlon. Introduction: The K-ras proto-oncogene is acuvated m more than 80% of pancreatic cancers, mostly with point mutauons at codon 12. The a~m of tiLlS study was to investigate the mtubltory effect of anttsense oligonucleottdes (ASON) d~rected against the K-ras gone on the growth of pancreatic cancer cell line. We also tned to clarify the sensitive locat~on as a target site for the anttsense oligonucleotide. Materials and Methods: We used a cultured cell line. HuP-Th established from malignant ascites of a patient with poorly differentiated pancreatic adenocaremoma, in our laboratory, m 1983. This cell hue had a mutated K-ras allele (GGT to GTT) at codon 12. We designed four kinds of the phosphorothioate ASON to target two different regions, i.e., A. codon 12 and B. AUG translational imtianon codes of the human K-ras mRNA. A-D mutation-matched ASON-codon 12; targeting G'l-r mutated codon. A-IT~ mutation-rmsmatched ASON-codon 12: targeting the wild codes. B-D ASON-AUG h targeting the AUG codon, with mires sequence. B-m ASON-AUG 2: targeting the AUG codes, without rotten sequence. Sense sequences of each target site were also synthesized as control. Each oligonucleotide was transfected mto cancer ceils by the tiposomemediated technique. Ceil growth actwities were estimated by MTT colonmetnc assay. The levels of K-ras p21 protein producuons were deterrmned using western blotting analysis. Results: .M[ ASON mhthttcd the tranbfected cell growth as compared with respectwe sense sequenced o|igonucleoude. Mutation-matched ASONcodon 12 inhibited the ceil growth and K-ras p2I protein expression strongly as compared w~th mutatlon-nusmatchcd one and sense sequenced oligonucleoude. Conclusions: ASON directed against the K-ras gone effecuvcly inhibited the growth of pancreauc cancer ceil hue probably through the reduction of K-ras p2t protein levels. ASON-codon 12 targeted K-ras point mutation was more efficient than mutation-mismatched one. These results suggested that ASON directed against K-ras gone would be useful for pancreauc cancer therapy, and codes 12 of mutated K-ras gene is an atu"act~e region for anti,once approach. Introduction. Combination of heat and various anticancer drugs can have a synergistic antitumor effect in vitro and in vivo, though the mechanism is not clear. We have previously shown that endogenous tumor necrosis factor (enTNF) acts as an intracellular resistance factor to inhibit the cytotoxic effect of heat by scavenging oxygen free radicals via the induction of manganous superoxide dismutasr (MnSOD). Consequentry, we examined whether the suppression of these resistance factors by combining anticancer drugs and heat cause augmentation of heat-mduced cytotoxicity in ancreatic carcinoma cells. ateriais and Methods. (1) The human pancreatic carctnoma cell line. PANC-1, constitutively expresses appreciable amounts of enTNF and also demonstrates heat resistance, was used in this study. (2) Heat sensitivity was mesured by dye-uptake assay and clonogenic assay. (3) The expression of enTNF was measured by a indirect fluorescein antibody method using polyclonal anti-human TNF antibody, and intensity of cell fluorescence was measured by a Fluoroskan II. MnSOD acnvity was assayed by the nitroblue tetrazolium method. (4) Apoptosis was determined by DNA ladder formation using agarose gel electropboresis. Results. (1) After treatment of FPuN'C-1 cells for 15 h wath adnamycin (ADM), the expresston of enTNF was decreased by -!.3%, and MnSOD activtty was suppressed by 55%. (2) The cytotoxic effects by the treatment of PPuNC-I cells with ADM followed by heat were greater than the sum of those observed with the agents administrated individually. Heat induced apoptosis was also augmented by pretreatment wuh ADM. (3) Furthermore. the specific mterleukin-l~-convertmg enzyme ~CE) inhtbitor. Ac-YVAD-CMK. reversed the augmented cytotox~ctty. These results indicate that heat-reduced apoptosls vta ICE-like proteases is augmented by ADM. and that the lninbmon of intracellular reststance factors such as enTNF and MnSOD ~s important mechanism underlying this phenomenon. Dept. of Surgery, IT, Himskima University, Hiroshima, Japan Introduction, We previously reported a model of acute alcoholic pancreadtis, however this model did not reach a severe state. We considered that this is because the pancreas in dogs, unlike that in humans, is not fixed to the reu'o~ritoneum. In the present study, we utilizedthe previous dog model but with the pancreas fixed to the retroperitoneum, and investigated the effect of the f~ttion in an experimental model of severe acute alcoholic pancreadtis. Methods. Adult dogs, weighing 9-15 kg, were used. A gastric fistula was prepared, and an 8 Fr tube was inserted into the greater pancreattc duct. Two weeks after the insertion, the duodenum was isolated 5 cm apart from the greater pancreatic duct on the anal side, followed by administration of ethanol (at 2.5 oJkg) into the gastric fistula (Group At.n=6). In a second group. fixation of the pancreas to the retroperitoneum in addition to the same treatrnentas in Group Ar was performed (Group Ar~-F. n=6) . In a third group, fixation of the pancreas to the retroperitoneum only was performed (Group F. n=6). In a control group, only laparotomy was performed (a=6]. Results. Group Ar represents the model that we have already reported and in this group, biochemical and histopathological findings obtained 36 hours after administration of ethanol demonstrated acute alcoholic pancreatitis. although the disease did not become severe. In Group Ar~-F. lethal condition was doted 2,1 hours after administration of ethanol. Accordingly. m all =m'oups mth, s present stud.',', laparotomy was re-performed 24 hours after adrmmstration of ethanol. In Group Ar+F. serum amylase, lipase, elastase [. ALT. LDH. and Cr levels 24 hours after ethanol admimstrauon were higher than before, whereas serum Ca and Po2 levels were lower. In Group Ar+F histopathological examination revealed that hemorrhag,c neerosts and infiltration of inflammatory cells were noted in the pancreas, and m addition.variable damage were noted in the lungs, liver, and kidneys.These findings were not noted in any of the remaining groups. Conclusion. Fixation of the pancreas to the retropentoneum was considered to be an impo~ant factor responslble for rendenng acute alcoholic pancreatitis severe. I. Kobayashl*, M. Miyacb, M. Kanai, M. Nagmo, S. Kondo, J. Kamlya, M. NakaoL N. Hayakawa:, Y. Nimura. The first department of surgery, Nagoya Univers=ty School of Medicine and "Nagoya University Hospital Pharmacy, and =Tokal Hospital, Nagoya, Japan Introduction. Recently, pylorus preserving pancreatoduodenectomy (PPPD) has become one of the standard surgical procedures for benign or malignant periampullary lesions. Although transient gastnc stasis immediately after PPPD has been a frequent complication, the cause remains unknown. Changes in gastric emptying (GE) function in solid and liquid meals were investigated in patients undergoing PPPD. 14 patients underwent PPPD for periampullary malignancies (2 papillary, 5 bile duct, 7 pancreatic head cancers). The liquid phase and solid phase GE functton were evaluated before and after surgery (mean: on the 38th postoperative day, range: the 27th to 53rd day). Two pharmacologic GE tests were used: acetammophen test for liquid phase GE and the sulfameth]zole capsule food test for solid phase GE. The absorption of the marker agents depends on the GE rate, a quick rise m the blood drug concentration suggests rapid GE. Results. The solid phase GE was delayed s)gnificantly in the postopeartive period. The peak sulfameth=zole concentration was 3.58--1.40 ~ g/ml at 150 minutes preoperatively and 2.08 --1.15 ',.t g/ml at 180 minutes postoperatively. The differences in liquid phase GE were not mgmficant. The preoperattve and postopeative peak acetammophen concentratmns were t 1.9 -1.6 u g/ml and 10.4---2.8 '~ gjml at 60 minutes. Gastnc function in the early postoperative period after PPPD Ls characterized by delayed solict phase emptying but good hqmd phase emptying. Harmonic imaging has been developed to enhance the effect of the contrast medium by intensifying second harmonic components derived from the cenmast medium and subtracting intrinstc steals from issues. However. even without contrast medmm, harmomc zmagmg ts known to ~mprove lateral resolution and the stgnal-to-no~se raao compared w~th conventional US. In this study, we evaluated the diagnosUc usefulness of harmomc imaging without contrast medium in disorders of the pancreas, fSubjects and methods] The subjects were 79 paUents with pancreas disorders who underwent harmomc ~maging w~thout oontrast medium at our department between December. 1996 and November, 1997. They consisted of 79 pancreas disorders (26 wtth ductal cell carcinoma, 26 with muem-producmg tumor, 10 with mass-formtug pancreaaus, 9 with pseudo cyst. 5 wtth serous cyst adenorna, and one paUent with tslet cell tumor, wtth sohd and papillary tumor, with lymphoepithehal cyst). We compared for chmcal usefulness between convenuonal US and Harmon,c ~mage Comparatwe cntena were as follows, Equal , Images equal to conven,onal US. Better, Images wzth more clear delinealaon. Excellent; Succeeded m ob~mn.o images not visible using convenuonal US The apparatus used was HDI3?J00 (ATI.., Bothell, Wash,ngton. USA) [Result} Seventy four (93 7%) cases of all 79 pauents were judged as Better or Excellent For each d)sorder, the paUents who were judged as Better or Excellent were 24,26t92.3%)-ductal cell carcanoma. 26,26(100%)-mucm-producmg tumor. 9,10(90.0%)-massfortmng pancreatttas. &'9(88 9%)-pseudo cyst. 4~5(800%)-serous cyst adenoma. 3,3(100%)-others. respecuvely [Discussion} Exact reasons for the above ads antages provtded by harmomc ima~ng are unclear But tt ,s believed that the major reason for the ~mprmed tmagmg charactensucs *s the reducuon m overall haze and clutter m the harmomc tmage In the pancreas disorders, because the masses were more clearly delineated b.', harmomc tmagmg, harmomc ,mage may take the place of conventmnal US m screening exammauon m the near future [Conclusion] Harmomc *ma--m.-wtthout enhancang ~ents is a very useful and new dmgnosUc methods m ~e pancreatic disorders Introduction A considerable amount of evidence collected from several ~'xperimental systems and clinical studies with NSAIDs indicates that cyeinoxygenase-2 (Cox-2) may play a major role in colorectal tumorigenesis. It has also been reported that expression of Cox-2 in co[orec~ carcinoma tissue and gastric carcinoma tissue was higher than normal mucosu. But little information about Cox-2 expression in pancreatic carcinoma is available. F-xpression of Cox-2 was investigated by means of both immunohistochemical analysis and immunoblot analysis in pancreatic tumors. Patients and Methods Samples of tumor tissue were obtained from patients with primary pancreatic tumors who underwent surgical operauons at our deparaneat. F, xpression of Cox-2 was investigated by means of immunoh~stochemical analysis (anti-human Cox-2 moAb) in 50 invasive ductal adenocarcmomas s(DAC), [6 ina'aductal papillary-mucinous adenocarcinomas (mallgnant IPMT), l0 intraductal papdlary-mucmous adenomas (benign IPMT') and 5 normal pancreatic tissues, lmmunoblot analysis was performed in 5 cancer tissues and 5 pancreatic cancer cell lines. Immunostainmg results were scored from 0 to 9 with regard to ratm of positive tumor celts and reia~ve immunostaming intensity, and samples w~th the score more than 4 were regarded as positive immunostaining. Results 1) Immunoblot analysis showed that Cox-2 protein expression was detected as a stogie band corresponding to a molecular size of 70 kDa. which is companbie with Cox-2. and expression rate in pancreatic cancer tissues was 5/5 and that m ceil lines was ~5. 2) The staining for Cox-2 was mainly idem, fied in the cytoplasm of cancer cells. Immune-positive rate of DAC was 72% (36/50), malignant IPNff was 31% (5/16), benign IP~fI" was 0% (0/10) and that m normal pancreauc tissues was 0% (015). immune-positive rate of DAC was significantly higher than that in malignant IPMT and in normal pancreatic tissues ( z : test: p = 0.0037. p = 0.0007). and that malignant [PMT was significantly h=gher than that in benign IPbfl" ( p= 0.018). 3) There was no significant correlation between expression of Cox-" =n DAC and prognoses of the pauents or ciinicopatholog~cal factors of the tumor, such as pTNM. chmcal stage, and histological grade in UICC classification. Conclusion Cox-2 was expressed in 72% of =nvas~ve pancreat,c ductal carcinomas and 31% of intraductal papillary-mucinous adenocatcinomas, but not m m~'aductat papillary-mucinous adenomas and normal pancr~t~c tissues it was suggested thai Cox-2 might be revolved in the carcinogenesis or" intraduckal papdla~'-mucmous adenocarcmoma and mvas~ve ductal adenocarcmomas Department of Oncological Pathology, Cancer Center, Nara Medical Untversity. 840 Shljo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634. Japan Adenocarcmoma of the pancreatic ducts is to the fifth leading cause of cancer death in both U.S. and Japan. Development of the disease is clinically silent so that at the time of the diagnos~s, the vast malonty of cases are incurable w~th a very poor prognos~s. Thus, prevention and early detect=on offer the only hopes for effective centre/of this deadly disease. The experimental model ofpancreatic duct carcinomas by N-nitrosobis(2-hydroxypropyl)amine (SHP) and related nitrosammas m hamsters was first introduced by Dr. KdJger in 1974. During the past 20 years th=s model utilizing N-nLtrosob=s (2-oxopropyl)amine (BOP), the most potent of the propylnitrosamme family of pancreatic carcinogens, has been widely used for studies of duct carc=nogenes=s because the morphological, molecular, and histological features of the tumors closely resemble those of their human counterparts. However, the relatively long latent penod prior to the appearence of pancreat=c duct carcinomas has lira=ted the application for studies of the mechan=sms of pancreatic duct carcinogenesis and bioassays of modulation potential. In this presentation, we would tike to introduction our rapid production model for pancreatic duct adenocarctnomas and to report the mechanisms of pancreatic duct carcinogenesis so far elucidated in hamsters. Th=s model incorporating the pnnc=ple of selectton by resistance to cytotox=city demonstrated ealier for liver carcmogenes=s. In th~s model, =t ~s evident that a senes of h~stogenetic steps are involved, leading from duct ep=thetial cell hyperptasia through a.typ=cal hyperplasaa to intraductal carcinoma and mvastve carcinoma. W=th regard to DNA alterations. K-ras mutations appear to be early events while p53 mutattons generally occur m the tumor progression phase. Midkine and nm23/NDP klnase genes are over-expressed tn invas]ve carcinomas and the mducad cancer cells may show autocnne growth, secreting TGF-cr and VEGE Ewdence of ~mmortatizat=on is ~r~OWded by ~ncreased telomerase act=v~ty w~th shortened telomeres. e rapid productlon model of pancreatic duct carcinomas has not only prowded ama or stimulus to understanding =nduct~on mechanisms but should also serve as a b=oassay to fact rate the identification of dietary risk factors and the search for appropriate chemoprevent~ve and/or chemcterapeut~c agents to help cor~trol th~s deadly disease. Introduction. Artenal pseudoaneurysm ~s one of the most catastrophic complication of pancrea~tis. Interventional procedure has been reported as an effective and a salty treatment for such complication. Author report a rare case of inferior phren=c artery pseudoaneurysm secondary due to pancreatltlS treated successfuly w~th the transcatheter embolizatJon. Patient. A 49-year-old alcohol abuse woman was edm=tted to our hospital for acute pancreatitis. Computed tomegraphy (CT) showed an enhanced mass and a pseudocyst at the ta=l of the pancreas. Ang=ography revealed an inferior phren=c artery aneurysm. Transcatheter embolizat=on using m=crocoils was performed superselectlvely wa the left mfenor phren~c artery through a microcatheter. After thas procedure, the pseudoaneurysm was disappeared on CT. The pseudoanerysm, however, was regrowth acompanmg w~th increasing level of serum elastase I after a month later. Therefore, additional embolization was needed. Result. After the second embohzation, the pseudoaneurysm on CT enlarged again concom=tant w~th transcent elevation of serum elastase I. However ~t dtsappeared spontaneously later The patient has not been suffering from the symptoms of pancreatlt~s. Conclusion We expenenced a rare case of left Lnfenor phren~c artery pseudoaneurysm caused by acute pancreaUt=s. Transcatheter embolizatr was an effective and a safety treatment for the pseudoaneurysm of th=s case. Introduction. The p53 tumor suppressor gene plays important roles m regulaung the ceil cycle and apoptosts. The p21 gene product ts induced by wtld type p53 and mediates the G t arrest of the cell cycle. While ac~vanon of telomerase has been detected m majon~ of human cancers, tt renk~ns unclear whether there is any hnkage between the tumor suppressor genes and telomerase acuvtty m cancer ceils. In the studies presented here. we invesugated the effects of p53 and p21 genes transduct]on into panereanc cancer cells on cell growth, apoptosts, cell cycle, and telomerase ac-vtty. Materials and Methods. The cell line used ts a human paacrcanc cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2, which e,,dubtts a p5"3 gene mutation. The exponenaaily growing cells were incubated wtth PBS (mock), or infected at a mot of 100 wtth AdLxZ (control). Adp21 (p21), or Adp53 (p53) for one hour. The number of ceils was counted, cell vtabtlity was assayed using proptdium iodtde (PI), and telomerase actavt .ty was measured by TRAP assay for four days. Transttaons of the cell cycle were analyzed by flow cytometty. Results. Overexpresstons of the p53 and p21 proteins were confirmed by Western blot analysts after trunsducnon of the genes. Growth of the cells transducted wtth the p21 gene were resmcted to 46% of control and arrested at the G t phase. However, apoptouc changes were not prormnenL Telomerase acuvmy was reduced to 32% of control. The p53 gene Wansdu,.mon caused more severely cell growth mhibmon 11..1.%) and induced apoptosts. Flow c'2,.tomemc anal)sts showed accumular.on of apoptoUc nuclear fragments (the subG~ area of cell c2,'cte) wtth the G~ arrest. Moreover. telomerase acuv~ty, was completely depressed to 2% of control. Conclusion. Cur results demonstrate that the p53 and p21 genes mhib~t growth of human pancreauc cancer cells and the p53 gene induces apoptolac cell death. Telomeruse acav=t2:" can be used ~ a parameter of the aw, c.' .' .' .' .' .' .' .' .' ancer effect and mtght be related to cell cycle and apoptos=s. AFTER ENDOSCOPIC DRAINAGE OF THE MAIN PANCREATIC DUCT R. Laugier, C. Renou. Gastroenterology Department, Unwersity Hospital, Marsedle, France. Introduction : increased mare pancreatic duct (MPD) pressure ~s frequently considered as a mechanism of pain during chromc pancreatltis (CP) e~ther calcifying or obstructwe. Nevertheless, MPD pressure has never been assessed at the end of endoscop=c drainage procedures in painful CP or pancreas diVlsum (PD) as a predictive factor of clinical effectiveness. Patients and method : out of our cases of painful CP or PD treated by endoscopm drainage, 13 patients (10 men, 3 women, mean age=45.1 years, range " 18-67) wtth good clinical results after a long term follow-up (45 months) were studied manometncally. The major feature was a MPD stncture m all pattents (CP 11 in cases, PD m 2 cases) whtch was cahbrated with a 7F (2 cases) or a 12F (11 cases) stent dunng a mean time of 13.6 months (range 9-31) The pressure was stmultaneously measured m the duodenum (zero level) and tn the MPO thanks to a dual electronic pressure device. The pancreattco-duodenal grad=ent (PDG) represented the difference between pressure =n the MPD and in the duodenum. Results -the mean PDG did not decrease after drainage (16 1 before, 15 2 mm Hg after). The 7 patients who had normal PDG (10.2 before and 5.9 mmHg after) had a complete disappearance of the MPD stenosis. In the 6 remaining patients who had an elevated PDG after drainage (24 7 before, 22 4 mmHg after), the MPD stncture persisted or was unchanged. Sex, age, aetiolcgy, duration of stentmg or followup and stent d~ameter was not different ~n the 2 groups. Conclusion a normal PDG after endoscop=c drainage of the MPD was always associated w~th a good anatom=cal result, while an elevated PDG could not predmt the clmmal effecUveness of treatment. R. Laugler, C. Renou. Gastroenterology Department, Umversaty Hospttal, Marsedle, France. Background and aim . SOM has already been demonstrated to be efficient for indicating endoscopic sphmcterotomy (ES) in case of sphincter of odd~ dyskmes~a, when the bdJary or the pancreatJco-duodenal gradient is enhanced. So far, no demonstration exists as to know what tO do when these gradients are normal although symptoms exist and ducts are dilated. Our aim was to validate in a retrospectzve study the abstention of ES when SOM was normal in ~ose patlents. Patient and Method 13 patients (M/P. 4/9, age range 24-81, mean 52.4+/-19,1 years) were included in th~s study All but two presented wroth pare episodes of either bfliary or pancreattc type 8iolologlcal cholestasls was present in 2 patients. Mean diameter of the main bde duct (MBD) was 10.1+/-4 1 mm at ultrasonography. Five pataents had been prewously cholecystectomlzed and 5 had gallstones. Endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography demonstrated a MBD diameter of 10.9 mm w~thout stones. As SOM was normal m all cases, we decided not to perform ES (plateau value, amphtude and frequency of contraction gradients). all 13 patients were followed up during a mean of 42 months Three out of the 5 patients w~th gallstones were cholecystectom~zed as recommanded before SOM and one more although no stones were detected r Dunng the follow up, we observed one episode evocative of ang~oct~oht~s whtthOut btologtcal proof 37 months after SOM (follow up 62 monks), one episode of atyp~cat pare while another patient presented wtth repetet~ve pare relieved by oral trmftnne spray. The 10 remaining patients were totally pmn free None has necessitated a endoscoptc or surgical papfllotomy. Conclusion SOM ~s ~nterestmg ~n case of bfltary or pancreatic pare and dilated duct when SOM appears normal ~t seems tO be relevant not to perform ES although the ducts are d~lated. Introduction. The generation of oxygen-derived flee radicals has been implicated in the pathogenesis of experimental pancreatitis. The aim of this study was to determine the role of oxygen-derived free radicals in patients with acute pancreatitis. Patients and Method. The serum levels of lipid peroxide(LPO), myelopero~dase (MPO) and C-reactive protein(CRP) were measured 13 patients with acute pancreatitis and 1.4 healthy volunteers as control subjects. The seventy" of acute pancreatiris was assessed by Atlanta Classification. Results. The mean age of patients with acute pancreadtis and healthy volunteers were 53.6=15.9 and 32.5=7.6 years. The sex ratio(M:F) of the two groups were 11:2 and 10:4, respectively. The serum levels of LPO. MPO, amylase and CRP were as follows (table) . Conclusion. The senam levels of LPO and MPO were higher m pataents with acute pancreatttts than control group..2maong acute pancreatttts group, these levels were htgher m severe oancreatms than rruld pancreatms but no statistical stgntficance was found. Introduction. Gallstone is the most common cause of acute pancreatitis, but the mechanism of cell death m human and experimental pancreamis remains poorly understood. The experimemal models of pancreatitis induced by duct obstruction are particularly important because they closely resemble the mechanical events that occur during or after gallstone passage Thus, this study was designed to determine the mechanism of cell death in the model of pancreafitis induced by pancreaticubllia~/duct(PBD) ligation in rats. Methods. Thirty five male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into six groups; Group A, sham operated; Group B, PBD obstruction for 1 day; Group C, PBD obstruction for 2 days; Group D, PBD obstruction for 3 days, Group E, PBD obstruction for 5 days: and Group F, PBD obstructron for 7 days. In each rat, we evaluated the biochemical and morphological changes. Biochemical parameters were serum amylase, lipase, AST. ALT, alkaline phosphatase and total bllirubin Morpholo~cal changes were shown by light macroscopy, chromatin condensation and DNA breaks were assessed using Apoptag In Sire Apoptusis detection kit Results. The level of amylase and lipase peaked within 24 hours after PBD obsu'uction, and returned to baseline after 5 days despite persistent obstruction. Acinar cell deletion and prohferattoo of ductal-like cells were prominent after 3 days of PBD obstruction without an acute inflammatory response Complete deletion of acmar cells and severe atrophic changes of pancreas with fibrosis were observed after 7 days ofPBD obstructmn When the TL,'NEL technique was used. PBD ligation in rats was noted to reduce apoptosts in a monophasic manner Apoptos, s reached peak level on day three. and then declined. Introduction. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is characterized by low resectabdi~' and poor long-term survival due to distant metastases and locally advanced disease which precludes curauve reseetron, while regional pancreatectomy improves resection rates in a locally advanced lesion. However this procedure has been reported to involve high mortally" and morbidity without improvement of Iong-term survival. We are going to analyze this procedure comparing with other pancreatectomy and non-resection procedures in patients v, qth pancreas cancer. Patients and Method. From August 1989 to September I997. 162 patients operated on tbr pancreas adenocarcinoma were grouped into non-regional pancreateclomy group(NRP.n=32), regional pancrentectomy ~oup(RP.n=37), and non-resection group{NR,n=93). Their clinical features, morbldi~" and mortality, and risk factors for prognosis were analyzed retrospectlvel.v. Results. Out of 162. 69(42.6%) patlents under~ent resection. Operative procedures were pancreaticoduodenectom~ m 22 pauents, distal pancreatectomy in 9. total pancreatectomy m t. and regional pancreatectom? m 37 Overall morbidi~" `*as 25.0% m NRE and 40 5% in RP Hov, ever there v, as no monaliD" m both groups. One-year survival rate ~as 50.7% m NRP. 30.0~ in RP. and I1 6% m NRIp < 0.05). In a same stage, namely stage IlI oneyear survi',al rate was 38.9% in "4RP. 26.9% m RE and 1".9% in NR(p < 0.05). Interestmgl.~. in a locally advanced legion such as T3 . one-year sut~ tval rote ~as 37 0% in RP and no sur,, v, al In NRP regardless of nodal status tp < 0.05). Factors affecting prognos~s ~ere tumor sizelp=0 013). I.~mph node status~p=0.022L and tumor stagelp=0021) Conclusion. Regmnal pancreatectomy tmpro'.ed resectablfitx and sur,.ival rate m a locally ad'.anced legion ~thout s~gmficant addiuxe risks of morbldiD and mot~,lit), compared ;'.lth the classical resectmn procedures. (IPMT) is an uncommon and not ,hell defined intraductal pancreaUc tumor. This tumor illus~ates aa good example of precancerous lesion from bemgn epithelial dysplasia to carcinoma. We are going to characterize the IPMT as a premalignant condition m the patientS operated on in our deparnnent. Patients and Method. We retrospectively analyzed 20 IMPT patients admitted and confirmed histologically from August 1994 to December 1997 in our department. Results. Male was predominant as the rauo of 3.1 and the mean age was 62)ears (4%73). The symptoms in the descending order of frequency were: upper abdominal pain to 14(70%) with 4 months of symptom duration, weight [uss m 4(10%) .and no symptom in 2 cases According to CT.MRI.ERCP. mmn pancreatic duct was in,,ol~ed in 20% and tbcal ductal branch in 80%. Surgical procedures '*ere total pancreatectomy in 4. pancreticoduodenectomy in 12. segmental resecuon of pancreas in I. distal pancreatectomy m 1. and bypass in 2. Site of tumor was head in 60%, uncinate 5~ body 10%,tad 15%. and diffuse in 10%. In histology ductal epithetial h,,perplasia was detected in 15%. h~perplasla associated with dysplasla 15%.hyperplama or dysplama associated v, lth adenoma in 5% and t0% each, and cancerous change in 55%. ?ancreanus was associated m 48%. The size of the tumor ~as 7 9 cmm the cancerous lemon and 2.5cm in benign lesion. Post resection mortaht.~ and recurrence ~,ere not detected during follov, up period( l-19too) Conclusion. Regarding the incidence of IPMT m our series, this lesron should be ruled out in exeD patients complaining the s~mptom of pancreattus Considering the existence of an adenoma -carcinoma sequent', m [P.MT. pancreatectomy including the removal of enure lemon should be considered for the control of this curable disease Growth inhibitory effects of a novel somatostatin analog (TT-232) on pancreatic cancer. J-U Lee, g. Hosotam. M. Wada, T. Koshiba. K. Fujimoto. Y. Mlyamoto, R, Do,. S. Tsuji, S. Nakajtma. M. Imamura. Department of Surgery and Surgical Basle Science. Kyoto Unwatstty, Kyoto 606-0 I, Japan. Somatostatm. a natural tetradccapeptide, possesses annsecretory and annproliferanve activities on several tumor cell lines. In recent years, many somatostann analogs have been d~veloped as antipre, liferative agents. The amtprohferanve aeneas were reported to be mmnly mediated through the type 2 somatostatm receptors (sstg). The sstP,2 was a major of receptor among sstRs in normal pancreas, whereas it was less exhibited m pancreanc cancer. Th,s fact ts thought to be the reason why the formerly developed somatostatm amdogs exert some side effects before they show thelr anuproliferanve effect on pancreanc cancer. In 1996, however, a novel somatostann analog wlth a umque five-~:s~due ring m'ucture. "1"T-232, was reported to have mmor-selectwe antipreliferanve acnv~ty without antisecretory activity (PNAS. USA. 93, 12513-1251g. 1996 . We obtained 1"1"-232 (D-Phe-C~-Tw-D-Tm-Lyp~-Tht-NI-{2) and RC-160 (D-Pbe-Cvs-Tw-D-Tro-Lvs-Val.Cvs-Trp-NI-12) from Dr. Fujfi (Faculty of Pharmaceuncal Sciences of Kyoto Umvers~t2i ) In this study, we examined whether these agents have antipmhferanve effects and receptor binding activity Ill vtu'O and anti-tumor effects In vlvo usmg human pancreatic cancer cell lines. Methods: I. PANC*I. AsPC-I, Capon-2. CFPAC-t and MmPaCa-2 cells were employed. The ceils were plated m 24 multi-well plates. In the exponennal phase of growth m monolayer, the cells were incubated with T'I'-232 and RC-160 for 48h. The cells m monolayer were measured by Coulter-counter to compare the annprohferanve effects among these agents. Furthermore. cell survival fracnon assay was done for TT-232 to deny a simple toxic effect. 2. PANC-I cells affected with 5 gM TT-232 for .tgh were subjected to FITC-TUNEL stummg to detect fragmented DNA. 3. AsPC-I cells (I 5xl06) were subcutaneously ~mplanted to nude mine w,th simultaneous mtraperltoneai injection Of 5 mgikg TT-232 twice a day for 31 days. 4 Membrane fraction (50ag/5OaL) was exlracted from Mia PaCa-2 cells and react wlth 30pM l I I ln-DTPA-O"T-232) 50ttL foliowmg addit,on of 50t~L of"i-1"-232 m 10 -6 -10 "12 M to plot the receptor-binding mhlbltton curve Results: I. "V1"-232 inhibited the growth of all of four cell hoes m a do~-dependent manner, l'he ICh0s were apprommately 5, 10. 15. 15 and 20 ~.tM m PANC-I. MmPaCa-2. Capan-2, AsPC-1. CFPAC-1 cetls, respecnvely Re-160 had no antzprohfemttve effects on these cell lines. 1-100 p.M ofTT-232 d~d not affect the cell survwal fraction, mdlcanng that the annproliferative activity, of'1"1"-232 was specific effect within the concentranons used m these studies. An intravenous catheter is inserted into the rectum about 20-30r deep. and 500ral the mixture was instilled 4-6 a day.. In addition, 10Oral of the mixture was introduced through a nasogastric tube into the stomach 4 -6 a day champing the tube f~ 30rain after installation. When inmstinal paralysis, ~eus and abdominal distension were improved, the therapy was changexl to 100ml of the mixm~ twic~ a day until MODS improved. R~ul[s: total mortality rate is about 9"~.3/33) and r.'Msed mortality rate is about 3~ patients wath SAP di*d from .~,LSOF on the day admission, one only was 5hr.and the other was 21hrA. SAP ,,.--it,.'da of severity, consist of ~n's early object sign~"3, Clinical cfit~ia of Bank and Wisc>I,APACHE-I]>g and Balthazat"s CT" C. Conclusion: The results seem to indicate that ITCWM therapy may reduce the mortality rate in the patients with SAP when used with other standard techmqtms. Mechanism of action of traditional Chinese medit;inv include facilitating intestinal paralysis and protnoting bowel ,ontcnt cxcretud making pancruanc juice and gall drainage. increasing living-organ and pancreas blood-perfusion as well as oxygen IlnliTanolx blocking ischemi~reperfusion injury., resisting ~ytokme injury. ( TN'Fa. P.LF. IL-1,2.6 Lproteclang intestinal bamcr and decreasing organisms wanslor maintain oncro-~ologacal eqtalibnum in but, ,:onfi'ont cndotovan and ~-mdotoxetma. Clln/cal controlled study of early ERCP and endoscopic treatment in the acute pancreatltls Li Zhao-shen, Xu Guoming. Dept. of Gastroenterology, Cha~ghai Hospital, the Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, (200433) , China Introduction. To evaluate the value and safety of early endoscopic re.grate choiangiopancreatograpby(ERCP). Patients and Methods. 126 patients with acute pancreatitis were randomized to divide into two groups. Six~ six patients with acute pancreantis in the early ERCP group were under-want early ERCP and endoscopic therapy (within 3 -10 days). 60 patients with acute pacreadtis were not treated by surg~ally, r and early ERCP in control group. The disappearance of the abdominal pain, decreese of serum asnylasr level, the mean days and cost of the bospitodzatton and complications were observed in all the patients of two groups. Results. (1) In the early ERCP group, ERCP showed that in 54.5% of ease with biiiary tract disease, 4 cases with pancreatic stones, 4 cases of pancreatic divisum, 4 cases of larger divemcula of around the papilla., and 17 cases of normal (~ 33 cases with biliary tract disease were treated by endoscopy including papdlosphmcterotany, endoscopic nosal bdiary drainage and endoscopm dilatation of the accessory papilla, with no complicatins. (~ There were no significant differences in the decrease of serum amylase level and the cost of the hospaalizarion in early ERCP group and control group, but the days of the disappeareace of abdominal pain and the hospitalization were significant shorter m the early ERCP group than m the control groop (p<0.01). Conclusion. It as more safe and effectwe that the patients with acute pancreatitis undergo early ERCP and endoscoplc therapy. especially acute severe bdiary pancreatttis. 5-HT3 receptors axe widely dismbuted in both enteric and enteroVancreatic nervous system. Duodenal actdification results m the release of not only secreUn, but also 5-HT. However, it has not been clardied whether or not 5-HT receptors (5-HTR) plays a role on the reJease and aCdon of sec~tin We mvesugated the effects of ~nclnlol (PD) and 5HTP-DP Cooth are 5-HTtR antagomsts), Kemnsenn (KT, 5-HT:R antagomst) and ondansetron (OD, 5-HT~R antagomst) on paocmanc exocnne secreuon ~ ti~ release of s~n in response to duo~naJ aadificauon m amstheuzed rats. In addi,on, a posstble cholin~gic role on the acuon of KT and OD was also studied. Meth~.s: rats were prepared vath duodenal pancreatob cannulas as well as jugular venous catl~eters. HCl (0.031',0 was infused iatrnduodenally (id) with or without tv atropine at 50gg/kg and ~ I~g/kg/h. Vanoas 5-HTR amagomsts were administered iv. Exogenous seereun (2.5, 5 and 10 pmol/kg/h) was g~ven tv m some rats. Pancreauc jmce was collected to measure volum~ and bicarbonate output, and ~mmunoreactlve secreun level m plasma was detet-nmaed. Results-In basal state, all 5-HTR amagorasts so studied did n(x atgmficanfly influence pancreauc section or plasma secreUn level. Bo~ pancrea.uc sec~don and release of secreun reduced by duodenal actdificauon were dosedependently tnlubtted by K'T (l-I00 tlg/k.g) and OD (1-100 ~g/kg). whereas PD (1 mg/kg) or 5HTP-DP (1 mg/kg) did not. Atropine faded to modify, KT-or ODiulabned release of secreun by duodenal actdificauon. KT and OD also suppressed paocreanc secretion m response to exogenous secreun at 2.5 and 5 pmol/kg/hs but no~ I0 pmol/k~Uh. Atropme parually reversed KT (10 lag/kg).mtubtted pancreauc secxeuon m response to secretm (36A.+I0.1%. 67.7_+13.0% vs 54,1_+16,3%, 104.5-+24.7%). r 5HT.,R and 5-HT~R mediate duodenal ac~dificauonstimulated release of secretm and aeoon of secreun at phystolo~cal doses. Introduction. Chronic relapsing pancreatitis (CRP) is a common disease of digestive system. The results of the treatment are not always sausfactory. Taking into r significance of the phospholipase A2 at pathogenesis of CRP, we used inhibitors of this enzyme m complex ~eatment of the disease. Patients and Methods. 110 patients suffering from CRP m the exacerbanon stage were observed in our clinic. 30 of them received usual therapy with spasmolytics, cholinolytics, fermental drugs (group D, 50 of the patients received additionally protease inhibitors such as contrycal, ete (group H), 30 other patients apart from the basic therapy received inhibitors of phosphotipase A2 --tetacm-caicium (EDTA) in the dose of 10 ml once a day in the course of 10-15 days (group III). 30 healthy persons were also observed. Results. Stopping of the pain syndrome was more effeettve in the patients received EDTA, than in other groups. In the group III pain syndrome remained the same only m one case (3.3%L para decreased at 21 pattents (70.0%), pain ceased at 8 patients (26.7%). Admintstering tetacin-calcium treatment, authentic improvement of the functional state of pancreas was reached. This results in increase of debit pan of amylase, t~'psin and tipase in duodenal contents and also in increase of index of immune-reacttve insulin in blood. The level of immune-reactive phospholipase -\2 was increased before treatment in the patients of all groups. Only in the patients of group Ill this index had signtficantiy decreased alter the treatment. Expenmcntal studies demonstrate the croctal role of pmt=Lses m the pathogr of acute pancreanns (AP) However ts not known ff the amount of pancreauc enzs.me into the organ determines the seventy, ofAP Prcwous studies have shown that undcmutrutton reduces the mortah% of acute experimental pancreanns probably by decreasing pancreanc e~'me content The present study was designed to assess the effect of acute redacttou of pancr~ttc enz)~uc content in the outcome of expenmental AP METHODS: Acute pancrcantts '.sas reduced m rats b} mf'J.smn of 2.5% sochuro taurocholate rote the pancreattc duct through a PS0 catheter Pulroonaq." injury secoudary to :L v ~as evaluated by using a morphometric techmque (Wctl~L 1990) Hepanc celular dmnage ',,.'as r through the stud~ of rmtocondnal resptruso~" fimctton (RCIL $4. and ADP/O toxin). ?umlase. ~sm and volume of ascmc fluid '.~ere also anal.~sed Rats ~,,ere divlded in c,,,o groups Group l (Con~'ol group)" 52 rats '.stthout reducuon of pancreaoc enz3mauc content. Group II (Expenmental group) 54 rats subrruRcd to reducnon of pancr=aoc en~.. BACKGROUND" One of the major problems associated with the management of insulinomas is their preoperative localization after the diagnosis has been made. The purpose of th~s study was to analyze the efficacy of preoperative localization of these tumors and the immediate and late results of their surgical treatment. METHODS. Fifty-nine patteots with hyperinsuhnism were studied and the results of the diagnostic tools for tumor preoperative localization were compared with findings at surgical intervention. The influence of the type of surreal procedure on the immediate and late postoperative courses was studied RESULTS Fifty-five of the 59 cases were benign lesions Preoperative diagnosis was possible by US in 28 1% of the cases, by CT imaging in 25%, by combined selective celiac and mesenteric ang~ography in 54 19/o, by EUS in 27 2*,/0 and by assay of portal plasma insulin levels in 94 4% In 54/55 cases (98 2%) the tumors could be identified intraoperatively by palpatlon. By the addition of intraoperative US all les~ons were identified Twenty-nine enucleanons and 32 resections were performed m the 55 patients with bemgn tumors The five patients with malignant lesions were submitted to pancreauc resections There was no mortality m this series External pancreatic fistulas were the most frequent complications and all healed spontaneously Late diabetes developed in three cases at~er distal pancreatic resec,on Long term results were excellent m 98 I% of the bemgn cases Only one of the pat~eots w,h malignant tumors survived more than 5 years CONCLUSIONS It is concluded that preoperatwe localization of msulinomas ~s not absolutely necessary, and by combining peroperatt',e palpation with mtraoperatl~e US. mainly at reoperauons, most of the cases can be adequately dealt ~tth Tumor enucleat~on ~s the best choice tbr treatment of the bemgn les~ons except those assocmted with type I multiple endocnne neoplasia. Introduction. Mucan-producmg tumor of the pancreas (MPT) has been increasingly recognized as a new climcal enuty m Japan. Histopathologtcally, for the most part, It consists of mtraductal pap,llary adeno-carcinoma and adenoma, although some cases are diagnosed as hyperplasm. It is clinically important to distinguish adenocarcmoma / adenoma from hyperplas~a. Patients and methods. From 1983 to 1997, we have encountered 111 MPT cases, including 43 operated cases (23 adenocaromoma. 15 adenoma. 5 hyperplasla). Imdally we evaluated the relanonshlp between imaging findings and hmstology, and continued to examine the changes of ima=,nng findings for followed up cases. Results. We classified MPTs into main duct type and branch duct type. Branch duct type was overwhelrmngly predormnant, and almost all of the rnmn duct type were mah~ant. The branch duct type cases with excrescent nodule of 6ram or more. dilated branch duct of 25mm or more and/or mmn duct of more than 7mm were all adenocarcmoma and adenoma. There zs no effecnve Imagmg modahty to distmgmsh adenocarcmoma from adenoma. However. it is possible to distinguish adenoma or adenocarcmoma from hyperplasla We are following up 61cases of suspected hvperplasla m accordance with our diagnostic criteria. S. Anna Hosp. , Como, Italy~ + Neuroscience Dept., Changchun Univ., China~ J Liver Unit Crespi, Milano, Italy. Introduction. Hepatic cell injury with subcellular organelle damage has already been reported in the course of AP. The aim of t-his study was to make an assessment of hepatic energy parameters during AP while testing 2 potentially protective molecules. Katerials and Methods. Sprague-Dowley rats, were allocated into 4 groups: A) saline at 0.6ml/hr for 6 hours; B) saline + Caerulein 5~g/kg/hr for 6h~ C) as B, + 5mg/kg body w~. Taxol s.c.~ D) as B, + 10mg/kg/hr Nafamostat Mesilate (FUT-175) i.v. Six hours later rats were sacrificed and venous, arterial and liver tissue samples were used for biochemical work-up. Results. As compared to B, either C and D treatments limited the increase of GOT and GPT level (D > C, p<0.05). However, only FUT-175 prevented (p<0.05) the hepatic energy metabolism failure (arterial pyruvate, lactate, pyruvate/ lactate ratio, acetoacetate and acetoacetate/3hydroxybutyrate ratio, tissue ATP, ADP, AMP, Total Adenine Nucleotide and Energy Charge). A timecourse increase of Lysosomal Cathepsin B leakage and my~hocondria MDH leakage was observed in liver tissue of B group (p<0.01 vs control). Both treatments equally limited such phenomena (p<0.05). However, at 180min FUT-175 proved to be better than Taxol (p<0.05). These data confirm the liver involvement during AP and suggest that microtubule stabilizers and, to a greater extent, low molecular weight protease inhibitors may protect the inner liver tissue function. Reduced portal inflow of activated pancreatic enzymes, together with intracellular stabilizing and free-radical scavenging actions are candidate mechanisms. EXTENT OFNECROSIS. F. Marotta*, +Z.L. Li, w u Naito, G. Harbi. GI Serv., S. Anna Hosp., Como, Italy~ +Gastroenterol. Dept., Shianxi Prov. Hosp., Xian, China~ w Sumitomo Memorial Hosp., Nagoya, Japan. Introduction. Recently the role of cytokines as "acute phase response" mediators within the common pathway of inflammatory processes has been suggested. The aim of this study was to make a time-course assessment of some parameters of the cy~okine cascade during AP of different severity. Materials and Methods. In 205 Wistar rats, three models of AP were applied: A) Caerulein-induced (7~g/kg/h for 6h i.v.); B) as A, plus 10mg/kg lipopolysaccharide (LPS) i.p. injection 3h afterwards; C) 3% Na-taurocholate injection into the common bile duct. Saline and sham-operation were considered for control of A/B and C group, respectively. Sacrifices were made at i, 3, 6, 9, 12, 48h plus observation until death for extra 25 C-group rats. Samples were withdrawn for: routine chemistry, TNF-O~ IL-6, IL-8, Granulocy~e colony-Stimulating Factor (G-CSF) and endotoxin (Ex). Results. As a whole, peak levels of each cytokine were significantly higher in AP rats ( C > S > A ) than in control (p<0.001). Levels in C group were higher vs A and B groups (p<0.01) and increased later on. TNF-~ and Ex level were negligible and delayed in group A. IL-6 and IL-8 were correlated in S and C group (r:044, p<0.05). However, only IL-8 and G-CSF correlated with the prognosis (days of survival) in Cgroup (p<0.05).Ex, which showed a time-course increase, was related to TNF-~, G-CSF and IL-6 (p<0.05) but only G-C3F significantly correlated with the e~ent of necrosis (p<0.05). Conclusion. These data suggest that the severity of AP is related to an earlier and more sustained increase of some cy~okines. TNF-= seems to tailor IL-6 and G-CSF correlation with Ex and necrotic damage. F. Marotta F*, J R. Barreto, +C.C. Wu, G.Barbi. GI Service, S. Anna Hosp., Como, Italy;JCancer center, Tokyo, Japan; + Dept. of Surg., Veterans Hosp., Taichung, Taiwan. Introduct/on. TP alters AAmetabolism via deranged protein digestion/absorption and the loss of pancreatic endocrine secretion followed by hyper-AA.This study aimed to clarify its pathophysiology Materials and Methods. Mongrel dogs were divided into: A) esophago-and cholecysto-jejunostomy with TP+splenectomy~ B) splenectomy, as sham operation. Jugular vein and femoral artery were cannulated for infusion and for biochemical studies (glucose, iNmu~o-reactive glucagon [IRG), insulin (IRI) and AA) on day 1, 3 and 7 post-op. Endogenous glucose production (rate of appearancs-RA-in mg/min/kg) was studied by i.v. infusion of 6-'H glucose (0.05~Ci/kg/min) after a bolus injection of 5~Ci/ kg and then glucagon infusion (30ng/kg) was set up. Group A was given either continuous infusion of insulin 0.2 U/kg/day (A1), or nothing (A2). Results. IRI level remained unchanged while IRG level dropped in group A (p<0.001) being restored by exogenous administration. Glucose level and RA increased in A2 (p<0.01), as compared to AI and B groups on the 1st post-op, day. After 1 week A1 and A2 showed comparable values. I.V. Glucagon increased (p<0.05) either RA and glucose level in A1 and B group. However, RA decreased (p<0.05) in group A2 and no further P-glucose change occurred. Group A showed an increase (p<0.01) of total AA throughout the study while glucagon administration caused a significant drop in all groups (p<0.05). Selected AA (to be shown in detail) showed such changes and only in group A2 BCAA increased without any further effect by i.v. glucagon. These data show that hyper-AA following TP is mainly due to glucogenic-, ureacycle and system A-(alanin-preferring transport) -AA increase. TRANSPLANTATION. F. Marotta *, + P. Safran, J Z.L. Li, J N.X. Liao. GI Serv., S. Anna Hosp., Como, Italy; + Econum Lab., Villeneuve d'Ascq, France; J Gastroenterol. Dept., Shianxi Prov. Hosp., Xian, China. Introduct~ion. During pancreatic transplantation, ischemia/reperfusion phenomsnona. The aim of this study was to test an antiprotease, i.e. Hafamostat Mesilate (FUT-175) on the metabolic and hemorrheological parameters of the graft. Materials and Methods. 160 syngeneic Wistar rats underwent pancreatico-duodenal transplantation. The overall cold ischemia time was within lh and the operating time was within 3h. Rats were then allocated to 3 different perfusion media via the sup. mesenteric artery. A) 3cc of saline + heparin 150IU~ B) 2cc of Eurocollins + saline 1co +heparin 80 IU; C) FUT~ 1.0mg/ml in normal saline + heparin 80 IU; Sham operation group served as control. Rats were sacrificed at i, 3,6 and 12 h. Blood samples from the portal trunk served for: malate dehydrogenese (MDH), amylase and trypsin. Pancreatic micro-circulation of the graft (flow velocity, shear rate, n. of sticking leukocytes) was studied by a video camera-assisted microscope. Samples of the pancreas were also removed for: mithocondria studies and Adenine nucleotides assay Results. A significant (p<0.01) time-course increase of portal MDH, t~/psin and amylase ~nd a decrease of all energy metabolism parameters occurred in group A and B but not in C (p<0.01). Mithocondrial fragility was partly preserved in group C (p<0.05). Further, FUT-175 lessened the histological and microvascular score (p<O.05). Conclusion. These data suggest that FUT-175 employed as a perfusion medium of the graft allows a significant overall (subcellular, microvascular, metabolic and histological) preservation of the organ with a likely more adequate functional restoration. F. Harotta, * P. Safran, D. Tettamanzi + Y. Naito, G. Barbi. GI Serv., S. Anna Hosp., Como, Italy~ * Econum Lab., Villeneuve d'Asoq, France; + sumitomo Mem. Hosp. Nagoya, Japan. Introduction. Scanty reports have suggested that during AP, subcellular organelle fragility and ~paired tissue energy occurs in the upper GI tract. Recently, a potent natural antioxidant, i.e. BN, has been developed. We studied the reported gastric mucosa failure during AP while testing BN on the very early cellular events. Materials and Methods. Wistar rats were allocated into 4 groups which were given perorally a 5ml saline solution of: A) lg BN; B) 15~g/kg Misoprostol. After one week of either treatment, a oaerulein-induced AP model (5~g/kg/h for 6h) was applied to both groups. C and D groups represented AP without any drug and healthy control, respectively. Rats were then sacrificed. Half of the stomach was frozen in liquid nitrogen to assay energy metabolism parameters and the onher half for subcellular studies and glutathione assay. Results. Gastric juice pH was unaffected during both treatments. As compared to D, gastric mucosa of B and C groups showed a significant time-course increase of Lysosomal Cathepsin B leakage, mythocondria MDH leakage and TBARs (p<0.01) together with decreased energy charge and glutathione concentration (p<0.05). BN, although unaffecting the overall course of AP, totally prevented the above gastric mucosa metabolic failure (p<0.01 vs B and C groups). Conclusion. These data strengthen previous reports on metabolic GI tract derangement during AP and point out a lipid-peroxidation mechanism as a relevant pathophysiological basis. Such phenomena were prevented by an oral supplementation with a novel natural antioxidant which is not inactlvated by gastric acidity. Introduction. The aim of this study was to assess plasma fatty acid profile in asymptomatic chronic pancreatitis patients (CP) while attempting its correlation with other clinical variables. Patients and Methods. We studied 18 patients with ethanol-induced CP. As control, 15 age-and sexmatched healthy subjects were considered. Patients were not on vitamin-or enzyme-supplements for at least 3 months prior recruitment. Blood was withdrawn for: vitamin A, E, total lipid, Retinol Binding Protein, zinc, prealbumin and plasma fatty acids. Patients were put on a 3-day 80g fat diet end a 24h-stool collection was used for Near Infrared Reflectance Analysis (NIRA) (Esetek, Grottaferrata, Italy). At the entry, calorie intake was not statistically different between the groups, but fat intake was lower in CP (p<0.05). Results. Serum level of vitamin A, Retinol Binding Protein, total lipid and zinc were comparable between the groups. However, praalbumin and vitamin E were significantly lower in CP patients (p<0.o5). Linoleio acid (18:2) and arachidonic acid (20:3) were significantly lower in CP patients (p<0.01). Mild steatorrhea was showed by NIRA assay in CP patients (less than 10g fat/24h). Only linoleic acmd values correlated with vitamin E/total lipid ratio (r: 0.44, p<0.05). The latter parameters showed a significant relationship with MIRA value (r: 0.67, p<0.01). Conclusion. These data suggest that in CP patients with mild insufficiency, in spite of normal routine biohumoral values, subtle plasma fatty acid changes take place. Such abnormalities are paralleled by low vitamin E/total lipid ratio and unrelated to steatorrhea. However, the latter two parameters appear to be somewhat interdipendent. We previuously demonstrated enhanced expression of ICAM-1 in severe acute pancreatitis, suggesting ~e role of activated endo~elium. In this study, we examined effects of ascitic fluids prepared from rats with experimental necrotizing pancreatitis on the (i) cytokine expression, (ii) vascular tone. and (iii) micro~rombus formation in human umbilical veto endothelial cells (HUVEC). Methods. Experimental necrotizing hemorrhagic pancreatitis was induced in male Wistar rats with sodium taurocholate. At 24 h later, the peritoneal exudates were collected, centnfuged and HUVEC were treated w~th the supematants. We examined (i) expression of interteukin (IL)-6, IL-8 by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; (ii) induction of mRNA for these cytokines, endothelial isoform of nithc oxide synthase (ecNOS), endothelin-1, platelet-derived growth factor-B (PDGF-B), tissue factor, thrombomodulin by reverse-transcription PCR or Northern analysis, (iii) activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NFr nuclear factor IL-6 (NF-IL6), cyclicAMP responsive element binding protein (CRER) by electrophoretic mobdib/shift assay. Results. IL-6 and IL-8 express=on ~n HUVEC was induced =n a dose-dependent manner. Comparably pronounced mRNA expression for these cytokmes, endothelin-t, PDGF-8, tissue factor was observed. In con~'ast, mRNA expression of ecNOS and thrombomodulin was downregulated. NF.~B , NF-IL6, and CREB were actwated by the treatment suggesting that asQtic fluids contain soluble factors transcriptionally activating the endothelium. Our results suggest that endothelial activation such as cytokme expression, vascular contracUon, and microthrombus formation may play roles =n the pathogenesis of acute pancreaUt~s. M. Masuda, K. Miyasaka', S. Kanal, K. Tatemhi, A. FunakoshL Dept. Clin. Physiol., Tokyo Metropolitan. Inst. Gerontol., Tokyo, 1st Dept. Biochem. School of Medicme, Fukuoka Umv., Fukuoka, Div. Gastroenterol. Natl. Kyushu Ca Cir. Fukuoka, Japan. Introduction. Studies in rats showed that diversion of bale-pancreatic juice (BPJ-D) from the small mtestine strongly stimulated pancreatic enzyme secretion (luminal feedback regulatmn by protease). LCRF, a novel 8136 dalton pept~de punfied from rat intestmal secretion is a putative intralummal regulator of CCK secretion. We have established a RIA for LCRF. We examined whether LCRF secretion was regulated by cholinerg~c regulation or mh=b~ted by sematostatln, a potent inhibitor of CCK release and pancreatic secretion, m consc=ous rats. Methods. Male Wistar rats (300-330g) were prepared w~th cannulae drainmg BPJ separately, and with a duodenal and a right jugular veto cannulae. Rats were placed in restraint cages and expenments were conducted 4 days after the operatmn without anesthesia. After 1.5-h basal collection w~th 8PJ return, BPJ was diverted and NaHCO3 was infused instead (1el/h). The changes ~n pancreatic secretion of flu=d and protein were momtored for 4-~. intravenous mfusr of somatostatin-14 (2 nmol/kg/h) or atropme (100 t~g/kg/h) was started at the begmnmg of 8PJ-0 or 1-h before 8PJ-D The rats were sacnficed before and 2,4-h after 8PJ-D, ancl the plasma CCK was measured by RIA usmg OAL-656 antibody The [ummat content of LCRF =n the small mtestmal lumen (prox=mal 20 cm) was measured by RIA. Results. 8PJ-D s~gnfficantly ,ncreased pancreat=c secret=on and LCRF content ,n the lumen The plasma levels of CCK also ~ncreased s~gmficantly paralleling the changes ,n protein secretion. Atropine did not affect plasma CCK, pancreatic secretion or LCRF content s~gmficantly. Intravenous =nfumon of somatostatm s=gmficantly decreased responses of protein secret=on and CCK release to BPJ-D. whde luminal content of LCRF was not affected. Conclusions. Secretion of LCRF was not =nh~b=ted by atropine or somatostatm These results are compat=ble w=th our original proposal (AJP-G, 1989 ) that luminal CCK releasing pept=de m,ght be spontaneously secreted and luminal protease (trypsin) regulated ~ts CCK-releasmg act=wty. Introduction. The accurate staging of pancreatic cancer as mandatory m the preoperative status. Helical CT allows for detsded ~mages of pancreas and penpancreatic structures, however there ate few reports concerning the st~gmg of pancreatic cancer on helical CT. The purpose of th=s study was to elucidate tt~e utility of Ibm-section heiicaJ CT for iocal stagmg of pancreatic cancer. Patients and Method. Twenty patients who underwent surgery and pathologically confirmed pancreatic cancer were mcluded in th~s study SUbleCts. These patients prospan~vely underwent dynamic thm-sectmn helical CT (5 mm slice-thickness, 5 me/sac table speed, 2.5 rnrn reconstruction). CT findmgs were mterpretted by three r~dmlog~sts accordmg to the GeneraI Ruies for the Study of Pancreatic Cancer estabhshed by Japan Pancreas Society. ~,e., the s~ze. serosaJ (antenor) and reltopentoneat (postenor) extansmn, artenaJ and po~tal evasion, duodenal eves=on,bale ducts evasion, extrapancreatlC nerve plexus evasion. The accuracy of CT staglng was determmed by the correlation w=th surgical and penological findmgs. Results. Tumors were detected ~n a~ patients on CT. but the s~ze tended to be smaller at CT than at pathology. The accuracy of helical CT was 85% for sero"~J invasion, 85% for retropantoneaJ extension, 100% for artenal ~nvaslon, 92% for gortat ~nvas~on, 94% for duodenal mvas;on, 88% for bde ducts evasion, 90% for ext~apancraat~c nerve ptexus invasion. The evaluation of penpancraat~c veins such as mfenor pancreatlcoduodanal veto was useful for determmg the duodenal mavamon or extrapancreatr nerve plexus invasion Conr uslon. Thin-section hei=cal CT,s an =mpor~ant toot for preoperatively detaining the local staging of pancreatm cancer. M~ter~als and Methods. Twelve Male W~sEar rats were dlvlded into two groups: 6 DDC rats and 6 control rats. The form.or were Zreateo w~zh i? in]ect~cns of DEC at s ~ose of 50Om.g/kg cody we!gn: zwlzeweek!y and k~lled at 4 weeks. The latter ~era treated w~th i? ln]ectlcns of saline ana kliied at 4 weeks. Aims : Our group has shown that primed circulating neutrophils account for an increase in hydrogen peroxide production in patients with severe acute pancreatitis compared with healthy controls. We postulated that the reduction in organ failure scores seen in two human trials of Lexipafant in acute pancreatitis was due to the effect of this potent platelet activating factor (PAF) antagonist on neutrophil function. Methods: 31 patients with severe acute pancreatit=s (median APACHE II= 10.5, IQR 9-12) were randomized to receive intravenous Lexipafant or placebo as part of a multicentre study. We measured circulating neutrophil priming and hydrogen peroxide production on admission and at 72 hours following the start of the infusion in 17 of these patients. Hydrogen peroxide production and priming of circulating neutrophds was measured using a previously described flow cytomemc method. Mann Whimey U test was used for statistical analysis. Nledian Introduction. Cysuc tumor of the pancreas has been mvesugated by a variety of tmagmg techmques. Though endoscoptc retrograde cholang.o-pancr~graphy (ERCP) is well-known as one of the useful modal,oes. ~t ts often difficult to diagnose the correct e.,ustence of the ~,st or =ts charactenst:cs due to a lot of mucm and/or a lack of the commumcaaon bet~ een the q.. st and the mmn pancreauc duct in ~'sac tumor of the pancreas. IVlagneac resonance cholang~opancreatos (MRCP) :s being wtdely performed as a noninvasive diagnosUc modal,ty for mvesugaUon of the bdiary a'ee and pancreaac duct system. In the present study, we compared MRCP =mages to ERCP. CT images and hlstologtcal findings m order to clarify the thagnosuc efficacy of MRCP for cysuc tumor of the pancreas. Patients and Methods. Fifteen pat,en~s w~th cysuc tumor of the pancreas, surgically resec~t and h:stologtcally confirmed, were stud~. The.', consisted of 5 ~-].ses of mWaductal papdlary adenocarcinoma, 5 of mhmductal papdlary adenoma. 2 of serous ~smdenoma. 2 of retenaon ~'st associated t~=th invastve duc~ carcinoma, and I of sohd c)suc tumor. All of them v, ere examined by NRRCP, ERCP and CT preoperuUvely at Nanonal Cancer Center Hospital East dunng the period from Februa~" 1995 to Januat3." 1998 MRCP images were compared to ERCP. CT tmages, and l~stolog~c.al findings. The aims of the study were to analyse 1. The spontaneous apoptosLs =n human pancreatzc cancer, 2. Its association wzth the prolderation rate of the turnout, 3. The correlation of apoptotlc index and mzto0c ~ndex wzth the hlstoiogtcal features of the turnout and the outcome of patients. Patients and Methods. 13 surgical spec:mens of ductal adenocarcmoma of pancreas were collected from patients who underwent potentially curative resection. No preoperattve radto-or chemotherapy was performed. In these specimens we determme the apoptotlc cell death by deo~nucleotidyl transferase (TdT) -mediated dUTP-degoxlgenzn nick end lal~elling (TUNEL). The prohferatlve acttvlty was determined by immunohzstochemzstry us;rlg monoclonal an0body MIB-I. Apoptotlc Index (A/ evaluated as a percentage of TUNEL-posltzve cells of 1,000 neoplastic calls) and Mitot~c index (MI, evaluated as a percentage of positively stained nuc!e= /1,000 nuclei counted) were calculated tn each case. Statzstlcal analyszs was performed by means of Pearson's and Fisher's exact test. TUNEL and Ki67 were expressed ,n neoplastic ceils but not ,n normal tzssue of the same speczmen. Results. The AI was 49 0-*-47 9 and MI 12 8-_10 2 (mean:S.D) AI was h,gher in small (<4 cm) than ~n large (>4cm) tumcurs (80 3=56 1 and 20.7 1 respectzvety)(p<0.02) CytoZog=cal and archztectural grading showed a pos=tzve con'elatzon with AI (p<0 05 and p<0.05 respectively). No correlation was found between AI and stage, lymoh node. vascular and penneural =nvaszon (p ns). No correlaUon was found between AI and MI (pns). Szgnzficantly hzgher values of AI were found ~n patients wzth short (5 17_-4 3 months) as compared to long survzval (26 I-_.23 3 months) (p<0 02) On the contrary paUents with low MI values surv=vecl more than those wzth h,gher levels (6.83__.4 1 and 25 1=20.1 months, respectlvety)(p<0 05) MI was correlated only w,th the stage of dzsease (p<0 03) Conclusion Our data suggest that 1 =n pancreatzc cancer the spontaneous PCD *s more present zn small tumours, w=th very low d=fferentmt=on 2 pat=ente w=th h~gher AI have a poor prognos=s; 3. panc, oeattc cancer seems to differ from other tumours smca PCD =s not assoc:ated w,th cell prolzferat=on and ~s an zndependent prognostzc factor ~a three patients, 21, 44 and 67 years old, increasing abdominal pain had been preset for 3, I 1 and 17 years respectively. The symptoms were not related to either food retake or def,,'atioa. Laboratory findings revealed a mL[d choiost~s and hyperamyls.~emia, r~ all eases the rate diagnosis of" a 'choledochocele (22 documented cases to date) could be es'~hshed by hypownic duodenogTaphy, ERCP and biopsy. In 1974 we performed at the first time an endoscopically coau'olled elect:rocoagulatory abiauon of the choleduchocele (case I) trader general an~thesia using a mare. Three and four years later in case 2 and 3 resp. the procedure was simplified. An electtoeoagulatory, spli~ng was performed by means ofa papRlotom= "mthout general ana~hesia. Prior to the operation, the celes were maximally dilated (fig,) by injecting coawast medium through thr natural openings. Then. in case 2. the papdlotome was also inserted through ~ opening ( fig.) . In case 3, the nana'al opening was located atthe lei~: lateral wa.]l of the celt. ~fore, the papdlotomr inserted tl~ough a small medial mc~sion. The length oft.he cut was related to the r of the eele and reached 3 and 5 cm, respecnvely. The opcra~ons were performed without complicanons ~nr.~n l0 minutes. The _~ abdominaJ pmn ceased directly dterwerds. Annual coal:ors following endoscoplc splitting showed an unhindered outflow 9f c~nwas~ medium f:om the bile and pancreatic duct systems. Laboratory c~ndiags were witl-an the normal range. Them was no re~un'ence of the omplamts. In case I however, a cholecy, stectomy was necessary, because of :ho/ccystitis four years after ab|anon. In the other cases cholecyste~tomy erformed before endoscopzc sphttmg. Methods. Female F344 rats (age, 6 weeks) were divided into a control (C; n=7) and an exercise (E; n=6) group. Food consumption was matched between the two groups. Rats in the C group were kept sedentary. Rats in the E group were exercised for 60 rain a day (treadmill running final speed, 32 m. mm"), 5 days a week during the experiment. After 8 weeks, the pancreas and hindlimb muscles were rapidly excised and weighed. Protein and DNA contents and enzymes a~vlties in pancreatic tissue were measured. Pancreatic tissues were prepared for transm=ssJon electron microscopy. Results. Inh=bition of growth and hyperVophy of hindlimb muscles were recogmzed m the E group. Pancreatic wet weight, protein content, and amylase and lipase ac~v=tles =n the E group were significantly h=gher than in the C group. There was no s=gmficant difference in total DNA content m pancreas between the two groups. Electron micrographs revealed that acmar cells obviously hypertrophied and zymcgen granules increased in the rats of E group compared with C group. Conclusion. These results suggested that the chromc exercise causes the increase in pancreatic wesght with hypertrophy of acmar cells. The increase of pancreatic protein content could be due to the increased synthesis and storage of exocnne enzymes. Introduction. The Beger's procedure is an organ-sawng procedure in the treatment of svere chromc pancreatitis. However, there are some problems, when this procedure =s indicated to the patients with low grade malignant cystic tumor. The paraduodenal pancreatic remnant, may cause tumor remain and pancreatic fistula. Therefore, a duodenum-preserving procedure for low grade malignant cystic tumors is essentially a total resection of the head of the pancreas w~th the preservation of the blood supply to the bile duct and duodenum. We report a new techniques of the preservat]on of the vessels around the duodenum and the bile duct during total resection of the head of the pancreas. This surgical procedure was performed in 3 patients with mucinous cystic tumors of the pancreatic duct in the head of the pancreas.The metods of the preservation of the vessels dunng the total resection of the head of the pancreas is to preserve the supura-and/or infrapancreatoduodenal veto dunng the explcrat]on of the mesentenc portal vein, to remain the duodenal branches of the anterior artenal arcade, one by one diwdmg the pancreat]c branches, and not to dissect the pancreat=c posterior menbrane which the posterior artanal arcade runs under. Results. The Operative time was 429 minutes, and the mean blood loss was 810 ml. The mean postoperat=ve hospttalizatJon was 20 days. None of the pat]ents had early or late postoperat]ve complicat]ons. Conclusion. The new operative procedure, wh=ch preserves the vessels around the duodenum and the b=le duct dunng total pancreatic head resect]on, freed us from early postoperative complicat]ons. FAT ABSORPTION FOLLOWING VARIOUS RECONSTRUCTIONS OF PYLORUS-PRESERVlNG PANCREATO-DUODENECTOMY S. Miyakawa, A. Horiguchh K. Miura. The 2nd Dept of Gastroenterol. Surgery, Fulita Health University, Toyoake, Japan. Introduction. The supenority of various metods of reconstruct]on following pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy (PPPD) is unproven. We believe that the supedonty should be demonstrated for patients wtth similar pancreatic exocrine function Therefore we studied fat absorption after these operat]on using 13C.tnoctanoin breath test. These operations were compared w~th respect to thoctanom absorption for groups of patients classified by their pancreatic fibrosis. Patients and Methods. We used two metods of reconstructions following the PPPD as follows: PG group (30 cases), Pancreatogastrostomy, duodeno-lelunostomy and choledocho-lelunostemy were done ~n order; P J-2 gruop (22 cases), Pancreato-jelunostomy, choledocho-jejunostomy and duodeno-lelunostomy ~n order. The breath test were performed on the pat]ents who could tolerate a normal solid diet 1 to 3 months after operation. The pat]ents =n the gruops were classified by the fibroszs of the pancreatic remnant, wh=ch was presumed the area of by measunng fibrosts of the transectinal wegde of the resected pancreas h~stolog=cally. We classified the fibros=s into three grades according to the degree of the fibrosis as follows: grade 0, < 10% fibrosis, grade 1, 10% to 30%; grade 2, > 30~ Results. There were no significant differences tn the 13 C excretion rates and the cumulat]ve values between the gruops. The 13 C excret]on rates and the cumulat]ve values in the pattents w~th more than 30 % pancreatic fibros=s were lower than those tn the patients with less than 30 % pancreat]c fibros=s, regardless of the metods of reconstruct]on The cumulat]ve value ~n the PG grade 1 subgroup was s~gnffzcantly better than that for the P J-2 grade 1 subgruop. Introduction. Various activities of Interleukin-6 (IL-6) are the result of its interaction with a membrane receptor consisting of an 80 kDa ligand-binding 9 subunit (gp-g0), which triggers the association with a 130 kDa 3 subunit (gp-130), a common signaling component shared with other members of the 1t.,-6 superfamily. Recent clinical puhlicanons have shown high serum levels of IL-6 in patients with surgical intervenuon or cancer-induced cahe.xia; however, functional analysis of IL-6 and its receptor has not been fully elucidated in the level of cancer cells, in this study, we examined the relationship between the expression and activation ofgp-130 and the resistance to r~iarion-induced apoptosis in pancreanc cancer ceil lines, and reed to clari~, the molecular mechanism. Materials and Methods. Four human pancreatic cancer cell lines (CFPAC-I, HPAC, AsPC-I and Mia.PaCa-2) were employed. Levels of IL-6 in condiuoned media were measured by ELISA assay, and phosphorylated gp-130 were detected by immunopreuclpation method (IP" anti gp-130 pAb, IB: ann p-Tyr mAb). Ceils with phosphorylated gp-130 (CFPAC-I) and without phosphory, tated gp-130 (AsPC-I) were treated with or without 50 ng/ml IL-6 and three experiments were done. l) The effect to ceil proliferation. 2) At the Ume points of 8, 12, 24, agh.. proteins were ex~'acted and subjected to immunoblot analysis for Bcl-2 farmly proteins (Bct-2. Ba,x and BcI-X). 3) The cells were exposed to radiauon ranging from 0 to 10 Gy and the number of attached cells was counted48h later. Results. Levels oflL-6 in the media were as follows: CFPAC-I: 1900 pg/ml, HPAC: 51 pg/ml. AsPC-h < 0.2 pg/mL Mia.PaCa-2: < 0.2 pg,,'ml. Phosphorylated gp-130 was detected m CFPAC-I and HPAC. but not m ,~PC-I and MiaPaCa-2. IL-6 did not affect the cell proliferation in CFPAC-I and AsPC-I. Expression for Bcl-2 and BcI-XL protein were increased by IL-6 treatment in CFFAC-I cells, but not m AsPC-I cells. Table Hospital Solid cystic tumor of the pancreas is rarely seen in young male. We report here a solid cystic tumor of the pancreas in a boy who had no recurrence for mn years. A 12-year-old Japanese boy was admitted to our hospital in September 1987 because of dull upper abdominal pain. On admission, a 6 crn t*nder, elastic hard, barely movable mass was palpable in the upper abdomen. Routine blood studies yielded values within the normal range, except for moderate elcvalion of T-bil (2.4 mg/dl), GOT (77 IU/L), GPT (105 IU/L), and ALP (84.9 KA). Serum neuron-specific enolasr CNSE) was devoted to 24 ng/ml (normal range: <10). The serum levels of gastroimr.slinal hormones such as insulin, glucagon, somatostaun, and gasa'in were all within normal Limits. US and a CT scan revealed an encapsulated, cystic mass with a solid component. 6 cm in diameter, located in the head of tlm pancreas, and a dilated gallbladder and intrahcparic bile duct. FI'GBD was performed and cholangiography demonstrated obsamcdon of the common bile duct. Celiac angiography revealed a hypovascular mass. A solid cystic tumor was suspected, and pylorus-prescrving pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed. The resected tumor measured 7.0  6.5 X 6.0 cm. and was covered with a fh'm. fibrous capsule. Histological exan'finaaon revealed that the cyst was Lined by pscudopapillary epithelial ceils, and mitoses were ra:t. Immunohistochemical studies showed immtmomaaivity for a a l-antin'ypsin alone, with no cells Ixing reactive for careinoembryonic anugen, insulin, #ucagon. somatostann, or gastrin. We determined the tumor to be a solid cysnc tumor of the pancreas. The patient has been well for ten years since surgery, with no signs of rl~-'ur~fll~. We are studying the influence of site of tumor growth, route of immunization, and ,mmunological tolerance on the induction of immunity to MUC1, a human gtyr C57BV6 mice (w/t) and C57BI/6 transgenir for MUC1 (MUC1-Tg) were challenged with Panc02-MUC1, a syngene,c pancreatm cancer cell line expressing human MUC1, e,ther orthotopically (into the pancreas) or subcutaneously. All wit mice rejected tumor cells injected subcutaneously at a dose of lx10 s cells but 7 out of 10 (70%) did not relect tumors injected orthotopically. MUC1-Tg mice did not re ect tumor cells injected by either route. Sera from wtt mice that rejected Panc02-MUC1 at the orthotop,c s te showed no detectable IgG1 and IgM against MUC1 tandem repeat. Mice ,n which Panc02-MUC1 grew progressively showed s]gn,ficant IgG1 and IgM titers, suggest,ng that a humoral immune response to the MUC1 tandem repeat was ineffective for rejection of Panc02-MUC1 and that tumor rejection was cell-mediated, wit mice were protected against orthotopJc challenge with Panc02-MUC1 by two different procedures : (1) Preimmunization of wit m,ce w,th a low dose of Panc02-MUC1 subcutaneously; or (2) Adoptive transfer of spleen and lymph node cells harvested from mice ,mmunized with Panc02-MUC1 subcutaneously. Th,s demonstrates that ,mmune responses aga,nst MUC1 can be detected and adoptively transferred. These results suggest that the otthotop,c site is more favorable for growth of Panc02-MUC1 than the subcutaneous s,te and that it is more difficult to produce immune responses to tumors grow,rig at th,s site. Nonetheless. Panc02-MUC1 cells grow,rig in the pancreas are accessable to the immune system. We are currently evaluating different =mmun,zahon protocols and the =mmune cell types =nvolved =n this protective response. Introduction. Our previous study suggested that the rapid gastric emptying and impaired gallbladder contraction in patients with chronic pancreatitis (CP) was due to depleted pancreatic lipase output. We tested whether oral pancreatac enzymes can improve the results. Patient* and Method,. Study subjects comprised 17 healthy controls and 20 patients with CP. We studied gastric emptying time (GET) and gallbladder contraction (GBC) in response to a mixed liquid meal. Thirteen patients had an initial study using a test meal without pancreatic enzymes, followed on separate days by a test meal with pancreatic enzymes (Excelase', Meiji, Seika Corp., Tokyo). Blood samples were taken before and 2 hours ajar the test meal to determine the pancreatic polypeptide (PP) levels. Results. In patients with CP, GET was faster (92.9:26.6 rain vs. 129.7:26.0 rain), GBC at 15 rain after meal was impaired (46.7:17.0% vs.58.1"-16.0 %), and the ratio of pre-to postprandial PP levels was enhanced (1.93:0.6 vs. 1.28 : 0.35). Oral administration of a capsule of Excelase sigmficandy improved GET (I07.6:19.7 rain), GBC rate at 15 mm (51.2: 20.3%), and the PP ratio (1.73 = 1.25). Condtmion. Oral pancreatic enzymes improved gastro-biliary dysmotility, confi.rmmg the prevtous findings that suggested the depleted pancreatic enzyme output aa a cauae of the dysmotthty. Gastrointestinal hormones such as PP are likely to mediate the pathophysiology. Introduction: Orthotopic pancreatic cancer implantation models in heterologous or homologous animals have been reported reccndy. It is not clear whether r pancreanc resection can bnng complete cuz~ in such uanor-baring animals. The purpose of this study was to clarify the possibility of curative resection in orthotopically implanted hamster experimental panc~.aric cancer model Materials and Methods: HaP-T1, a BHP-induced, moderatelly differentiated hamster pancreatic cancer cell line, r in our laboratory, was implanted into the splenic lobe of the pancreus of twenty syngeneic Syrian golden hamsters. They were divided in two groups: ordmtopic cell implantation and orthotopic tissue implantation. Partial pancreatcctomy was performed in the 1, 2, 3, and 4th weeks after implantation. The resected specimens were examined histologically whether thctr margin were free of tumor infiltration. The general state and weeldybody weight of the animals were followed up as far as they surwved. "l'hr animals were nccropsicd immediately after death. Four hundred days a.q~-r the tumor resection, the surviving hamsters were sacrificed and also invcsugatcd whether they had histological and/or @neuc metastases, by detecting K-raa point mutauon asmg PCR-RFLP method. Results: All the surglcul specimens were confirmed as having pancreatic neoplasm. Tumor implanted hamsters without panCreatectomy died before 75 days. The ammals m whmh pancreamctomy was performed later than 15 days after implantauon, died bcfore 120 days due to local recurrence and/or metastases. Five hamsters survived unn1400 days after tumor removal: two of cell implantaoon group, which underwent resccuve surgery at 7th and 13th day, and three of ossue tmplantanon group, operated after 10, 14 and 15 days after the implantanon. Furthermore, none of the survwed hamsters had histologacal nor geneuc metastases. Conclusions: The present study clearly showed that the early pancreatic resecnon, i.e.. before 15 days wlth free margins, could bring complete cure in the orthotopmally implanted pancreanc cancer model of S.vnan golden hamsters. This model would bc useful for further research of adjuvant or ncoadjuvant therapy m pancrcaoc cal~inoma. Introduction: Pancreas cancer is the fifth cause of cancer death in Brazil. Whipple operation is the most common surgical procedure performed as a challenge of cure. However. it has different operative mortality rates depending on the center, surgeon experience, post operatlve cares and so on. Specialized centers seem to have low morbidity. This time. we would like to show our institution data and experience. Patients and Methods: Thirty three patients who underwent duodenopancreatectomy with reconstruction in single loop and duct-tomucosa anastomosis (between pancreatic duct and jejunal loop) were analyzed retrospectively. The surgeries were done between t99t and 1994, in Campmas State Umversi W Hospital. Brazil. Nineteen of the patients were male (57.5%) and 14 were female ~42.5%), with median age of 61 years (range" 30 to 75 y.o.). Pathologic examination results showed: adenocaremoma of duodenal papilla in 19 patients L57.5%), pancreatic head cancer m 11 patients (33%), adenocarcmoma ofbde duct m two (6%) and non-functiomng endocnne tumor in one case. The reconstruction techmque performed m all cases was jejunal single loop (Whipple modified): 1. hepatmojejunostomy with interrupted ~utures. 2. pancreatic duct and jejunal loop m two layers using *Iaxon 5.0@: tst-Wirsung duct and jejunal mucosa anastomosis in interrupted ,,utures. 2nd-interrupted sutures between jejunal seromuscular layer and the pancreas. 3. gastrojejunostomy in interrupted sutures. It was left Multffenestrated Levme| catheter through pancreauc duct-mucosal anastomosis. Results: As immediate post operative complications, we obse~ed: I case of pneumoma. I case of pleural effusion. I case of digesuve bleeding from gasmc jejunal anastomosis. 2 cases of wound infection. 2 cases of prolonged deus. 2 cases of bltiary fistula. There were no cases of pancreatic fistulas. There were no deaths during the ho~pttahzatton time lmedian: tO days). Conclusions: Our study suggests that duodenopancreatectomy is a procedure able to be performed with low rates of post-operative complications tn teruar)" hospitals. Introduction. Pancreantis-associated protein (PAP) ts almost absent m normal pancreas, but is overexpressed in acute pancreantts. Hov, ever, the pethoph~siologlcal significance of PAP tn chronic pancreatuts is unkno~ n. The aim of thas stud.,," is to anal.',xe the gene expression of PAP in a rat spontaneous chronic pancreattus model. Materials and Methods. Four-week old male WBN/Kob rats were led wtth a specaal pellet diet (MB-3) for 20 weeks. The rats were sacrificed at 4-week intervals, and the imncreata were removed. The F~ncreanc ussues were Mstopathologtcally examined. PAP mRNA was detected by an RT-PCR method. Semtquan,tauve analysis on the RT-PCR results was performed Using a computer scanning of PAP and beta-actm (internal control) mRNA hands on an agarose gel electrophoresis. The cellular localization of PAP mRNA was anah. zed by in smt h) bndizanon (ISH) using biotin-labeled PAP eDNA probe (777 bp) Chmhu-~uizlu-tang (T J-10) was orallx administered as drug therap}. Camostat mesdate (Fotpan) was used as a control drug. Results. Pathologmal changes of chronic pancreatms xxere first seen in 12-week-old WBN/Kob rats. Inflammation and hbrosls progressed thereafter, and at the age of 24 ~ eeks. dense fibrosis almost replaced the normal acmar structure Interestmgl 3 , PAP mRNA x~as detected at 8 ~eeks when the pancreauc htstolog~ ~as still normal. The expression ot PAP mRNA was highest at 12 ~eeks and graduall', decreased PAP mRNA ~sas expressed in the c.'.toplasm of aonar ceils m the anal)sis of ISH. ISH conhrmed the RT-PCR results showmg the PAP mRNA expression in acmar cells in 8 and 12 x~ eeks. T J-lO inhibited the de~ elopment o[ chronic pancreauus at 12 and 16 v,~eks almost completei.x, and the pathological c "hanges at 20 and 24 x~eek~ in the TJ-10 group were redder than those m the non-treated ,~roup PAP mRNA was not expressed m the T J-I0 group at 8, 12. and 16 ~eeks. but ttv, as ~eaklx expressed at 20 and 24 ~xeeks. The el feet of T J-I0 x~ ~ comparable to that of camostat mesdate. Acute pancreatJt~s unusual in late childhood and adolescence, and chronic pancreat=tis ~s even less common. We have reported three cases of acute pancreatitis and two cases of chronic pancreatitis with history of onset at less than twenty years old. Case1: 17-year-old boy had acute pancreatttJs. CT Grading was D. Case2: 9-year-old g~d had with traffic injury and had occured acute pancreatitis after two months of the neurosurgery. CT Grading was E. Case3: 17-year-old boy had repeated todd acute pancreatitis from eleven years old. CT Grading was B. He was treated w=th steroid therapy for the paralysis of dght optic nerve on nine years old. C.,ase4:1 l-year-old boy had surgical operation for the stenosts of duodenum on his birth. He had frequently abdominal p~un from three years old. We have diagnost=cated him chron=c pancreatitis w~th pancreatolith and found the lack of pancreatic tail. Case5: 20-year-old man had mild acute pancreatltis. CT Grading was B. We had detected tumor of pancreatic tad. As a result of distal pancreatectomy, tomor was chron=c localized pancreatihs of the pancreatic taft. The most frequent cause of acute pancreat=ts at juvenile onset is anomalous arrangement of the pancreat~cob=liary ductal system ~n Japan. Endoscopic retrograde cholanglcpancreatography (ERCP) was performed =n all patients and no patients have th~s anomaly. Hypertiptdem=a, hypercalcem~a and wrus rnfect~on were not detected in all patients. NO paUents had a family history of pancreatihs. Inlury and surgery ~n Case 2, drug (steroid) =n Case 3 and abnormality of pancreas and surgery tn Case 4 m~ght cause the pancreat~t=s. However a definitive et~ologlcal relationship =s thfficult to prove. Introduction: TO develop diagnostic assays that can identify patients va~h pancreatic cancer early in the come of disease, the use of molecular techniques is a promising new area of investigauon. K-ras mutation in pancreatic juice has been shown to be positive m up to 70% of pancr-atic cancer. However, the usefulness of K-ras mutation in the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer is questionable due to its high false positive and false negative values. Telomerase is a nbonucleoprotein enzyme necessary for the synthesis of telomeres. In contrast to normal somatic cells, cancer cells are characterized by the aberrant expression of telomerase. We conducted flus study to determine the useffflness of the K-ras mutation and telomerase activity in pancreatic juice for the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. Patients and Methods: The pure pancreatic juice was examined in 31 patients: 12 with ductal cell carcinoma of the pancreas, I l utah chronic pancreantis, and 8 controls. About 15-20 ml of pancreatic juice wa.i collected dunng ERCP after secretin stimulation. The K-ras gene was amplified by enriched PCR and the mutation at the codon 12 was examined by direct sequencmg Telomerase activity was detected by telomenc repeat amp[ificanon protoco [ (TRAP, Oncor For the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer, teiomerase activity in pancreanc juice may serxe as a possible useful tool complementary to the K-ras mutation because it may decrease the false positive rates. Introduction. We evaluated the cm~lation between mm~pan:w~nc iron-ion and other spreading factom, and dm~6ed histologically the part-ten of muvpancmauc mvasmn m ca.,or~ana of the head of the pan~eas based on msectedspedmem. Hereditary pancreatitis (HP) is an autosomal dominant disorder, and not distinguished from pancreatitis due to other causes with the conventional morphologic or biochemical markers. Since a high risk of pancreatic cancer in HP has been reported, it is important to make predse diagnosis of HP for the prediction of prognosis. However, the diagnosis of HP in Japan by means of family tree study is difficult due to decreasing number of children in this country. Recently Whitcomb st at. reported that a point mutation in trypsinogan gone could cause HP. Their observation opened the way to gone diagnosis of HP. Thus far, two mutations have been cisscribed: a G-to-A transition in exon 3 (R117H) and an A-to-T (N21 I) change in exon 2. The aim of this study is to assess the contribution of trypsinogen gene mutation on juvenile or familial pancreatitis in Japanese patients. Patients and Method. Ganomic DNA was extracted from 24 patients who showed symptoms of the pancreatitis in childhood and/or had affected famdy member(s) and four healthy relatwes in 17 families. R117H mutation was examined by Aft III digestion of PCRamplified DNA #agments and N211 mutation was inspected by directsequancing. ResultS, R117H mutation was found in four families. Families A, B and C had four affected patients respectively. In fam=ly D, two brothers were patients. N211 mutation was detected in no families. The R117H mutation is a common mutation among American and Italian patients. It occurred at CpG mutatmn hot spot, which might explaun the ident~ficat=on ot the same mutation m genetically different Japanese population. It showed also that the gone mutation analysis could contnbute to diagnos=s of HP in the case hawng an msuffioent family h=story. Introduction: We assessed the chmcal efficacy, and problems assocmted with conunuous regional arterial mfuston of a protease inhibitor and antlbtoucs (CAI) for severe acum pancreauus, Material 8r Methods : The subjects were the 3 pments m whom CA/ was performed among the 6 paaents wtth severe acute pancreanus (AP) we encountered during the past 3 years. The euology of the AP was alcohol m 2 eases and tdtopathlc m 1. The paaents's age was 44.8"7 years, and all were males. As mdtcauons of the seventy, of the AP, the prognosts scores (PS) were 2-8.5, and the APACHE-II scores (AP-H) were 13 -29 The CT grade was "grade IV" m all cases, and there was pancreaoc necrosts m 2 cases and penpancreauc fat necrosis tn I cases. PS and CT grades were calculated =:cording to the criteria of the Japan Intractable Pancreaac ~seases Study Group. A combmatton of Nafamostat mesdate 120 mg/d and wmpenem t g/d was continuously refused. The lap of the cathemr was posmoned m the celiac arteD', the common hepaac after,, and the splemc artery, m one case each. Introduction. The mechamsms which mediate pancmauc blood flow am not well understood. In this study we have investigated the effect of CCK on pancreatic blood flow, systemic arterial pressure, and heart rate and compared them with those of stomach and intestine in 5 conscious beagle dogs. Methods. Under ether anesthesia, flow probes of transit-nine blood flow meters were placed around a pancreatic branch of the splemc (PA), left gasmc (LGA) and superior mesentenc arteries (SMA). Chronic gasmc and duodenal fistulae were conswacted and a catheter of the blood-pressure sensor for a telemetry system was placed Inside the femoral artery. After a recovery period of one month, blood flow of PA. LGA and SMA. systermc blood pressure, and heart rate were measured m the conscmus state under a constant intravenous adrmmstrauon of CCK-8 (200ng/k*dhr), loxyglurmde (10mg/kg/hr) or CCK-8 plus loxyglurmde. Results. The mean blood flow of PA dunng the fasung quiescent phase was 3.0"-0.7 ml/rmn. Pancreatic blood flow rapidly increased to 18.2-'-3.4 ml/mm after the intravenous admmistrauon of CCK-8. while blood flow of LGA and SMA, systermc blood pressure, and heart rate did not change. The intravenous infusion of loxyglurmde did not affect the resting PA blood flow, but suppressed PA blood flow response to CCK-8. Conclusion. In dogs, CCK-8 increases PA blood flow without affecrang blood pressure and blood flow of LGA and SMA. Loxyglurmde mlublts PA blood flow response to CCK-8. which suggests that pancreanc vasodtlatauon induced by CCK-8 is mediated by the CCK-A receptor. Introduction. Technetium-99m ~lacmsy! human serum albumin (Tc-GSA) is a novel liver scintim'aphic agent. The aim of the present study was to examine whether liver scintigraphy with this agent performed before bfliaD' drainage could predict outcome of bilia~.' drainage in patients with periampullary carcinomas complicating obstructivc jaundice. We also investigated whether this liver scmtim'aphy could predict postoperative liver function in these patients undergoing pancreaticoduodenectomy. Patients and Methods. Tc-GSA liver scinuEaphy was performed m 13 patients with periampullary carcinomas compficating obstructive jaundice. Each patient underwent standard pancreancoduodenectomy after bfliar," drainage. Maximum removal rate of Tc-GSA (GSA-Rmax; standard normal value~-0.60) was calculated using a radiopharmacokinetic five-compartment method. Efficacy of preoperatw," biliary drainage was assessed with decrease of serum total bilirubin concentration for the tmtial l week after the biliary, decompression. Postoperative liver function was assessed with increase of serum bilirubin concentration, which was calcaiated by the difference between bilirubin concentration Immediately before surgery and maximum bilirubin concentration after the surgery. Results. Decrease of serum bilirubin !. week after bdiary drainage were hi~er in the GSA-Rmaxz0.60 ~oup than m the GSA-Rmax<0.60 ~oup (8.1 = 1.3 vs. 3.0 --1.3 mg~dbweek, p<0.05). Postoperative bilirubin increase was si~ificandy lower In the GSA-Rmaxz0.60 ~oup than in the GSA-Rmax<0.60 goup (0.7 = 0.4 vs. 4.8 = 1.3 mg,'dl, p<0.05). A multivariate anabsls showed that GSA-Rmax measured before bdia~' drainage si~mificantly predicted postopemtr,'e bllirubin increase (p<0.05). Thcse results suggest that technetium-99m galactosyl human serum albumin fiver scmu~apny is useful for prcdicong outcome of blliar.." drainage and postopemtwe hepatic d.~sf~nction in patients with penampullary carcinomas complicating obstrucu~e jaundice, who underwent pancrcaticodutxienc ctom.v. Introduction. K-ras gene mutations m codon 12 are frequently found in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Detection of these mutatmns have been focused for screening and diagnosis of the disease. The aim of this study ts to examine the potential usefulness of the detection of K-ras gene mutations in plasma DNA from the patients with pancreahc dudal adenocarcmoma. Patients and Method. K-ras gene mutations in codon 12 were exanuned by mutant allele specific amplification method (MASA) in DNAs extracted from surgacal specimen and plasma obtamed from 21 patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma and four wtth chronic pancreatitrs. Results. K-ras gene mutations m codon 12 were deteded m DNA from 15 of 21 (71%) primary tumors. In nine of 15 (60%) patients with the K-ras gene mutahon posttive tumors, the identtcal K-ras gene mutations were detectable m thetr plasma DNA. Netther of the pahents with chrontc pancreatitts nor healthy volunteers demonstrated the mutated DNA m plasma. Tumors postttve for the K-ras gene mutatmns in plasma DNA were more likely to be large (p<0.05) and chance for palliative treatment (p<0.1) than those negative for K-ras gene mutattons in plasma DNA, while other climcopathologlcal features such as htsto[ogic type, mode of invasion and metastasis dose not correlate with K-ras gene mutation status m plasma DNA. K-ras gene mutattons in plasma DNA were not detectable after treatments m six of nine (67%) patients. Conclusion. K-ras gene mutations can be detectable in ctrculating DNA extracted from the plasmas of the patients with pancreatic ductal adenocarcmoma. The monitoring of the K-ras mutations in plasma may be climcall,v applicable to evaluate the development of tumor and etficac'v of treatments for the disease. A. Nakao*, T. Kaneko, T. Nonami, T. Kurokawa. Department of Surgery II, Nagoya Umveristy Hospital, Nagoya, Japan. Duodenum-preserving pancreatic head resection has been performed for benign pancreatic head diseases. Complete resection of the pancreatic head with preservation of common bile duct and duodenum sometimes causes common bde duct or duodenal necrosis due to ischemia. We propose a simple, easy and safe procedure for complete resection of pancreatm head with segmental duodenectomy and preservation of the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) to prevent complications which may be caused on duodenum preserving pancreatic head resection. Pancreatic head resection w=th segmental duodenectomy including minor and major papdla was performed for mucin-producmg tumor of the pancreatic head. By preservation of the right gastric artery, supraduodenal artery and GDA, 5 to 7 cm of the first portion of the duodenum is preserved with good artenal circulation. By preservation of the anterior infenor pancreaticoduodenal artery, the third portion and anal side of the second portion of the duodenum are preserved with good artenal circulation. Complete pancreatic head resection w~th 3 to 4 cm of segmental duodenectomy including minor and maior papdla ts completed. Tumor extension in the main pancreatic duct of the remnant pancreas was studied using ultra-thin pancreatoscope. Reconstruction of the alimentary tract is performed with pancreatogastrostomy, end to end duodenoduodenostomy and end to side choledochoduodenostomy. Results. In 15 cases of pancreatic head diseases, cmef]y bemgn tumors, th=s procedure was successfully performed w=thout severe complicatzons. Postoperative QOL was qu=te satisfactory. Complete resection of pancreatic head for bemgn tumor of the pancreat=c head reg=on can be performed w~th safety and ease by tins procedure. cases of male and 5 cases of female and were divided to two groups, single therapy group(ESWL only) (Group A) and combined therapy group(Group B). The average age of the SUbleCts was 50.7. The combined therapy applied to 10 cases in whom intraductal mumple pancreatic stones and stenosis of pancreatic ducts were treated wah both ESWI. and endoscopic therapy including endoscopic pancreattc sphincterectomy (EPST) (5 cases), stone dismtagration therapy using balloon or basket catheter (5 cases), endoscopic nasc pancreatic drainage (ENPD) (8 cases), and stenting of pancreatic duct (4 cases). The endoscopic therapy was performed in order to extract stones, drainage pancreatic ju=ce and fragments of stones, and focus the s~ock wave under panoraalJcography. [Results] Concerning about the age and maximum diameter of stone, there was no difference between Group A and Fa. The number of the cases who had vanous number of stones (1 2-4 5~) in Group A and [3 were (1 .3.5) and (1 1 8), respectively The total number of the times of ESWL and the total number of the shock wave discharges in Group A and B were 5.4 and 10.2, 20656 and 39446, respectively. Regardtng aDout exocnne function (PFD) and endocnne function (C)GTT), there was no difference between Group A and S. The duration of hospital treatment in Group A and B were 48.1 and 79.5, respestavely. The total number of ,*he times of therapy, the total number of the shock wave, and the duration of the therapy in Group A were larger than in Group B, because the number of stone of the Dattents tn Group A was also larger than that of Group B. [Conclusion] We concluded that combmatlon management (ESWL wRh endoscopic therapy) could improve the effect of therapy even =f patient has a lot of stones. The retroperitoneal site of pancreas, his relatively small bulk and his Intimate relation with the neighboring digestive and nondigestive structures confers an extreme difficulty to diagnosis of some masses with this topography. Sometimes the diagnosis is established only peroparafively, even postoperatively, after meticulous dissection of the operative specimen. We present the case of a 38 year old young women who was admitted for palpable epigastric tumor and violent abdominal pains. Echography, scanner, gastroscopy, radiology and laparoscopy could not specify, the origin of the tumor. Only laparntomy and histological examination specified the diagnosis of ectopic antropiloric pancreas. Retrospectively, only the CT could suggest the diagnosis. If the laparoscopy is often named "the queen" of the abdominal exploration, the laparotomy is "'the emperor". Introduction. Recent studies have evaluated pancreatic exocrine function by using MRCP to monitor changes in duodena/ fluid induced by secretin. However, this method does not provide a quantitative measure of pancreanc exocrine function. We evaluated pancreanc exocrine function by measuring changes in the intensity of pancreatic tissue on ,MR/. Patients and Method. We examined five patients with pancreatic exocrine hypofunction confirmed by PFD test (hylx>-function group) and five normal volunteers as control group. After intravenous injection of 100 units of secreim (Secrepam Eizai), T2 enhanced images of pancreatic tissue v, ere serially taken for 16 minutes. The ratxo of intensity between pancreas tissue and iliopsous muscle was calculated and changes in the intensity ratio v, ere calculated in both groups. Results. In the control group, the intensit2/' muo increased immediately after injection of secretin and reached a peak value at about 5 minutes. Hov, exer. the intensity ratio =m'adually decreased to the baseline value. In contrast, in the hypo-funcUon L..n'oup. two different patterns were obser, ed: I) no changes in the intensiD" ratio relative to baseline value. 2) the intensity ratio gradually increased hut the peak value ~as delayed compared wlth the control. Conclusion, Our results sbox~ed that the intenslty ratio of pancreas tissue m patients with hypo-fimctlon of pancreanc exocrme secreuon x~as different from that in normal subjects, and suggest that MRI-secretin method ma~ be usefid tbr quamitauve assesment of pancreatic exocrme fianctlon. It may also be used tbr anal.',sls of patlents who undergo intestinal reconstructxon after Introduction. In the evolution of the surgical treatment of acute pancreatitis (AP) there were two periods: the old penod when we recommended early surgery and the late period when we do not operate m the first interval and we operate only when septic complicauons occurred. In our retrospective study we try to see if the modem concept is sustained by the results in our cases. Patients and Method. From 1989 to 1995 100 cases of necrotic pancreatitis (NP) were treated in our department. It was 68 male and 32 women. The etiology was biliary in 38 cases, etanolic in 27 cases, metabolic dislipidemic in 12 cases, drugs related in 2 cases and tmknown in 21 cases. The lesion involved all the pancreas (total NP) in 32 cases and just a segment (.parcelary. N'P) m 68 cases. All the cases were operated. Results. The surgery was early indicated when the clinic shows an acute abdomen with ascitis and peritomtic syndrome, the ettotogy was bdlary or the choledocian obstruction was important and later, in the period of septic intraabdominal complications in the others cases. The explorer laparotomy established the diagnosis and the precise extend of lesions, the imagistic explorations offenng sometimes lacunary data. The early surgery, realized the bfliary decompression and drainage and treatment of the etiological bihary factor, the lavagr of the peritoneal cavtty, opening and draining the peripancreatic spaces. The late surgery, realized the evacuatmn and drainage of the collections or pancreatic necrectomtes, sometimes pancreatic caudal resection. Global mortality, was 48%. but only 24% for biliary etiology Conclusion. In our mind "early or late surgery" for acute pancreatnls is a wrong concept. The time of surgery, is indicate by different factors: etmlogy, clinic, evolutmn. In all the cases the surgery in NP must be ak~ays conservatr, e regarding the pancreatic tissue. Introduction, The early pancreatic enzyme response to intraduodenal (id.) stimulants is mediated by a vago-vagal cholinergic enteropancreauc reflex (Am J Physiol 1980;238:G23-G29). The aim of the study was to further characterize the cholinergic receptors and to investigate a possible involvement of CCK-A-receptors ha this reflex. Methods. In 6 conscious dogs with gasu-ic and duodenal cannulas, secretin (164 pmobXg/h iv.) was given to provide a flow of pancreatic juice of about 1 drop/sen. Amylase activity was measured ha each drop before and after rapid iv. in lecuon of caerulein (7.4 pmol/kg) or id. injection of L-tryptophan ('I'R.P; 1 retool), Na-Oleate (3 retool), and HC1 (3 retool). The ex'penments were repeated in the presence of the Ml-antagonist telenzepine (81 nmol/kg iv.) and of the CCK-A-amagonist L-364,718 (0.1 mg&g iv.). Latency of response was defined as the time elapsing between injection and increase in amylase activity greater than the mean  3SD of prestimulation output. Results. Latency of pancreatic amylase response to TRP and oleate was sig~Jficaztly (p<O.05] shorter than to caeru[eir, and to HCL Teler~z.epme increased the latency to TRP and oleate, but not to HCI. L-364,178 abolished the response to all given stimuli. 28=4 I 17=7'" 16=5"" ,] 120=473" Telenzepine(n=3) 30=4 t73=138 *~ 220=119"~ I t27=70" L-364,718 (  The present study confirms and extends earlier findings: Since the latency of amylase response to TRP and oleate was shorter than to iv. caerulem, the imtal response is probably not due to release of hormones into the elrculanon but rather to a cholinergic reflex ending on muscannic M 1-receptors. However. the activatton of (possibly vagal) CCK-A-receptors (possibly by neural or pamcrine CCK'I ts essential for running the reflex. The ininal amylase response to HC1 is probably mediated by the release of CCK into the c]rculatmn. Introductiom The carbohydrate antigens in pancreatic cancer tissue dramatically change in comparison with those normal tissue. The CA19-9 epitope (sLea), one of ~c sialylated Lewis antigens, is welt known tumor marker which is useful for screening of cancer in pancreas, colon and other organ. The sLe x and sLe a antigens are known to serve as ligands for selecrin m&ccole and considered to pamcipam in the via E-sclectin to venular cndothelium m vtvo which is the essential step for cancer cell metastasis. In an attempt to correlate the sialvlaved Lewis antigen expression in human pancreadc tissae with expression of #ycusyttransferase genes, we quantitatively analyzed giycosyitransfemse transcripts in pancreatic cancer. Methods. l.)Wc established the competitive RT-PCR method for measuring r kinds of ~ycosi.','transferases. which wcr~ considered to be invoNed in the synthesis of sialylated Lewis anu~ens, and applied for pancreatic cancer. 2)The amounts of S/Le a. SLe x and Le ~ antigens were determined bv We.stem blotting analysis using antl-sLe a. sLc x and Le b mAb. respccnvely. 3) Gcnotyping of two giycosyltransfcraScs, Lewis enzyme and Se cnz3'mc were performed by PCR-RFLP method. Results and conclusion, l) The sLe a. sLc x and Lcb antigens increased dmmaocally m cancer, The correlatmn between the amount of sLea and that of sLcX was observed. 2)The sL, c a expression was influenced by Lewis genotype, l.x:wis enzyme synthc.sized sLe a antigen. 3) The Se enz3me expression was in good proportlon to the amounts of Leb anl~gcns to show that Se en~'rne synthesizes I..c b ant;gens. But the amounts of sLe a and sLc x antigens thd not correlate directly w~th four ct2.3-~,ial.x Itransfera~e (ST3GalI.II-111 and I~r transcripts, three ct 1.3-fucosx ltran~fcrasc(Lcw]s enzyme. Fuc-TI'v. FucT-'l% [)transcripts. ~ 1.4-galactos', Itran~femse ( ~5 L4GAbT~ tmn~crtpts and Core 2 ~ 1.6-'q-acetx tgiuco~amin,, ttran~ferasr (Core" GoT)transcripts. Dept of Gastroenterology and Int. Meal. 1st Dept of Pathology" Tokyo Women's Med=cal College. Tokyo. Japan Introduction. NItnc oxtde (NO) has been reported to contnbute to multJorgan oxidatwe stress and t=ssue mlury ~n Na4aurocholate induced pancreatttis, but some mvestfgators have reported find=ng that NO has a protectwe effect m cerulem-mduced pancreat=tts To clarify the s=gnfficance of NO m acute pancreat~t=s, we investigated the etfect of dtfferent NO synthase mh~b~tors and NO donors on expenmental pancreat~tls. Methods. Closed duodenal loop (CDL)-mduced pancreat=tis was produced in male Wistar rats and the ammals were d~v=ded =nto five group 1) NS group: infusion of normal sahne, 2) ARG group NOS substrate. L-argmme (25 mg/kg bolus followed by 5 mg/kg/h), 3) SNAP group. NO donor. S-nltroso-N-acetyl-penicfllamtne (0 2 mg/kg /h). 4) AG group =NOB =nh=bltor, aminoguan=dine (20 mg/kg followed by 5 mg/kg~). 5) L-NAME group the more powerful inhibitor of eNOS than tNOS. N-mtro-L-arglnme methyl ester (10 mg/kg followed by 2 5 rng/kg/h) All drugs were ~nfused intravenously dunng a penod of 6 h or 12 h ~n 10-12 animals ~n each group. Pancreat=c t~ssue was removed at 6 I~ and 12 h after creating the CDL. Results. Serum amylase levels were tncreased 3 h after creating the COL L-NAME-treated antmals showed s~gn~ftcantly ~ncreased serum amylase levels compared to the antmals tn the NS ARG, SNAP and AG group every time 3 h onwards Htstolog~catly. L-NAME aCmm~strat~on significantly increased edema and aclnar cetl vacuoh-zat~on at 5 h and resulted ~n Severer hemorrhage and actnar cell necroses than observed ~n the other four groups at 12 h Neither ARG SNAP nor AG had any s~gmhcant effect on the h~stologtcal changes Conclusions. The eNOS mhtb~tor s~gnfftcantly aggravated pancreat~t~s but NO donors or =NOB ~nhlbltor dtd not change the seventy of the pancreat=t~s We conclude that eNOS may play a pr0tectwe rote against the progression of acute pancreat=t=s Introduction. Single-point mutations m the cationic trypsmogen (CT) gene have been reported ~n Caucasian hereditary pancreatltJs CLIP) kindreds. We studied CT and anionic trypsmogen (AT) gene mutations m Japanese HP kindreds. Methods. All five exons of the CT and AT genes were amplified by PCR and sequenced [n seven Japanese HP famrhes. Results. Two kinds of a smgle-pmnt mutation =n the CT gene, which were ~dentical to those prewously reported ;n Caucas=an HP families, were observed in separate Japanese HP families: 29Asn(AAC):Ile(ATC) in exon 2 and lZ2Arg(CGC):His(CAC) m exon 3. PancreatztlS occurred at more advanced ages =n patmnts wath the N291 mutation than patients wtth the Rt22H mutation. Large talc=fled pancreatic stones were observed Jn patients w~th the N291 mutation, but small stones were observed ~n only one of three patients w=th the R122H mutation. Bestdes normal polymorphlsms in axons 4 and 5 of the CT gone and ~n exon 3 of the AT gone, no mutation was found Jn patients =n the remaining 5 HP famtlies, 21 patients w~th sporadic chronic pancreatltlS, and 5 normal sublects. Conclusions. These results show the heterogenetty, but no racial specffic=ty, ~n the CT gone mutatzons m HP kindreds. Destructive chn~cal features for each of the mutation types were suggested: adult onset and large calc=fied pancreat=c stones for the N291 mutation, and chddhood onset and no tendency toward pancreat=c calclficat~on for the R122H mutation Patients and Methods. Of patients who were admitted to Aichi Medical University Hospital suffedng from cardiovascular emergencies, e~ght patmnts were selected for the present studies: male in six, female in two and 24-93yrs (mean 67.8yrs). Basic cardiovascular diseases were as follows: acute myocardial infarction(AMI) m two, old myocardial infarctlon(OMI) m two, AMI or OMI plus aorta aneurysm of the abdomen (AAA) in two, wral myocardit=s m one and acquired valvular disease m one. No patients had any known pancreatic diseases. Serum amylase and its isoz~me were measured m all patients. Results. 1. Serum amylase was elevated in all patients, ranging from 1,027 to 8,371 mU/ml (normal <400mU/ml), and a pancreatictype isoamylase was dominant. 2. Upper abdominal or eplgastnc pare was noted only ~n two patients. Seventy of pancreatit=s,wh~ch was assessed by using the recent cntena, was todd and moderate in each patient. 3. F~ve patmnts had been =n shock on the=r adm=ssion to ICU, so that ~twas obscure whether they had had any complaints related to pancreat~t~s. 4. Three patients d=ed of the rupture of AAA, heart fadure or multiple organ fatlure(MOF). The other patients recovered from pancreat~t~s. 5. Autopsy was done m 93yo male patient who had suffered from d~abetes mellitus. OMI and AAA, and d~ed of MOF. Hyperamylasem=a and ~nflammatory response were pers=stent. Histooathology ofthe pancreas revealed acute deter=oration of chronic pancreatltiS and severe artenoscleros=s of mtra-and extrapancreat~c artenoles. Conclusion. Ischem~c pancreat=t~s may occur ~n the low perfus=on to the pancreas. Reference values were set by Hoffmann's ~terative ~runcation method. Upper limit of normal was 8.2 mM for TAP, whereas that for PROP was 7.7 mVI m males w~th 9.3 ruVI in females. Conclusion. Upper linnt of normal was age-anrelated and set for urinary TAP and PROP. PROP was higher in females. A.Noda,S.Hase,E.Ibuki,K.Takeuchi,H.Murayama,T.Suga Third Department of Internal Medicine, Aichi Medical Umverslty Introduction. Intraductal pancreatic stones and protein plugs act as an outflow barner of pancreatic secretion, and can reduce recurrent attacks of abdominal pain and progress chromc inflammation of the pancreas. Patients and Methods. Thirty six patients were selected for the present studies: 34 w=th calcified pancreatic stones (alcoholic m 22), one with protein plugs(nonalcoholic), and one with recurrent attacks of pancreatitis after pancreatoduodenectomy. The antiepileptic agent thmethadione(TMO) and the mucolyllc expectorant bromhexme -HCI were given orally at a dose of 0.6-1.2g dady to patients with calcified stones, and at a dose of 12mg dady to the other patients, respectively. Another 30 patmnts with calcified stones served as a TMO-nontreated(control) group. Pancreatic stones, protein plugs and climcal features of patients were followed up for 14-148 months. Results. 1. On plain X-ray films and CT scans of the abdomen, calcified stones d,mmlshed m s,ze and number or disappeared in 23 patients(68%). Impa=red exocnne pancreatic functlon returned to normal m one-third of patients, and diabetes melhtus was well controlled by e=ther d~et therapy alone or oral hypoglycem=c agents m 63% of patients. Complete relief of pare was noted in 78% of patients. Overall game and no change =n body weight were ooserved =n 83% of patients. 2. Pancreatic stones of the control group nether d=sappeared or diminished spontaneously. 3. Adm~n~stratmn of bromnex,ne-HCI ehmmated protmn plugs and reheved recurrent artacks ofpancreatttls. Conclusion. TMO treatment ,s a useful tool for chemical htholys=s of catclfied pancreatic stones. Bromhex,ne-HCI has a potential to ehmmate prote~n plugs and relieves an attack of pancreattt~s, resulting probably from decreasing wscos~ty of pancreatic juice. Tsukuba City,, Japan Introduction. We have been treating patients with potentially localized pancreas cancers with preoperative RT; this treatment setting could improve ms~,'tability and yet eliminatepatieotswith occuhmetastasis. CA 19-9 is a tumor marker available for estimating active tumor cell burden. We studied usefulness of CA I%9 in this treatment serdng. Patients and Methods. We used 23 pancreascancerpattentswith elevatedCA 1%9, treatedby pmoperativeRT (30--50 Gy) between 1991 and 1997. They were planned to be followed by tumor resectionwhen possible and intraoperative radiotherapy (IOR, 20 Gy) irrespective of resection. CA 1%9 serum levetwas checkedbefore RT, immediately after RT, and thereafter. Recurrenceincludingliver or peritoneal metastasisand local progression was dux'nmnedwith CT scans to study the relationship with changes of CA 19-9. Results. CA 19-9 level before RT, ranged from 64 to 14(X)O U/ml, decreased immediately after RT in 10 patients (Group A), increased in I0 patients(Group B), and remainedstablein 3 patients(Group C). In Group A, 6 patients underwent lapalotomy: IOR alone (4 pts: one showed peritoneal dissenunation), resection+lOR( 1 pt), resection alone ( 1 pt); and ,.t. pataentsdid not: esumated unreseetable(3 pts) and metastasis( 1 pt). In Group B and C, 6 patients underwent lapalotomy: IOR alone (4 pts), resecuon -~OR (1 pt), resection alone( 1 pt); and 7 Paaentsdid not: esumatedunres~ctable(2 pts) and metastasis(5 pts). Metastasisdeveloped by 60 days after the initiation of l~r in these 7 patients. Metastastsdevelopedthereafterm 15 of remaining 16 patients. Imtial recurrence was liver metastasis( 14 pts). pentoncal dissermnation(7 pts) and pleuraldisseminatmn{ I pt). Timeof recurrence ranged from 30 to 272 days r 150.4) in Group A and from 35 to 3,-18 days (mean, 116) in Group B and C. Prior to climcal reeurrenceCA 19-9 levelincreasedin 17177.3%) of 22 pauents. Medmnsurvwalof allpa, ents was 265.8 days. The surglcally treated paUents survwed longer than non-sur~callytreatedpauents:312 vs. 214 days (p<O.05). The patmntsof Group A and Group B and C ~ho underwent surge D' sur,'wed 327 and 299 days. respectively (NS) Conclusion. Momtonngof CA 19-9 level before and lmmedmtely after preoperatwe RT is useful in predicungearly development of metastasis m pauents with climcally localized pancreatic cancer at presentatmn. Introduction. l~lorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PpPD) is a standard operation for peripancreatic neoplasms, however, pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) acommpanied with gastorectomy ks still recomnmnded for some malignant diseases. Malnutrition is one of important complications after PD, especially with gastrectomy, our new reconstructive method after PD could improve the oral nutriotion after surgery. Case report. A 54-year-old male was admitted to our hospital complaining of abdominal fullness and vomitting after eating. Borrrnann type-2 gastric cardnorna was recognized in the antrum of the stomach. On operation, a tumor was exopsed on the anterior suface of the stomach and nodal metastases were positive also in the nodes along ASPDA and SM'V. En bloc Dancreaticogastroduodenectomy and extended lymphnode dissection of nodes arround SMV and hepatoduodehal ligament was performed. Fancreaticojejunostomy and choledocojejunostomy was perfomed with interlx~itioned Jejunum. Jejunal ~ouch was made with cutting the wall of the jejunul loop and was anastomoted with residual stomach. Oral intake was st~ed at 9th pod and he could take 70~ of usual food at 24th pod. His weight gained to +lkg at 40th Pod. Conclusion. Jejunal ix)uch anastomosis with the residual stomach after PD with gastrectomy could improve oral intake. HirohMe Ohmshi ~ Tetsuya Mine, Tomohiro Tsuch,da, and Toshiro Fujita. Department of Internal Medicine IV, University of Tokyo School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Introductlon. Rab4, a member of the Rab family of Ras-related small GTP-bmding proteins, has recently been suggested to participate in exocytosm in addition to its well known role in recycling of GLUT4 and transfernn receptors. The present study was conducted to elucidate the function of Rab4 in regulated exocytosis. Methods and Results. Western blo~ng showed Rab4 to be localized to zymogen granule membranes of pancreatic ac)m as well as to endosome rich fractmn. When the synthetm peptzde corresponding to the Rab4 hypervariable carboxyl-terminal domain was introduced into streptolysin-O permeabflized acmi, the amylase release induced by 10 pM free calcium was potentiated by 80% at maximum in a concentration-dependent manner. Fur~ermore, anti-Rab4 antibody enhanced calc=um-trtggered amylase release from permeabflized acmi. To furltaer eluc=date the involvement of Rab4 in the stlmulus-secretlon coupling, we examined the effect of CCK on GTP-binding rate to Rab4. GTP-bindmg rate was measured by introducing radiolabelled GTP into streptolysm-O permeabd,zed acre= and immunoprec=p,tatlng GTP-bound Rab4. StJmulatmn of pancreatm aclm w,th 100 pM CCK increased the incorporation of radiolabetled GTP into Rab4 by 75% compared to control. TPA also enhanced the GTP-bmding rate to Rab4 m pancreatm acmL In additmn, pretreatment of pancreatic aczm w)th 1 pM caiphostm C. a protein kmase C tomb=tot, attenuated the st~mulatory effect of CCK on GTP-bmding to Rab4 Conclusion. Rab4 protein on zymogen granules plays a cruczal role m regulated exocytosm and that Rab4 ,s revolved in the st~mulus-secretmn couphng of pancreatic acre, v,a protein kmase C dependent s,gnallmg pathway EFFECTS OF HEPATOCYTE GROWTH FACTOR AND TRANS-FORMING GROWTH FACTOR ct ON THE GROWTH OF HUMAN PANCREATIC CANCER CELL LhNES N. Ohba. R. Makmo. T. SekL H. Funatomi*, K. M, itamura Second Deparunent of Internal Medicine, Showa Umverstty School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan Introduction While mitogenic effect of ~'ansforming growth factor a (TGF oO on human pancreatic cancer is well known, the role of hcpatocyte growth factor (HGF) on the development of pancreatic cancer LS not yet enough evaluated. We invesugated the effects of HGF and combined treatment with TGF a on the growth of human pancreatic cancer cells. Methods Pane-l, COLO 357, T3M4 and ASPC-1 human pancreauc cancer cell lines were used. These cells were plated on a 96 well plate and medmm was changed to serum free medium supplemented with TGF ct or HGF at coneentranons up to 20 ng/ml. Fixed conccnWauon (10 ng/ml) of HOF was combined with different concena-atmns of TGF a. Cell growth was assessed by MTT assay 48 hours after medium change. mlLNA expressmn of c-met, TGF a and epidermal growth factor receptor after treaanem of each cells with TGF a or HGF was examined by Notthem blomng using respecuve eDNA probes. Results TGF ct stimulated the cell growth of all cell lines. The smnulatorv effect of HGF on cell growth was observed m COLO 357, T3M4 ant:[ ASPC-I cells, except for Panc-I cells. Combination treatment wtth 10 n~rnl of HGF and 1 n~ml of TGF 0t enhanced their sumulatory effect compared to HGF alone, however, thin effect was not clearly shown when the concentration of TGF cr was increased to 10 nffml. In .all cell lines. ~'eatment with TGF ct increased the expression of TGF a mRNA and treatment with HGF did not influenced the expresston of c-met mRNA. In ASPC-I cells, expression of TGF ct mRNA was enhanced by the treatment with HGF Conclusion HGF sumulated human pancreauc cancer cell growth except for Pane-1 cells and combmauon treatment wtth a low dose of TGF a enhanced its ~umulatory. effect, but combination of h,gh dose did not. TGF a mRNA expresszon was enhanced by HGF m ASPC-I human pancreanc cancer cells. Introduction. An aut~immune mechamsm may be involved m some patients with idiopathic chrome pancreala~s. However, the clinical features and pathophysiology are still unknown. To eLa_nfy it. we analyzed 38 patients with au~oimmune-related chronic pancreanus. Patients and Me thods. Th~'y-e~ght patients with antoimmune-rala~ed pancreantis were diagnosed as foIlows:(1)mcreased pancrea~c enzymes, pancreatic exocrme dysfunction, and abnormal pancrea~ogram. (2) hyper-gammaglobulinemm, autoan~bodles, or complicauon with other autotmmune diseases, (3)hmtopatholog~cal]y, mfdtradon of lymphocyl~s, (4)effective steroid therapy In 38 panents (26 males and 12 females, mean age: 63 yr.) w~th auto~mmune pancreanns, we analyzed clinical features, ERCP ~magas, b~ochemm~'y, and immunological findings. We studied autoannbodies (against DNA. smooth muscle, mitochondrm, lactoferrm, carbomc anhydrase l'I, or rheumatoid factor), tmmuno-hmtochemistry, or flow-eytome~rw. R as u Its. Fourteen of 38 pat~-en~ had ~aunchce. Seven panents were complicated w~th s~cca syndrome. 5 w~th prmaary scleresmg cholang~tis. and 14 w~th dmbetes roellims..421 panents showed segment~l or diffuse stenosis of the mmn pancreanc duct. FiReen panen~s showed stenos~s of the common bile ducL BT-PABA excreuon test showed abnormal pancreanc exocrme funcnon ~n 16 pat~ent~. Twen~--four pauen~s had hyper-gammaglobulmemm. Rheumatoid factor was detected in 4 of 11, annnuclear ant,body m 4 of 12, ann-smooth muscle annbody m 2 of 7, ann-carbomc anhydrase II annbody m 3 of 9. and anu.lactoferrm ant-~body m 3 of 6. None had ann.mttochondrml annbody Microscopic findings showed mfdtra~mn of CD4(~') lymphocytes around the pancrea~ac duc~. and HLA-DR was expressed on CD4r cells and pancreatm duc~ cells. Flowcymmetrm analysm confirmed activated T ceils were the ma~or infiltrating lymphoc.~es m the pancreas, more ~han 80%. Concluaxon. .An autom~mune mechanmm agamsz carbonm anhydrase [I or lactoferrm vta CD4 pos~tr,.e cells may be revolved m pacxents w~th lmmune-relazed chronic pancrea~lllS. INTRODUCTION : Early recogn$on of NICT ~s d~cu~t parlcuiady when i~ size is snail and angiography ~is to prove tumor s~.inmg. We present 3 pa~en~ w~ NICTw~ their modern imaging modalities and gan~c anatyses. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Three consecutive patients with N~CT were enrolled. A pa~ent (A, 55/m) had a back pa~n occurred two month before, wh~le ~e o~er two {B, 43/m; C, 42/~) were as/mptomatic P~ent A visited our clinic w~ the abnormali~es such as elevated serum CEA,CA19-9,amy~ase and elestase 1. Pa~ent B & C were referred ,=or the exardna~on of pancrea~c masses incidentaJly detected by screening US. US, CT, MR. EUS, ERCP, and celiac angiography were per~rmed =n all. Endoscodica~y pure pancrea~c juices (PPJ) were collec~d. Muttons of K-ras gene atcodon 12 ,n PPJ were analyzed u==ng HPA. All underwent dis=tl pancreatec~omy w~ sp~eneaomy. Pathological s~Jdy in p~ent A showed two malignant NICT(1.4 cm and 15 cm in diameter). Pa~ent Bwas also diagnosed as malignant NICT (3 cm), whereas pa~entC was diagnosed as bencjn (8 ram). RESULTS: US showed isoech=c tumor w~ low echoic halo in all. In the malignant NICT ~e halo was ~h=d< and the merg~n was ,rregular, whereas the halo was thin and the margin was smooth in the benign NICT. EUS showed almostthe same appearance as thatof conven'~onal US. However, the Jnages were vrvid and thez quaht~es were much more e~:ellent O~amJc CT sludy showed ~m enhancement in all. MR in p=entA & B showed row ~ntens~ =n T1 and hcJh in T2, while both T1 and T2 ,mages showed hypo ,ntens~ Jn p~lent C. Dynamic MR showed early s~.ln m all. ERCP showed sogmental s~Bnos~s only in pzCentA. No tumor sa,ns were detected in celiac angiography. Muta~o~ of K-ras in PPJ was seen only m patient B. CONCLUSIONS: Early diagnos~s of N[CT may be accomplished flus charec'~ns~c ullTasound fealures and hypervasoJlar nature can be proved by imaging modaiiles. The muta~on of K-ras was shown in a p~ent w~ maJ=gnant NICT, suggeslng IS chimera charac~r. ~KSWL) [ Okashim" , S Nakazawa. I. Yoshina K [asi, Y. Nakamura and T. Takashi,rz Department of Internal iedicin~ Second Teaching Hospital Fu]ita Health Umversity, Schoul of iedicin~ Nagolra Japan Introdnctic~ We performed F.SI[L to 35 patients ~th pancreatic stones in the ~ara pancreatic duct (l~D), and evaluated its therapeutic vaiu~ Patients 29 patients were =ale and 6 feaale ranging between 22 and 72 years of ag~ average 49 years. Pancreatic stones were detected at the following regions of the pancreas.at the head of the pancreas in 27 lmtients, at the head and body in 4, at the body in ?-and throughout the entire pancreas in Z Solitary stone mere detected in 19 patients, whxle multiple stones were detected in 16 patients. ]iaxmal diameters of the stones in respetive cases ranged between 4-25"~ laverege 13m). IMtlxx[ The lithotripter used in this study ,as a Tripter l-I (Direx Ca. Lt~[ ). Frequency of truament was 1-18 times (averege 4 times}, and the n,~ber of shock ,raves ranged from I. 800-31, 774 {average 10, 424). 18 patients mere treated with only. mhile other 17 patients mere treated by a combination of ESIL and endoscopic theraw. s Stones m the I[PD had disappeared in all cases After treament, pare disappeared in 86~ of the patients. Ser~ a~lase levels decreased after treatment and the dilataion of the 1f19 was i~prove& Values of the P/9 test were improved m 2 of 9 patients mhose courses were observed for =ore than 1 year after treatment: [results of oral glucose tolerance test using 75g of glucose beon=e normal in I of 6 patients mho shomed diabetic glucose tolerance before treatment. The iusulinogenic index (&IRI/IBS) ras improved fTO~ 0. 22 to 0. 87 in one patzent. Recurrent stones were observed m 6 patxents ,17,~} The rate of reccurent stones detected m 6 patlents mith stesosls of the I[PD was as hlgh as 50,~ Coucluaioa ESIZ ts a useful method of treating pancreatic stones m the I[PD Stenosls of the IPD was thought to pro~te reccurence of stones. Introduction Acute Pancreatitis (AP) is an inflammatory disorder, most commonly caused by gallstones, alcohol and drugs, although up to 30% of cases are idiopathic, Interactions between environment/diet and genotype may affect an individual's predisposition to AP via the alteration of oxygen free radical levels and/or the inappropriate metabolism of xenobiotics. In this study, we have examined four polymorphic xenobiotic metabolismg enzymes, Cytochromes P450 CYPIAI, CYP2D6, CYP2EI, and N-Acetyltransferuse 2 (NAT2) to ~sess their influence on susceptibility to AP Methods.Genomic DNA was extracted from 80 Caucasian AP pa.dents and age/sex matched random unaffected controls Polymerase Chain Reactions were performed using specific oligonuclcotide primers and restriction endonucleases to detect the genetic polymorphisms wuhin the CYPIAI, CYP2D6, CYP2EI and NAT2 genes Results. From the genetic analysts, 100% (20/20) of pauents with alcohol-induced AP were NAT2 slow acetylators, compared with 67 5% (54/80) in the random population (Chi-Squared Test P<0 01) No statistically significant difference in slow acetylator frequency was observed in the gallstone-reduced AP or idiopathic AP when compared wth the random population. No association was observed between the occurrence or aetiology of AP and CYPIAI, CYP2D6 or CYP2E! genettc polymorphisms Conclusions. These results suggest that the NAT" slow acetylator status may be associated with an increased risk of alcohol-reduced AP. but not gallstone or idiopathic ..L ~ In alcohol-reduced :L a, reduction of CYP2EI catalysed oxidauon and impaired N-Acetylatton of promutagens such as nkrosammes may increase the nsk of pancreatic tissue damage inmba~n rest is now m~,~la_~ad the "~Id-~,d" test <~ ~ pmx~a~ ~ In the px'~ent study, we ~ ,,;t,.,,~-,d the ~fic duct diameter (PDD) on ~hy (US) and the ~crine fime~n simuI~n~oualy attzr an ina-avenous boh~/n.iec~n of seera~/n (100 IU). Our aims was m de~-~nine the relafio~h~ between PPD and e~ctme function in the sea~fin test, and the ,.~,,-~1 meamng amblnmg tm~t~ Subjects and Met.hxt~: The sea.tin test with PPD moasu~,~-twas e.~m,~iin 70 ~ compc~lof30cont~l~ ~C3, 26 pauanm with pmbabla CP (P), 14 padent~ with defirLr~ CP (D). The ~g,~ ~fCP was based on the ~ ~/zena ~br CP by ~ Japan Soae~f in 1995. In the sea~a msr~ we amly~ tkad vol~, lmutxa~te con~anwafiom and amylase ~ of 6 aliqt~m of du~ienal asp/ra~e per 10 mm l~r 60 mm ~Ik~vmg an m~on of sea~un. Sim-~-~ously, PPD was determined at the body. oft.he panamas on US L Z 5.10,15, 20. 30 and.40 mm ater r~ sea~un m~c~o~, l~ul~ The average c~t, be basal PDD m C, P and D g~up was LL L1 and 3.3 ma~ mspecuvely. .4/t~ PDD was in=eased m any group ~I]tm, ing the setme~n mjec~or~ them w-~ ~o diffamr~e m a Ume to roach the maxm~ ddamuon of PDD among 3 ~'oup.~ PDD r~-r to ~dn was e.xpt~,sed as a pe~nt i~=~ase of the ma~m~l m the basal PDD (M/B raho). The M / B mt~ in C. P and D group was 185_-9~/~ 161-8% and 134:8%. ~ly. The M/B ratio in D group was ~n~a~mdy less than C and P group (p<0.006, x~3eo:zvely Surreal transduodenai papiI1aplasty is a ,,cry effective intervention in cases of chronic obsttucti~e pancrearitis resulting in definiti',e amelioration of' pancreatic outflow and enzyme secretion. Howe,,er, in some cases it can be complicated with a severe restenosis of the divided papilla of Vater ~,ith painful relapses of pancreatitis pro,,oked by ductal hypertension some years after plastic surgery. In these cases endoscopic classic double repaplUotomy could be dangerous because of risk of bleeding, perforation and fiJnher restenosis of the postoperatb, e scars In the presented three cases we found restenosis of the papilla of Vater 3-6 years after surgical double papillotaplasty for chronic pancreamis After ex'tended endoscopic septotomy v, hh needle-nile papillotom between the pancreatic and biliary outlet along a 5-7 F pancreatic dram another 7-10 F d~n was placed into the pancreatic duct for 2-3 months to pre~,ent restenoms and dilate suprapapillar:' stricture not accessible for papillotomy All of the three patients are doing ~sell since removal of stents wuhout pare, relapses and pro~essi',e dilatauon of the pancreatic duct until now, ho~ever, the follow-up time is only 3-6 months Conclusion. endoscopic septommy with needle-nile papillotom can be performed in patients with restenosis of surgtcal double papdlaplasty Long-term stenting with double prostheses seems to be necessary to pro~essive[y dilate additional suprapapillary smctures and prevent early restenosts Late results should be e',aluated by thorough longterm follow-up with uItrasonography and funcuonal tests. ANTICYTOKINF.S ~IAs'qAGEMENT ON ACLqT. P,tNCREATITIS A.Pcrejaalov. Faculty Stmgery Department. Medical Umvermty, Lvrv, Ukraine Proinflanmaatory cytokin~, such as TNF~J., IL-6, IL-8, play an important role in the pathogenests of acute pancreatitis. The administration of anfi-inflanm~ory ~;ytokines, cytokinc receptor antagonists and various drugs arc used for the decreasing of nega~'e effects of cytokines or inhl'bifion of e~okine produeuon. With thin goal thre~ groups of remedies were used: eorticosteroids, cytostatics and pentoxify~ine. Fo~-two patients with acute pancreatitis, which evaluate as severe (APACHE l~ score more than 7) wine studied. The increased level of all cytokines was marked in all patients after adratssion. In the complex of the intensive care the hydroeortusone in doses 100 rag/day was includes in patients of the first group (n=12), the pentox.tfyllinc in doses 200 rag/day was include trt patients of the second group (n =12) and floorour~il in doses 5 n~day -in third group. The control group ~mpiled 6 patients. Through day. after the treatment ~tart, the database ofl~'ds ()fall cytokines was noted in patients of first and tlurd group. At the same ume. in patients of the second group the ie~,el of TNT-~ deceased and the ~evels of II.-6. IL-8 signal]candy did not change. Serum le,,els of TNT-~. IL-6 and ,rl.-8 return sio~,ly to normal ~alues after 7 da~,s in pallents of the mum ~IX)U,nS. Inti.mton of hydroco~sone and pentoxl-fyUinc did not evoke the adverse reactions, infumon of tluorouracil in -t patients ~companied by nausea, diarrhea and myocardial ischerma, what dctermincd the ncc~.~sity of the drug cancellation. The de,,clopmcnt of the systermc ct)mplicanoml of acute pancreautts did not obser',e m patacnts of these groups. The ievel of ~;ytokines rem.'-n.s the high dunng first rive day~ in the control ~oup. The mulupic-,n3an failure develops m three paUents of the control group on the background of the traditional managt.wncnt. Introduction Maintaining islets in culture has remained a problem. This has hamlx'red generations of islet stem cells for possible treatment of diabetes mellims. We have been able to culture Syrian hamster islets in a defined medium indefinitely, Material and Methods. Freshly isolated islets from Syrian hamsters were hand-picked and cultm'ed in a M3:6 medium. After roelang for 14 days and removing fibroblaats, islets were hand-picked, placed in culture dishes, and examined at weekly intervals hmologically, inmaunohistochemically, and electron microscopically. llemqts The isolated islets showed typical structures of inlets with no contamination with exoerine cells. Cultured islets floated m the medium during the fimt 14 days and tended to adhere to each other. After 14 days, fine duetulur structures, not seen ha the freshly isolated islets, ap~ared within all islets. At 21 days, the islet cells gradually lost their granules and were replaced by undifferentiated cells of duetular cell morphology. These duetular.like cells formed lumen and typical microvllh and were surrounded by typtcal islet cells intermingled v,ath undifferentaated cells. Smgle or group of cells showing characterisncs of at;nat cells and intermediary cells of aemar..ductular, acinar-I~ cell, or aemar-~ cell appeared between the duetular structures and endocrine cells. After 21 days, the exocnne cells disappeared and were replaced by multdayered ep~thehum that covered the surface of the islets. At 28 days, the epithelial cells gradually migrated into the surrounding area to form a monolayer of monomowluc undifferentaated Early diagnosis of pancreatic cancer is rarely possible because of symptomless nature of the disease in early stages. Screening with ultrasonography (US) followed by computer tomography (CT) in suspicious eases is not sensitive enough and diagnostic work-out has to involve endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreato~aphy (ERCP) v, ith histology or at least cytology m most cases Percutaneous fineneedle aspiration, is claimed to promote tumor-cell seeding, thus intraductal brush-cytology or biopsy should replace it if deep catheterization of pancreatic duct is possible However, diagnostic efficacy of the intraductal approach is not known. In the last year, we performed ERCP in 52 patients with pancreatic tumor. Cy'tology or biopsy was taken in 29 patients (both in 10 cases wnh further supplementary techniques in 2 other patients) The intraductal cytology confirmed ERCP diagnosis in 11 patients, it x~as negative in 11 cases The intraductal biopsy was posture in 3 and negatb, e in 9 patients Both techniques ~,,ere successfial m 3 cases, only cytology m I patient, neither confirmed ERCP diagnosis in 6 cases In 5 patients duodenal biopsy also helped the ~orkout ho~e',er, it v, as negati',e in 2 cases with highly suspicious lesions Conclusion mtraductal cytology and bmpsy can confirm diagnosis of pancreatic cancer in 50 % and 33%, respecti',ely but ERCP remains the gold standard until magnetic resonance imaging (MRCP) will replace it for diagnostic purposes Operative endoscopy for mtraductal sampling and palliation will keep its important role even later on Recendy we postulated that chronic ethanol feeding can cause pancreatic injury by modulauon of phospholipase D (PLD) acttxaty fan early marker of regeneration) On the other hand qumolone annbtonc, ciprofloxacm (Cipro), which mlubtt prokaryouc cell growth and protein s'ynthests, is known to improve the recovery from liver injury after ethanol The present study was undertaken to detarrnme the influence of Clpro on PLD aenwty and other parameters of pancreatic regeneranon a.fter chronic ethanol feeding. Methods: Male rats were pair fed ad hbttum wth isocaloric liqmd Lieber DeCarli diet with or without ethanol content. After 6 weeks of feeding alcoholic and non-alcoholic rats received Cipro (p o. 100mg/kg/day) or saline for 4 addiuonai weeks. At the end of treatment some rats received also t h mfuston of caerulem (Cue) (0 25 p.g/kg,'h), to sumulate PLD actavlty. After 6 and 10 weeks of thfferent treatment modes. rats were kdled, dispersed pancreatac acmt were prepared and loaded w~th ~H mynsuc acid to label phosphatidylcholine pool, and phosphaladic acid (;H PA) was counted as a marker of PLD actiwty. Pancreanc weight, amylase, chymotrypsin, protein, RNA and DNA content m pancreas were measured. For m vitro expenment dispersed actm from healthy rats were prepared, incubated with Cipro (5 l.tg/ml) and PA accumulanon was than measured Results: 1/Body weight and pancreauc weight were comparable in all groups. ~ PLD acnvtty niter 4 weeks of anubtotac treatment in alcoholic rats was stgmficantiy higher than m untreated alcoholic animals 3/Can infusion m Cipro treated alcoholic ammals cause 195",/, increase m PLD actixaty (comparable to the control), but m alcohohc rats vathout anub~ottc, Cue was not able to stimulate PLD activ~ty 4/Clpro treatment caused stgmficant increase m chymotrypsm (60%), RNA (38%) and DNA (61 3%) content in alcohol fed group; total protein and amylase content remain unchanged. 5/b) vnro m dispersed pancreauc acmi anublouc had no effect on PA accumulation. Summary: Cipro significantly increased PLD actr, my, chymotrypsm, ILNA and DNA content in pancreatic tissue in alcohol treated rats, but did not alter all this parameters in groups vathout ethanol Conclusion: Ctpro ts not a trophtc factor itself, but may reverse negauve effects of ethanol on pancreatic regeneration, howe',er the mechanism of this a~on =s Introduction. Some patients complain of persistent abdominal pain associated with high serum levels of pancreauc enzymes, but without definite signs of chronic pancreatitis. This condition has been regarded as possible or mild variant of chronic pancreatitts. In the present report, we proposed a new pathophystologm hypothesis and therapeutic strategies for this condiuon. Patients and Methods. Six patients. 2 males and 4 females, 32 to 62 yrs old, with persistent abdominal pain (more than 3 yrs.) and elevated serum pmacreatlc enzyme levels have been treated in our department. US. CT and ERCP did not show any significant abnormality in any patient. One or more pancreauc enzymes, i.e., serum p-type isoamylase, elastase-1 or trypsin. showed sustained elevation. Peroral trypsin inh]bltors had been administrated but had failed to induce a sufficient response. From precise medical interviews, a vicious psycho-somauc cycle consisted of the fotlowmg three processes was hypothesized: l) Depressive mood and anxiety reducing hypersecretion of pancreauc juice. 2) Elevation of the mtraductal pressure resulting from pancreauc hypersecreuon causing abdominal pare and increasing the serum levels of pancreatic enzymes. 3) Exacerbation of the symptoms aggravating the depressive mood and anxiety of the patient. Based on this hypothesis, a therapeutic strategy, focusing parocularly on the physician-patient relationship was formulated. The patients were treated under this strategy and have been followed up for 2 to 8 years at the authors' clime. Results. All the six cases showed rapid improvement not only m their physical symptoms but also m their quality of life within a few momhs after inntating treatment. Serum pancreanc enzyme levels returned to normal in 5 of 6 cases. No complication has developed during follow-up period. Conclusions. The pathophystology )n these patients was completely different from that of definite chrome pancreatttts, and the condition should be considered a functional dtgesuve disorder similar to functional d x spepsla or imtable bowel ~', ndrome. Introduction. The liver has been proposed as a source of mediators that influences the lung damage in acute pancreauus.The aim of this work ts focused on the acUvatton of alveolar macrophages m a model of experimental lung damage associated with acute pancreantls and the influence of the liver tn this activation. Methods. The study design included four groups of male Wistar rats (300 g b.w.). In the first group, pancreatms was induced by intraductal admmtstratlon of sodium taurocholate (5%). In the second ~oup. an end-to-side portocaval shunt was performed immediately before pancreatitts induction in order to prevent the mtual passage trough the liver of substances released by organs revolved ,n the inflammatory process of the pancreas. A group of animals with mtraductai admtmstratton of physiologic saline and a group with portocaval shunt alone were also included as control groups m the study. Three hours after pancreatms reduction, physiologic saline administration or ponocaval shunting, a bronchoalveolar lavage was performed and alveolar macrophages were obtained. Cells were counted, cultured m 6 dish plates, incubated for I h at 37"C under 5% CO2 m air. and then. washed to remove nonadherent cells. Superoatants of cultured alveolar macrophages were obtained after 24 h of cell culture at 37"C under 5% CO2 m air. Macrophage activation '.,,as evaluated by the release of NO. TNF and MIP-2. NO generation was measured by mtrtte accumulauon. TNF and MIP-2 were measured by using a commerczal ELk kit. Results. Induction of pancreauus was associated with the acuvauon of alveolar macrophages reflected m the mcrea.~ed generauon of NO. TNT and MIP-2. All these changes were prevented when a ponocaval shunt ~,,a.s performed before the mducuon of pancreautts. Portocaval shunt had no effect m the local ~eventy of pancreauus, reflected by serum ilpase [evel~ Conclusion. Thr, ~tudy ,uggest that the passage through the liver of mflammatoty medtatorq released from the damaged pancreas mediate the activation of alveolar macrophage~. ~htch pla.~ a ptxotal role m the development of lung m jut" 3' assocmted ~ tth acute pancreatul~. To clarify generic alterations based on the histological charactedstics of ductal epithelium and examine the spatial relationship of different types of genetic alterations in the early stage of pancreatic carcinogenesis, we conducted an extensive, tolal-area, muiOfocal analysis of K-ras gene mutanons and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at p53 gene locus occurring in cases of mucin-prodocing tumor (MPT) of the pancreas. Patients and Methods. We studied three cases of MPT: One case each of intraductal papillary tumor (IPT), ducvectauc mucinous cystic neoplasm (DMCN) and megacysnc mucmous cystic neoplasm (MMCNL which were previously venfied to con~n vanous atypias of ductal epithelium including carcinoma, and to harbor K-ras gene mutation and LOH of p53 gene. After histological exammauon, a total of 126 sites were mlcrodissected from the section representative of each entire lesion of the three cases, and the geneac analyses were performed. Results. in all three cases. K-ras mutations were found m tissue with nuld atypla of ductal epithelium, and always (100%) in regions of moderate atypla or higher, whereas LOH of p53 gene was seen m moderate atypla or higher. and at 50% or more in severe atypta (carcinoma). LOH of p53 gene was always associated with K-ras mutauon. In contrast to K-rm mutataons, LOH of p53 gene showed a more gradual tendency to increase with atypm. Moreover. in all three cases, K-ras mutation was dismbuted wMely throuo_hout the tumor, but LOH of p53 gene was localized to one or a few Mstologtcally homogeneous areas. Whde the [PT and DMCN cases showed single types of K-ras mutation and LOH of p53 gene, the MMCN case presented two types of each genetic altemuon occumng separately m different areas. Conclusion. From these data we could confirm that K-ras mutation occurs in the early stage of tumongenests, and LOH of p53 gene supenmposes on the K-ras mutauon dunng the course of tumor progression. In addmon, these alterations were homogeneous w~thm the individual area of the same Mstolomcal characterisoc. Further. m the MMCN case the double mutst]ons of K-ras ~ene may indicate a different histogenesis of this ty. pe from the other two types of ~iFl'. a notion that has long been proposed from a clinical and anatomical view point. Group2 had desoxycholate-induced acute pancreatlt~s. The necrot~zmg pancreat]tis was reduced by retrograde injection of 15/ji of 5% sodium desoxycholate into common bfliopancreatic duct. 1 Survwal rates was observed up to 72-hour after the reduction. 2.Blood samples were taken at 1-.12-.and 24hour after the ~nduction Moreover lavaged samples were taken at same tlme. Pancreas was removed and exam=ned h~stolog=cally. Serum amylase was determined TNF-aand IL-10 Jn serum and lavaged samples were determined by ELISA. Results, 1. Survival rates were at 72-h were 100%(15/15) in group1, and 67% (10115) m group2 2. H~ghly s=gnfflcant increases of serum amylase were found m group2 compared w=th group1 TNF levels m lavaged samples =n group 2 ~s s~gnfficanytly h=gher than ~n goupl only at l-h, serum TNF levels rema=ned unchanged IL-IO levels =n lavaged samples were s=gmficanytly h=gher than ,n goupl , and gradually increased up to 24 -h, serum IL-10 levels ~n group2 were also s=gnfficantly h=gher than =n group1 at 24-h Conclusion. We produced b~le acid pancreat;t;s modei ~n m~ce tt showed hyperamylasem=a and mcrotczmg pancreat~t~s Incresed carcinoma ts still poor ,n sp~te of the use of venous therapeutic modaht]es. Stop flow chemotherapy w=th aort=c clamping was recently developed but complications hke gastroduodenal ulcer may develop we stud~ed the effect of regional stop-flow chemothera!~y wh=ch allows a specific infusion of the ant~-cancer drug into the pancreas Patients and methods E~ght consecutive patients w~th nonresectable pancreatic ductal carccnoma were treated by reg=onal stop-flow chemotherapy After laparotomy the celiac artery superior mesentenc artery right and left gastnc artenes and slolemc artery were clamped A cocktail of MMC(10-30mg) CDDP(20-40mg) and 5-FU(250-500mgl =n 300 ml of saline was =nfused through the catheter introduced into the common hepatic artery followed by vascular clamping for 20-3Omen The t~ssue blood flow was measured by laser Doppler flowmetry to evaluate the degree of ~schem=a Arlenal infusion chemotherapy (CDDP10-20mg and 5-FU 250-500mg'~ was performed through th~s catheter every two weeks thereafter Results Pancreatic t~ssue blood flow markedly oecreased after regional vascular clamping Although chemotherapy d~d not reduced the size of the tumor ~n every patient the growth of the ma~n ,,umor was arrested for 2 to ~ months ~n all patients The 'evel of CA 19-9 decreased or did not change for 2 to 8 morons exceCt m two patients who also had hver metastasis !n patTents w~t~out hver metastas~s the prognos;s was better compared w,th the h,stoncal control suOlects but Jn those w=th hver metastas~s ~t was st~ll coor and ched within 8 months Anorexia and vomiting were noted ,n all pat=ents but were wed controlled by conventional therao=es Conclusion Regional stop flow chemotherapy ~s effective ,n oatrents with non-resectaule oancreat~c carcinoma ~owever for the ~etter prognoses ~t ~s =muortant to control hver metastas;s EVALUAT;ON OF PRE-AND iNTRA-OPERATIVE ~,SVS~ARTERiAL STIMULATION AND VENOUS SAMPLING) FOR DIAGNCSIS AND SURGICAL RESECTION OF INSULINOMA M Sakon T Aok) H Ohzato S K=sh~moto S Ohsn=ma T Yamada. S Nakamon K Dohno K Umesl~=ta. M Gotoh O Ish=kawa ~ S [maoka" Y Hasurke'" K Shlbata"* M Ivlonden Department of Surgery II. Osaka Unwers=ty MedEcal School "Department of Surgery The Center of Adult D~sease "" Department of Surgery National Osaka Hosp=tal and "'" Department of Surgery Ikeda Mun=c=pal Hospital Osaka Japan Introduction. Preose tumor Iocahzat=on =s essential for surgical treatment of fnsulmoma. In adder=on to venous ~magrng modal~t~es ASVS (artenal stimulation and venous samphng) [s also used to Iocahze Jnsuhno ma However the role of ASVS =n the d~agnos=s and the surgical treatment of msuhnoma remains to be eluc=dated Patients and methods. Pro-and ~ntraoperatwe ASVS were performed ~n s~x patients w~th ~nsutmoma together w~th ~magmg mctud~ng ultrasonography CT scan and ang~ograpny Preoperatwe ASVS was Derformed by w~thdrawal ol blood from the right ~eoat~c veto 0 30 60 90 120 seconds after a bolus ~nject~on of calc=um gluconate (0 025mEq / kg) into ;roDer heoat=c artery gastroouodenal artery splen=c artery and sucenor mesentenc artery For =ntraoperatwe ASVS the artena~ catheter was ~ntroouceo ~nto the 'eedmg artery ASVS was performed before and afte r surgical resection Immunoreactlve ~nsuhn ,IRI) concentrations and the ;RI ratio (IRI concentration at eacn time ',nterva~ after :dictum rnlect[on/ basehne IRI concentratlom were determ~neo by the conventional or qu~ck IRI method Results. B'/ precoeratwe ASVS the sJte of the tumor was =dentff~ed ~n all s~x 3argents out only ~n four patients by ~magmg The ~RI ratio vaned ',v~dety from 3 ~ 'o 99 2 but a cut-off value of 3 0 clearly dJfferent~ateo oetween 'eeomg and non-feeding artenes Intraooerat~ve ASVS dsmg ,..he "eeo~ng artery showed a sire]tar elevation of =Rllevels but C~saucearea afte r tumor resection ~n all but one oat~ent tn ',wo oat~enls ,esectlon ot the tumor was confirmed dunng surgery o-' ,ntracoerat~ve measurement of IRIlevels Conclusions. The severity of acute pancreatitis varies over a wide range, but the determinants of severity are unknown. Recently, PAF has been implicated in several inflammatory conditions including pancreatltis. We report on the effects on pancreatitis of deactivating PAF by the recombinant enzyme PAF-acetyl hydrolase (rPAF-AH) (ICOS Corporation, Bothell WA). Methods: Caerulem (i.v., 10 p.glkg/hr for 5 hr) was used to induce mild edematous interstitial pancreatitm m rats, whde bdiopancreatlc duct ligation under sterile conditions was used to induce severe necrotizmg pancreatltis in opossums. Results: Rats receiving rPAF-AH (5 mg/kg) 30 minutes before the start of the caeruleln infusion showed a modest reduction in hyperamylasem]a, vacuotizat[on of ac;nar cai{s and pancreatic inflammation at a h~stologJcal level, but not ~n pancreahc edema. In opossums, the rPAF-AH gwen 1 to 4 days after duct ligatton resulted ~n s~gmficant amelioration of acmar cell injury and necrosm as determined by morphometnc analys,s of hematoxyhn-eosm-sta=ned sect=ons Acute lung injury, whose most frequent oJimcal manifestation is adult respiratory distreas syndrome, (s a frequent accompaniment of severe acute pancreatitis. The tnlury-causmg mechanism is not well understood. However, piatelet-activatmg factor (PAr"), whmh is generated during the onset of acute pancreatitis, has recently been implicated tn several inflammatory conditions including panc~eatitis. This study uses the enzyme rPAF-AH (ICES Corp., Bothell WA) to deactivate PAF and details the effects of this drug on the severity of lung inlury. Methods: The biliopancreatic duct of opossums was ligated under sterile COnditions, leading to the development of severe necrotmng pancreatitis within 24 hours, with increasing seventy over several days. Increased serum amylase and lipase, necrosis of pancreatic amnar cells, and infiltration of inflammatory cells characterized the disease. One to four days after duct blockage, opossums were administered esther rPAF-AH or a placebo. Results: The placebo.treated animals showed acute lung injury three days post-ligatton. The seventy of injury progressed with time and was marked by enhanced microvascular permeabdffy as quantitated by extravasation of FITC-labeled albumin into the lungs and morphological damage seen m hematoxytin-eoslnstained paraffin sections. Remarkably, animals treated with rPAF-AH were completely free of pancraatltis-induced tung mjury. Conclusion: The present observations show that (i) acute Tung injury is a sequel of pancreatltis caused by biliopancreatm duct ligation in opossums, 00 suggest that PAF plays a cntical role =n induong pancreattbs-related tung injury, and 0ii) demonstrate that rPAF.AH prevents such ~nlury =n opossums, leadmg to the possibility that tt wilt be of theraDeutm value tn preventing tung inlury in patients of pancreatittsadmmtstered after the onset of pancreatitls WBN/Kob rat (Kob) is a diabetic and chronic pancraatitic model derived from Wistar rat and has fibrosis of the pancreas. In ~his study, we compared the exocrine secretion and histological ehanges of pancreas of Kob with that of Wistar rats. To clarify the mechanism of the pancreatic disorder, the binding of CCK-8 to the pancreatic membranes were also examined. Methods. Male Kob and Wistar rats at 10, 12, 16 and 20 weeks were used. Cannulas were inserted into biliary and pancreatic ducts, and duodenum. Bile and pancreatic juice were returned to the duodenum continuously, and on the 3rd day, CCK-8 (250 ng/kg/hr, i.v.) was administrated. Pancreatic juice was collected every 30 rain in conscious rats. To measure the CCK-8 binding to pancreatic membrane, pancreatic membrane fractions were incubated with '=I-CCK-8 for 60 rain and the radioactivity of membranes were counted. The number and affinity of CCK receptors were estimated by Scatchard analysis. For histological examination, slices of pancreas were dyed with hematoxylin-eosm and azan-mallory methods. Results. Compared to Wistar rats, the stimulation of protein output of Kob by CCK-8 was weaker from 16 weeks and continued to diminish up to 20 weeks. The bindings of CCK-8 to pancreatic membranes in Kob were lower from 12 weeks and continued to diminish up to 20 weeks. In Scatchard analysis, the insufficiency of CCK-8 binding to pancreatic membranes was denved from decreased numbers of CCK receptors. In histological examination of pancreas in Kob, prcliferatmn of fibrous tissue and infiltration of neutrophds appeared at 12 weeks and progressively increased up to 20 weeks. Conclusion. In Kob, histological changes in pancreas appeared and were associated with the reduction of pancreatic exocrine reaction to CCK-8. The secretory insufficiency was denved from the decrease of CCK receptor numbers in pancreatic membranes. Introduction.. The differen~al diagnosis between pancreatac cancer and inframmatory mass of the pancreas is very difficult.As the management and prognosis of these two disease is different.the selection of appropnatc operation is necessary to prevent unnecessary resection.We now report on a case of inflammatory pancreatic mass diagnosed befor the operation and performed segmental pancreatectomy. Patient and method. A 73-yeat..old male,who had been a heaby drinker adrmtted to our hospital on December 5,1997.A low density mass lesson, which occupied in the body of the pancreas,was found in CT.Then we performed MRI.Angiography,EUS to examine the mass. showed round mass in the pancreatic body.which was 1.2cm or l.Scm in diameter.ERP showed smooth stenosis of the pancreatic duct in the body.Angiography,EUS,US could not detect abnormal pancreatic moss.We diagnosed the round mass as inflammatory pancreatic mass befor the operation.US performed at the operation,also showed low echoic mass in the body of the pancreas,but we could not detect the mass macroscopicaUy. According to the frozen section.the mass was diagnosed as acute ntlammatory mass,then we performed segmental pancreatectomy.After operatlon.we got pancreanc jutes 60-180ml/day through pancreatm tube from the pancreatic tall. Stenosis of the panereattc duct may cause chronic panc~atitts in the distal side of the pancreas.Segmental pancreatectomy for the pancreauc inflammatory mass m the body is useful to keep the function of the pancreanc tail.Therefore pre-operattve and mtra-operanve differential diagnosis is vet3/ important for the operation of inflammatory, pancreatic mass. (OLErF) rats developed for study of non-insulin-dependent diabetes nxllitus has been reported to be no or reduced expression of choleeystokinm (CCK)-A receptor gene in the pancreas. CCK is a critical gastrointestinal hormone having tropluc effects on pancreatic growth and regeneration. CCK is pre, umabiy revolved m deterioration of pancreatttts because of supramaximal stmaulanon of intraeellular mediators which causes disorder of enzyme secretion. We studied the effects of CCK on ethiomne-induced acute pancreatitis during the earlier and later periods using OLETF rats. Method. Male OLETF rats (7 weeks old) and male Long-Evans Tokushima Otsuka (LETO) rats as the control group were fed by special diet containing a small amount of protein (low protein diet) for ! l days and received a daffy intrapentoneal adrmmstrauon of 20mg/100g body weight of DL-ethtonme for the last 4 days. and then they were fed by standard diet. They were sacrificed on l, 4 and 7 days after the last injection of ethionme followed by blood coilectton and removal of pancreas. Pancreauc protein and DNA were measured by Lowry's and Button's methods, respecuvely. Plasma CCK levels were measured by radiotmmunoassay using anu-CCK-8-spectfic anuserum (OAL-656 Rosult& The prevalence of pancreattc cyst was 0.17% (male 0 11% vs. female 0 22%, 1343.01) and was s~gn~ficantly higher ~n older people than ~n younger people The s~ze of the cyst was less than 2cm ~n 94%. Further examination was performed in 188 patients, andwe found 26 neoplastic cysts, 2 retention cysts and 5 pseudocysts. In the remaining 155 cysts we were unable to disclose their et~ology N~ne of the neoplastic cysts were resected, and h~stolog~cal diagnos~s was made (muc~nous cystadenoma 3, serous cystadenoma 3, sol,el and cystic tumor 2 and muc~nous cystadenocarc~noma 1) All of tt~ese neoplastic cysts si~ow the findings of mural nodule and/or septal structure and/or MPD a~latat~on Ultrasonograph~c follow-up of the pancreatic cysts over 3 years was performed ~n 34 cases Eleven of the cysts were enlarged ~n s~ze dunng the follow-up period, but 4 cysts were reduced and remaining 19 cysts were unchanged ~n s~ze. The m~t~al s~ze of the cyst ~n unchanged cases (average 10.6 range 5-20ram) was s~gn~fican[ly smaller than ~n enlarged cases (p<0 05) The ~nc~dence of MPD d~latat~on and the septal structure of the cyst was s~gmhcantly f~,gher tn enlarged cases (p<0 05, ~ 01. respectwely) Conclusion. Most of the small pancreatic cysts w~thout a septum, a mural nodule or MPD dilatation are non-progressive It w~ll not be necessary to follow-up the pauents so frequently Wistar rats, 4 ardmals in each, v, eighing 350-400g were anaestitized with 1,6~100g by, of urethan sc The main hepatic duc~ ~as hgated aRer cannulauon of the common pancreato-biliary duct, and the femoral ~ein. I.v infiasion of normal saline ~as started and fractions of pancreatic secretion ~ere collected hourly for 3 hours In the expenmental group 500m~/100g bw ofl-.~gmine v, as given after 2 hours of control period for another 2 hours v, ith a 4 hour follow up af~er~ards Controls receb, ed normal saline ovdy Specific actt~ity and enzyme ratios ~ere calculated following measurements of amylase, lipase. t~'~sln acti',ity and total protein content RESULTS There v, as a sevenfold increase in t~'psin secretion peaking aRer 3 hours, a ~radual, fivefotd increase in its specific acti~Jty after 4 hours, v, ith a fivefold increase in the t~'psme-to-am)lase ratio, a~er 3 hours from the beginning of the l-.~ginine inflation No change ~as seen in controls CONCLUSIONS. Intravenous l-.&r~nine excess induces a stimula-tor7 effect of non-parallel nature on the rat pancreas, resembling that of CCK These results correspond ~ell v, ith pre'4ous data showing a loss of trypsin content in the pancreas after administration of I-Al'gimne K.Satoh, 1". Shimosegawa, M. Koizumi and T. Toyota. The Third Department of Internal Medicine, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendal, Japan. Introduction. Within recent years evidence has been produced establishing the relauonshmp of cancer cells and stromal cells for tumorinvas~on. One mediator which may play an important role in such processes is transforming growth factor ~l (TGFI31), because this mullffuncaonal cytokme regulates cellular funclaons such as epithelial cell growth, differentianon and the synthesis of extracellular mamces. Although ~t ~s well known that TGFI3 transduces the signaling through a heterodimeric complex of the type I and type II TGFI~ receptors (TI3RI and TI3RII), no study has been corned out to examine their expresston simultaneously in tissues of pancreatic duct cell caromoma (PDC). In additmn, because the interstioaJ fibrosis seen in chronic pancreantis (CP) resembles the desmoplasm of PDC, companson of thetr expressxon between the nssues of PDC and CP would be mteresung. Method. We invesngated the expression of TGFI~I and tts receptors, TeRI and TgRI! m surgtcally resected tzssues of 21 PDC and 13 CP by immunohistochemlstry using specific anubodies. In the eplthehal cells of PDC and CP, no sigmficant differences was found in the expression ofTGF~I. TI~RI and T~RII. In contrast, there was a tendency that stromal expressmn of th~s cytokme and ~ts receptors, especmlly that of T~RII. were stronger m PDC than m CP Conclusion. Our data suggest that stronger stromal expression of TGF~I and ~ts receptors may contnbute to the essennal difference tn the pathobrology of desmoplasm associated w~th PDC and the mtersnoal fibrosis of CP. Introduction. Magned,c res.on~ce panc~atography(/vlRl~..) is a noninvasive maagmg tecnn~, que rot me vtsuaJtzatron ot the pancreanc duct system similar to those obtained with endoscoptc retrograde pancreatography(ERP). The am of t/us study was to determine the role of MRP versus ERP in the diagnosis ofpancreauc tumors. Patients andMethod. Sixteen panents (10 male and 6 female, mean age 61 years) with pancreattc tumors underwent .MAP and ERP between March 1997 and December 1997. MRP was performed with single shot fast spin echo se.quence on a 1.5T system. All tmages were retrospectively reviewed by a radiologist and a gastroenterologast m conference. Both MRP and ERP were compared for visualization of the head, bodv, and tall pomon of the pancreatic duct separately and scored as excellent (4), good (3), fair (2), poor (I), and no vlsualizanon (0). The overall diagnostic confidence of both modalines also was graded subjectively from non-dmgnosttc image(0) to definite information (4.). The final diagnoses derived from surgical findings (n--9) or imaging findings and clinical follow-up (n=7) were as follows: pancreauc cancer (n=8), mucm-producmg pancreatic cancer (n=2), mucmous ductectauc tumor (n--4), serous cvstadenoma (n=2). Paired t-test was done to assess the statistical slgn~ficanc'e of the difference be~veen the MAP and ERP tmages. Results. Mean scores of vlsuahzauon of the pancreanc duct bv MRP and ERP were 2.88 and 3.44 m the pancreatic head (p=NS), 3.06 and 2.19 in the pancreattc body (p--NS), and 3 06 and 1.38 xn the pancreattc tad (p<0.01). Mean score of'the dia~ostzc confidence was 3.94 to MRP and 2.81 m ERP, whtch had a stausncallv sl~tficant difference (P< 0.05). in S panents with obstrucnon of pancreatic duct due to mahgnant lesions. MRP demonstrated both the proximal and distal s~te of obstruction in the pancreatic duct whde ERP only visualized the distal site of obstrucnon. MRP was supenor in defining the extent of tumor because of the visualization of the surrounding pancreatic parenchvma and the relauonsh~p of the ducts. In two cases of serous cvstadenoma w~th lack of commun~catton between the pancreattc duct ~d" cysttc neoplasm, MRP characterized the lesion precisely whereas ERP showed no mtbrmatlon. Conclusion. MRP xs better than ERP m vtsuahzauon of the pancreatic duct proximal to the szte of obstrucuon and assessment of the extent of tumor in the dia~osts of pancreatzc neoplasm. MRP is also benefictal compared to ERP m the dlagnosts of cystic neoplasm wtthout commumcat~on w~th pancrezuc duct. Introduction. The differential diagnosis of pancreas cancer and massforming chronic focal pancreafitis is quite troublesome. Recently, ~tp magnetic resonance(MR) spectroscopy has been applied to various malignancies and phosphomoooester~ME) signal was suggested to be a marker of cell proliferation. This study was undertaken to evaluate the ~r of~tP ,MR spectroscopy in the differential diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis. Methods. Five patients with histologically proven pancreatic adenocarcinoma and five patients with chromc pancreadtis were included. All MR imaging and localized m vn, o )tp ,MR spectroscopy of the pancreas were performed on a t.ST system (Magnetom Vision, Erlange~ Germany) with two-dimensional chemical shift imaging techmque (TR/TE 32/3 msec, slice thickness 40ram, total acquisition time 17ram) Peak areas of PME, phosphodiester(PDE), inorganic phosphate(Pt) and e., !3 and 7-ATP were determined and relative ratios of PMFJ~3-ATP and PDE/~3-ATP were calculated. Re, ulta. Spectroscopic metabolite changes were summarized >0 05 The levels of PME and PME/13-ATP were slgmficantly higher m patients with pancreatic cancer than those with chronic pancreatms However. the levels of PDE, PDEJ!3-ATP and Pi were not slgtuficantiy different between two groups. Conclusions. np .MR spectroscopy may be a useful tool m the differential diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and ehrotuc pancreatms and the increased signal of PME seems to be associated w~th the rapid proliferation Tubular complexes have been noted in experiments on animals, such as the rat. dog. and rabbtL but in humans, they have been only descnbed as a rare finding of pancreatltm, especially In the postacute phase. Recently, we encountered a case with tubular complexes without any history of pancreattUs, and herein describe the case with a review of the literature. The patient was a 76-year-old man who had undergone a right middle lobectumy for lung cancer (adenocaroinoma). After operation. he was treated with chemotherapy because of metastasis. He enterered the hospital with a chief complaint of cough and general fatigue. His condition deteriorated and he died of respiratory failure two months later. An autopsy revealed pieural and pencardial carcmomatosis with metastases to the liver, nght adrenal gland, diaphragm, esophagus, vertebrae and lymph nodes. The cause of death was considered to be respiratory failure. As an incidental finding, the head of the pancreas showed a lesion of ductule-likc structures measunng 2,5 ram. This lesion was surrounded by fibrous cooneenve tissue. Immunohtstochemlcally, the ductuie-like structure was positive for keratin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). and focal posltlvtty was noted for alpha-l-antttrypsm and alpha-amylase. It was neganve for carcthoembryomc antigen (CEA). CA 19-9, chromogranm A. neuron specific enoiase (NSE), insulin, glucagon. somatostatm, and pancreatic polypeptide. Based on these findings, we diagnosed this lesion as tubular complexes. Disctt~ion. In general, tubular complexes are thought to be the result of re=~resswe degeneration of aclnar cells followed by pancreanc injury. However. we could not find any htsto~" of pancreatms or histological ev*dence of pancreatic injury, m this case. In addition, tubular complexes in the pancreas show similar microscopic findings to those of van Meyenburg complexes m the hver. Therefore. the posslbtIRy of tubular complexe.x of hamartomatous nature m the human pancreas can not be ruled out completely. In 31 I~nente pancreatm duet could be clearly vlsuahzed m ItS court length. Diameters of duct m head. body. tall and branch to uncmatr process were measured and corr~non for magmfieanon t~as done Abnormahties of side braneh~ were also noted if there was filling of side brauches Length & dmmeter of common channel were aJso rne.q~red if common channel ~as clearh xlsnnh/.ed. Mean age of patxents ~tth pancreanc ducts| abnormahues xxas 24. )'ears. Pancreatic ductal abnormalmea ~r seen m 3 pauents (23 8'Yo) The abnormalines detected ~sx:re dilated pancreatic duct (S). stones m pancreatic duct [2). dilated branch to unclnate process (4L stricture or" pancreatic duct (I) Dilated side branches xxere seen in 3 patxents Anomalous panereatobtha~ ductal amon xxas seen in 2 patients. In one patient there e, as pancreas dP.lsum The mean diameter of I~'tnereattc duct m head. bod', & taft tn pnuems ",snh dllated pancrenuc duct ',',ere fi O. Although the mcldence of pancreatic cancer has been increasing, there have been only a few papers dealing with metastauc pancreatic cancer and hide is known about zts climcopathogtcat features. I~tiell~ and Method. We reviewed 1,171 autopsies performed at Kawasakt Medical School from 1988 to 1994, and found 467 cases of malignant tumor excluding cases of primary pancreatic cancer. We invesagated the presence or absence of pancreanc metastasis tn these cases, and analyzed the age, sex. pnmary site, ~oss findings, and microscopic findings m cases with pancreatic metastasis. Resu.lts. We found 71 cases with pancreatic metastasis ~. 15%) among the 467 cases of malignant tumor invest,gated. They included 43 males and 28 females who ranged m age from 2 to 85 years. These cases consisted of 53 pnmary epithelial tumors and 18 non-epithelial tumors. The former cases included adenocarcmoma (31 cases), undifferentiated carcinoma, and squamous cell carc,noma, whde the latter included leukemia (5 casesl, malignant lymphoma, letomyosareoma, multiple myeloma, and malignant melanoma. As a pnmary site. the stomach was the most common site ( 13 cases, t8%). tbllowed by the lung ( 12 cases), liver, extrahepanc bde duct. breast, gallbladder, urinary bladder and ovary, m order. Grossly. metastasis was not ~denofied m 23 eases (32%). As for the pattern of tumor spread, most cases were considered to have been due to lymphatic and/or vascular ~pread. while some cases seem to have been due to direct tumor invasion. In about two-th~rds of these cases, the d~smbuuon of tumor cells microscopically had an rater-and mtralobular pattern. Conctm~on. As a primary site of metastatic pancreatic tumor, the stomach. liver, and bdiary tract were the most common. Interestingly, undJfferentmted carcinoma was often found m cases of bde duct or unnary. bladder cancer with pancreatic metastasis,. Acute panCreatltlS associated with pancreatic metastasis was also observed m some cases. (1988), chronic inflammatory, pancreatits (CIP) is recogmzed as an entity distinct from other forms (calcifying, obstructive, or autoimmune) of chrome pancreattts. However. the pathology of CIP has not bean fully described. Patients ~ Method. We reviewed pancreatectomy specimens from five patients with chron,c inflammatory, pancreatits. Resr162 specimens wen: htstologtcaJly and immunohtstochem;cally examined ;n detail. ResttltlL The patients ranged m age from 51 to 68 years and all were men. Two cases showed tumor-formmg pancrcatlttS clinlcaIly and the otherS showed diffuse enlargement of pancreas. P;mcrcatic carcinoma was suspected preoperatively m most of these cases. Four out of five cases presented with jaundice and one case had elevated serum CAt9-9 and DUPAN-2 levels. Microscopically. lymphoid follicles were observcd and lymphocytic infiltration was marked. Exocnnc paranchyma of the pancreas was replaced by fibros=s, and perineurnl lymphocytic mfiltrauon was also noted. Tortuous ducts were often seen. [rnmunoinstochmecally. lymphocytes were predominantly T lymphocytes (UCHL-I posture). Alpha-~mooth muscle actln and vtmentm were positive in the mterlobules. One case revealed focal destmcuon of the duct epttbelinm by mfiammanon, a finding similar to that in recently described "chrome duct obstructive pancrcatms (CDOP)". Disctulsion. All panents were males, and lobular as well ~s penductal infiltrates consisted of mainly T lymphocyres. Tortuous ducts as well as penneural lymphooyttc tnfilwatmn wcrc obser','cd m most ca.ses. There may be SOme ovcdap between CIP and CDOP. since no history of aJcohol was obtained m our scnes. Further mvcst;gaoon ;s necessary.. Pancrmmc rnmcnchymal cells ~asting in pcnacinar region arc thought to be involved in mtralobular fibrosis and acmar cell funcUon. In the present study. ~e mccessfully isolated and cultured PFC denved from human pancreas Further. ~e k~ve shm~a the cha~cterimcs of human PFC morpholagtcally and immanocytochcnucally' Human PFC ~as isolated from pancrcatm acml of normal pancr~nc tlssue. ~htch ~s resr in the mass by' the opcranon of non-pancrr disease. Briefly. the acua ~txm obtained by means of dJg~sung specimens of The role of the different chemical mediators =n the early stages of pancreatic fibrosis occurmg as ares ult of acinar ceil damage =s still unclear. The aim of the present study was to investigate the dynamics of various chemical mediators in the early stages of chronic pancreatitis using an experimental model. Methods: A mixed (ZO) solution of the simple protein zero and the cytotox=c ole;c ac;d was prepared. A volume of 100 ,u. I of the ZO solu;tion was infused from the end of the common bile duct of rats and the pancreas was resected 3 or 24 hours, or 2, 4 or 7 days later. A part of the resected pancreas was immunohistologically stained with HE and the myofobroblast marker -smooth muscle actin ( ot -SMA). The (esected pancreas was homogenized and lipoperoxide, leucotnene 134, CINC/GRO-t equivalent to rat IL.8, and TGF-~' 1 (ELISA) concentrations m the supernatantwere measured and converted to content per pancreatm wet weight. Results: (~Chanqes in the pancreatic htsto/oqy Edematous pancreatitis was oPserved t day after rufus=on. After 2 days, marked monocytic infiltration of the intedobular interstitium was evrdent, and fibroblasts were seen. After 4 days, there was further destrumon of the Iobular structure and fibro blast hyperplasia was observed. After 7 days, destructmn of the Iobular structure was marked, and early signs of fibrosis were seen reside the Iobules. ~)Chanqes ~n the ~nterstltm/ fibrob/asts The spindle-shaped fibroblasts that appeared after 2 days were negatwe for ~-SMA. After 4 days, a penthelium-lJke aggregatmn of interstitial ceils strongly positive for ~-SMA was seen adjacent to the area around the penpheral pancreatm duct bifurcation. These were myofibroblasts derived from act;vated fibroblasts. The a'-SMA stamabd=ty ofthe mterst~t~alcells decreased after 7 days. @C_hanqestn the mterstitml chermca/ mediators (1}LJpoperox;de content reacneda peak after 24 ~ours and gradually declined thereafter. (2) Leucomene Ek content increased after 3 hours and qumkly decreased thereafter. (3)Rat IL-8 (CINC/GRO) content rose for 2 days and then fell. (4) TGF.,,3 content increased for 4 days, at winch time =t peaked, and then fell slightly after 7 days. Conclusions: Pancreatic fibrosis appears to begin w=th acmar cell damage as a result of free-redmal.medlated react;on, as reflected by a rise ~n lipoperoxlde content. Next. the mediators leucomene 8,= and IL-8 respons=ble for fnflammatory cell =nfiltratmn were reduced. Th=s was followed l~y mductmn of TGF-,,.Y ~ , wmctl plays an rmportant role ~n the early stages of pancreatm fibros;s; that is. ,n the fibrobtast hyperplas=a and the transformat;on of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts. Introduction. In addition to slightly different anatomy, the lipid contents of human and rat pancreas differ, but are more similar than those of ox and guinea-pig pancreas (Durand et al. Pancreas, 1987; 326-332) . It is well known that the same experimental disease model gives different results in different animals. Materials and Methods. Pancreatic glands from 25 alcoholics, 86 patients with heart disease, and 1618 rats, and pancreatic powders from horse and pig were examined for amylase, ~-hexose amidase, carboxyl ester lipase, cctipase, elastase, insulin, lipase, phospholipase A2, PSTI, trypsin, A~so, Lowry, and pH. Pancreatic glands were minced, delipidated, and air-dried. Pancreatic powder was dissolved in buffer (1 g/10 ml, pH 5.0 and 8.0), stirred at room temperature for 30 minutes and centrifuged 2x10 minutes (cell centrifuge, 2000 rpm). The supematant was used for the above mentioned examinations. Results. A pronounced variation in the composition of the different pancreas was found. Even some differences in the two human groups were seen, which support findings that eg. obese patients, who get pancreatJtis, are in a more senous condition than lean patients. Conclusions. The differences in compositions of pancreatic enzymes, hormones, other proteins, and liplds may explain why good animal models have solved only few of the questions in the understanding of the causes of human pancreatic diseases, and have contnbuted very little to treatment and prevention. Healthy subjects commordy expenence fullness, bloating and mild abdominal discomfort follow~ng mgestaon of large meals. When h'equent and severe, these symptoms commonly are attnbuted to the u'ntable bowel syndrome. Whde more rapld digestion presumably would reduce these symptoms, unimpresmve results have been obtained m previous studies empinymg pancreatic supplements that are denatured m the stomach and thus provide rrummal enhancement of digestzve activity. The purpose of the present study was to determine ff nucroencapsulated pencrealac enzymes (MPE) (CreonX; Solvay Pharm. Inc) reduce the seventy of postpranchal symptoms expenenced by healthy volunteers after Lngeshon of a ~gh fat meal. METHODS: In a randomized, doubleblind, crossover study, 18 subjects ingested a breakfast consstmg of 185 g of cookies (1196 calories and 72 g of fat) and three MPE capsules or ~dentacal placebo. The seventy o[ gastrointestinal symptoms and frequency of flatus passages were recorded for 17 hours, and endalveolar breath samples were obtained hourly for I0 hours. RESULTS: For the entire test period, ingestion of pancreahc supplements was associated with a mgn~cant (P<O.05) reduction m bloating, and reduclaons m perception of gas, flatus frequency, and nausea that had P values between 0.05 and 0.10. Independent analysis of early versus late symptomatology showed that MPE produced stgndacant (P<0.05) reductxons m bloating, gas, and fullness dunng the droner to bedtame period. MPE had no mgnificant effect on breath H2 or CH~ excretann. CONCLUSIONS: MPE reduces postprandml symptoms m healthy subjects. These "normal" post'prandtal symptoms form a continuum with the complaints observed m irritable bowel or non-ulcer dyspepsia. The posslbdity that these common condthons also might benefit i:rem treatment wtth pancreat'tc supplements needs to be remvestagated utdizmg microencapsu[ated pancreahc enzyme preparataons that dehver active enzyme to the duodenum pan passu w~th the meal Introduction. The transcription factor NF-~B is protecttve agmnst apoptotic kalling mduced by TNF-ct. We mvesagatod, whether the NF-~B is protective against apoptosts by TNF-a using the human pancreanc cancer cell line MIA PaCa-2, which s relatt~,ely resistant killing by TNF-ot. To potentially block the aettvation of the NF-~B in response to TNF-e., we transfected lxB gene, which ts mhibttor NF-~B .Methods Apoptosts was evaluated by propidiurn iodide staining and the appearance of sub-G1 population by the cytofluoromemc analyms and the Hoechst 33258 stmmng with the rmcroseoptc observatton. The cellular localization of NFr,B was determined by lmmtmostammg using annbody against the p65 subunit ofNF-~B Transient luctfera~ assay was earned out to evaluate the effects of I~:B gene transfer m blocking NF-~B acttons To directly evaluate the roles of NF-r,B m blocl~ng apoptos~s, M1A PaCa-2 were transfected wuh p65 and;or lrB genes m combination w=th a plasmld ~pressmg GFP ~green fluorescent protein) and the gene-transduced cells were vtsualized by GFP expression. Results [ ) TNF-,t reduced apoptoms in the MIA PaCa-2 cells m a dose dependent manner 2) Re -treatment with IL-llS. kno~vn to acuvate ,NW-~:B. attenuated TNF-~t reduced apoptosis (TNF-,t. 34.5~ vs. IL-1{5 -TNF-a. 15 4~ 3) When those ceils were transfected ~tth a piasm~d expressing p65 the) became remsrant to the TNF-ct reduced apoptosts 4) In the co-transt'ectton exp~nments wtth p65 and [rB genes, the extent of apoptot~c response mcrensed. Conclusion 1 ) NF-~cB was effecuve In blocking TNF-,t induced apoptosJs response m the MIA PaCa-2. 2) The [KB gene transfer increased the senstttvtt?, to the apoptosts These data suggested that. zf tumor cell sensltr, t .ty to TNF-,t controlled by NF-,~B b.~ the .~ene transfer of b:B may result m a dmmanc enhancement ofkdhng oxer TNF-,t alone HISTOPATHOLOGICAL STUDY ON SO-CALLED TUMOR-FORMING TYPE OF CHRONIC PANCREATITIS K. Suda*, M. Takase. Department of Pathology, duntendo, University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan ntroduct on. Morphologically chronic pancreatitis is characterized by irregular sclerosis with destruction and loss of the exocrine parenchyma. It is known that at some stage during disease process chronic pancreatitis clin,cally presents tumorous swelling, often suspected to be carcinoma. This stage is also known as the tumorforming stage of chronic pancreatitis. Patients and Method. Ten cases of so-called tumorform ng type of chronc pancreatitis which were detected as a tumor on computed tomographic scanning or physical examination were studied hidtopathologically. Eight of the 1 0 cases were in heavily alcoholic drinkers. I-n 7 cases the tumorous lesion was located in the head of the pancreas, and in 3 cases in the body and tad. In all of the former 7 cases there was obstructive jaundice due to stenosis of the intrapancreatic common bde duct. Results. Macroscoptc examinations revealed tumorous swelling or sclerotic apperance in the pancreatic tissue. Histologically these lesions showed tumorous swelling with (N=8) or wtthout (N=2) a background of chronic pancreatttts. In the former, the tumorous swelling consisted of extensive fibrosis including necrosis or abscess and stone, and there was successwe transition to the surrounding chronic pancreatitJs pattern. The other 2 tumorous lemons presented rater-and intralobular fibrosis with lymphmd hyperplasia and were adjacent to normal pancreatic tissue. So-called tumor-forming type of chronic pancreat~tls shows at least two distinct types : reparative tumorous swelhng w~thm a background of chromc pancreat~tls, which ~s considered to have gtven rise to the tumor at some stage, and lymphmd and fibrous proliferatton tn normal pancreattc tissue, which ts considered to represent an autommune-related disease process. Introduction. In PPPD for advanced diseases, peripyloric lymph nodes are resecxed sacrificing the first gastric branches of the dght gastric artery. (RGA) and right gastroepipinic artery (RGEA). We examined the effect of different procedures of pedpyinric vessels on gastroduodena[ blood flow. Patients and Methods. In 14 PPPD cases (8 pancreatic cancer, 3 biliary cancer and 3 other diseases) operated in our Depamnent fi'om February 1.995 to May 1997, gastroduodenal tissue blood flow was measured intraoperativeiy by a laser flow meter (MBF3D, Moor Instruments, U.K.). Measurement was performed three times [before starting resection, after removal of the organs (REM) and after finishing reconstruction (REC)] at the serosal surface of the duodenum (2cm anal from the pyloric ring), antrum (2 cm oral from the pyloric ring) and body of the stomach, respectively. Change was estimated as a percent of the value obtained before resection. Results. In 13 cases, one of the following modes was performed; type I (n=5): preservation of RGA and cutting RGEA near its origin, type 2 (n=5): cunmg both RGA and RGEA near their origins with all gastric branches preserved, Type 3 (n=3): resection of the first gasmc branches of both RGA and RGEA. In one case excluded from this study, RGA was cut at the origin and the first gasmc branch of RGEA was resected. In general, blood flow significantly decreased after the removal of the organ (REM) in the duodenum and the antrum, then recovered to some extent after reconstrucuon (REC) m the duodenum. No sigmficunt change was observed m the body. The table shows the results. Table. Values: mean" SE (%). *" p<0.05 vs type 1. Type Duodenum(REMJREC) AntrumIREM/REC ) Bodv(RE.VeREC) 1 56=12/66=9 76__-9 /59=9 86=15,84=14 2 33" 5/55=ll 78-'-20/55=8 80_-15,'73-'-28 3 11= 3*/16=1" 34=4 ,'36=11 93=14~ 104=27 Conclusion. RGA can be cut wuhout significant decrease in blood flow. Sacrificing the first branches of both RGA and RGEA significantly decreases duodenal blood flow. which hmlts the [ength or duodenum to be preserved. APOPTOTIC CELL DEATH OF RENAL TUBULES IN EXPERLMENTAL SEVERE ACUTE PANCREATITIS K. Takase*, Y. Takeyama, J. Nishikawa, M. Shmkai, T. Ueda, Y. Hori, M. Yamamoto, Y. Kuroda First Department of Surgery, Kobe University School of Medidne, Kobe, Japan Introduction. Mechanism for renal failure in acute pancreatitis remains unclear. We hypothesized that renal cell injury via apoptosis is involved in renal failure with acute pancreatitis. Methods. Necrotizing pancreatitis was induced on male Wistax rats by retrograde injection of sodium deoxycholate into pancreatic duct. Six h later, the kidney was harvested and apoptosis was evaluated by in situ nick-end labeling and by DNA agarose gel electrophoresis. The asotic fluid, which was collected 6 h after development of pancreatitis, was injected intraperitoneally into normal rats, and apoptosis in the kidney was also evaluated as described above. In vitro, apoptosis-inducing ability of the ascitic fluid was estimated using isolated rat renal tubules and normal rat kidney cell line (NRK52E) by nuclear stainixtg and by cell cycle analysis in addition to DNA electrophoresis. Results. Apoptosis was detected by in situ nick-end labeling on the renal tubules 6 h after induction of DCA pancreatatis m vivo, and was confirmed by DNA fragmentation. Similar tubular apoptoms was also detected 6 h after intrapentoneal injectaon of the ascitic fluid in normal rats. In in vitro analyses, the ascitic fluid reduced nuclear and DNA fragmentations on the isolated renal tubules, and increased the apoptotic cell ratm on NRK52E cells in a time-dependent manner. Conclusions. Apoptotac cell death of renal tubules occurs in severe acute pancreaht:s, and ~s possibly involved m the mechanism of renal failure via apoptosis-mducing activtty in pancreatitis-assoc~ated astatic fluid. been reported in clinical cases of acute pa~creatitis, thymic change in acute pancreatitis is still unknown. To investigate impairment of cellular immunity in acute pancreatitis, alterations of thymus in the rats with acute pancreatitis were examined experimentally. Methods. Male Wistax rats were used and two groups with pancreatitis of different grades of severity and control group for each other were developed. Edematous pancreatitis was induced by 4-h continuous intravenous administration of cerulem (5pg/kg/h), and necrotizing pancreatitis was induced by retrograde injection of 0.1 ml of 10,% sodium deoxycholated into biliopancreahc duct. The thymus weight and number of thymocytes were estimated. Apoptosis in thymus was examined by the in situ nick-end labeling, by DNA agarose gel electrophoresis, and by cell cycle analysis using proptdium iodide. Results. Both thymus weight and the number of the thymocytes decreased significantly in the rats with necrotizing pancreatitis 6 h after introduction of pancrearltis (p <0.02 vs. sham operation). Neither thymus atrophy nor the thymocyte reduction was observed in rats with edematous pancreatitis. In the thymus from the rats with necrohzing pancreatitis, in situ nick-end labeling showed mgruficant increase of apoptotic changes of thymocytes, which was also confirmed by step ladder pattern on agarose gel electrophoresis of the extracted DNA and by cell cycle analysis. Conclusion. Thymus atrophy associated with apoptoms occurs in the rats with necrotizmg pancreattt~s. Introduction. Pancreas ,s one of the most v~gorous organs, synths=zmg secretory proteins to provide digesnve enzymes and proenzymes. Pomtron emission tomography (PET) can be used for quantifying the amino nod metabolism and protein synthesis rate. The aim of th,s study was to mvesti-~te the metabolism of i tC-methmmne m the normal human pancreas by analysing dynam=c PET images and the duodenal juice. Methods. Eight healthy volunteers were enrolled. A mpledumen tube was indwell m the duodenum. Dynamic PET scan was performed for [ LO minutes after the intravenous mjectmn of i iC.methionine dunng the continuous intra* venous admmistratmn of secretm I~ng/k~hr and caerulem 30nVk~hr. The radioactivity m the pancreas was measured over the PET ~mages. in parallel. 1C radioactivity m the I0 min-fractmns of duodenal aspirate was measured. in the HCIO~ preopitable protein and supematant, respecnvely. In additmn. protein, amylase, trypsin, b~carbonate concentratmn were also measured m every fracuon. Results. After ~v mject~on. ~ tC-meth]onme accumulated m the pancreas m a few minutes. It remained at a plateau untd the end of scanning. The radiolabelled protein in the duodenal jmce increased linearly 30 mm after I JC-methionine mjectmn Conclusion. ~ r is taken up rapidly by the hunmn pancreas and Introduction 8ilia~ deeompres~on and endoprostheses have been accepted as l:xtlli,~ve =-eennes~s for unresectable malignant bile duct obstr,~on due m pancreatic cancer, biliary tract cancer and metastasis to hepatoduodenal ligament. The problems a~sociated with such u'eatments have been reposed to be infection, biliary sludge, migration of endoprosthcses, and re-smnosis by tumor growth. To overcome these problems, we adopted intracavitary in-adiation and microwave tissue coagulation therapy (MCY) in combination with serf-expandable metallic mesh smut (EMS). Materials and Methods EMS (Wal~ent@, Accuflex| NT stent| or Memotherm| ) was inserted through the pemutaneous tnnshepatic drainage (FrBD) fistula on 50 consecutive patients with malignant bile duct obstruction, including two patiants who underwent endoscopic insertion. In selected patients, intracavitary in'adiadon using remote aftedoading system (RALS) with 60Co was combined in order to control the stenosis by rumor growth. Total dose of 32 to 48 Gy with 4 to 6 sessions of RAI.,S was applied to each pafienL Percutanoous MCT was also performed in patients with biliary stenosis by tumor growth after s~enting in order to ablate the tumor and dilate the bile duct. Results All of these patients have been followed up. Three patients suffered from biliary stanosis after EMS stenting and they were treated with MCT and/or EMS insertion. We observed no complicanons relating to the smut inse~ion, irradiation or MCT. Patients died of GI bleeding without jaundice or cholangitis, liver fmlure due to portal vein occlusmn or multiple hapauc metastases 3 to 12 months after the stent mserdon. Conclusion Our experience shows that EMS could be easily inserted through the PTBD fistula wlthout complicaaons, and pereutancous transhepatic inU"acavimry irradianon and MCT could provide good palliation for patients with malignant bile duct obstruction, Introduction Perineural invasion is one of the most important prognostic factors in pancreato-biliary wact cancer, and recent reports indicate a close relationship between expression of neural cell adhesion molecule (NC.~ and cancer im'dlzadoo into the permeutal space. To develop spec~c chemotherapy for perincural inva.,aon, conjugate of anticancer drag and monoclona[ antibody was prepared and evaluated anticancer activity and antibody activity of the conjugate in viwo. Materials sod Methods Mitomycin C (MMC) and anti-NCAM antibody conjugate was prepared with cyanogen bromide (B~ r) method. The degree of substitution was determined spectropbommeu'ically. A drug activity of conjugate was tested by MTT method of the g'owth inhibition with oeuroblastoma cell line (IMR-32). Antibody activity of conjugate was examined by immuuohistochemical staining with Avidia-Biodnylamd enzyme complex on NCAM positive bile duct cancer. Results Average degree of subsumaon in conjugate was 3.5 (tool concentration of drug / mol concentration of antibody Introduction. Regulatory peptides are involved in the growth os pancreas. However, little is known about the development of regulatory peptide receptors in pancreas. Receptors for cholecystokinin (CCK), bombesm (BBS), seeretin, vasoaetive intestinal peptide (VIP) and epidermal growth factor (EGF) were therefore visualized and quamified by storage phosphor autorediography in rat pancreas at various ages. Method. The panereata of three rats in each of age group (10 days, I month, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months) were removed and rapidly fiozen at -80 ~ C. Tissue sections were incubated with each labelled peptides mentioned above at concentration of 100 pM. Alternate slides were incubated with addition of 1 gM of the corresponding non-radioactive peptides to determine the extent of non-specific binding. Results The specific binding of CCK (3.8 + 06 finol /mg protein) and BBS (1 2 4-0.3 fmol /mg protein) in the panereata of rats was able to be visualized at the age of 10 days and kept increasing with their aging. The h~ghest binding for CCK and BBS at the age of 12 months was 40 _ 0 9 and 4.6 + 0 7 fmol / mg protein separately. The panereata of rats at the age of 10 days expressed receptors for EGF w~th similar binding capacity (3 6 4-0 7 fmol /mg protein ) as that at the age of 1 to 6 months (3 8 4-1.1 fmol /mg protein) However, the EGF receptors in the pancreata of rats at the age of 12 months were significantly decreased (0 9-L-_ 0.3 fmol /mg protein) It could be observed that VIP and seeretin receptors in the pancreata of rats increased from the age of l0 days (1. I 4-0 4 and 0 9 _ 0.2 fmol /mg protein) and reached to the peaks at the age of 3 months (4 5 -," 1.6 and 5 1 4-0.9 fmol /mg protein) then decreased gradually. Their lowest binding at the age of 12 months was 0 8 _-0 2 and 0 8 4-0.1 fmol / mg protein Conclusion The binding discrepancy of various regulatory peptides in rat panereauc development may be benefit to understand the pancreanc physiology Third Department of Internal Medicme, University of Occupational and Environmental Health. Japan, School of Medicme, Kitakyushu, Japan Introduction. TGF-I] 1 and extracellular matrix (ECM) are known to play an important role on the process of fibrosis. The histological alterations ia human chronic pancreatms are scamng of acinar parenchyma and diffuse fibrosis, and overexpression of TGF-~I and ECM gene has been observed in the pancreas. Furthermore, transgemc mice overexpressing TGF-~I is shown to develop massive pancreatac fibrosis. The pathogenesis. however, remains unclear. In the present study, we investigated the senal changes of gene expression of TGF-I~I and ECM (fibronectin, type L III and IV proeollagen) of the pancreas in oleic acid-reduced pancreatitic rats. Method. Pancreatitis was induced by a single intraductal infusion of 50 I, tl oleic acid in male Wistar rats weighing 200-250 g. These rats were killed at I, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 12 wks after lntraductal infusion. Total R.NA was extracted from the pancreas using acid guan=dinium thiocyanatephenol.chloroform method. Expression of TGF-~I and ECM genes was determined by Northern blot analysis. Immunoreacuvlty of fibronectm and type Ill procollagcn in the pancreas was assessed by using the labelled streptavtdin biotin method. Results. TGF-[~I mR.NA expression was detectable at I wk after ole=c acid treatment and reached the peak value at 2 wks. Fibronectm, type 1. III and IV procollagen mRNA expression was detected at I wk and reached the peak value at 2 wks after the treatment. On immunolustochetmstry, fibronectm and type I~ collagen ~mmunoreactwtty was ovserved at 4 wks. Fibronectm immunostammg was found around the tubular complexes, whereas type I]I collagen tmmunostammg was detected around small vessels as well as around the tubular complexes m the pancreas. Conclusion. Increased express=on of TGF-~I at 1-2 wks after oletc acid treatment was comczded with that of ECM. These results suggest that TGF-I~I plays an important role on pancreat=c fibrosis m the early stage of ole=c acld-mduced pancreatms m rats. THE TWO-LAYER COLD STORAGE METHOD Y Tanioka, T. Deal, I. Matsumcto, Y. Suzukk Y Kuroda. First Deoartment of Surgery, Kobe University Medical School Kobe, Japan Introtiuotlon: Poor ~slet yteld from cold preserved human pancreas is one of the ~mpedtments to successful ~slet transplantatzon. New preservation methods to gwe tslet yield and function szmltar to fresh pancreas are needed A two-layer method(TL), whzch uttlizes perfluorochemical (PFC) and UW solution, has prewously demonstrated to have the unique characteristic of supplymg oxygen to the graft, more effectively maintaining wab~lity of whole pancreas transplants We tested the feasibility of TL for pancreatic preservation pnor to islet =solatlon in a canine model. Methods: Exc=sed dog pancreases were preserved =n 4 different conditions(3 and 24 hrs of TL and simple cold storage m UW(s-UW)). then digested by the method of Ricordi and punfied with C08E cellseparator Pancreases processed immediately after procurement were the control group(w~thout preservation). Punfied =slets were autotransplanted =nto the liver via a mesentenc vein. Yield after punficat=on was converted to ~slet edutvalents(IE). Maintenance of norrnoglycem~a (<150 mg/ml) for at least 10 clays after transplantat=on or a K-value of ~ntravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT) at 3 weeks after transplantation < -1 0% was considered as functional success and as a measure of =slet v=abflity. Post-ounttcatlon Functional memo~ (hr) IE.,g pancreas IE:JBOCl y We=gnt(kg) success rate TL 3 5600 12200 (UW/PFC) 24 4000 8400:1:3300" 3 4700 11000 s-UW 24 1300  1100 4 2800  : w~out 0 preserva0on 5CC0 1900 -J 10500  3600 ~ 83% (n---6) 56%7(n=9) 33~ J(n=6) 0%-1(n=9) 89%J(n=6) Conclusion: TL mamtaned ~slet yield and waofltty for at least 24 hrs =n more than half the cases rn contrast, s-UW for as hftle as 3 hrs reduced islet wabihty and 24 hrs s-UW made :slet yield too low for any success. TL =s clearly more effective than conventional s=mpte cold storage Jn UW for pancreatic preservation pnor to islet isolation. Hirosaki Unlv School of Medzclne, HIrosakJ, Japan Introduction. The etiology of type 2 diabetes is very complicated and not entirely clarified. However, both deteriorated insulin secreUon and insulin resistance are related wrth the development of diabetes. The reduction of ~nsulin-producmg beta cells were often seen in type 2 diabetic patients by autopsy. Such reduction might be the basic defects that lead glucose mtoterance. On the other hand, the reduction of glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2), a key factor for glucose-reduced insulin secretzon, was seen In some diabetic ammals. Methods. We Jnvestigated if the amount of beta cells would affect the beta cell function or GLUT2 expression tn beta cells, The following 3 groups were prepared ; 1) 50 % pancreatectornlzed (Px) rats at 6 weeks 2) The rats transplanted 1000 rslets under the renal capsule at 6 weeks 3) control rats. At 10 weeks, oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) were performed m each group Then the islets were isolated and perffused to study their function. And Some islets were homogenized for GLUT2 ~mmunoblortmg Results. Daily blood glucose (BG) levels, body weight, and HbAlc levels at 10 weeks were not different among each groups In OGTT, BG levels at 30 mm were szgnfficantly hzgher, and serum insuhn levels at 0 and 60 m=n were szgmficantly lower Jn Px group. However, Insulin secretion assessed by ~slet perffus[on were preserved in Px group. Moreover, GLUT2 expression evaluated by Western blot were not significantly different among each group Conclusion. Insuhn-secretmg function and GLUT2 express=on were not influenced by 50 % Px or add=txonal transplanted islets. In Px ammals, their beta cells could compensate the reduced beta ceil mass by overworking. Nevertheless. their beta cells could maintain the msuhn secretion and GLUT2 express=on, which suggested that the reduced beta cell mass or their overworking alone could not explain the mechanism of beta cell dysfunction often seen ~n diabetes Introduction. Extracorporeal shock wave tir.hon'ipsy(ESWL) Ls a user"a1 tool for fragm~nng p'ana'endc ch~a stones. However, d~cr.al ciearmce of calculi is relatively poor in pauents w~th main pancre=~ic duc~MPD) strictazres. In those eases, endoscopic i~erventions ate effective in extracting stone fragments and decompressing MPD pressure. The m.m of this study is to evaluate the outcome of ESWL and endoscopic tregment. Patients and Method. Between 1991 and 1997.63par .tents with ~mptomatic chronic pancrea~us underwent ESWL w~th or .w~thoo: endoscopic interventions. ERP was performed m all patients before and after the treal:ment. We evaluated techmcal results..stone clearance .un.mediate and long-term pm.n relief ,stone teem'fence. Results. In all patients.ER.P showed MPD gones with prommal oq)~t~on. MPD gncture was found in 26patients. ESWL was performed prior to endoscopic interventions. Complete clearance of stones was observed m 23paaents and peraal clearance in 22pauenm gter ESWL Immediate pain relief and reduction of MPD d~ameters were obtained in 21paaents by ESWL alone In 24pauents.tme~'enuonal endoscopy was underwent in add:,on to ESWL. Endoscopic extrac~on by using Dornnatype basket was done m 6panems. Naso-pancreauc dram to de:a" the dua of re,'a~,n;n~ fragments in 13panenm and pancreanc s-tent for dominant smcture of .MPD in 9p-a~ents. Comple.e ciem'ance of stones was me.eyed in 15,24pat~en'gs and immediate pm.n t'ehd was obtained m all p~r by addttcanal endoscopic wea~nem. Pauents were followed for a median of 26.4monrhstrangr3-74). 9."34patients l~ad recurrent gones alter a median of The pancreatic duct carcinoma stands out as a h,ghly lethal neoplasm assoc)ated w,th the poorest likelihood of surv)val among all major malignancies. Therefore, basic research related to modulating factors contributing to enhancement and ~ or )nh,bition of carcinogenesis in the experiment is ,mportant. We have studied modulat)on of pancreatic duct carcinogenesis in two different experimental models, one featuring a class,cal initiation-promotion protocol w~th N-nitrosobis(2-hydroxypropyl)amine (BHP) or N-nitrosobis(2-oxopropyl)amine (BOP) m~tiat)on followed by administrat)on of test compounds and the other a re!rod production for.pancreatic carcinomas by in)tiat)on w)th BOP and selection of initiated cells by augmentation pressure and then expose to agents to be tested. The reduced ductal les,ons m these two experimental models demonstrate a histogenesis from duct ep)thelial cell hyperplasia through atypical hyperplas)a to intraductal and invasive adenocarcmomas. The main difference between these two protocols is that duct epithelial hyperplas,a are already present ~n the rapid production case when application of test compound =s commenced. To evaluate the effects of different compounds. inc=dences and numbers of tes,ons are quant)tatively assessed. We found deoxycholic acid. lithocholic ac=d. and combined cholecystectomy and }ithocholic acid to enhance pancreat=c carc=nogenesm w,th the classical protocol, and Trp-P-1 exerted promotion w,th the rap=d product,on protocol Compounds wh,ch inh,bited the development of tes,ons were the anti-ox,dants. 10utylated hydroanisole/BHA), catechol and analogs, as well as sarcophytol A ~n the classical model and sulfat~on mh,b,tors for BOP. [3-carotene. green tea polyphenot, and auraptene in the rap,d production protocol. Compounds wh)ch might have been expected to cause inh,b=tion but did not st~ow any benefic=al effects were N-(4-hydroxy -phenyl)retinamlde (4-HPR). palm carotene, lycopene and NSAIDs hke aspmn and p)roxmam. These results prowde useful mformat)on for further studies of possible chemoprevent)on, specifically of pancreat)c duct carc)nomas. ESIL combined wltb EPST and EPD-BD has turn out to be very useful for pancreatic stone treatments. AN ANIMAL MODEL OF AUTOIMMLrNE P.~NCREATITIS USING NEONATAL THYMECTOMIZED MICE IMMU'NIZED WITH CARBONIC ANHYDRASE K. Uchida, K. Oksz~l, T.Chlba. Department of Gasu'ocnterology and Hepatology, and Endoscopy, Faculty. of Medicine, Kyoto Umverslty., Kyoto, Japan Introduction. It had been reported that an autotmmune mecharasm may be revolved m some panents wlth i&opathlc chromc pancreamls, wi'ach could called as "autoanmune pancreamls" We ~ve reported that autoanribodies against carbomc anhydrase II (CA-[I) were 1denufied in some ofthesu pauents. However, it is sull unknown whether CAII plays an important role in the pathogenesis or not. To clarify it, we established an animal model of auto, mmune pancreauus using neonatal thymectommed mice immumzed wuh CA-[I. Materials and Methods. Ei~t Balb/c mice m each group were thymectom~.ed on the 3rd day aRer birth (3dTx). At the penod of 3 weeks old, rmc,r were subcumneooslly tmmurazod with 0 ling of CA-II with complem Freund's adjuvant, and sacnficed after twice booster mjecuuns Normal rmcc irrunumzed with or without anugens and 3dTx-nuce rejected with adjuvant alone were served as controls, Antibodies agmnst CA-[I were serially measured. We studied lustolng~cal findings of the pancreas, salivary. gland and hver, and the subsets of mf-dtratmg lymphocytes by zmmuno-hJstochemlstry and flow c vtometlc analysis. Gene expressions of [FN-y and 9"-.I. were also analyzed by RT-PCR Results, Fhstologlcal studies showed degeneratlve changes ofacmar cells m seven and mfiln-anng lymphocytes around the pancreanc duct m four of c=ght 3dTx-mlce immunized v,~th CA-ll Infiltranon oflymphocytes miD the duct of sahvary gland or bdlary duct was found m all ~mmun~zed n-ace Flow cytomctD' and tmmunobastochermcal studies showed predominant mt]Itratmn of CDg posluve cells m each immunlzed mouse. Expresslon of IFN-y was predominantly detected by RT-PCR Conclusion, An ammal model of autotmmune pancreamls uslng neonatal thymectom~zed truce zmman~zed ~ith CA-II seems to be useful m clarifying the pathophysmlogy of autmmmune pancreatms Our findings suggested that an autolmmune mcchamsm agmnst CAll may be m',olvod m the pathogenesls ofthls ammal model Japan Introduction. The short-term safety of endoscopic sphincter dilation (ESD) remains to be defined. We prospectively investigated the rate of pancreatitis and changes in pancreatic enzyme values induced by ESD. Patients and Methods. One hundred nine patients with common bile duct sZones were treated using ESD between luly 1995 and September 1997. Serum amylase values were examined before and after the procedure in 102 patients treated 106 times and these findings were compared with the incidence of paucreatitis. Patients were classified into three categories according to serum amylase levels before therapy (A group: within the normal range. B group: over the normal range up to 500 mU/ml, C group: above 500 mU/mt). The severity, of pancreatitis was categorized into four grades (mimmal: abdominal pain after the procedure lasting no longer than the next morning, mild: with elevation of amylase values to at least three times normal and abdominal pain necessitating treatment for three nights after the procedure, moderate: reqmred 4-10 nights treatment, severe: required intensive care). Results. Serum amylase levels after the procedure in groups A and B were elevated significantly compared with baseline levels, in contrast, levels in group C decreased. Overall, amylase levels after the procedure were elevated in 95 studies. Minimal or mild pancreatitis developed in 21 (15 minimal and 6 todd) patients from groups A and B only. The absolute values of serum amylase levels after the procedure in patients who developed mild pancreatitis were significantly higher than those in patients who did not develop pancreatitis. Conclusions. Although pancreatic serum en~.'mes were elevated in almost all patients after ESD. procedure-related pancreatnis developed in a small percentage. Among indications for th~s procedure, there does not seem to be any contraindication regarding treatment of pattents wtth high amylase levels. although such patients sometimes have stone-related pancreat]t=s or may be predisposed to developing this disorder. Introduction. Patients with chronic pancreatifis are reported to have a somewhat higher prevalence of pancreatic carcinoma than the general population. Furthermore, recognition of carcinoma in patients with chronic pancreatitis is reported to be difficult. Patients and Method. We investigated 7 cases of chronic pancreantis with pancreatac carcinoma treated at our hospital to clarify clinical features of such patients. Results. The incidence of pancreatic carcinoma in association with chronic pancreatatis was 3.6% of 196 chronic pancreadtis panents encountered over 26 years . The mean age of these 7 patients was 5"7.9 years old. Five patients (3 men and 2 women) had calctfic pancreatt, s and 2 panents (men) had non-calcific pancreatins. Pancreatic diabetes had been recognized in 4 calcific pancreatitis patients. Large pancreatic stones m the head of the pancreas were recognized in two rather younger (49-and 42-year-old) women. These two patients did not hahttually drinking or smoking. Almost aJl of the 7 panents including the women complained of continuous intractable abdonunal and/or back pains or abdominal discomfort, somewhat different from the complaints in the previous period. Pancreatic tumor was suggested by imaging examinations performed ,n response to those complaints. However. zt seemed to be difficult to ob~n a definiove diagnosis earlier, because of the presence of chrontc pancreatitis. Considerable calcificaoon was shown within and around the mass lesion m the pancreas in one patient, whde a eystxc mass was detected m one of the others. Serum CA19-9 levels were retrospecnvely noted to have been elevated compared with previous data m one par, enL wh,le serum elastase l levels were transiently elevated on an earner exam in one of the other pa(aents. Radical surgery. (PDI was performed only m two pauents with carcinoma of the papdla of Voter. Median survival of the 7 patients *as 8 months from the=r adrmssion date. Conclusion. In conclusion, early diagnosis of pancreauc carcinoma ts often difficult even m pauents wtth chromc pancreantis who have been followed for qutte a long nine. The following points should alert the phys=cmn to perform more detailed exammatmn: conunuous severe pare diffenng from prevtous attacks of pancreanns, weight loss. and changes In laboratory, data. especmlly tumor markers such as serum CA 19-9. pancreatic enzymes such as serum etastase I. Introduction. A possible cause-effect link between the presence of lipopolysacchande (LPS) in the bloodstream and the appearance of acute pancreatitis has been suggested. Th~s study was des,gned to assess the effect of LPS adminustration on different acute pancreatitis markers ustng rodent expenmental models. Materials and Methods. Male, Wistarrats walghmg 180-200 g, were fasted for 16 h and then received 4 tntra pentoneal injections containing 10 mg/kg Salmone//a LPS at 1 h intervals. Control rats received sterile nonpyrogentc saline. Rats were exsangulnated and the pancreas removed at 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 72 h and 4 d after LPS admm]stratuon. Pancreatltisassociated preteen (PAP) express,on was assessed by vertical SDS-PAGE in 12.5 % gels and Western blot analyses In other sanes of experiments, male, 25-30 g Swiss mica rece,ved the same treatment as rats. Mice were also sacr~ced at different times thereafter, the pancreas was removed and RNA was extracted, punfied and separated by electrophores,s. Gen=c express=on of TNF..a was established by Northern-blot analysis ustng a TNF--a probe labeled with =P. Rasults. Plasma amylase act~v~y was significantly increased in LPS-~eated rats when compared ~th control an,reals (2,712 vs. 1,533 U/L. n=8, p<0001). Rat PAP was detected ~n the pancreas 6 h after LPS admm=stratJon. 4t was increased at 36, 48 and 72 h, then decreased and became undetectable by 4 d after LPS admmJstrat=on Expression of mouse TNF-<z mRNA was apparent 1 h after LPS admcntstrat=on, increased hy 2 h and were still high 6 h after LPS adm,nlstratton. There was no TNF~ mRNA expression ,n control mice. Conoluaion. Thts study demonstrated that adm~n=stra'uon of LPS can =nduce expenmental acute pancreattt=s and suggested that the =nflammatory response in the pancreas may be involved ,n the early pathogenests of the disease. Introduction. Trypsinogen activation peptide flAP) is a sensitive indicator for the activation of trypsinogen. Urinary TAP is reported to be a useful marker for the prediction of severity of acute pancreatitis. In the present study, we measured plasma TAP in experimental pancreatitis in rats and evaluated the usefulness of measuring plasma TAP. Materials and Methods. Edematous pancrentitis was induced by inwaperitoucal injections of 40 ~tg/kg of caerulein (two times). Hemorrhagic pancreatitis was induced by an infusion of 0.5 ml of 0. I% trypsin and 5% sodium tsurocholate. Plasma TAP was measured by ELISA. Results. In caemlein induced pancreatltis, plasma TAP increased 1 h after the In'st injection of caerulera, and then decreased to pre-pancreatitis levels. The mean value of plasma TAP at lh (2.55-~0.82nM) was significantly higher thaa that at 0 h (0.62 nM). A subcutaneous injection of CCK antagonist ~'S-941 3 mg/kg) after caerulem significantly ini~bited the elevation of plasma TAP at 1 h. In trypsin-taurocholate induced pancreatitis, plasma TAP at 1 h was 41.88 10.66 nM. Plasma TAP decreased gTadually, but remained at significantly hi~er levels ( 18.81 raM at 12 h) than prepamcreafitis levels. The treatment wtth a synthetic trypsin inhibitor (ONO3403 lmg/kg) significantly decreased the elevation of plasma TAP m trypsintatwoeholate induced pancreatitis. Conclusion. Trypsinogen activation immediately after the induction of paucreatins by caerulem can be detected by measuring plasma TAP. Plasma TAP can be used for esnmating the severity of pancreatitis and the effectiveness of the treatment. Introduction. We made a retrospective study of 50 cases of patxents wlth necrotlzing pancreatitis(NP). All these patients died and the necropsles have been performed. The purpose of the study was to identify the aggravating factors in the evolution of this disease. Patients and method. From 1991 to 1997 50 patlents died with the diagnosls of NP. Among risk factors we mention: obesity (68%), tobacco (56%), vascular disease (78%), dlabetes (28%), age above 70 (12%), coexlsting pathology (32%). The presence of all these factors has been statistically increase in our cases agaxnst cases with good evolutlon. Results. The results of necropsies have shown in majority of cases the extensive (or almost total) aspect of pancreatic necrosls (42 cases -84%). In 49 cases the death occurred between 1 and 14 days after surgery. One case dxed after one month. In 4 cases (8%) we found extenslve Intestinal infarctus. In 6 cases (12%) we found myocardial infarctus at patients with important sings of coronary ischemia before operatlon. In 28 cases (56%) we found important asc!tls (26 wlth hemorrhage aspect and 2 with pus aspect). In 8 cases (16%) patlents developed pulmonary septlc complicatlons. All cases presented HOF syndrome wlth Important to slgns for the cases that dled early after surgery and wlth important septlc sangs for those whlch dled in the second week. From et~ologlc point of v~ew, ethanollc etlology (36 cases -72%) have a greater frequency versus blliary et~ology, in contrast with the cases wlth favorable outcome, where the blliary etlology is more frequently. Conclusion. Although evolution is uncertaln, there is a lot of aggravating factors: ethanol, age above 70, obeslty, extenslon of the lesions, vascular pathology, ascltls. The role of PYY in regulating the growth of human pancreatic cancer cells and its mechanism Zhang Zhongbing. Fu Qiang. Zhang Xingrong. Dept. of Gastroenterology. Chang Zheng Hospital. Shanghai. China. Recently it has been reported that gastrointestinal peptide hormones may act as growth modulators of pancreatic cancer in viva and in vitro. PYY is a 36-amino-acid peptide secreted predominantly by PYY endocrine cells located in ileum, colon and rectum and decreases pancreatic exocfine and endocrine function and pancreatic blood flow. We studied whether pancreatic cancer cell growth would be inhibited by PYY. in this study, the effect of PYY on the growth of human pancreatic cancer cell line SW-t990 was investwated bv means of cell count and 3H-TdR incorporation as parameters for cell growth. Cellular c.MMP in cytosol was measured with radioimmunoassay after PYY stimulation to study the possible post-receptor signal transduction pathway. Cell mutant P~ gene mlLNA and mutant P53 protein were analyzed with Northern dot blotting and immunohistochemical method after exposure to PYY. The results indicated that PYY significantly inhibhed the _+rowth of human pancreatic cancer cell line SW-1990 (P<0.01) , with a doseand-time-dependent decrease in the number of cells and 3H-TdR incorporation. In PYY treated pancreatic ceils, a dose-dependent decrease of intracellular cAMP was noted (P<0.01). The mutant P53 mlL'qA and P53 protein were significantly reduced in cells by treated with PYY compared with control cells wtthout treatment. The abo, e results suggested that PYY mizht inhibit pancreatic cancer cell line SW-1990 cells growth ria decrease of intracellular cA.X.lP levels in * ltro. [n the other hand. The decrease of mutant P53 gene expressing might be one of the mechanisms by which PYY inhibited pancreatic cancer cells growth. 
