15352a91d86694ea1b169c066388c56fb3529c37
Abstracts O-001 Effect of Maternal BMI on 5-Hydroxymethylcytosine, a Novel Epigenetic Modification and Resultant Gene Expression in the O-002 Sexually Dimorphic Regulation of KLF11 Epigenetically Alters the Fibrotic Response and Progression of Endometriosis
Placenta  Ashley N  Parker Leslie  Myatt Mitsuyah  Kohzoh /  Ob   Gyn  Zaraq Khan 


INTRODUCTION: Maternal obesity may cause epigenetic modifications, including DNA methylation, that mediate differences in placental function and fetal development. 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) is a novel DNA modification at CpG sites, generated from 5-methylcytosine (5mC) by ten-eleven translocase enzymes. While 5hmC may have unique functions, the balance between 5mC (gene repression) and 5hmC (gene expression) may regulate placental function. We hypothesize that differences in cellular localization, overall amount and individual gene methylation/ hydroxymethylation occur in placentas of obese vs normal BMI women. METHODS: Villous placenta genomic DNA from 10 obese (BMI 34.0±2.9) and 10 normal BMI (23.4±2.3) women with uncomplicated pregnancy was collected. Methylated and hydroxymethylated DNA immunoprecipitation-chip was performed on the NimbleGen 2.1M high-density DNA methylation array. Differentially methylated/ hydroxymethylated genes were identified between groups, differences confirmed by pyrosequencing and gene expression measured by qRT-PCR. Immunofluorescent staining for 5mC and 5hmC was performed on villous tissue of obese (n =16) and normal BMI (n=12) women and cellular localization and quantitation performed. RESULTS: Increased numbers of methylated (14,233 vs 12,319) and decreased numbers of hydroxymethylated regions (9,797 vs 11,789) were seen across the genome in obese vs healthy groups. Differences were widely distributed including genes involved in placental development, cellular invasion, vascular remodeling, increased BMI, lipid transport, energy and aerobic metabolism, chromatin modification, immune and/or inflammatory responses. The placental lactogen-growth hormone (CSH/ GH) and pregnancy-specific glycoprotein (PSG) gene clusters were differentially methylated/hydroxymethylated and mRNA expression decreased with obesity. Pyrosequencing of CMTM1 gene confirmed methylation array data. 5mC and 5hmC immunostaining localized to cyto-and syncytiotrophoblasts and vascular endothelium. Decreased staining for 5hmC was found with increasing maternal BMI (p=0.05) agreeing with DNA methylation array data. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first demonstration of 5-hydroxymethylation in the human placenta and that differential methylation/hydroxymethylation occurs with increasing maternal BMI. As the balance of 5mC and 5hmC affects gene expression, this may be a mechanism whereby maternal obesity affects placental function. Formerly preeclamptic women p<0.05 Age (years) 31.9 ± 3.5 31.2 ± 3.8 0.52 Parity 1.3 ± 0.5 1.1 ± 0.5 0.24 Gestational age (weeks) 40 Preterm birth (PTB) is a major cause of perinatal morbidity and mortality and its incidence is higher in twin pregnancies. So far no treatment has been proved to be effective in preventing PTB in these pregnancies. Our aim was to evaluate whether Arabin cervical pessary prevents preterm delivery in twin pregnancies with short cervical length. METHODS: This is a retrospective cohort study on 91 women with twin pregnancy and cervical length ≤ 30 mm between 18 and 32 gestational weeks. 30 patients who received Arabin cervical pessary were compared with 61 patients who underwent expectant management at hospital admission. Primary outcomes were gestational age at delivery, PTB before 37, 34 and 28 weeks. Secondary outcomes were use of Atosiban and time interval between detection of short cervix and delivery. Normality of variables distribution was tested using Shapiro-Wilk test. Normally distributed continuous variables were compared using Student's t-test, while not normally distributed variables were compared using Mann-Whitney U Test. Categorical variables were compared using Chi-Square (c 2 ) test . RESULTS: Of 91 twin pregnancies 30 women received an Arabin cervical pessary and 61 received no treatment. The two groups had similar age and incidence of prior PTB. Gestational age at hospital admission was significantly lower in the pessary group (25 vs 28 weeks, p = 0.004). The group with pessary delivered at a higher gestational age compared with controls (35 vs 33 weeks, p = 0.008). The incidence of delivery < 28 weeks was significantly lower in the group with pessary (p = 0.04), while no difference was found in the rate of deliveries < 34 weeks. There was a trend towards a reduction rate of delivery before 37 weeks in the pessary group, even it did not reach the statistical significance (p = 0.09). The use of Atosiban and incidence of PROM and chorioamniotitis was not significantly different between groups . Time interval between detection of short cervix and delivery was longer in the pessary group (p < 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Arabin cervical pessary seems to increase the gestational age at delivery in twin pregnancies with short cervix and to reduce the incidence of delivery < 28 weeks, but not < 34 or 37 weeks. Smoking during the periconceptual and gestational periods is associated with adverse fetal and infant outcomes. While many studies hypothesize that such exposures dysregulate fetal developmental programming through epigenetic modifications such as DNAm, all have failed to link exposure→DNAm→offspring phenotype. We test this hypothesis using a novel genome-wide analytic approach in the largest DNAm database worldwide to better address the stochastic and interdependent nature of biological interactions. METHODS: DNAm microarray data from cord blood in a convenience sample of 584 healthy children from a population-based UK pregnancy cohort (ALSPAC) were used. We extracted DNAm signatures related to maternal smoking patterns from periconception to the 2 nd trimester (T2) of pregnancy with partial least squares regression. We predicted differences in fetal and infant growth using DNAm signatures while controlling for maternal and paternal social status. RESULTS: Distinct signatures in cord blood separate children by maternal smoking pattern. (Figure: DNAm components plot. Legend: black-nonsmoker, blue-only periconception, green-throughout, redstopped in T2, white-other.) The signatures predict birth weight and rate of infant weight gain and linear growth in the 1 st 3 months. Findings were consistent between analyses with and without multiple imputation and bootstrapping. Interestingly, DNAm signatures related to periconceptual smoking alone captured a similar amount of variation in growth as that related to smoking overall or in T1 or T2. CONCLUSIONS: This novel approach predicts both pre-and postnatal growth. It is the first evidence linking maternal smoking-based DNAm signatures to child outcomes. Moreover, our findings regarding periconceptual smoking highlight the important biologic "footprint" left by exposures before gestation that affect offspring health. Our approach may provide insights into disease mechanisms that are unique from traditional experiments and analysis. After adjusting for metabolic syndrome, both composite outcomes were slightly attenuated (composite 1: HR 1.13, 95% CI 1.03-1.24 and composite 2: HR 1.08, 95% CI 1. 00-1.19 ). The risk was higher in the stratum of women having H-OC before age 40 for CAD (HR 1.24, 95% CI 1.02-1.51), CHF (HR 1.66, 95% CI 1.18-2.34), and both composite outcomes (composite 1: HR 1.38, 95% CI 1.15-1.65 and composite 2: HR 1.26, 95% CI 1.07-1.48). CONCLUSIONS: H-OC is related to subsequent CV morbidity, similar to the effects of bilateral oophorectomy. The uterus, or its removal, may have local effects on the ovaries, especially when surgery is performed at a younger age. Alternatives to hysterectomy should be considered as first-line therapy. and environmental factors such as nutrition, lifestyle and stress that may modulate the length of gestation via the epigenome. DNA methylation is a well-studied epigenetic modification whereby promoter methylation commonly represses gene expression and vice versa. We hypothesized that we would find differences in the DNA methylome of myometrium from women with idiopathic preterm labor vs normal term labor. METHODS: Lower segment myometrial tissue was obtained at cesarean section from women at term with established labor (TL, 38.9±0.8 wks, mean±SD, n=11) and with idiopathic preterm labor (iPTL, 34.9±1.3 wks, n=6). Genomic DNA was isolated from myometrium and then samples in each group were combined prior to analysis. Genome-scale DNA methylation analysis was performed using MeDIP (methylated DNA immunoprecipitation)-chip analysis on the NimbleGen 2.1M high-density platform. We identified those genes with the most significant change in methylation in regions -1.5 to +0.5kb of the transcription start site. RESULTS: MeDIP-chip identified 28,952 and 29,610 methylated regions in TL and iPTL groups respectively. Differences between in the methylomes were identified at CpG islands, shores, shelves and gene bodies across the genome. Functional clustering analysis indicated the significantly enriched pathways of hypomethylated genes (permissive) in iPTL vs TL were related to acute inflammatory and acute-phase responses (p<0.001). By contrast, genes that are hypermethylated (repressive) in iPTL vs TL revealed enrichment for contractile fibers and cell junctions (p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: We present the first high-resolution DNA methylome of human myometrium and provide evidence for differences in the methylome that may relate to idiopathic preterm birth via regulation of gene expression. The findings extend previous observations that idiopathic preterm labor is associated with subclinical intrauterine infection and inflammatory pathways and point to targets for further molecular characterization of preterm delivery. Impact of Maternal Ageing on Murine Myometrium Function. Rima Patel, Poston Lucilla, Tribe M Rachel. Divison of Women's Health, King's College London, London, United Kingdom. INTRODUCTION : Pregnancy complications associated with advance maternal age (≥35 years) include increased operative delivery and post-term induction. The underlying physiological causes are not well understood. We hypothesise that advanced maternal age negatively impacts on myometrium contractile function and timing of birth. Previously, we reported in a pregnant mouse model of advanced reproductive age, that gestation length, labour duration and spontaneous contractile function in myometrium ex vivo was impaired in older mice. The aims of this study were to determine whether older pregnant mouse myometrium had i) reduced expression of mRNA encoding for contraction associated proteins, ii) impaired contractile responses to oxytocin ex vivo and iii) reduced myometrium mitochondrial copy number (MtDNA). METHODS: Myometrium tissue was obtained from non-pregnant and nulliparous pregnant mice (day 18) aged 3, 5 and 8 months of age. Strips of myometrium were mounted in an organ bath containing physiological salt solution for isometric tension recording. Oxytocin (10 -12 to 10 -7 M) was added to spontaneously contracting tissue and mean integral tension (mean ± SEM) determined. Myometrium mRNA expression of CX43, OXTR and PTGS2, and MtDNA copy number was determined using qPCR (expressed relative to a normalisation factor; MtDNA to B2M). RESULTS: Oxytocin-stimulated contractile activity was impaired in myometrium from older pregnant mice (mean difference in slope of concentration response curve, 95% CI) at 8 months (-7.63, -13.92 to -1.35, P< 0.05) and 5 months (-7.29, -12.31 to -2.28, p<0 .01) vs 3 months (n=32 tissues from n=8 mice/group). This age related impairment was not observed in myometrium from non-pregnant mice. CX43 expression was significantly lower in myometrium from pregnant 8 month old mice vs 3 month old mice (mean ± SEM; 4.18 ± 0.03 vs 4.40 ± 0.03, p<0.01, n=8 per group). OXTR and PTGS2 mRNA expression were unaffected by age. MtDNA expression declined with age; in pregnant mice there was a 25% and 41% reduction in copy number in tissue from 5 month (n=p<0.01) and 8 month p<0.001) vs 3 month old animals (n=8). Reduced responsiveness of myometrium from older pregnant mice to oxytocin and a reduction in CX43 expression provides a potential mechanism to explain delayed parturition and prolonged labour in this model of reproductive ageing. Reduction in mitochondrial number in myometrial tissue implies that ATP availability for effective contraction could be impaired. Funding: BBSRC and Tommy's Charity. 10 -6 M), COX2 (NS398, 10 -6 M) and NOS (L-NNA, 10 -4 M) inhibitors. RESULTS: Uterine artery sensitivity to U46619 increased in rats treated with ODN 2395 as compared to vehicle-treated rats (pD 2 , ODN 2395: 7.22 ± 0.107 vs. vehicle: 6.88 ± 0.093, p<0.05). COX1 and COX2 inhibition reduced the potentiating effects of ODN 2395 (pD 2 , ODN 2395: 7.22 ± 0.107 vs. ODN 2395+SC560: 6.36 ± 0.24 vs. ODN 2395+NS398: 6.62 ± 0.225, p<0.05) and abolished the differences between ODN 2395-and vehicle-treated rats. NOS inhibition did not have any effect on the group differences seen in U46619-induced contractions. Systemic activation of TLR9 had no effect on either fetal or placental weights but increased maternal blood pressure (ODN 2395: 134 ± 2.2 mmHg vs. vehicle: 121 ± 1.6 mmHg, p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Systemic activation of TLR9 potentiates the contractile responses to TxA 2 in uterine arteries from pregnant rats and this effect is mediated by cyclooxygenases. We speculate that in the presence of TLR9 ligands such as in cases of infections (PAMPs) or exaggerated placental cell damage (DAMPs), COX inhibition may prevent or alleviate the development of dysfunction of arteries supplying the uteroplacental unit. may explain this finding: 1. Abnormality in ovarian function leads to bleeding abnormalities which in turn increases the risk of hysterectomy; 2. Hysterectomy, by an yet to be illucidated mechanism, causes damage to the ovary and earlier failure. We utilized frozen sera from participants in the Prospective Research on Ovarian Function (PROOF) cohort to compare the changes in Anti-Müllerian Hormone (AMH) levels (a novel marker of ovarian reserve) between women undergoing ovary sparing hysterectomy and similar age controls. METHODS: Sera samples from women who had a baseline and 1 year follow up blood sample, had proven fertility, were non-smokers and were not on hormonal contraception were selected for analysis. Continuous variables were compared using t-test and categorical variable were analyzed using chi square test. Baseline AMH levels were grouped as not-detectable, "aging" (AMH ≤1.2 ng/ml) and "young." Among the patients with detectable baseline AMH, who had no interval gynecological surgeries or pregnancies, who were not taking oral contraception or hormone replacement, follow-up AMH levels were compared between hysterectomy and control groups using ANCOVA after adjusting for baseline AMH, race, and age. RESULTS: A total of 80 women who had a hysterectomy and 83 controls met inclusion criteria. A greater proportion of control women were Caucasian, however, there was no difference between groups in mean age or parity. Although there was no difference in median AMH levels at baseline (1 vs. 0.7 ng/ml), there were a greater proportion of women with "young" ovary profile in the hysterectomy group (43.8 vs 28.9%; p=0.049), suggesting that women presenting form hysterectomy do not have dimished ovarian reserve. At 1 year follow up AMH levels were on average 45% lower in the hysterectomy compared to control group (95% CI, 22 to 62%, p=0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Despite ovarian preservation, women undergoing hysterectomy experience a greater decline in AMH levels compared to controls. This suggests that the association between hysterectomy and decreased ovarian reserve is due to direct impact of hysterectomy on ovarian function (hypothesis 2). hampered isolation of a pure population of stem cells required for proper characterization of a gene expression profile. Here we present a new method to analyze gene expression profiles of stem cells retrospectively without the requirement to isolate stem cells. In order to trace a stem cell expression profile we will use a fusion between the bacterial DNA cytosine methyltransferase (DCM) and different components of the RNA Polymerase II machinery. METHODS: Mouse embryonic stem cell lines have been generated with doxycycline inducible fusion proteins, which methylate the CCWGG sequence in active genes. Pulse labeling active genes with a stable epigenetic mark that is propagated to daughter cells will allow retrospective analysis of gene expression. DCM methylation of transcribed, or previously transcribed, genes is detected by digestion with the methylation dependent restriction enzyme LpnP1 using quantitative PCR and Southern blotting. RESULTS: DCM methylation of transcribed, or previously transcribed, genes is detected by digestion with the methylation dependent restriction enzyme LpnP1 using quantitative PCR and Southern blotting. We found that DCM methylation is propagated to daughter cells in vitro and in vivo and is still detectable more than eight weeks after induction of the fusion protein. We find that DCM/RNA Polymerase II can methylate active genes. The DCM methylation pattern is propagated to daughter cells and can be detected with LpnP1. DNA isolated from differentiated ES cells shows a DCM methylation status that is representative of gene expression at the stem cell stage, before differentiation. Therefore a fusion protein between DCM and RNA polymerase II makes it possible to analyze gene expression profiles of adult stem cells retrospectively. Current aim is to develop techniques for genome wide analysis of DCM methylation. Transient Exposure to Hypoxia Impairs the Function of Fetal Endothelial Colony Forming Cells (ECFC). Peter Sipos*, 1 Stephane Bourque*, 2 Phil Baker, 3 Sandra Davidge, 2 Ian Crocker. 1 1 Maternal and Fetal HEalth Research Centre, University of Manchester, United Kingdom; 2 Women and Children's Health Research Institute, University of Alberta, Canada; 3 Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, New Zealand. INTRODUCTION: Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is associated with placental hypoxia. We have previously demonstrated the role of fetal ECFCs in vasculogenesis of the human/murine placenta 1 and uterus and showed these cells, derived from growth restricted neonates, to have impaired functional capacities 2 . These impairments may impact placental development resulting in IUGR and, if sustained in adult-life, could be a determinant for cardiovascular risk (CVR). We therefore hypothesised that transient exposure to hypoxia, as proposed in IUGR, permanently affects ECFC-function. METHODS: We isolated and verified ECFCs by cell culture from human umbilical blood from normal pregnancies (n=6) and examined their vasculogenic capabilities in artificial tissue blocks implanted for 14 days in normoxic immune-deficient NOD/SCID mice. Matched blocks contained ECFCs with and without prior exposure to 1%O 2 for 72hrs. Cells were also examined for senescence using fluorescent ß-galactosidase assay and matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) activity by zymography, as a fundamental angiogenic enzyme. RESULTS: In 6 random fields of 3 systematically selected sections, the numbers and average diameters (pixels) of simple (single ECFC) and more complex (multiple ECFC) vascular structures were determined in the implants. In both cases, hypoxia reduced ECFC vasculogenic potential, as compared to normoxic controls (simple structures: 271 [132-526] vs. 43 and 2289 vs. 595 , respectively, p<0.05 n=5, Wilcoxon's matched pairs test) (complex structures: 450 [370-688] vs. 84 , 346 vs. 94 , respectively, p<0.05 n=5). Levels of senescence (as a ratio) were exaggerated under hypoxic exposure (1.0 vs. 4.3 [1.4-10.1], p<0.05), whilst MMP-2 production was elevated compared to normoxic controls (4.1 [2.7-7.1] vs. 1.0, respectively, p<0.05). These data suggest that hypoxia causes impaired vasculogenic capacity of ECFCs through increased senescence, not reduced MMP-2 production. These observations may simulate in utero changes in placental/fetal ECFCs under hypoxia, providing a potential mechanism for IUGR and associated CVR in adulthood. INTRODUCTION: Human amnion epithelial cells (hAECs) have protective and reparative effects in acute lung injury, including in models of neonatal lung disease. these effects do not require in vitro differentiation into lung cells. We hypothesized that hAECs exerted their effects via modualtion of the host response to injury, specifically by polarizing macrophages from pro inflammatory (M1) to proreparative (M2) phenotypes, and by inducing naive T cells into regulatory T cells (Tregs) . To determine in vitro effects of hAECs on macrophage and T cell phenotypes during acute lung injury, we administerd 0.3U bleomycin sulcate intranasally to 8 week old C57Bl6 mice. One day later we administered 4 million hAECs (or saline) intraperitoneally. Animals were culled 3, 5, 7 or 14 days later (n=5 each group), lungs collected and FACS sorted (CD86+ for M1, CD206+ for M2) to assess cell phenotype. To determine direct effects, we co-cultured hAECs with either macrophages or naive T cells from FoxP3-GFP mice. RESULTS: Bleomycin significantly increased macrophage infiltration in the lung at day 7, an effect prevented by hAECs (4.1±0.4% vs 0.5±0.1%, P<0.005). Administration of hAECs also shifted macrophage phenotype from predominantly M1 to predominantly M2. Direct co-culture of macrophages with hAECs in vitro also shifted cell population from M1 to M2 and significantly increased phagoctyic activity. Administration of hAECs also doubled the Treg population in the lung following bleomycin injury (p<0.01). In vitro, hAECs induced FoxP3 expression in naive T cells. CONCLUSIONS: The protective and reparative properties of hAECs are, at least in part, due to their ability to modulate host macrophage and T cell function to promote resolution of inflammation and fibrosis. Understanding how hAECs exert these effects may lead to novel therapeutics. Friday substratum without Matrigel. Cells were immunostained for pluripotency markers and for those indicating trophoblast differentiation. FGF2 was removed from the culture medium to promote differentiation and the cells were immunostained for trophoblast markers and assayed for the production of placental hormones by ELISA. RESULTS: Human ESCs showed epithelial morphology after 24 hours in the presence of BMP4 plus inhibitors. After 5 passages in the presence of only FGF, cell colonies emerge with a slightly changed morphology and the capacity for self-renewal. With a doubling time of approximately 24 hours, the cells have now survived more than 40 passages (190 doublings) . The majority of cells show highly elevated CDX2 expression while maintaining expression of the pluripotency markers (POU5F1, NANOG, MKI67). With removal of FGF2 from the culture medium, the cells become positive for the trophoblast markers CGA, CGB, GATA2, and KRT7 and secrete hCG and PGF. CONCLUSIONS: Limited exposure of hESC to medium containing BMP4 plus inhibitors followed by MEF feeder cell-conditioned hESC culture conditions in the presence of FGF2 allows derivation of distinct self-renewing progenitor cells that can differentiate into trophoblast upon removal of FGF2 from the medium. Derivation of Cardiac Endothelium from Human Embryonic Stem Cells (hESCs) Via Dual Transgenic Labeling. David Reichman, Kenny Chou, Michael Poulos, Zev Rosenwaks, Daylon James. Reproductive Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, NY, NY, USA. INTRODUCTION: Endothelial cells(ECs) exhibit regenerative paracrine functions in liver and lung. Mammalian heart does not regenerate, yet embryonic cardiac ECs(CECs) may offer a regenerative impetus after myocardial infarction(MI). Methods for identifying CECs arising from hESCs are undefined and molecular pathways driving progenitors to CECs are unknown. METHODS: We modified a cardiac specific hESC reporter line via lentiviral transduction, creating a dual reporter line in which the Nkx2.5 promoter (cardiac) and the VE-Cadherin promoter (EC) drive GFP and mOrange, respectively. We defined culture conditions that enrich for double-positive cells (putative CECs), isolated this population via FACS, and analyzed its molecular phenotype via RNA sequencing. We confirmed biologic relevance of this population via lineage tracing in progeny of Nkx2.5-Cre, floxed-stop TdTomato, and VEGFR2 GFP crosses in mice. We used a mouse model of MI to test engraftment of embryonic CECs. RESULTS: Lineage tracing in mouse revealed that cardiac crescent ECs ancestrally express Nkx2.5. In-vitro correlates on day 9 of hESC differentiation exhibited both reporters. RNA sequencing revealed that this population expressed cardiac and EC-specific genes; WNT signaling was increased in cardiomyocytes and decreased in CECs. Principal component analysis identified a signature similar to CECs from human fetal heart. Subsequent inhibition of WNT during hESC differentiation increased the yield of CECs (+42.9%±9.8%) at the expense of cardiomyocytes (-32.8%±6.8%, p=.027) . Pilot studies revealed that mouse embryonic ECs engrafted and formed functional vessels after MI. CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac ECs can be derived from hESCs. Persistent WNT inhibition in progenitors drives CEC identity, and enriches for a population that may have unique regenerative potential. It has been postulated that endometriosis results from abnormal, ectopic dislocation of basal endometrium. We have recently shown for the first time that nuclear SOX9 and cell-surface SSEA-1 marks human basalis endometrial epithelial cells. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry analysis of SOX9 and SSEA1 in 30 secretory phase endometrial samples and 15 ectopic endometriotic lesions from women with and without endometriosis; 10 women on exogenous hormones using a modified Quickscore and ImageJ. Western blotting and qPCR (SOX9, and surrogate markers for SSEA1, FUT4, FUT9) were used as secondary methods. Gene expression of epithelial cells enriched for SOX9 expression (Magnetic bead sorted SSEA1+) from women with/ without endometriosis (n=8/group) were analysed by qPCR. The effects of ovarian hormones on SOX9 gene and protein expression were analysed in vitro using Ishikawa cells. RESULTS: There was an increase of SOX9 and SSEA1 expression in secretory epithelial cells of the women with endometriosis compared with healthy controls (1.33 vs. 0.44, p=0.01). Ectopic endometriotic deposits had high scores for SOX9 and SSEA-1. SOX9 protein levels were lower in the secretory than in proliferative phase. The thin, basalis like hormone treated endometrium contained high SOX9 expressing epithelial cells compared to the secretory phase not exposed to exogenous hormones (p=0.0001). SOX9 enriched epithelial cells from women with endometriosis showed reduced PR and ERa mRNA expression and increased expression of OCT4 and NANOG. DHT, MPA and FGFs altered the SOX9 gene and protein expression levels in Ishikawa cells compared to the control; E2 did not alter SOX9 expression. CONCLUSIONS: Women with endometriosis are more likely to shed an increased number of cells with basalis-like phenotype at menstruation, some of which may travel retrogradely into the pelvis. Since these cells can generate endometrial gland-like structures in 3D culture, and have the gene expression profile of a less differentiated phenotype, they are likely to give rise to ectopic endometrium-like lesions in the pelvic cavity. Progesterone and Androgens effect on SOX9 may partially explain their therapeutic effect in endometriosis. As in other organs SOX9 may be a regulator of progenitor cell proliferation and as such involved in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Endometriosis. David W Erikson, 1 Joseph C Chen, 1 Terhi T Piltonen, 1,2 Marco Conti, 1 Juan C Irwin, 1 Linda C Giudice. 1 1 Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, USA; 2 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Center of Clinical Research, University of Oulu, Finland. INTRODUCTION: Endometriosis is a gynecologic disease characterized by the presence of endometrial lesions outside the uterus. Aberrant protein kinase A (PKA) signaling is one of several proposed reasons for the inability of endometrial stromal fibroblasts (eSF) from women with endometriosis (eSF endo ) to decidualize, contributing to the high incidence of infertility seen in women with the disease. Abnormalities in protein kinase B (PKB/AKT), mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling have also been observed in endometriosis. Inhibition of any one of the above pathways, while affecting specific cell processes, has not proven to be successful in restoring decidualization in eSF endo . Our objective was to restore decidualization marker expression in eSF endo during cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) -induced decidualization in vitro by using chemical inhibitors to cell signaling pathways known to be aberrantly regulated in endometriosis. METHODS: eSF from women with severe endometriosis (eSF endo ) or no disease (eSF non-endo ) (n=5 each) were treated for 96h with 0.5 mM 8-bromoadenosine 3'5'-monophosphate (8-br-cAMP), and chemical inhibitors to EGFR tyrosine kinase (gefitinib, 10 µM), MAPK kinase (MEK; UO126, 10 µM) or mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR; rapamycin, 10 nM). RNA and protein were isolated for qPCR and multiplex assay analyses. RESULTS: Addition of gefitinib during cAMP treatment restored mRNA expression of the decidualization markers insulin growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP1), prolactin (PRL), and forkhead box protein 01A (FOXO1A) in eSF endo to levels seen in similarly-treated eSF non-endo . Increased P70S6K phosphorylation (downstream of mTOR) was observed in eSF non-endo treated with cAMP, but not in cAMP-treated eSF endo as measured by multiplex analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Aberrant EGF signaling is involved in preventing expression of decidualization markers in eSF from women with endometriosis. Elucidating the underlying differences in cell signaling pathways between diseased and non-diseased endometrium will lead to better infertility management in women with endometriosis. This project was funded by NIH U54HD 055764-06 Specialized Cooperative Centers Program in Reproduction and Infertility Research. Endometriosis. Ana M Sanchez, 1 Paola Vigano, 2 Massimo Candiani, 2 Paola Panina-Bordignon. 1 1 Reproductive Sciences, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy; 2 Ob/Gyn Department, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. INTRODUCTION: Increased pelvic contamination with menstrual blood by retrograde menstruation is believed to play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. A high concentration of heme and iron derived from lysis of red blood cells by macrophages in the peritoneal fluid may be regarded as a prerequisite for endometrial cell implantation and survival. Iron-derived products may favour disruption of mesothelial cells, exposure of submesothelial collagen matrix and angiogenesis. Thus, iron homeostasis is acquiring increasing interest in endometriosis pathogenesis and associated infertility. The objective of this study was to investigate the impact of pelvic iron overload on the development of peritoneal endometriosis in a mouse model. METHODS: Hemin (25mg/kg), was injected i.p. at the time of endometriosis induction in Balb/c female mice, and treatment was repeated twice a week for 2 wks. The mice were sacrificed on day 15 and lesion number and size were evaluated. Gene expression analysis of IL-6, IL-1a, TNFa, VEGF, survivin, E-cadherin, MMP3, MMP9 were evaluated in eutopic and ectopic endometrium by qRT-PCR. IL-6 levels in the peritoneal fluid were evaluated by specific ELISA. RESULTS: Treatment with hemin did not affect the total number of lesions per mouse (2.4 lesions/mouse in control mice vs 2.6 lesions/ mouse in hemin-treated mice). However hemin significantly increased the volume of endometriotic lesions (0.047 ± 0.01 cm 3 ) compared to vehicletreated mice (0.013 ± 0.003 cm 3 ) (p=0.047). Expression of MMP3 and VEGF transcripts in ectopic endometrium of hemin-treated mice were increased compared with vehicle treated mice (p=0.038 and p=0.048, respectively). No differences were observed for inflammatory cytokines in hemin-treated vs control mice. CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that an excess of iron in the peritoneum of mice with endometriosis induce upregulation of MMP3 mRNA expression hence facilitating extracellular matrix breakdown and implantation of endometrial stromal cells onto the mesothelium. Subsequent lesion vascularization is also favoured by iron, as indicated by upregulation of VEGF transcripts. This mouse model might help to identify novel iron-dependent molecular pathways involved in the pathogenesis of endometriosis. Japanese ancestry. Random effects models and heterogeneity statistics (I 2 ) were used to investigate the evidence of the nine reported genome-wide significant loci, across datasets and populations. RESULTS: Meta-analysis showed that 7/9 loci had consistent directions of effect across studies and populations, and 6/9 remained genomewide significant (P< 5x10 -8 ) including rs12700667 on chromosome 7 (P=1.6x10 -9 ), rs7521902 in WNT4 (P=1.8x10 -15 ), rs10859871 in VEZT (P=4.7x10 -15 ), rs1537377 in CDKN2BAS1 (P=1.5x10 -8 ), rs7739264 near ID4 (P=6.2x10 -10 ) and rs13394619 in GREB1 (P=4.5x10 -8 ). Two independent intergenic loci, rs4141819 and rs6734792 on chromosome 2, showed significant evidence of heterogeneity across datasets (P<0.005). All 9 loci had stronger effect sizes among stage B cases, implying that they are likely to be implicated in the development of moderate/severe, or ovarian disease. While 2/9 loci are intergenic, the remainder are in or near genes with known functions of biological relevance to endometriosis, varying from roles in developmental pathways to cellular growth/ carcinogenesis, which will be discussed. CONCLUSIONS: Despite reported lack of formal replication, our metaanalysis show remarkable consistency in endometriosis GWAS results across studies, with little evidence of population-based heterogeneity. However, phenotypic definitions used have been crude. Stronger associations with stage B disease observed for most loci emphasize the importance for future studies to include detailed sub-phenotype information. In the present study, we evaluate the suitability of miR-142-3p, known to be dysregulated in endometriotic lesions, as a noninvasive serum biomarker for endometriosis. Furthermore, the functional role of miR-142-3p in this disease is evaluated in vitro using immortalized cell lines and patient-derived primary endometrial stroma cells. METHODS: miR-142-3p expression in the sera of patients with laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis (n=41) and control sera of patients without endometriosis (n=44) from the IVF clinic of Münster University Hospital were analyzed by qPCR. The immortalized cell lines 12Z (epithelial endometriotic), ST-T1b (endometrial stroma) and primary eutopic endometrial and ectopic stroma cells were transiently transfected using miR-142-3p precursors or appropriate control reagents, respectively. Cell behaviour and morphology were evaluated by MTT assay, video microscopy and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy. Target gene expression and signal transduction analysis were performed by qPCR and Western blotting. RESULTS: miR-142-3p expression was decreased by 80% (p=0.0116) in sera of endometriosis patients compared to controls. miR-142-3p upregulation resulted in a downregulation of the predicted targets IL6ST, ITGAV, RAC1, WASL and ROCK2. In ST-T1b cells, IL-6 mediated STAT3 signaling and cell viability were significantly inhibited (p<0.05), whereas 12Z cell motility was significantly affected (p<0.05) due to changes in cytoskeletal structure. CONCLUSIONS: Downregulation of miR-142-3p promotes the pathogenesis of endometriosis via upregulated expression of proinflammatory signaling receptors and cytoskeletal elements, which in turn may facilitate establishment of the endometriotic lesion at ectopic sites. miR-142-3p emerges as a noninvasive diagnostic marker and therapeutic target in endometriosis. Life by Altering Adaptive Responses to Later Challenges? Y Niu, 1 BJ Allison, 1 KL Brain, 1 A D Kane, 1 EA Herrera, 2 DA Giussani. 1 1 Physiology Development & Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom; 2 Physiology, Universidad de Chile, Chile. INTRODUCTION: Different stressors during early life can programme heart disease. It is widely understood that they do so by altering adaptive responses to later challenges, such as an unhealthy lifestyle, rather than by initiating pathological changes per se during fetal development. Whether suboptimal environments trigger a fetal origin of cardiac dysfunction has been difficult to prove in mammals, largely due to the complexity of studying the fetal heart in rodents. We have created isobaric chambers able to maintain pregnant sheep under hypoxic conditions for the duration of pregnancy. We have used this model to investigate the effects of chronic fetal hypoxia on cardiac function in the offspring both during the fetal and adult periods. METHODS: 32 ewes carrying a singleton fetus were instrumented with vascular catheters at 100 days of gestation (term~145 days). Half of the pregnancies were exposed to chronic hypoxia from 105 days to term. In one cohort, hearts of fetuses were isolated at 138 days and studied. In a second cohort, hearts of adults were isolated at 9 months and studied. In both fetuses and adults, cardiac function was investigated using Langendorff preparations. RESULTS: Chronic hypoxia reduced maternal PaO 2 (107±2 vs. 47±1 mmHg, P<0.05). Chronic hypoxic pregnancy impaired diastolic function (LVEDP) and the cardiac recovery to a 20 min ischaemic reperfusion challenge in hearts of fetuses at the end of gestation (Fig. 1) . By adulthood, both effects persisted, but the cardiac dysfunction amplified to reveal additional impaired systolic function (LVDP). CONCLUSIONS: We provide evidence of a fetal origin of cardiac disease that amplifies into adulthood in a mammal. The data advance the thinking of this field to understand the concept that programmed cardiac dysfunction by adverse conditions in early life may originate in fetal life rather than be of adult-onset, resulting from altered adaptive responses to postnatal challenges. Supported by The British Heart Foundation. The Role of Infection and the TNF Family of Cytokines in Neonatal Hypoxic-Ischemic Brain Injury. Eridan Rocha-Ferreira, 1 Erika Francesch-Domenech, 1 Laura Thei, 1 Ahad Rahim, 2 Sigrun Lange, 1 Donald Peebles, 1 Mariya Hristova, 1 Gennadij Raivich. 1 1 Perinatal Brain Group, UCL Institute for Women's Health, United Kingdom; 2 Dept of Pharmacology, UCL School of Pharmacy, United Kingdom. INTRODUCTION: Materno-fetal infection and hypoxic-ischemic insult around the time of birth are known to interact synergistically to cause neonatal encephalopathy. We have previously shown that deletion of the TNF cluster of cytokines abolishes LPS sensitization in the immature murine brain. In this study, we investigated the independent effects of TNFa, LTa and LTb, members of the TNF cluster, using mouse models of global single gene deletion, as well as cell-type specific deletion of TNFα in peripheral macrophages with Mlys::Cre. METHODS: At P7, littermate wild-type (n=20) and knock-out (n=20) mice underwent HI insult consisting of unilateral carotid occlusion followed by 30min 8% O 2 exposure. 12h prior, 0.6µg/g LPS (n=10) or saline (control, n=10) was administered intraperitoneally. Animals were sacrificed 48h post-HI. Forebrain sections were immunohistochemically stained for αM (activated microglia) and Nissl (cell survival) injuryassociated markers. Assessments were based on combined injury score (αM+Nissl, CIS) and infarct volume (Nissl), and statistically measured using one way ANOVA followed by post-hoc TUKEY. RESULTS: LPS pre-treatment resulted in significant up-regulation in injury in the WT littermates of all 4 groups. LTα-/-mice had significantly decreased CIS in the pyriform cortex and hippocampus (45%, p<0.05), as well as significantly reduced infarct in the dorsoparietal cortex (40%, p<0.05) when compared to their WT LPS controls. LTβ-/-animals had significantly more CIS in the pyriform cortex, striatum, thalamus and overall (50%, p<0.05). There was also a significant overall increase in tissue loss relating to WT LPS controls, particularly in dorsoparietal cortex, striatum, thalamus and external capsule (50%, p<0.05). TNFa deletion appeared to be detrimental, with increase in CIS and infarct The risk for any pregnancy to have a live born infant with chromosomal abnormalities or structural defects has been estimated to be 3%-5%. Current methods of invasive and non-invasive genetic diagnosis are limited to gestational ages of 10 weeks or later. The need to develop earlier and minimally invasive methods for prenatal genetic diagnosis (PGD) are warranted. At 5 weeks gestation, trophoblastic cells can be non-invasively retrieved from the endocervical canal using a cytobrush. We are now able to isolate trophoblast cells from maternal cells using the fetal specific marker human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-G. Prior to using these fetal cells for PGD, it is necessary to ensure distinction between trophoblast DNA and maternal DNA. METHODS: Following isolation of trophoblast cells from pregnant patients in the first and second trimester, specimens were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for HLA-G expression. Trophoblast cells were separated from maternal cells using a column-free magnetic nanoparticle separation procedure. Purity of the trophoblast specimens was calculated by staining for BHCG. Following whole genome amplification (WGA) of maternal and fetal cell DNA, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) assay and gender identification was preformed by polymerase chain reaction. RESULTS: Maternal and fetal cells were compared after isolation from 5 patient specimens. Average total trophoblast recovery was 700 cells, average purity was above 90%. A minimum of 10 mg of DNA was obtained after WGA using either single cells or groups of 5-100 cells. SNP assays demonstrated allelic differences between maternal and trophoblast cells in all specimens. Gender was identified and confirmed from patient records. CONCLUSIONS: Trophoblast cells can be retrieved and isolated from the endocervical canal with acceptable purity based on their high degree of BHCG expression. Furthermore, fetal DNA was distinct from maternal DNA, indicating its utility as a platform for non-invasive prenatal testing of the intact fetal genome. Ductus Venosus Morphology Is Not Related to Increased Nuchal Translucency, Cardiac Defects or Aberrant Lymphatic Development. Nicole B Burger, 1 Monique C Haak, 2 Christianne J De Groot, 1 James F Martin, 3 Weinian Shou, 4 Peter J Scambler, 5 Vincent M Christoffels, 6 Mireille N Bekker. 7 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 2 Obstetrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands; 3 Anatomy, Embryology & Physiology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 7 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center St Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands. INTRODUCTION: Ductus venosus (DV) flow velocities are considered to reflect cardiac function and are used for evaluation of fetuses with increased nuchal translucency (NT), cardiac defects and growthrestriction. Increased NT is associated with changed DV flow velocities and was believed to origin from cardiac failure. However, several studies have shown that aberrant lymphatic development causes increased NT. Thus, we hypothesize that altered DV flow velocities are caused by local DV changes and not by cardiac performance. The objective of this study is to examine if local changes in DV morphology and a DV sphincter are related to increased NT, cardiac defects and aberrant lymphatic development. METHODS: Mouse embryos with cardiac defects and nuchal edema (Fkbp12 -/-, Tbx1 -/-, Mesp1Cre Chd7 -/-), cardiac defects without nuchal edema (Pitx2 -/-) and disturbed lymphatic development and nuchal edema (Ccbe1 +/-, Ccbe1 -/-) were examined. Embryos were analyzed from embryonic day (E)11.5-15.5 using markers for endothelium, smooth muscle actin, nerve tissue and elastic fibers. RESULTS: The DV lumen was wide in E11.5-12.5 and developed to a narrowed lumen in E13.5-15.5 wild type and mutant embryos. Wild type and mutant embryos showed similar positive endothelial and smooth muscle actin expression from E11.5-15.5 in the DV. In all examined embryos nerve marker and elastic fiber expression were not identified in the DV. Local morphology and staining expression in the DV were similar in all investigated embryos. CONCLUSIONS: DV morphology is not related to increased NT, cardiac defects or aberrant lymphatic development. Thus, DV flow velocities reflect intracardiac pressure and are not influenced by local changes. (SMCs) induces the release of multiple chemotactic cytokines, with CXCL1 and CXCL8 being the most highly expressed. These locally generated chemotactic gradients regulate leukocyte (monocytes and neutrophils) migration and infiltration into the human myometrium, where they induce an inflammatory state that contributes to preterm and term labor. We hypothesize that antagonism of chemokine receptor signaling will reduced the migratory ability of peripheral leukocytes. METHODS: Cultured myometrial SMCs (hTERT-HM) were subjected to static mechanical stretch for 24 hours (h) using the Flexcell-5 strain unit; stretch-conditioned media (SCM) and non-stretched media (NSM) were collected.Human uterine myometrial microvascular endothelial cells (UtMVEC-Myo) were plated inside 3-mm cell culture inserts. Human primary neutrophils were isolated from peripheral blood of pregnant women. Transendothelial migration (TEM) of neutrophils was performed with UtMVEC-Myo cell-coated inserts stimulated with SCM or NSM for 3h. Primary neutrophils were treated with blocking antibodies against chemokine receptor CXCR1 and CXCR2. In addition, SCM was incubated with broad-spectrum chemokine inhibitor (BSCI) for 1h prior to TEM assay. Human THP-1 monocytic cell line was purchased from ATCC. Chemotaxis assay for THP-1 cells was performed with or without BSCI. RESULTS: 1) In TEM assay SCM significantly increased transmigration of primary neutrophils as compared to NSM. 2) Incubation of peripheral neutrophils with anti-CXCR1 and anti-CXCR2 neutralizing antibodies decreased TEM in response to SCM by 61.1% and 62.3% respectively; simultaneous application of both antibodies decreased TEM by 80.6%. 3) Pretreating SCM with BSCI reduced neutrophil TEM by 70.4%. 4) SCM significantly increased chemotaxis of monocytic THP-1 cells compared to NSM. 5) Migration of TCP-1 cells towards SCM was down-regulated by pre-treatment of SCM with BSCI to a level similar to NSM. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that antagonism of individual or multiple chemokine receptors on leukocytes inhibits their transmigration potential. We suggest that pharmaceutical agents targeting chemokineinduced leukocyte infiltration into the myometrium could be an attractive approach to delay preterm labour by preventing uterine activation. The Androgen Receptor Is an Apoptosis Regulator of Myometrial Cells. Haolong Li, 1 Ning Xie, 1 Liangliang Liu, 1 Stephen Lye, 2 Xuesen Dong. 1 1 The Vancouver Prostate Centre, University of British Columiba, Vanocuver, BC, Canada; 2 Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Although extensively studied in male reproduction system, the androgen receptor (AR) function in female remains unclear. Female AR knockout mice present a sub-infertile phenotype, indicating that AR is required for normal pregnancy and labour. We have demonstrated that high AR expression during the first trimester of pregnancy is necessary for myometrial cell proliferation. Here, we investigated the role of AR in apoptosis of myometrial cells. METHODS: Human myometrial cells were infected with lentivirus to either overexpress AR or knock down endogenous AR expression. Myometrial cells were also treated with vehicle, 1nM R1881 (AR agonist) or 10nM Enzalutamide (AR antagonist). Cells were then exposed to camptothecin, UV light or anti-Fas antibody to trigger either endogenous or exogenous apoptosis pathway. Cell apoptosis was detected by immunoblotting cleaved Caspase-3 or PARP proteins as well as by FACS assays measuring the subG0 cell population. Gene microarray analyses identified signaling pathways that regulate myometrial cell proliferation and apoptosis, and followed by validation assays by real-time PCR and immunoblot. RESULTS: Enhanced AR expression or AR agonist enhanced 3-10 fold resistance of myometrial cells to both endogenous and exogenous apoptosis stimuli. In contrast, AR knockdown or AR antagonist increased 2-8 fold sensitivity of myometrial cells to apoptotic stimuli. Gene microarray assay identified 1558 AR regulated genes, among which 96 genes are associated with cell proliferation and 99 genes related to cell apoptosis. We identified AR regulated PI3K/Akt signaling is critical to determine apoptosis outcome of myometrial cells. Primary cultures of human myometrial cells were grown from myometrial biopsies obtained during planned caesarean section at term. Cells were pre-incubated with P4 (0.1, 1 and 10mM) and forskolin (100mM), either alone or in combination and the cells were exposed to IL-1b treatment (5ng/mL) for 6, 24, and 48 hours. Total RNA and proteins were extracted. mRNA levels of IL-1b associated genes, such as COX-2, IL-1b, IL-8, IL-24, CCL8, MKP-1, IRAK3 and 11bHSD1 were measured with qPCR. COX-2, c-jun, c-fos and p65 proteins were measured by western blotting, and IL-8 proteins by ELISA assay.The results are presented as ratios of GAPDH as mean±SEM. Graphpad 5.0 was used for statistical analysis; statistical significance is defined as p<0.05 (n=8). RESULTS: The combination of forskolin and P4 has significantly reduced IL-1b-driven COX-2 mRNA expression at 6 and 24 hours. Similar trends were observed in IL-1b, IL-24, IL-8, IRAK-3, and CCL-8 expression at all 3 time points. The combination of forskolin and P4, compared to P4 alone, has significantly increased IL-1b-driven MKP-1 mRNA expression at all time points. At the protein level, the combination of cAMP and P4 significantly reduced IL-1b induced increase in COX-2, c-jun, c-fos, and IL-8 to greater extent when compared to P4 alone. CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study showed that the combination of cAMP and P4 would be more effective than P4 alone in the suppression of inflammation-induced PTL. Further studies need to be performed to investigate the mechanisms through which cAMP enhance P4 action. Microbes in the Maternal Basal Plate: New Etiologies for Preterm Birth. Bin Cao, Molly J Stout, Indira U Mysorekar. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington UNiversity School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. INTRODUCTION: Preterm birth (PTB) is a one of the most significant global health problems. Intrauterine infections are prominently associated with PTB, yet the infectious organisms and the mechanisms by which such infections might trigger PTB are poorly understood.Antibiotic treatment is relatively ineffective for preventing PTB suggesting that the putative infectious organisms may be 'hidden' within the tissue. Our central hypothesis is that cells of the maternal basal plate, the peripheral region of the placenta on the maternal side harbor microbes which may be associated with PTB. METHODS: To test our hypothesis, we previously accrued the target cohort of n=300 samples of basal plate tissues from PTB and term placentas, and scored tissue sections for presence of intracellular bacteria. We next elucidated the location of these microbes in basal plate biopsies using histologic and immunohistochemical analysis. To determine the preferred niche for intracellular bacteria, basal plate biopsies were cultured ex vivo, infected with either gram negative (E. coli) or positive (L.monocytogenes) bacteria, and examined by histological staining, immunofluorescence, and transmission electron microscopy. Next, we determined whether modulation of HLA-G levels could be one mechanism associated with PTB by quantifying tissue HLA-G expression levels in term versus preterm placentas using qPCR and immunohistochemical assays. RESULTS: We recently published our novel findings that intracellular bacteria are present in a third of the total cohort with over 50% incidence in placentas <28 weeks (Stout et al., AJOG, 2013) . We have now found that all intracellular bacteria are exclusively localized to fetal extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs). EVTs express in a cell-intrinsic manner the multiple histocompatibility antigen, HLA-G, which mediates fetal tolerance. We found that HLA-G+ EVTs were preferred niches for both E. coli and L.monocytogenes in basal plate explants where they can replicate and form aggregates. Finally, we show that increased levels of HLA-G expression is associated with a significant 2.7 fold increased PTB risk. CONCLUSIONS: Together, our new findings demonstrated that EVTs in the basal plate are highly susceptible to bacterial invasion and persistence likely due to their unique immune-privileged status. The association of HLA-G EVT expression with PTB may be a pivot balancing fetal tolerance with maternal immunity in the basal plate and microbial colonization may tip the balance. Plasma Gelsolin as an Endogenous Inhibitor of Syncytiotrophoblast Microparticle Shedding in Pregnancy. Neil Nadkarni, 1,3 Augustine Rajakumar, 1,3 Rama Krishnan, 1 Thomas Stossel, 2 S Ananth Karumanchi. 1,3 1 Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth Israel Deaconness Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 2 Translational Medicine Division, Brigham and Womens' Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 3 Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia (PE) is characterized by a premature, pathologic release of syncytiotrophoblast microparticles (STBM) into maternal circulation. This process may systemically distribute sFLT-1 into the maternal circulation. We hypothesize STBM release exposes cytoplasmic actin to plasma and thereby depletes plasma gelsolin (pGSN), an abundant plasma protein that scavenges circulating actin and other pro-inflammatory mediators. We investigate pGSN's role on placental health and hypothesize that exogenous replacement of recombinant GSN may promote placental health by decreasing shedding of STBM and that plasma GSN (pGSN) may be reduced during severe PE. METHODS: To quantify if recombinant GSN negatively regulates STBM shedding from human placental explants, alkaline phosphatase levels (a proxy marker for STBM) were compared between conditioned media of CTL and GSN-treated explants. To mimic the phenotype of preeclamptic shedding, we characterize a novel mechanism using dynamic stretch as a biophysical stressor. We designed experiments in which placental explants incubate in conditioned media with or without GSN (100 mg/mL) and are either subject to no stretch or stretch with subsequent assay for placental alkaline phosphatase levels. Lastly, to confirm a pathological role for GSN in preeclampsia, we measure pGSN levels by ELISA. RESULTS: The addition of recombinant GSN (100 mg/mL) reduced shed STBM prepared for both low (40%, p<0.01, n = 12) or high-speed centrifugation (32. 4%, p<0.01, n=9) . With our dynamic stretch method, we found: 1) Stretch induced a 3-fold increase in STBM shedding over CTL (p<0.05) , 2) Pre-treatment with recombinant GSN significantly ameliorated STBM shedding and 3) Decreased STBM shedding by recombinant GSN was accompanied by lower sFLT1 levels in the supernatant. We found that GSN levels were dramatically lower in PE as compared to normal pregnancies (PE 906767 ± 118110 mU/mL vs. NP 1766879 ± 161310 mU/mL, p < 0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: We report circulating GSN, a protein of maternal origin, may have a unique capability to promote placental syncytial health. By depleting pGSN, PE initiates a vicious cycle that results in increased inability to protect the placenta from premature shedding. Decidualization Defect in Patients That Suffered Severe Preeclampsia Is Mediated through ANXA2 Deficiency. Tamara Garrido-Gomez, 1 Francisco Dominguez, 1 Alicia Quinonero, 1 Pablo Padilla Iserte, 2 Alfredo Perales Marin, 2 Carlos Simon. 1 1 Fundación IVI, FUNDACION IVI, Valencia University, INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain; 2 Obstetricia, Ginecología y Reproducción Humana, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. INTRODUCTION: Defects in human endometrial stromal cell (hESC) decidualization are related with trophoblast invasion alteration as a possible cause of preeclampsia. The aim of this work was to investigate the decidualization process in patients that have suffered early severe preeclampsia and the implication of annexin A2 (ANXA2) as key regulator of defective trophoblast invasion. METHODS: hESC of women that have suffered severe preeclampsia (PE) (N=18) and healthy patients (Non-PE) (N=13) were in vitro decidualized and PRL, IGFBP-1 and ANXA2 assessed. Trophoblast spreading was investigated in an in vitro model using hatched mouse embryos cocultured on decidual ANXA2 siRNA inhibited vs control hESCs. Trophoblast invasion was analyzed using JEG-3 cell line on collagen transwell invasion chambers. RESULTS: In vitro decidualization was successful at a reduced extent in hESC obtained from PE compared to Non-PE patients (24,9±6,2% vs 80,7±2,7%, respectively). During decidualization, secreted PRL and IGFBP-1 were significantly reduced in PE vs non-PE (4,2±2,6 vs 18,11±4,6 ng/mL for PRL; and 6,1±1,7 vs 29,2±7,2 ng/mL for IGFBP1). ANXA2 protein significantly increased in decidual vs non-decidual hESCs obtained from non-PE patients (73,5±21,2 µg/mL vs 44,2±16,9; 8,8±4,1 vs 4,9±2 µg/mL intra-and extracellular levels, respectively). Interestingly, this regulation was abolished during decidualization compared with non-decidualizated hESC in PE patients (13,5±21,7 vs 16,9±15,2 µg/mL; 2,5±1,1 µg/mL vs 2,16±0,8, intra-and extracellular levels, respectively). Trying to mimic the dynamics of ANXA2 in hESC from PE patients, ANXA2 siRNA transfected hESC showed a marked decrease in trophoblast spreading area compared to control cells (33,6%±15,3 vs 81,3%±13,5), as well as trophoblast invasion (49,2%±9,1 vs 86,5%±11,6). CONCLUSIONS: hESCs from patients that have suffered early severe PE showed a limited ability to decidualize and intra/extracellular ANXA2 regulation was abolished during decidualization. We further demonstrate in vitro that ANXA2 inhibition in hESC affects trophoblast spreading and invasion as a mechanism involved in the onset of the endometrial origin of PE. The Preeclampsia-Like Phenotype in an Obese Mouse Model Is Associated with Increased LOX-1 Expression. Joanna L Stanley, 1 Anita Quon, 2 Colin P Sibley, 3 Sandra T Davidge, 2 Philip N Baker. Preeclampsia is associated with widespread endothelial dysfunction. Increased concentrations of oxidised low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL) and expression of its receptor, the lectin-like oxidised low-density lipoprotein-1 receptor (LOX-1) have been observed in women with preeclampsia and animal models of the disease. Binding of oxLDL to LOX-1 may mediate endothelial dysfunction via a number of mechanisms, including increased superoxide production. We have shown previously that feeding mice, which lack the enzyme catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT -/-), a high fat diet before pregnancy results in a preeclampsia-like phenotype, including increased blood pressure, impaired uteroplacental perfusion and fetal growth restriction. We hypothesize that LOX-1 expression will be increased in this model, and that this will be associated with increased superoxide production. METHODS: Control C57BL/6J and COMT -/mice were randomised to high fat diet (60% calories from fat) or normal chow (4% calories from fat) for 8 weeks prior to mating. Sections of thoracic aorta and placenta were collected at gestational day 18.5 (term=19.5). Western blotting was used to determine LOX-1 expression in aorta homogenates, using primary antibodies for . Placental and aortic sections were stained with dihydroethidium to determine superoxide production. RESULTS: There was a significant effect of high fat diet on LOX-1 expression (p=0.002). Expression of LOX-1 was significantly increased in C57BL/6J mice on high fat diet compared to chow fed controls (22.5±2.0 vs 12.5±1.5, LOX-1:Actin AU; p<0.05). There was no effect of high fat diet on superoxide production in aortic sections in C57BL/6J (96±4% compared to control fed; p>0.05) or COMT -/mice (97±6% compared to control fed; p>0.05). Further, there was no effect of high fat diet on superoxide production in placental sections from C57BL/6J (87±8% compared to control fed; p>0.05) or COMT -/mice (92±6% compared to control fed; p>0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Consumption of a high fat diet, which resulted in a preeclampsia-like phenotype, was associated with increased LOX-1 expression. Interestingly, there was no increase in superoxide production in this model, thus suggesting that LOX-1 may have alternative mechanisms for contributing to vascular complications in pregnancy. The Uterine Natural Killer Cell Transcriptome Is Differentially Regulated over the Course of Human Pregnancy: Role for Type I Interferons? Emiel D Post Uiterweer, 1,2 Niels Eijkelkamp, 2 Marian J Groot Koerkamp, 3 Louis L Peeters, 1 Frank C Holstege, 3 Cobi J Heijnen, 2,4 Arie Franx. (uNK) cells are key regulators of the placental bed during early placental development and account for 70% of decidual leukocytes. uNK cells are involved in angiogenesis, trophoblast invasion and spiral artery remodeling. Moreover, these cells may play a role in the etiology of placental syndromes (e.g. IUGR and preeclampsia) . Little is known about regulation of uNK cells in the decidual microenvironment which changes over the course of pregnancy. Objective: To elucidate uNK cell transcripts regulated in the 1 st and 2 nd trimester of pregnancy. METHODS: uNK cells from 1 st (7-8 wks, n=6) and 2 nd trimester decidual tissue (13-14 wks, n=6) were isolated by enzymatic digestion, followed by flow sorting of CD56 bright CD16 -CD3cells. Total RNA was isolated and subjected to genome-wide gene expression profiling. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were validated by qPCR. Freshly isolated 1 st trimester uNK cells (7-8 wks, n=5) were stimulated in vitro and expression of validated DEGs was analyzed by qPCR. RESULTS: We identified 140 DEGs in purified uNK cells between the 1 st and 2 nd trimester. Bioinformatical analysis revealed upregulation of a large cluster of "interferon stimulated genes" (ISGs) in 2 nd trimester uNK cells, e.g. ISG15 and ISG20. To determine whether this was mediated by type I (INFa, INFb) or type II interferons (INFg), uNK cells were stimulated with 10, 100 and 1000 U/mL of INFa, INFb and INFg. Both INFa and INFb enhanced ISG15 (up to 4.6 and 14.9 fold respectively) and ISG20 (7.5 and 32.5 fold) expression in a dose dependent fashion (2-way ANOVA p<0.001). INFg stimulation had no effect on ISG15 and ISG20 expression. Meanwhile, INFs did not alter the expression of DEGs outside the ISG cluster, such as IGFBP1 and amphiregulin. CONCLUSIONS: The uNK cell transcriptome changes over the course of early human pregnancy, with a major cluster of ISGs being upregulated in the 2 nd trimester. This change in uNK cell transcriptome may reflect enhanced type I but not type II INF signaling. We hypothesize that type I INFs are an important signal for uNK cells to promote the orderly and precisely timed process of placentation. Gain in the Vervet Monkey. Andrew Bradford, 1 Kenneth Jones, 1 Justin Chosich, 1 Margaret May, 2 Katerina Kechris, 1 Susan Appt, 2 Alex Polotsky. 1 1 Ob/Gyn, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA; 2 Pathology, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. INTRODUCTION: Ovulatory obese women exhibit decreased fertility and higher miscarriage rates relative to normal weight controls. Obesity is linked to decreased progesterone secretion, suggesting a dysfunctional corpus luteum, but molecular mechanisms are unknown. MicroRNAs (miRNA) are implicated in corpus luteum development and function including steroidogenesis. However, their role in obesity-related subfertility has not been investigated. METHODS: 10 adult, regularly menstruating female vervet monkeys (Chlorocebus aethiops) were randomly placed on a high fat, high fructose (HFHF) or control diet for 10 months. Luteectomies were performed, before and after, dietary intervention on luteal day 7-9 (based on follicular phase estradiol peak). RNA was isolated by RNEasy Plus mini kit (Qiagen) and integrity and quantity determined by Agilent Biolanalyzer. miRNA libraries were prepared and sequenced using TruSeq Small RNA kit for Illumina HiSeq. MiRNA sequences were identified, based on human homologs, and quantified using a custom in-house script. Differential expression in response to diet and correlations to changes in weight and fat mass (dual energy X-ray absorptiometry) were tested by ANOVA in R. RESULTS: Dietary intervention resulted in 20% weight gain for HFHF fed monkeys vs 2% in controls (p=0.03). 5 miRNAs were differentially expressed in response to HFHF diet. miR-27a and miR-28 were increased, while miR-10b, miR-191 and miR-7641 decreased. MiR-27a and miR-28 are known to suppress secretion of progesterone and inhibit granulosa cell proliferation. Conversely, miR-191 stimulates progesterone release and promotes granulosa cell survival.  The observed HFHF diet-induced changes in miRNA expression are consistent with development of a dysfunctional corpus luteum and may underlie the decrease in progesterone observed in ovulatory obese women. MiRNAs may represent novel biomarkers of obesity-related subfertility and potential new avenues for therapeutic intervention. Telomere Telomeres are non-coding tandem repeats, which protect the ends of chromosomes and promote structural integrity. In males, premutation and full mutation of FMR1 results in Fragile X syndrome, which has been shown to be associated with reduced telomere lengths. However, telomere lengths have not been assessed in women with premutations of the FMR1 gene. In a prospective cohort study, peripheral blood was collected from women with premutations of the FMR1 gene. Mean telomere length was measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). PCR was conducted in triplicate in a Rotor-Gene Q real-time instrument with the Rotor-Gene SYBR Green Kit (Qiagen). Primers for telomeric repeats (FP 5'-GGTTTGTTTGGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTTTGGGTT-3' and RP 5'-GGCTTGCCTTACCCTTACCCTTACCCTTACCCTTACCCT-3') and human 60S acidic ribosomal protein P0 as single gene control (FP 5'-CCCATTCTATCATCAACGGGTACAA-3' and RP 5'-CAGCAAGTGGGAAGGTGTAATCC-3') were used. The telomere length for each sample is based on the telomere to single copy gene ratio (T/S ratio) [Ct(telomere)/Ct(single gene)]. Telomere length for each sample was calculated from the T/S ratio for each sample normalized to the reference sample. Telomere lengths of this cohort were compared to age matched controls using a standard curve generated from healthy human subjects. RESULTS: Women with the FMR1 premutation (n=14) had a mean age of 28.8 years compared to 30.2 years of age matched controls (n=78) (p=0.41). Women with FMR1 premutation had a significantly shorter mean telomere length of 8.10 kilobase (kb) compared to 8.69 kb of agematched controls (p=0.03). Structural Maintenance of Chromosome 1b(SMC1-b) Expression in Aging Human Oocytes. Sahadat K Nurudeen, 1 Maryam Shirazi, 2 Robert Prosser, 1 Dorothy Warburton, 2 Mark V Sauer, 1 Vaidehi Jobanputra. 2 1 OB- GYN, Columbia University Hospital, NY, NY, USA; 2 Pathology, Columbia University Hospital, NY, NY, USA. INTRODUCTION: Segregation errors in older oocytes may be due to an age-dependent loss of chromosome cohesion proteins, such as SMC1b, which leads to chromosome misalignment and premature separation at meiosis. In addition, studies suggest women with low ovarian reserve have an increased incidence of fetal aneuploidy and pregnancy loss despite age. Our purpose is to determine if there is age-related change in SMC1b in human oocytes and to determine if its expression correlates with ovarian reserve and clinical outcomes when controlling for female age. METHODS: Immature oocytes harvested for ART but not suitable for ICSI/IVF were collected from women undergoing autologous and donor oocyte retrievals. Cultured oocytes reaching metaphase II within 48 hours after retrieval were collected for Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of SMC1b. Serum assays for AMH, FSH and estradiol were performed on each patient at the beginning of treatment. Collected oocytes were grouped by age and/or donor status and then compared with respect to ovarian reserve tests, relative SMC1b expression, and ultimate clinical pregnancy rate (PR). An a error of 0.05 was considered significant for nonparametric statistical analyses. RESULTS: Overall, SMC1b did not significantly decline with age (r=-0.20,p=0.06). However, women>40yrs demonstrated significantly lower SMC1b expression compared with donors<30yrs. Interestingly, non-donor women<30yrs did not have significantly different SMC1b expression from women 35-39yrs and >40yrs. SMC1b only correlated with FSH (r=-0.26; p=0.03). However, when controlling for age, SMC1b was not significantly correlated with FSH, estradiol or AMH. Though the highest SMC1b levels and PR were observed in donors<30yo and women 30-34yrs, there were no significant associations between SMC1b and PR even when controlling for age. CONCLUSIONS: Our results implicate an age-dependent loss of SMC1b expression in human oocytes. Though SMC1b does not show significant correlations with ovarian reserve testing or PR, there were trends towards decreased PR and higher FSH with lower SMC1b expression. analyze 22 SNPs in the 5' URR and 8 SNPs in the 3' UTR to define specific haplotypes of the HLA-G gene and their possible association with spontaneous abortion (SA). METHODS: Cases (n=27) included Caucasian women experiencing SA, and fertile controls (n=40) included women with at least 2 live births and no history of SA. Approximately 1400 base pairs (bp) of the HLA-G 5'URR and the entire 3' UTR of HLA-G gene were sequenced, and 30 SNPs with minor allele frequency >0.02 were observed along the 5'URR and 3'UTR region. Haplotypes were constructed from sequence information. The SNP at position -725 C/G/T differed significantly in frequency between women affected by SA and fertile controls (p<0.05). Consistently, a significant difference in the frequency of the 5'URR haplotype including the guanine (G) in position -725 (PROMO-G010101b) was observed between the two populations (p<0.05). On the contrary, no differences were found for the 3' UTR haplotypes. CONCLUSIONS: The haplotype containing G at the -725 SNP in the 5'URR region of the HLA-G gene is significantly associated with spontaneous abortion. It is currently known that the transposition of a C to a G at position -725 creates a CpG dinucleotide at nts -726 and -725, possibly influencing the binding of interferon response factor-1 (IRF-1) to the gene, with potential implication for HLA-G expression. The parallel ongoing analysis of HLA-G protein expression on regulatory cells in the decidua of women with SA will allow potential association of specific HLA-G haplotypes with decidual tolerance and early reproductive failure. Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune disorder which places pregnant women at increased risk of recurrent pregnancy loss and preeclampsia. APS is characterized by circulating antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL) that bind beta 2 glycoprotein I (b 2 GPI) expressed by the trophoblast, leading to altered placental function and adverse pregnancy outcomes. One way in which aPL alter trophoblast function is by inducing an inflammatory IL-8 response through activation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). MicroRNAs (miRs) can modulate inflammatory responses, and some have been found to both target TLR signaling and be induced by TLRs. Therefore, the objective of this study was to determine the effect of aPL on trophoblast miR-9 and miR-146a expression and function; two miRs known to be induced by TLR4. The human first trimester trophoblast cell line (HTR8) was incubated with or without a mouse anti-human b 2 GPI mAb, IIC5 (20mg/ ml) for 6-48h. Expression of miR-9 and miR-146a was measured by quantitative PCR. snU6 served as a housekeeping control. For functional studies, HTR8 cells were transfected with anti-miR-146a inhibitor or miR scramble control (100nM) and then treated with or without IIC5. Culture supernatants were collected and measured for IL-8 by ELISA. RESULTS: Treatment of trophoblast cells with the aPL IIC5 significantly upregulated expression of miR-146a by 1.43 fold after 24h (p<0.05) and by 2.02 fold after 48h (p<0.001) when compared to the untreated control. There was no significant change at earlier time points. In contrast, expression of miR-9 was not significantly modulated by IIC5 at any time point. Treatment of trophoblast cells with IIC5 in the presence of miR scramble control significantly increased IL-8 secretion by 2.14 fold (p<0.05) and this was significantly reduced to 1.65 fold in the presence of the anti-miR-146a inhibitor. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate for the first time that aPL induce miR-146a expression in human trophoblast cells. Furthermore, our data indicate that miR-146a may function to promote aPL-induced trophoblast IL-8 secretion. Together, these findings suggest a novel mechanism by which aPL and miRs together modulate trophoblast function and thus, may induce adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with APS. Lyase Null Mice Suggest Cytoprotection by Cystathionine. K Joseph Hurt, 1 H Jiang, 2 K Breen, 1 DJ Orlicky, 3 SP Stabler, 4 KN Maclean. 2 1 OB-Gyn, UC Denver, Aurora, CO, USA; 2 Pediatrics, UC Denver, USA; 3 Pathology, UC Denver, USA; 4 Medicine, UC Denver, USA. INTRODUCTION: Cystathionine gamma-lyase (CSE) and cystathionine beta synthase (CBS) are key enzymes in sulfur metabolism. CBS -/mice have high total homocysteine (tHcy) causing profound liver injury, while CSE -/mice have a milder phenotype with elevated tHcy and hypertension. To date, characterization of the methionine pathway in these strains was performed only in males. We hypothesized there may be differential regulation by sex for this pathway. Quantitative metabolite profiles in CSE and CBS null mice show, for the first time, sex-specific differences in transulfuration biochemistry. METHODS: We quantified sulfur metabolites by mass spectrometry in male and female CSE null mice and in wild type C57Bl/6 controls. Transulfuration pathway enzyme expression was evaluated by Western blot, and CBS or CSE enzyme activity was measured in vitro. The influence of estrogen and progesterone (0.5mg/kg x 2d) on homocysteine metabolism was evaluated in ovariectomized female mice. Plasma metabolic profiling in juvenile (3.5w) and older (8w) mice delineated changes due to sexual maturation. Comparative histologic assessment of liver injury in CBS -/and CSE -/animals was performed to evaluate tHcy pathologic effects. RESULTS: Female CSE -/mice have 3-fold higher plasma tHcy than agematched CSE -/males. MethyleneTetraHydroFolate Reductase enzyme expression was decreased in both male and female CSE null mice. The elevated tHcy in CSE -/females is due to sex-specific impairment of Methionine Synthase activity and decreased plasma methionine. This impairment occurs only after sexual maturation, and is unaffected by ovariectomy or estrogen/progesterone add back in adult mice. CSE -/females incur mild hepatic steatosis without detectable fibrosis or increased plasma ALT. Plasma tHcy in CSE -/female mice is comparable to the high levels in CBS -/mice, but the degree of liver-injury is markedly attenuated. CONCLUSIONS: CSE null mice reveal sex-specific metabolic changes at sexual maturity that are not influenced by estrogen or progesterone. We suspect that increased cystathionine is protective for homocysteinemediated liver injury, and perhaps other oxidative insults. Female sex may be an important regulator of the biochemical sequelae of inherited metabolic disorders, and cystathionine may have as yet unrecognized beneficial properties. Hypoxia is known to induce endothelin-2 (EDN-2) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression in the preovulatory granulosa cells. miR-210 has been previously linked with the hypoxia pathway and is up regulated in response to hypoxia-inducible factors. We studied the effect of miR-210 on hypoxia induced factor 1a (HIF-1a) protein and its inducible genes EDN-2 and VEGF in normoxic and hypoxic conditions in human granulosa cell line. METHODS: miR 210 was analyzed in vitro in a tissue culture model of SVOG cells. Cells were transfected with either synthetic miR 210 molecules or specific inhibitor of miR-210 and cells were cultured in normoxic and hypoxic conditions (induced by 100mM of CoCl 2) for 24 Friday hours post transfection. EDN-2 and VEGF mRNA expression levels were assayed using real time PCR with the specific primers. HIF-1a protein level was measured using immunoblotting. The induced elevation of miR-210 expression led to increased elevation of HIF-1a levels under hypoxic conditions. The EDN-2 and VEGF expression was 2 fold higher in transfected cells under normoxic conditions. After 24h of induced hypoxia the transfected cells significantly increased their expression of EDN-2 and VEGF mRNA. In the reciprocal experiment, cells transfected with miR-210 inhibitor demonstrated reduced expression levels of EDN-2 and VEGF in normoxic as well as in hypoxic conditions. CONCLUSIONS: miR-210 was found to increase the expression of HIF-1a protein under hypoxic conditions in human granulosa cells and also to increase the expression of hypoxia inducible genes: EDN-2 and VEGF. This genes increased expression occurs also without the presence of hypoxia. Antagonizing miR-210 effect by miR-210-inhibitor abolishes these normoxic and hypoxic effects. Our results suggest an independent effect of miR 210 on angiogenesis and on the endothelin system in the active human corpus luteum (CL). This increased gene expression will support the rapidly developing CL which is a vital organ for a successful implantation and pregnancy. Patients with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism present with absent puberty and low serum levels of sex steroids and gonadotropins due to gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) deficiency, which may be normosmic (nHH) or Kallmann syndrome (KS) if anosmia/ hyposmia is present. Mutations in >20 genes account for about 40% of the molecular etiologies in nHH/KS patients. To identify remaining new genes in nHH/KS, targeted next generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on 285 genes in 48 nHH/KS patients. METHODS: Genes were selected from the literature that were involved in hypothalamic or pituitary development, GnRH or olfactory neuron migration, GnRH gene regulation/function, and were positional candidates from chromosomal translocations. Following DNA fragmentation and target enrichment, Illumina ready libraries were constructed using HaloPlex target enrichment kits. Samples were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2000 to generate paired-end reads of 100 nucleotides and >30X coverage. Bases were called using SureSelect V1.1. Data was analyzed for exome-wide variations using GATK, and filtered to exclude synonymous changes and sequence differences in the SNP database version 132. Variant frequency in the Exome Sequencing Project was also ascertained. RESULTS: 319 rare sequence variants (RSV) after filtering were identified, including 56 high probability (nonsense, frameshift, and splice site) and 263 moderate probability (nonsynonomous missense) variants. Of the 56 high probability RSVs, 34 were excluded based upon SNV terminal location in fragments in binary alignment map files. 22 high probability RSVs were found in the following genes: AXL, CCKAR, CHAT, FGF5 , FGRFR1, GAS6, GPRIN2, IGF1, MASTL, NRP2, PTCH2, SDR16C5, SOS1, SP8, and TRAPPC9. All but FGFR1 have not been previously associated with nHH/KS. Confirmation by Sanger sequencing and segregation analysis are currently being performed to determine inheritance patterns. In addition, missense variants are undergoing additional filtering. CONCLUSIONS: Targeted NGS is a useful, practical strategy to identify new candidate genes involved in human reproductive disorders. LCL supported by NIH grant HD33004. An obesogenic diet has negative effects on the oocyte in a murine model, disrupting meiotic spindles and causing abnormalities in lipid accumulation as well as aneuploidy. These negative effects translate into an altered reproductive phenotype demonstrating reduced reproductive efficiency and negatively impacted litters. We aimed to determine if reversing the metabolic phenotype seen in the high fat diet-fed mouse model also leads to a reversal of the altered reproductive phenotype. METHODS: Sixty C57BL6/J mice were placed on either control chow (n=30) or a high-fat diet consisting of 52% lipid (HFD) (n=30) for a period of six weeks. Metabolic parameters including weight and serum parameters were assessed, and then all mice were placed on control chow for eight weeks. Following this "washout" period, metabolic parameters were repeated, and mice were sacrificed. MII and GV oocytes were collected and subjected to immunostaining of the meiotic spindle as well as BODIPY staining of lipid droplets. Images were evaluated and analyzed by a blind observer. The metabolic phenotype of the HFD including weight, lipid parameters, and serum glucose were fully reversible after the eight week washout period. However, the negative effects of the HFD on oocytes were not fully reversible. Following the 8-week washout period, despite the reversal of the metabolic phenotype, oocytes from the washout mice originally placed on the HFD demonstrated significantly more abnormal meiotic spindles and abnormal meiotic progression than the control mice. Furthermore, oocytes from the washout arm demonstrated a unique blebbing pattern when stained with BODIPY, whereas this pattern was not seen in the control oocytes. Even with reversal of the metabolic effects of the HFD, an altered reproductive phenotype persists. These findings could have implications when counseling and treating obese, subfertile women. In these patients low number of retrieved oocytes and poor embryos quality are associated with low pregnancy outcome. Growth hormone (GH) has been used in patient with DOR in attempt to improve pregnancy rate. Growth Differentiation Factor 9 (GDF9) and Bone Morphogenetic Protein 15 (BMP15) are members of the transforming growth factor b superfamily and are essential for oocyte maturation. The aim of this study is to examine the effect of GH on oocytes and embryos quality in patients with DOR undergoing IVF -ET and to investigate the effect of GH on the expression of GDF9 and BMP15. METHODS: 81 patients undergoing IVF-ET for DOR using GnRH antagonist protocol were selected. 25 patients received GH (5 IUI / day), were compared to control group of 56 patients both age and FSH matched, who did not use GH. Total days of stimulation, number of oocytes retrieved, oocytes maturity, fertilization rate and blastocyst formation were compared between the two groups. Follicular fluids (FF) collected from mature oocytes during the oocyte retrievals were used to measure level of estradiol, progesterone, FSH and AMH using ELISA. RNA extracted from granulosa cells was used to measure the expression of BMP15 and GDF9 using RT-PCR. Comparison between the two groups was performed with the independent t test. Spearman correlation coefficient calculated to detect any correlation between RNA expression and hormone concentrations. RESULTS: FF from GH patients had significantly lower AMH level compared to control, there were no significant differences in other hormones measured. Using RT-PCR, BMP 15 and GDP 9 expressions were 9 and 4 folds higher, respectively, in GH group compared to control. Patients in the GH group had more oocytes retrieved (P < 0.01) and higher percentage of mature oocytes (P < 0.05). GH group also had a higher ICSI fertilization rate and blastocysts formation (P< 0.05, P < 0.005, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates GH could play a significant role in improving ART outcome in patients with DOR. We speculate this could be due to up-regulation of growth factors involved in the process of oocyte maturation, such as BMP15 and GDF9. Depicting Ovarian grafts regain their perfusion at the end of the first week post transplantation. During this period, primordial follicles, which constitute the ovarian reserve, suffer significant damage due to ischemic-hypoxic conditions. Data derived from dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) enables long term follow up of ovarian grafts, both temporally and spatially. The aim of this study was to gain more insight into the dynamics of reperfusion and vascular remodeling in ovarian grafts after transplantation. METHODS: Ovaries from 6 weeks old wild type C57 black and Akt1 knockout mice (Akt1 -/-) mice were transplanted into the muscle of CD-1 nude female mice. Grafts were serially scanned on 2, 7 and 30 days after transplantation, as well as following hormonal superovulation with PMSG and hCG. Graft perfusion and angiogenesis were assessed by DCE-MRI analysis. The micro vascular density (fBV) and permeability (PS) of newly formed blood vessels were quantified and used as indicators for angiogenesis and reestablishment of blood perfusion. Mean fBV values in the ovarian grafts gradually improved from baseline measurement on day 2 to 30 days post transplantation, with an additional increase following hormonal stimulation. Mean PS values, however, declined from day 2 to day 30, consistent with the maturation of the graft newly formed blood vessels and increased modestly following superovulation. Next we traced fBV values in a group of transgenic Akt1 -/ovarian grafts in which histological analysis confirmed complete loss of the graft 60 days after transplantation. Increasing fBV over time can potentially be used to predict long-term ovarian viability. Furthermore, mean fBV below 0.02, after 7 days, predicted loss of ovarian graft. CONCLUSIONS: Following the changes in MRI derived angiogenic markers, we gained insight into the angiogenic response of ovarian grafts over time. fBV and PS levels during the first month after transplantation can be used to predict ovarian graft viability. Owens, Weston Troja, Chuck Klanke, Helen Jones. Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, USA. INTRODUCTION: Intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR) is a major cause of perinatal morbidity and mortality and is associated with an increased risk of developing diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease as an adult. Placental insufficiency accounts for 75% of IUGR cases. IUGR is associated with IGF-1 or IGF-2 deficiency and we previously demonstrated adenovirus-mediated intra-placental human IGF-1 gene therapy overcame growth restriction in a murine model of placental insufficiency. However, in order for translational gene therapy application in the human placenta, development of a non-viral tissuespecific transgene delivery system is essential. This study determined whether nanoparticle mediated Hu-IGF-1 treatments using trophoblastspecific promoters (Cyp19a and PLAC1) in a mouse model for placental insufficiency resulted in transgene expression and if expression levels of Hu-IGF-1 were sufficient enough for the pup to overcome placental insufficiency. METHODS: At day 16 of gestation, through laparotomy, uterine artery branch ligation (UABL) was performed and treatments of either nanoparticle (NP) +PLAC1-HuIGF-1, or NP+Cyp19a-HuIGF-1 were administered by intra-placental injection. Pups were delivered on day 20. Outcome data included placental weight and structure as determined by stereology and transgene expression by RTqPCR analysis and birth weight. RESULTS: Both trophoblast-specific Nanoparticle+HuIGF-1 treatments resulted in transgene expression in the mouse placenta; however, higher gene expression levels were noted with the Cyp19a promoter. Neither placental weight nor Labyrinth depth was altered in any of the groups. Following UABL, birthweight (0.83 ± 0.08) was significantly (p<0.05, n>5 per treatment) reduced compared to non-ligated internal control pups (1.11 ± 0.1), pups whose placentas had received NP+PLAC1-HuIGF-1 treatment had increased birthweight (1.02 ± 0.02) compared to UABL (p<0.05, n>4 per treatment) that were comparable with internal controls. NP+Cyp19a-HuIGF-1treatment (0.915 ± 0.1, n=4) did not result in increased birthweight compared to UABL. CONCLUSIONS: Nanoparticle-mediated treatment, under control of the PLAC1 promoter was successful in transgene expression in the mouse placenta and capable of maintaining normal fetal growth following uterine artery branch ligation. boost and bevacizumab in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer who were previously vaccinated with autologous dendritic cells pulsed with autologous oxidized whole tumor antigen (OC-DC). METHODS: Patients with recurrent ovarian carcinoma, who have previously undergone vaccination with OC-DC, underwent apheresis followed by the infusion of cyclophosphamide/fludarabine to induce lymphodepletion. Peripheral T cells gained by apheresis were expanded and stimulated by anti-CD3/anti-CD28 antibodies and IL-2. Adoptive transfer of expanded vaccine-primed T cells was followed by OC-DC vaccination and administration of intravenous bevacizumab 28 days later and bevacizumab every four weeks for a total of three doses. Immune related progression-free and overall survival was determined by CT scan and IR guided biopsy at the end of the study. RESULTS: Eight patients have completed vaccination and T cell transfer to date. The average number of OC-DC vaccine received prior to T cell transfer was 8. Following lymphodepletion, adoptive transfer of vaccineprimed, CD3/CD28-costimulated autologous T cells only produced grade 1 toxicity and resulted in durable reduction of CD4 + FoxP3 + T regulatory cells. Adoptive transfer of T cells was well tolerated in all patients and increased the total lymphocyte counts and restored vaccine-induced antitumor immunity in all five patients (63%) who experienced clinical benefit at end of study. The remaining three patients (37%) experienced disease progression and restoration of vaccine-induced antitumor immunity was not observed. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest the combination of cellular immunotherapy comprising of DC vaccination with whole tumor antigen and adoptive T cell transfer using tumor antigen-specific T cells is a safe and promising approach for the treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer. CONCLUSIONS: In premenopausal women, BMT self-administered at 1.25 and 1.75 mg SC was effective by multiple measures, with a clear dose response. Efficacy was seen in both HSDD and mixed HSDD/ FSAD populations. 50.0 9 6.7 1 -sarcoma 5.6 1 0 0 -undifferentiated 11.1 2 0 0 -borderline 0 0 6.7 1 RACE -white 77.7 14 93.3 14 -black 5.6 1 6.7 1 -hispanic 11.1 2 0 0 -asian 5.6 1 0 0 Among endometrial cancers, 1 (5.6%) exhibited a complete response (CR), 3 (16.7%) exhibited partial responses (PR), and 5 (27.8%) had disease stabilization (SD). Among ovarian cancers, 1 (6.6%) exhibited CR, 2 (13.3%) had PR, and 5 (33.3%) showed SD. Median follow-up was 3.5 yrs (range:1.3-15.3). Median progression-free survival (PFS) for endometrial/ovarian cohorts was 5.2/6.3 mo; median overall survival (OS) was 9 mo/not reached. 73% received concurrent bev (11 endometrial,13 ovarian). PFS/OS in patients who received bev were twice that of those who did not (6.7 vs 3.8 mo/9.6 vs 4.6 mo) (p=ns). CONCLUSIONS: Ixa shows encouraging activity in patients with chemoresistant endometrial/ovarian cancer. Weekly dosing with biweekly bev may improve PFS. Additional investigation is warranted. (GCT) is an ovarian malignancy of the sex cord stromal origin. It is characterized by a late recurrence associated with increased mortality. InhibinB is the currently utilized serum marker for GCT, but its levels fluctuate in premenopausal patients. Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) has been suggested as a marker for GCT in small and retrospective series, but evidence is lacking from larger cohorts, and especially in comparison to InhibinB. Our objective was to study serum AMH and InhibinB as single or combined markers in one of the internationally largest cohorts of pre-and postmenopausal GCT patients. METHODS: 123 GCT patients participated in this partially prospective, longitudinal cohort study. 560 serum samples were collected prior to surgery, chemotherapy, or during follow-up. Serum AMH and InhibinB were measured with immunoenzymometric assays. RESULTS: Serum AMH and InhibinB levels were equally elevated in pre-and postmenopausal patients with primary or recurrent GCT. AMH and InhibinB performed similarly in ROC-AUC analyses; AUC values were 0.92 (95%CI 0.88-0.95) for AMH, and 0.94 (95%CI 0.90-0.96) for InhibinB, respectively. AMH was highly sensitive (92%) and specific (85%) in detecting a macroscopic GCT; the highest sensitivity (94%) and specificity (92%) were, however, reached when AMH and InhibinB were combined. Serum AMH was elevated a median of 3.4 years and InhibinB 2.8 years prior the detection of a macroscopic tumor. The AMH and InhibinB levels positively correlated to tumor size (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Serum AMH is a sensitive and specific marker for GCT, and performs equally to InhibinB. The combination of the two markers is recommended for the follow-up of GCT patients. UPSC is an aggressive malignancy that accounts for more than 40% of uterine cancer deaths. The molecular events leading to UPSC are largely unknown. Epithelial cell transforming sequence 2 oncogene (ECT2) is a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (Rho-GEF) that catalyzes the exchange of GDP for GTP by Rho family GTPases. High levels of ECT2 expression have been reported in brain, lung and breast cancers, where they promote metastasis. However, the role of ECT2 in UPSC has not been previously explored. METHODS: After obtaining IRB permission, levels of ECT2 transcript and protein were measured in flash frozen specimens of endometrium (n=8) and UPSC (n =8) by Western blot and quantitative real-time PCR. Established cultures of UPSC cell lines (UPSC-ARK1, UPSC-ARK2) were transfected with either a siRNA targeting ECT2 or a non-targeting control (Dharmacon) using Lipoectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Standard MTS and Caspase 3/7 assays (Promega) were utilized to measure proliferation and apoptosis. Colony formation and Boyden chamber assays were used to measure metastatic capacity, migration and invasion in vitro. Reduced expression of ECT2 cultures transfected with target-specific siRNAs was confirmed by Western blot and qPCR. RESULTS: Our data indicate that ECT2 is overexpressed >4-fold in nearly all UPSC specimens tested (n=8, p<0.001). We also found that ECT2 is robustly expressed in the two UPSC cell lines tested. Knockdown of ECT2 decreased proliferation (UPSC-ARK1: 0.62-fold vs control; n=3, p<0.05; UPSC-ARK2: 0.34-fold vs control, p<0.05) and increased rates of apoptosis (UPSC-ARK1: 1.3-fold; n=3, p<0.05; UPSC-ARK2: 2.2-fold, n=3, p<0.05) in both cell lines tested. Reduced ECT2 expression led to decreased rates of colony formation by UPSC-ARK1 and UPSC-ARK2 cells transfected with target-specific siRNAs. Knockdown of ECT2 also significantly reduced rates of migration and invasion observed in vitro with both cell lines. Novel nanoliposomes targeting ECT2 are currently being tested for their ability to impair the growth and metastasis of UPSC in novel mouse xenograft models. CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of ECT2 plays a critical role in promoting the growth and metastasis of UPSC. Targeting ECT2 expression may provide an effective strategy for improving outcomes for UPSC and other human cancers where hyperactivation of metastasis-promoting Rho GTPases are observed. INTRODUCTION: Granulosa cell tumor of the ovary (GCT) remains an enigma because little is known about the molecular pathogenesis of this tumor. We observed that JNK is activated in the proliferating granulosa cells of the growing follicles in human and, when interrupted by pharmacologic inhibitors, the mitosis of granulosa cells is blocked and in-vitro follicle growth is halted (Fig-1) . We therefore in this study, have translated these findings into human granulosa tumor by investigating the role of JNK pathway in this tumor. METHODS: Human GCT cell lines COV 434 and KGN were used. JNK pathway was inhibited by pharmacologic inhibitors (SP600125 and AS601245) and by siRNA. Cell proliferation was analyzed with xCelligence system (real-time and quantitative monitorization) and EdU assay. Live/dead cell assay was carried out using Yo-PRO-1 staining, and cell cycle via flow cytometry. RESULTS: SP600125 and AS601245 inhibited the phosphorylation of c-Jun Ser 10 in a dose-dependent fashion . The cells treated with the inhibitors at log phase exhibited dose-dependent growth arrest. The silencing of JNK via siRNA produced similar effects (Fig-1D, 1E, 1F ). Both inhibitors significantly blocked EdU uptake during S-phase (Fig-1G ). There was a dose-dependent accumulation of the cells at G2 phase when JNK was interrupted during G2/M transition compared to control cells proceeding through G2/M phase regularly. Significantly less number of cells treated with JNK inhibitors completed mitosis compared to control cells (Fig-1H) . Furthermore, on the following hours, the cells arrested at G2/M underwent dose-dependent apoptosis (Fig-1J) . Targeting JNK pathway may provide therapeutic benefit in the treatment of granulosa cell tumors for which currently no curative therapy exists beyond surgery.  Prenatal Stress in the Second Generation: Evidence of Effects on the Duration of Pregnancy and Neonatal Weight. Amy-Eunice Furcron, 1 Derek StLouis, 1,2 Roberto Romero, 2 Sonia Hassan, 1,2 Nardhy Gomez-Lopez. INTRODUCTION: Young adults exposed to stress during intrauterine life are at increased risk for a higher BMI, primary insulin resistance, and a lipid profile consistent with the metabolic syndrome. We undertook studies to determine whether the effect of prenatal stress on the mother persists in the second generation and alters the duration of pregnancy, labor, viability, and postnatal weight. METHODS: C57BL/6 dams (F0-S; n=19) and their daughters (F1-SS; n=19) were stressed from 10.5 to 17.5 days post-coitum (dpc). Exposure to stress occurred twice daily at 8:30 am and 4:30 pm. Stressful events included 5 minutes of swimming, 20 minutes of restraint, 5 minutes of shaking or 20 minutes of white noise, on alternate days. On 17.5 dpc, after the evening stress treatment, dams were placed under video surveillance until delivery. The following parameters were assessed: duration of gestation and labor, number of dams with viable pups, pup viability, weight, survival at birth and 1-3 weeks postpartum. An additional group (F0-NS; n=14) was not stressed.Statistical analysis was performed using nonparametric statistics. A p≤0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS: 1) The duration of pregnancy was shorter in F0-S and F1-SS stressed dams than in F0-NS non-stressed dams (F0-S 18.77 ± 0.14 vs. F0-NS 19.27 ± 0.05; p=0.001, and F1-SS 18.98 ± 0.12 vs. F0-NS 19.27 ± 0.05 days; p=0.046); 2) duration of labor was longer in F0-S and F1-SS stressed dams than in F0-NS non-stressed dams (F0-S 86.93 ± 7.81 vs. F0-NS 66.85 ± 4.1; p=0.05, and F1-SS 118.17 ± 14.64 vs. F0-NS 66.85 ± 4.1 minutes; p=0.001); 3) F1-SS pups weighed less than F0-S pups at 2 weeks postpartum (5.43 ± 0.2 vs. 6.13 ± 0.23 grams; p=0.047). Yet, F1-SS pups weighed more than F0-S at 3 weeks of age (12.13 ± 5.52 vs. 8.18 ± 0.34 grams; p=0.049). CONCLUSIONS: Prenatal stress reduces the duration of pregnancy, changes the duration of labor, and complicates the labor process in mice. Prenatal stress in the first generation was associated with a lower neonatal weight at 2 weeks. Yet, prenatal stress in the second generation was associated with heavier neonates at 3 weeks of age. These findings indicate that prenatal stress leads to pregnancy complications and has transgenerational effects on the neonatal weight. Maternal obesity (MO) triggers adverse OFF changes in energy metabolism, affecting organs such as liver by changes in sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP 1-c) transcription factor and fatty acid synthase (FAS) that modulate lipogenesis and promote liver lipid accumulation. We hypothesized that maternal exercise would prevent these harmful OFF changes. METHODS: F0 female Wistar rats ate either control or obesogenic diet from weaning through lactation. Half of each group wheel ran 30 min/day, 5 times/week from day 90 of life through pregnancy beginning day (120) providing four groups (n=8/ group). 1) maternal control (C), 2) maternal obese (MO), 3) exercised controls (CEx), and 4) exercised maternal obese (MOEx). After weaning F1 OFF ate C diet. At postnatal day (PND) 110 body and liver were weighed. Liver H & E histology, gene expression (RT-qPCR) and Western blot were performed. M ± SEM, one-way ANOVA. RESULTS: Body and liver weight were lower in CEx OFF vs MO. MO fat percentage was greater than all groups (Fig 1A and 1F ). SREBP 1-c, FAS mRNA and protein were higher in MO than C and CEx, however F1 OFF from MOEx decreased SREBP 1-c, FAS proteins and mRNA (Fig B, C, D and E) . CONCLUSIONS: MO increased liver fat accumulation by SREBP1-c and FAS over-expression in male OFF. MOEx prevents these adverse OFF changes indicating the potential power of Ex in preventing development of MO OFF metabolic diseases. In this study we aim to determine whether the suppression of inflammatory cytokine production in T-cells in pregnancy is mediated via Fas/FasL interactions and whether the source of FasL is placentally derived. METHODS: CD95 (Fas) expression was determined in CD3+T-cells from non-pregnant and pregnant women by flow cytometry. Jurkat T-cells were cultured at 1x10 6 /mL in RPMI +/-10ng/ml PMA and 500ng/mL ionomycin (P/I) for 4hrs and subsequently lysed in Trizol for mRNA extraction. Jurkats were also cultured in the presence of 2.5µg/mL CH11 +/-100 or 500ng/mL of the Fas inactivating Ab ZB4 overnight, or 150mg/mL exosomes derived from non-pregnant or pregnant plasma and subsequently lysed for analysing by Western blotting. Exosomes were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation and purified on a sucrose gradient. RESULTS: Fas expression was significantly (p<0.05) increased in circulating T-cells during pregnancy relative to non-pregnant controls (median values 58.12% and 41.98%, respectively). Stimulation of Jurkat T-cells with P/I results in an increased production of IFNg and IL-2 mRNA. In contrast, activation of Fas using the Fas activating antibody CH11 prior to P/I stimulation resulted in suppressed p65 expression and an inability to induce IFNg and IL-2. Fas expression on Jurkat T-cells was reduced by ~50% using siRNAs to Fas. Reduced Fas expression resulted in an inability of these cells to respond to CH11. Levels of p65 remained high which resulted in transfected cells producing IFNg and IL-2 mRNA in response to P/I stimulation. The source of p65 suppression is placentally derived, only those exosomes from maternal plasma that were FasL+ were able to suppress p65 in Jurkat T-cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that Fas/FasL interactions regulate the level of p65 expression in maternal T-cells throughout pregnancy, and ultimately inflammatory cytokine production. The amount of Fas expressed on maternal T-cells and the abundance of FasL placental exosomes in maternal circulation will dictate the ability of T-cells to alter the cytokine to a favorable one for pregnancy success. of stage B HF at 5-7 years post pregnancy in formerly PE patients and healthy parous controls. Moreover, we studied the specific risk factors that are associated with the occurrence of this asymptomatic stage. METHODS: In this case control study, formerly preeclamptic women (n=95) and women with uneventful pregnancies (controls) (n=42) were invited for cardiovascular (CV) risk management analysis, including cardiac ultrasound. Measurements were performed after an overnight fast. Stage B HF was diagnosed as left ventricular hypertrophy (left ventricular mass index (LVMi) >95 g/m 2 ), concentric remodeling (RWT >0.42 and LVMi <95 g/m 2 ) or systolic dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction <55%), according to the ASE guidelines. Univariate and multivariate regression analysis were performed to calculate the (adjusted) odd's ratios (OR) for variables associated with stage B HF (adjustments made for BMI, fasting insulin, HDLc and systolic-and diastolic blood pressure. The prevalence of stage B HF was higher in formerly PE compared to controls (29% vs. 3%, p<0.001). Increased BMI (OR 1.4;95%CI 1.2-1.6), fasting insulin level (OR 1.3;95%CI1.1-1.5), and decreased HDLc (OR 0.1;95%CI 0.0-0.8) all related significantly (p<0.05) to stage B HF. moreover, PE was independently associated with the occurrence of HF stage B (aOR 9.9 (1.0-93.2, p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Seven years after gestation, women with a history of preeclampsia are 10 times more likely to have stage B HF compared to healthy parous controls. Moreover, unfavorable, but modifiable, metabolic syndrome risk constituents relate to heart failure stage B. A Biomarker Profile Characterizing "Healthy" vs. "Unhealthy" Overweight and Obese Women Postpartum. Calvin Hobel, 1,2 Christine Dunkel Schetter, 3 Susan Jackman, 1 Donnabeth Young, 1 James Mirocha, 1 Loretta Jones. The LA-site, one of the 5 Community Child Health Network (CCHN) sites participated in an NICHD study to assess multiple factors during the interconception period thought to contribute to the maternal and child risk. The CCHN-LA site selected 4 biomarkers & 2 physical risk profiles known to characterize major regulatory systems. We performed a nested study of 83 normal (BMI=18.5-24.9) compared to 55 OW (BMI=25-29.9) and 56 O women (BMI=>30) to study 4 profiles of risk. These profiles are: 1) Vitamin D (Brain/Neuro); 2) Blood Pressure (Cardiovascular) ; 3) C-Reactive Protein (Inflammation); 4), HgA1c, HDL cholesterol & waist circumference (Metabolic Dysregulation). Each parameter was given a score of 0(normal), 1(borderline), 2(abnormal) to calculate an Risk Score. All biomarkers were determined on blood spots using a Cleo Reference Laboratory ZRT (info@zrtlab.com). Standard definitions were used to define scores of 0 to 3 according to accepted ranges. HDL [p=0.132] . Risk Score means significanly differed accrosse the 3 groups and revealed an increasing trend (p=<0.0001) The best clinical profile was profile 3 indicating 59% of Normal women as "healthy" compared to 16.1% in the OW group and 3.6% in the O group. This profile fits into the "healthy profile" defined by Bluher. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study using vitamin D plus standard regulatory Allostatic markers to identify the degree of metabolic dysregulation and the first to identify the low per cent of OW & O women during the postpartum period with a normal risk profile. Intervention to reduce risk at this critical period for both women and children is important. This study aims to assess parameters of cardiovascular function in the early postpartum PE period. METHODS: Peripheral microvascular function was determined in normotensive women (n=25) in the third trimester of uncomplicated pregnancies, with re-evaluation at two months and six months postpartum. The effect of PE on postpartum microvascular function was assessed two months and 6 months after delivery (n=10). Nulliparous, pre-menopausal women (n=15) served for comparison. Cutaneous microvascular reactivity to acetylcholine (ACh) and sodium nitroprusside (SNP), delivered locally by iontophoresis, was measured by laser Doppler perfusion monitoring. RESULTS: Preliminary data suggests that pregnancy enhances endothelial-dependent vasodilation (ACh, P<0.001; SNP, P>0.05) as indicated by third trimester measurements. Elevated endothelialdependent vasodilation persisted at six weeks postpartum (ACh, P<0.05; SNP, P>0.05), and declined towards non-pregnant levels by six months postpartum (ACh, SNP, P>0.05). Vascular reactivity was blunted in the PE group at six weeks postpartum (ACh, P<0.05; SNP, P<0.05) but was similar at six months postpartum to levels measured in normotensive postpartum women. PE subjects displayed higher systolic and diastolic blood pressures at all postpartum visits, and presented with greater weight retention following pregnancy, despite having similar pre-pregnancy BMIs to the control group. CONCLUSIONS: PE is associated with early postpartum microvascular dysfunction. Development of cardiovascular risk factors following PE pregnancies will likely contribute to elevated postpartum cardiovascular disease risk in this population of women. This study is currently ongoing. generate IP 3 . Here we demonstrate that PLCL1 acts as an IP 3 /PIP 2 sink in myometrium, preventing Ca 2+ release irrespective of agonist. METHODS: Myometrial biopsies were collected from elective n=5 ) and spontaneous labor (LAB 37-40wks, n=5) C-section. PLCL1 mRNA was analyzed by RNA-seq and protein expression via western blotting and IHC. The effect of PLCL1 on Ca 2+ signaling was determined by confocal imaging in primary human myometrial cells (PMC) (passage 1-2, n=3) pre-loaded with Fluo-4. PLCL1 was knocked out via siRNA or overexpressed and cells challenged with 10nM oxytocin, 2µM PGE 2 or 1µM PGF 2a . (mean±sem, n=3) . CONCLUSIONS: Down-regulation of PLCL1 in laboring samples suggests a key role in labor. We propose that PLCL1 universally inhibits Ca 2+ signaling by binding IP 3 to prevent IP 3 receptor activation. As a chelator of IP 3 signaling, PLCL1 could act non-selectively absorbing signals from all Ca 2+ -mobilizing hormones during pregnancy to maintain quiescence. At term the protein is down-regulated, thus removing an important inhibitor of uterine stimulation. PLCL1 could be a pharmaceutical target for the prevention of preterm birth and/or induction of labor. exposed to increased levels of TM (5 µg/ ml) +/-PBA (5 mM). Markers of the myometrial ERSR, CASP3 activation and Cx43 levels were examined by Western blot, immunohistochemical analysis and Q-PCR. Gestational timing was also recorded. RESULTS: In vivo, while low levels of ER stress (TM, 0.04 mg/kg b.w.) did not effect gestational timing, higher ER stress levels (TM, 0.2 -1 mg/ kg b.w.) led to a preterm birth phenotype which occurred 12-24 h post TM administration. In contrast co-administration of PBA reversed the ER stress induced preterm birth phenotype allowing live births delivered at term. The preterm birth phenotype was accompanied by a precocious decline in uterine CASP3 levels followed by a surge in myometrial Cx-43 levels. Circulating P4 levels were maintained. In vitro we confirmed Cx43 to be a target of ERSR induced CASP3 action. We have identified a potential CASP3 cleavage site in Cx43, which targets Cx43 for proteolytic cleavage. TM-treated hTERT-HM cells confirmed our in vivo observations, that a surge in ERSR induced CASP3 activation resulted in a rapid and marked reduction in Cx43 levels. Accordingly Cx43 levels were restored upon administration of PBA (5mM). We have identified that the uterine myometrium utilizes the ERSR to monitor, tolerate and adapt to various contractile stimuli throughout pregnancy via the activation of CASP3. Furthermore we have revealed that Cx43 acts as a downstream target of myometrial ERSR-CASP3 signaling. The large conductance calcium activated potassium channel (MaxiK) helps to maintain myometrial smooth muscle cells (MSMCs) at a polarized membrane potential, thereby preventing voltagegated calcium influx and uterine contraction. Owing to their importance in regulating contraction and relaxation, there is interest in understanding how inflammatory mediators, which are known to induce preterm labor, regulate MaxiK channel activity in uterine smooth muscle cells. We have identified a novel member of the MaxiK interactome, alpha-2macroglobulin (A2M), and we hypothesized that it would regulate MaxiK activity in human myometrium during pregnancy. To study the proteins interacting with MaxiK in human myometrium, we co-immunoprecipitated the channel and interacting proteins in non-laboring myometrium and performed mass spectrometry. The associations between MaxiK, A2M, and its receptor, A2MR, were validated using co-immunoprecipitation and proximity ligation assay (PLA). Cell-attached single channel patch clamp studies were performed to understand the role of A2M in regulating MaxiK activity. Ca 2+ imaging was performed on MSMCs to investigate whether A2M causes Ca 2+ influx. RESULTS: Our data revealed an interaction between A2M and MaxiK in MSMCs. PLA revealed that MaxiK is associated with A2M and its receptor A2MR in MSMCs. Patch clamp studies showed that treating MSMCs with activated A2M (A2M*) enhances channel activity by increasing the open-state probability of MaxiK. We also found that A2M* causes Ca 2+ influx in MSMCs, which may serve as the mechanism for channel activation. Interestingly, these effects were not observed with inactive A2M or RAP, a competitive antagonist of A2MR. Taken together, these data indicate that A2M* influences MaxiK activity via A2MR by regulating the intracellular [Ca 2+ ] in human MSM. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of physical and functional interactions of MaxiK with A2M and A2MR in human MSMCs. It also suggests the novel role of A2M as a modulator of MaxiK channel that may, in turn, influence myometrial activity. Nevertheless, the mechanisms underlying labor onset are still poorly understood and there are divergent results between in vivo observations and in vitro studies showing a weak contractile response of myometrial cells to inflammatory stimuli. Owing to the massive influx of immune cells, especially macrophages, in the myometrium prior to labor onset, we hypothesized that macrophages might be responsible for myometrial cells activation. Uterine activation is associated with apoptosis (cleaved caspase-3) and metalloproteinases induction (MMP2/MMP9), prostaglandins synthesis (via COX-2), cytoskeleton reorganization (actin, desmin, h-caldesmon) and cell synchronization (via connexin-43). Our study was aimed to establish the contribution of macrophages on myometrial cells activation using a new co-culture model. METHODS: Primary myometrial cells and Thp1-differentiated macrophages were used for stimulation protocol. Myometrial cells were serum deprived for 24h. Thp-1 cells were differentiated into macrophages by incubation with PMA for 72h and then added to the myometrial cells at different ratios (1/1-1/5). Finally, cells were treated either with LPS (1-1000 ng/ml) or IL-1b (0.1-10 ng/ml) for 48h. Uterine activation markers were assessed either by Western blotting or immunofluorescence. RESULTS: MMP2 and Cx-43 have been identified as specific myometrial activation markers whereas MMP9 and IL-1b are specific of macrophages. No activation was observed when myometrial cells were treated with LPS. On the contrary, LPS stimulation in co-cultured conditions yielded to an increase in the expression of MMP2, MMP9, cleaved caspase-3, COX-2 and Cx-43. Higher expressions of uterine activation markers were observed with the ratio of 1/4 (Thp-1/myometrial cells) and for a concentration of 10 ng/ml for LPS and of 0.1 ng/ml for IL-1b. Interestingly, the use of higher macrophages ratios (1/1-1/2) or higher stimulation doses led to lower responses. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that uterine activation is fully achieved in the presence of macrophages, strengthening the role of immune cells and inflammatory processes in labor onset. This new coculture model between myometrial cells and macrophages provides a useful tool to investigate mechanisms underlying the process of human labor. Mice with a floxed exon3 of b-catenin allele (constitutively activated) and both AMH receptor 2 (Amhr2) knockout alleles (Amhr2-Cre and/or Amhr2-LacZ) and littermate controls were generated by mating for ovarian analyses by histology and immunohistochemistry for expression of AMH, inhibin, b-catenin, and its target genes, LEF1, TCF1, and cyclin D1. TUNEL and activated caspase 3 expression were done to measure apoptosis and pH3 analyses were done to measure proliferation. RESULTS: Ovaries of mice with one wild type allele of Amhr2 and constitutively activated b-catenin had a normal follicular phenotype in our analyses. Mice with both alleles of Amhr2 deleted and constitutively activated b-catenin had higher numbers of large follicles, and in some cases showed evidence of hyperthecosis. AMH expression persisted in the mural granulosa cells in antral follicles and inhibin expression was observed in smaller follicles compared with controls. Targets of b-catenin expression and proliferation were elevated and apoptosis levels were lower in Amhr2-negative, constitutively activated b-catenin ovaries. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that dysregulated b-catenin signaling combined with loss of AMH signaling in follicles can contribute to a phenotype with some of the characteristics of human PCOS. with an increased risk of pregnancy and neonatal complications, along with long-term metabolic and cardiovascular health risks. This study aimed to develop a preconception prediction model to identify women with PCOS who are particularly at risk of developing the most common complication during subsequent pregnancy, gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). GDM has distinct short-and long-term effects on mother and baby. In this multicentre follow-up study, women with PCOS and a wish to conceive were included before conception. Women with an ongoing pregnancy were followed until six weeks after delivery. Maternal and neonatal complications were reported. A multivariate model based on preconception patient characteristics was developed to predict GDM. The performance of the model was tested by the area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver-operating characteristic (ROC). RESULTS: 326 women were included, of which 189 (58%) presented with an ongoing pregnancy (8% multiples) and delivered. One or two maternal complications occurred in 62 (33%) women; mainly GDM (n=41;22%), and pregnancy-induced hypertension (n=14;7%). In children, one or two complication(s) were observed in 49 (26%) out of 206 children born; i.e. premature delivery (n=23;12%), and small for gestational age (n=15;8%). The prediction model for GDM performed well (AUC ROC 0.87, 95% CI 0.81-0.93). Independent predictors in the prediction model were first-degree relatives with type 2 diabetes mellitus, fasting glucose, fasting insulin, androstenedione, and sex hormone-binding globulin. CONCLUSIONS: Women with PCOS achieving a pregnancy have a high risk of developing pregnancy complications, especially GDM. Women particularly at risk for GDM can be identified before conception using this prediction model and should be monitored closely to reduce the risk of GDM and its adverse consequences. (IR) . It has been reported that IR occurs in association with reduced muscle mitochondrial function. We assessed the responsiveness of skeletal muscle mitochondrial function and insulin sensitivity to aerobic exercise (AE) in insulin-resistant PCOS women. METHODS: Twenty-four sedentary women with PCOS were randomized to a 12-week intervention of AE (n = 11), or no treatment (n = 13). Insulin sensitivity, estimated with glucose infusion rate (GIR) in the last 60 min during a 3-h hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamp; mitochondrial oxidative capacity (Vmax), estimated with the maximal ADP-stimulated respiration rates of isolated mitochondria from vastus lateralis muscle samples obtained by percutaneous biopsy; whole-body maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max); and body mass index, were obtained at baseline and at 12 weeks. AE consisted of exercise on a stationary bicycle to elicit heart rates corresponding to 65% of participants' pre-training VO2max. There were approximately 5 AE sessions per week, 50 min per session, with each session supervised by an exercise specialist. Participants in the control group maintained their regular sedentary behavior. The two sample t-test was used to compare baseline characteristics between the AE group and controls, and also used to compare changes (D) from baseline to 12 weeks for each characteristic between groups. RESULTS: At baseline, there were no significant differences between the 2 groups. AE resulted in a significant increase in mitochondrial oxidative capacity and improvement in insulin sensitivity (Table 1) . * data available for 7 in AE and 7 in control. CONCLUSIONS: Mitochondrial function and insulin sensitivity significantly improve in women with PCOS in response to AE. drawn while fasting and 2 hours after cream ingestion. Androgens were measured from blood samples drawn at 0, 24, 48 and 96 hours after HCG administration. Insulin sensitivity was derived by IS OGTT . RESULTS: Compared with weight-matched controls, women with PCOS exhibited greater % change (%D) in SOCS-3 (lean: 10±2 vs. -7±2, p<0.0008; obese: 21±4 vs. 7±2, p<0.007) and area under the curve (AUC) following HCG administration for testosterone (T) (lean: 6933±715 vs. 4010±340, p<0.03; obese: 7079±1236 vs. 3173±853, p<0.007), and androstenedione (A) (lean: 471±30 vs. 317±26, p<0.0001; obese: 511±14 vs. 294±19, p<0.0001). The %D SOC-3 was negatively correlated with IS OGTT (r=-0.63; p<0.0004), and positively correlated with AUC for T (r=0.43; p<0.03) and A (r=0.61; p<0.0007). The %D LPS was higher (p<0.05) in the obese groups (PCOS: 64±25; controls: 60±23) compared with the lean groups (PCOS: 13±10; controls: 2±11). The %D TLR-4 was greater (p<0.003) in obese women with PCOS (36±8) compared with obese controls (10±1); and was greater (p<0.02) in obese controls compared with either lean group (PCOS: -9±3; controls: -10±2). CONCLUSIONS: In PCOS, cream ingestion increases SOC-3 independent of obesity. However, lipid-stimulated increases in LPS and TLR-4 are obesity-related phenomena made worse by PCOS. Lipidstimulated inflammation may promote insulin resistance and excess ovarian androgen production in PCOS. The In the reproductive population there is a relatively high frequency of the use of acid-reducing drugs. The uptake of micronutrients, in particular folate and cobalamine, is dependent on the pH of the gastrointestinal milieu and shortages of these B vitamins affect human spermatogenesis. It is therefore hypothesized that acid-reducing drugs influence semen quality. METHODS: In a periconception cohort study conducted from October 2007 to March 2011, we studied the semen samples of 531 men, visiting the preconception outpatient clinic. We excluded men using medication other than the medication of interest and we used only semen analysis performed 70 days before and up to 21 days after the visit. General questionnaires were completed and blood samples were obtained. Acidreducing drugs were used in 18 men and comprised antacids, proton pump inhibitors and H2-receptor antagonists. Multivariable linear and logistic regression analyses were performed with adjustments for confounders. RESULTS: Acid-reducing drugs users showed a more than 3-fold higher risk for having a low motile sperm concentration (<3x10 6/ mL) (OR 3.11; 95%CI 1.20-8.07). Folate and cobalamin levels were not significantly different between users and non users. Multivariable linear regression showed an inverse association between acid-reducing drugs use and sperm concentration (b-0.467;p<0.05) adjusted for age, smoking, alcohol use and ethnicity. Red blood cell folate was positively associated with the motile sperm concentration (b0.443;p<0.01) and sperm count (b2.210;p<0.05). Serum folate was positively associated with ejaculate volume (b0.005;p<0.05). This study shows that the use of acid-reducing drugs was significantly associated with a decrease in (motile) sperm concentration. These findings support the importance for further research concerning medication use and male subfertility and underlines the importance of preconception counselling of men. Apolipoprotein-E Induction in Syrian Hamster Testis Following INTRODUCTION: Tributyltin (TBT) is a common environmental contaminant used as the active ingredient in many products such as a biocides, wood preservatives, disinfecting agents, and antifouling paints. TBT is a known endocrine disruptor. The aim of the current investigation was to determine the toxicity of TBT in the reproductive tract of adult male Syrian hamsters and to ascertain if this compound results in untoward effects on Apolipoprotein-E (Apo-E), a lipoprotein central to sex hormone synthesis. METHODS: TBT was administered orally to male Syrian hamsters at doses of 50, 100 and 150ppm/kg for 65 days of treatment. We determined body weight, testis weight, sperm count, sperm morphology, testis histology, Apo-E expression, serum lipid profile, testosterone level, follicle stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR) and steroid hormone receptor expression compared to vehicle treated controls. RESULTS: High doses of TBT significantly affected the parameters described above in Syrian hamsters. Testis weight and morphology were altered as well as sperm production. Real-time RT-PCR analysis revealed that expression of Apo-E mRNA was up-regulated in testes from TBTtreated groups compared with controls while the expression of androgen receptor (AR), FSHR, estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1) and estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) were decreased. CONCLUSIONS: We posit that exposure to TBT hinders intracellular cholesterol transport resulting in abnormal sex steroid biosynthesis and subsequent spermatogenic defects. Importantly, these effects may account for the decreased level of normal sperm observed in humans exposed to TBT. Mutlu, Erin F Wolff, John D Elsworth, Eugene Redmond, Hugh S Taylor. Ob&Gyn, Yale, USA. INTRODUCTION: Parkinson's is a common neurodegenerative disease caused by progressive loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra and insufficient dopamine concentrations within the striatum. Stem cell therapies may provide an unparalleled opportunity to supplant the lost dopaminergic neurons and protect the autologous neurons from loss. In this non-human primate model, we utilized 1-Methyl-4 phenyl-1,2,3,6tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) to induce selective neurodegeneration of the nigral dopaminergic neurons and used endometrial derived stem cells (EDSC) as treatment. METHODS: Three male african green monkeys were exposed to lowdose MPTP. Endometrial samples were collected from eight monkeys. Stromal cell cultures were generated and enriched for EDSCs. After 7 days in culture, cells were stained with PKH26, resuspended in MEM at a concentration of 100,000 cells/ml. Cells were injected into two stereotaxic targets in one caudate nucleus of each monkey. The opposite side received MEM only. One month after injection monkeys were sacrificed and brain prepared for immunofluorescence and dopamine metabolite Homovanillic acid (HVA) measurement. Anti-tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) antibody was used for immunofluorescence. The number of TH(+) cells was counted in multiple fields. Statistical analysis was done by t-test and Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test. Low-dose MPTP treatment was well tolerated. Endometrial cells from three monkeys proliferated well and reached counts sufficient for transplantation. PKH26 labeled EDSC showed the ability to engraft in the striatum and migrate to the substantia nigra. The transplantation of EDSC resulted in consistently higher numbers of TH(+) cells in the transplanted side (42 vs 62). Some engrafted cells differentiated from a stem cell phenotype into a neurogenic phenotype as evidenced by neurite like projections and TH expression. Most impressively, striatal mean HVA concentrations were 8.2 ng/ml higher on the EDSC transplanted side of the brain, indicating a therapeutic response (p = 0.03). CONCLUSIONS: EDSC differentiated into a neuron-like phenotype in vivo and expressed TH, the rate limiting enzyme in dopamine production. EDSC transplantation was associated with greater neuronal protection as demonstrated by higher TH(+) counts and dopamine metabolite concentration on the transplanted side of the brain. The endometrium represents an important source of stem cells with remarkable plasticity and vast therapeutic potential. The Human X-Inactivation Centre Can Be Divided in a Cis-Acting and a Trans-Acting Part. Bas de Hoon, 1,2 Joop Laven, 2 Joost Gribnau. 1 1 Reproduction and Development, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2 Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Erasmus MC, Netherlands. INTRODUCTION: X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) is the mechanism female cells use to silence one of their two X-chromosomes and equalize the dosage of X-linked gene products to male cells. XCI is regulated from a locus on the X-chromosome termed the X-inactivation centre (Xic). The Xic can be divided into a cis-acting part and a trans-acting part. The cis-acting part is responsible for inactivating the X-chromosome in cis, while the trans-acting part is required for counting the number of X-chromosomes in a cell and for the negative feedback that prevents from inactivating too many X-chromosomes. Thus far the solely identified trans-acting gene is Rnf12. Importantly, our current knowledge on XCI comes from studies in mice and mouse embryonic stemcells, while the human XIC has scarcely been investigated. In this study we had an unique combination of several patients that demonstrate that the human XIC can also be divided in a cis-acting part and a trans-acting part. METHODS: In a single patient with a deletion on the X, the deletion was mapped using CGH arrays, and fine-mapped using Qpcr. Skewing of XCI was assessed on metaphase cells. In three families mutations in RNF12 were identified using exome sequencing. The function of the three RNF12 mutants was tested by expressing the mutant protein in HEK293 cells, together with REX1, a known target of RNF12. Skewing of XCI was assessed using a pcr-based assay. RESULTS: The deletion of the Xic was mapped to a region of roughly 1,1Mb, encompassing the genes XIST, TSIX, JPX, CHIC1, CDX4, NAP1L2, NAP1L6 and DMRTC1, but leaving RNF12 intact. FISH on metaphase cells showed that all cells inactivated the unmutated X-chromosome. The mutant RNF12 proteins showed a very moderate effect on REX1 ubiquitination and degradation. All individuals carrying an RNF12 mutation showed exclusive inactivation of the mutant X-chromosome. CONCLUSIONS: The deletion in our patient identifies the human cis-acting XIC, and maps it to a region homologous to the mouse Xic. Also, cells harboring this deletion are still able to undergo XCI of the unaffected X-chromosome, showing that the trans-acting XIC responsible for counting and feedback regulation is unaffected. In the families with an RNF12 mutation the trans-acting XIC is affected, resulting in the exclusive inactivation of the X-chromosome with this mutation. Together, these results show that the human XIC can be divided in a cis-acting part and a trans-acting part, as in mice. The highly regenerative endometrium contains rare epithelial and stromal stem/progenitor cells (SPC). However their role in endometrial regeneration is not clear due to lack of a traceable marker. Our goal was to use telomerase reporter mice (1,2) to identify mouse endometrial SPC and examine their epithelial differentiation potential. METHODS: mTert-GFP mice were examined for GFP expression using endogenous GFP fluorescence or GFP antibody, and confocal microscopy. Cell lineage tracing used mTert-CreER::R26R mice, which were injected with tamoxifen on postnatal day 3 to permanently mark mTert lineage with LacZ expression, and were harvested 10 (prepubertal, n=4) and ≥40 days (cycling, n=12) later. Mouse uteri were also dissociated and examined by flow cytometry to identify intrinsic non-leukocyte (CD45 -ve) mTert+ stromal cells. Dual colour fluorescence microscopy was used to co-localise mTert+ cells with proliferating (Ki-67), BrdU+ label retaining, or estrogen receptor-a (ERa) expressing cells. A rare population of intrinsic (CD45 -ve) endometrial stromal cells expressed GFP during development and in adult mTert reporter mice. Rare focal regions of epithelial GFP expression were present in adult mice. The mTert+ cells were distinct from stromal and epithelial labelretaining cells previously identified in mouse endometrium. The mTert+ endometrial stromal cells did not express ERa or proliferate in response to estrogen. A close spatial relationship between mTert+ and Ki-67+ epithelial cells suggests that mTert+ cells may give rise to proliferating epithelial transit amplifying cells. Lineage tracing showed that mTert lineage cells were confined to the stroma of prepubertal endometrium, but contributed to glandular and luminal epithelium in adult cycling mice. In adult mice, removal of endogenous estrogen by ovariectomy resulted in endometrial atrophy and blocked expansion of the epithelial mTert lineage. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that epithelial structures of the adult cycling endometrium originate from an mTert+ stromal SPC that undergoes mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition during endometrial growth and development. This is the first report of a traceable marker for endometrial progenitors with epithelial differentiation potential. ). Mice were euthanized 12 hours post-injection, just prior to preterm delivery. Peripheral blood, spleen, thymus, inguinal lymph nodes and uterine lymph nodes were harvested and cell suspensions analyzed using fluorochromes conjugated to antibodies and flow cytometry. We determined the proportion of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and CD4+ and CD8+ Tregs (CD4+CD25+ FoxP3+/CD8+CD25+FoxP3+). Statistical analysis was performed with nonparametric statistics. A p≤0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS: 1) the proportion of splenic CD4+ and CD8+ Tregs was higher in pregnant mice treated with LPS than in those treated with PBS (p<0.003); 2) the proportion of thymic CD4+ Tregs was also higher in pregnant mice treated with LPS than in control mice (p=0.006); 3) LPS treatment of non-pregnant mice did not change the proportion of CD4+ or CD8+ Tregs in spleen or thymus; 4) LPS treatment of pregnant mice did not affect the proportion of Tregs or T cells in peripheral blood; 5) however, LPS treatment of non-pregnant mice reduced the proportion of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (p<0.015), and increased the proportion of CD8+ Tregs in peripheral circulation (p=0.002); and 6) pregnant mice had lower proportions of CD4+ and CD8+ Tregs in peripheral blood (p=0.002 and <0.0001, respectively) and a lower proportion of CD4+ Tregs in uterine lymph nodes and spleen (p=0.015 and 0.005, respectively) than non-pregnant mice. CONCLUSIONS: Pregnant mice respond differently to LPS treatment than non-pregnant mice. Unexpectedly, LPS treatment of pregnant mice increases the proportion of Tregs in spleen and thymus. These results suggest that inflammation during late pregnancy causes an expansion of Tregs in lymphoid organs. This expansion may cause an imbalance of immune mediators involved in maternal-fetal tolerance, and this, in turn, may predispose to preterm birth. Deciphering We compared phenotypic and genomic features of two clinical GBS isolates: GB37 (neonatal invasive disease) and GB590 (vaginal colonizing strain) that were identified through an unbiased macrophage phagocytosis screen (GB37 was poorly phagocytosed, GB590 was readily engulfed). METHODS: A mouse endometritis model was used to determine severity of infections and invasiveness was determined by measuring dissemination to the spleen. Macrophage phagocytosis and cytokine responses were measured in vitro, as were cytokine responses of intact maternal-fetal membranes. Biofilm production was compared in vitro. Whole genome sequencing was conducted and targeted comparisons were made involving genes implicated in pathogenesis. RESULTS: Strain GB590 was phagocytosed significantly better by human THP-1 macrophages, placental macrophages, and blood monocytes than was GB37, suggesting GB37 is able to evade innate immunity. The invasive GB37 strain was highly lethal in a mouse model of endometritis, while the colonizing GB590 strain was not. Dissemination to the spleen was greater with GB37. GB590 was a weak stimulator of macrophage cytokine responses compared with GB37. In maternal-fetal membranes, both GB37 and GB590 strongly stimulated release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. GB37 formed biofilms in vitro better than did GB590, which might also be important for eventual invasion. We identified genomic differences, including a SNP in lmb in GB590, which may partially explain some phenotypic differences. CONCLUSIONS: We identified phenotypic and genomic differences between an invasive GBS strain and a vaginal colonizing strain that might be important for explaining differences in virulence in vivo. This study was funded by a grant from the Global Alliance to Prevent Prematurity and Stillbirth (GAPPS) and was approved by the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board. At the end of pregnancy, myometrial cells undergo phenotypic changes, from a proliferative to a contractile state in order to initiate labor. It has been shown that leptin, an adipokine increased in obesity, inhibits in vitro uterine remodeling and contractility. This study was aimed to investigate the ability of leptin to induce myometrial cell proliferation in order to propose this adipokine as a potential tocolytic agent for threatened preterm labor. METHODS: Primary cell lines were established from myometrial biopsies obtained from women with uncomplicated pregnancies, at term, before labor onset. After 24h-adhesion and 72h-starvation, cells were stimulated by leptin (from 6.25 to 100ng/ml). Proliferation and cell cycle were assessed by studying total cell number and percentage of cell in S-phase by flow cytometry and cyclin D1 and E expression by western blotting. Signaling pathways involved were assessed by western blotting, immunofluorescence and by using pharmacological agents (U0126 and S3I-201to inhibit MEK1/2 and STAT3 respectively). Moreover, the specificity of the effect was investigated thanks to a siRNA approach. RESULTS: Leptin increased both cell number (increase vs. CTL; +47.5% and +32.9% for 6.25 and 50ng/ml respectively) and percentage of cells in S-phase (+62.1% and +37.7% vs. CTL, for 6.25 and 50ng/ml respectively) in a biphasic manner. Leptin also up-regulated cyclin D1 (ADU: 1.00 (CTL), 1.39±0.15 (6.25ng/ml), 2.69±0.42 (50ng/ml)) and cyclin E expression (ADU: 1.00 (CTL), 1.40±0.07 (6.25ng/ml), 2.08±0.58 (50ng/ ml)) after a 4h-stimulation, with higher increase for 50 than 6.25ng/ml. Moreover we showed that leptin at 6.25ng/ml induces cell proliferation through ERK1/2 signaling associated with an ERK1/2 phosphorylation at 3' and 40' (ADU: 1.00 (CTL), 2.22±0.49 (3'), 1.90±0.09 (40')) ; whereas, leptin at 50ng/ml induces cell proliferation through STAT3 signaling as the use of S3I-201 prevents its effect on cell number (increase vs. CTL; +68.7% and +31.1% for 50ng/ml alone or with S3I-201, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Leptin induces human myometrial cell proliferation via ERK1/2 or STAT3 signaling pathway according to the concentration used. Thus, leptin could be of interest as a tocolytic agent, by maintaining uterine quiescence and could contribute to explain parturition-related disorders observed in obese women. Dams (~10/group) were euthanized 4hrs later. Maternal plasma (MP), amniotic fluid (AF), placentas and uteri were assessed for cytokines (IL-1b,IL-12p70,IFN-g,IL-6,GRO/KC,IL-10,TNF-a) using a multiplex MSD. Data were analyzed by ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc testing. RESULTS: LPS-induced inflammation in the MP, AF, uteri and placentas was not reduced by the FO-diet vs. N-diet. TNF-a levels in uteri (p<0.001) and AF (p<0.0008) were elevated in the FO+LPS vs. N+LPS groups. FO+LPS placentas had significantly higher cytokines than N+LPS placentas (p<0.05-0.0001) (Table) . CONCLUSIONS: Using a mouse model of LPS-induced PTL, the FOdiet did not protect against maternal systemic inflammation or reduce inflammation in the AF, uterus, or placentas. Surprisingly, FO was associated with significantly increased inflammation in the AF, uteri, and placenta following LPS. Studies are underway to determine the effect of the FO-diet on pregnancy duration in the LPS-PTL model. States. It provides a unique resource with which to explore the effect of perinatal events on long term outcomes. We evaluated the association between maternal puerperal infection and neurodevelopment at age 4 and 7 years among term infants (≥37 weeks). The analysis was restricted to women enrolled in the CPP who delivered singleton infants at term (n=40,450). We compared results of gross and fine motor skills tests at age 4 and a general neurologic evaluation at age 7 among the children of women who did and did not have puerperal infection. Associations between infection and neurologic outcomes were evaluated before and after adjusting for confounders including maternal age, race, parity, smoking, BMI, education, and income, through generalized linear models with correction of variance estimates for clustering. RESULTS: Of the term children eligible for analysis, 29,576 had gross and fine motor skills testing at age 4 and 31,076 had a neurologic examination at age 7. After adjusting for confounders, the children of women with puerperal infection were more likely to have abnormal gross and fine motor skills evaluations with adjusted odds ratios (aOR) of 1.3 (95% CI 1.0, 1.6) and 1.2 (95% CI 1.0, 1.4), respectively. Children of women with puerperal infection were more likely to have an abnormal neurologic examination at age 7 compared with women without infection, aOR 1.3 (95% CI 1.1, 1.5). CONCLUSIONS: Maternal infection is associated with an increased risk of persistent motor deficits among children born at term. Given the frequency of term deliveries complicated by intrapartum infection, this may contribute to the burden of pediatric neurologic injury. Integrins may serve as biosensors of mechanical stretch in the pregnant human myometrium and their expression and/or downstream signaling pathway activation may play a role in the onset of uterine contraction. We hypothesize myometrial events that enhance uterine contractility occur prematurely in some cases of preterm labor and, specifically, aberrations in integrin expression or downstream signaling proteins might contribute to some cases of preterm labor. METHODS: Human myometrial biopsies were obtained with written informed consent from women undergoing hysterectomy or Cesarean section, either term in labor, term not in labor, preterm in labor, or preterm not in labor. Tissues were transported to the laboratory in cold physiological buffer, dissected to isolate smooth muscle, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 o C. RNA was extracted from frozen tissue and converted to cDNA using random hexamers. Complimentary DNA from six myometrial samples per group was pooled and subjected to quantitative PCR on a human extracellular matrix and adhesion molecules array. PCR data was analyzed using the online SABiosciences RT² Profiler™ PCR Array Data Analysis program. Myometrial protein was extracted and subjected to semiquantitative western blotting. Protein expression was normalized to GAPDH and ratios between groups were compared by one-way anova with p<0.05 considered significant. We observed upregulation of several integrins and matrix molecules in pregnant human myometrium at the mRNA level. We observed increases in ITGA5 and ITGA7 in both preterm and term pregnant samples. ITGAV was significantly increased only in the term nonlaboring group and ITGB3 was significantly increased in term myometrium as well as the preterm laboring (but not preterm nonlaboring) myometrium. Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) was significantly increased only in term laboring myometrium and mTOR was increased in all pregnant groups. These data indicate changes in integrins and downstream signaling proteins occur in human myometrium during pregnancy and labor. Defining these molecular changes may increase our understanding of the etiology of preterm labor. METHODS: Primary cultures of hUM were prepared from biopsies taken from non-laboring pregnant women at cesarean section. hUMs were treated with isoform-selective PKC inhibitors in the presence or absence of oxytocin (OT)(10 nM) or the non-specific PKC activator phorbol-12myristate-13-acetate (PMA) (1µM) and pRLC and ppRLC were assessed by validated in-cell western assay. Statistical significance was assessed using unpaired t test. Only significant findings (P ≤ 0.05) are presented. The non-specific inhibitor of conventional PKC (cPKC) UCN-1 diminished pRLC to 60% of resting levels but had no effect on ppRLC. In contrast, the selective inhibitor for PKCz significantly diminished basal ppRLC to 55% but had no effect on pRLC. OT treatment increased pRLC and ppRLC (2.37 ± 0.7, and 1.91 ± 0.1 fold of basal, respectively ). UCN-1 diminished OT-induced ppRLC (191 ± 7.6% to 117 ± 5.5%). A PKCe inhibitor blocked OT-induced pRLC (178 ± 22.7% to 127 ± 9.6%) but had no effect on ppRLC. PMA treatment increased resting levels of pRLC and ppRLC to 129 ± 5.8% and 167 ± 12.7%, respectively. UCN-1 inhibited the PMA-induced increase of ppRLC. The selective PKCz inhibitor has no effect on either OT-or PMA-induced phosphorylation of pRLC. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest diverse roles for PKC isoforms in contractile function of hUM. cPKC isoforms regulate basal pRLC as well as OT-and PMA-induced ppRLC. PKCz regulates basal ppRLC. These effects would be compatible with the conclusion that effects of PKC isoforms target the MLCP pathway. The ROK inhibitor g-H1152 (g-H) decreases oxytocin (OT)-induced uterine contractility and has been proposed as a method to arrest or prevent preterm labor. Because of concerns about vascular side effects, we studied the effects of g-H on paired samples of uterine strips (US) and small resistance vessels (~ 250 mm) (mesenteric artery (MA) and uterine artery (UA)) from non-pregnant (NP; n = 5), and late pregnant (LP; n = 6, gestational day 17-21) rats. METHODS: Vascular studies were performed using wire myography and uterine myography using a Myobath-4 apparatus. Vessels were pre-constricted with phenylephrine (PE; 3 µM) or ET (10 nM) and US were pre-contracted with OT (5 nM) or endothelin-1 (ET; 10 nM). Concentration response curves (CRC) were obtained for g-H (300 nM to 3 mM for vessels; 30 nM to 3 mM for US) to determine sensitivity (IC 50 values) and effects on maximal response. Data were analysed using ANOVA and a significant difference was considered if P ≤ 0.05. RESULTS: All three pre-constricted tissues demonstrated g-H-induced relaxation. The sensitivity (IC 50 ) to g-H was significantly reduced from NP to LP in both vessels (MA from 0.09 ± 0.01 to 0.25 ± 0.06 µM and UA from 0.27 ± 0.06 to 1.02 ± 0.2 µM,) but did not change in US. In the LP groups, there were no significant differences in the sensitivities to g-H among the three tissues. The maximal agonist-induced tension was significantly reduced by g-H in all three tissues (MA to 32.6 ± 11%; UA to 14.1 ± 0.4%; and US to 26.4 ± 9.2%) but there was no difference among tissues. In all tissues, western blotting indicated that g-H treatment caused a decrease in phosphorylation of myosin regulatory light chain (MLC) at S19, of myosin binding subunit of MLC phosphatase at T853 and of protein kinase C-potentiated inhibitor of phosphatase-1 (CPI-17) at T38. These data demonstrate that inhibition of ROK diminishes activity of several key inhibitory enzymes, which results in an increase in MLC phosphatase activity and reduced myocyte contractility in vascular and uterine tissues. We conclude that the ROK pathway plays a significant role in constriction of MA, UA and US. If ROK inhibitors are used as tocolytics, it will be essential to monitor closely for cardiovascular side effects. Preterm premature rupture of the membranes (pPROM) is a major cause of preterm birth and affects 2% of women worldwide. Factors such as uterine strecth, blood and infection appear to weaken the amniotic membrane (AM) due to a loss in biomechanical properties and tissue remodelling. These factors increase production of catabolic mediators such as PGE 2 and breakdown the fibre network. This study investigated the influence of fibre orientation on the mechanical properties of the AM and the effect of cyclical tensile strain (CTS) on PGE 2 release and whether the catabolic environment reduced connective tissue production within the AM. METHODS: AM were collected from women undergoing elective term Caesarean section delivery at University College London Hospital. AM from the cervix (CAM) and placental regions (PAM) were stained with India ink to identify fibre orientation. AM specimens (25 x 10mm) were subjected to a strain rate of 0.25 mm/s and loaded to failure (Bionix 100, MTS). In separate experiments, AM samples were subjected to CTS regimens, designed to mimic labour, and compared to unstrained controls (Bose Enduratec, UK). Samples were then analysed by routine biochemical assay for GAG, DNA, collagen and elastin. PGE 2 release was quantified in media samples. RESULTS: Differences were observed in the mechanical properties for CAM and PAM. The tangent modulus (TM) was significantly lower for CAM (4.9 MPa) when compared to PAM (7.5 MPa). Mechanical resistance to strain was found to be dependent on fibre orientation such that AM with fibres orientated parallel to the direction of applied strain showed greater TM and strain (e) to failure (#) values compared to fibres orientated in the perpendicular direction. Using an ex vivo bioreactor approach, human AM subjected to 2% CTS augmented PGE 2 release and GAG levels in PAM and CAM samples (p<0.001). In contrast, collagen and elastin content were significantly reduced in PAM and CAM (p<0.001). We speculate that a combination of inflammatory and mechanical factors disrupt AM biomechanics and matrix composition. Future studies will further examine the mechanical properties and determine whether catabolic and mechanical factors influence tissue remodelling. Weight Gain and Leptin Impact the Gut Microbiome in Pregnancy. KL Connor, 1 C Chehoud, 2 L Chan, 2 P DiStefano, 2 T DeSantis, 2 SJ Lye.  Weight of mothers during pregnancy was significantly associated with differences in microbial community structure. These associations were dependent upon gestational age. For example members of Bacillaceae were associated with weight and this relationship strengthened with gestational age. Further, weight gain in trimesters 1 and 2, but not 3, was associated with the microbiome. Bacterial abundance was driven by diet; differences were primarily in HF mothers and were significantly associated with leptin levels. Distinct taxa were significantly associated with leptin. For example members of Xanthomonadaceae negatively correlated and Sphingomonadaceae positively correlated with leptin. CONCLUSIONS: Altered nutrition is a permissive factor in modifying metabolism and the microbiome in pregnancy. Yet it remains to be determined if leptin influences the microbiome or vice versa. Either way, given the importance of both the microbiota and leptin in metabolic programming, this relationship may precipitate adaptations with profound effects on maternal and fetal health. Maternal Diet Shapes the Gut Microbiome, Impacting Immune Status in Pregnancy. KL Connor, 1 C Chehoud, 2 L Chan, 2 P DiStefano, 2 T DeSantis, 2 SJ Lye. The gut microbiota and immune system interact to influence host response to infection and nutrient availability. Nutrition can alter immune function, and inflammation has been associated with the pathogenesis of obesity. However, little is known about the link between nutrition, the microbiome and the immune system during pregnancy. This study investigated the relationship between the gut microbiota and immune status in pregnancy and if this was influenced by maternal nutrition. METHODS: Female mice (n=5/grp) were fed a control diet during pregnancy, or a 30% calorie reduced diet from day (d)5.5-18.5 of pregnancy, or a 60% high fat diet from 8 weeks before mating and during pregnancy. At d18.5 (term=19d) DNA was isolated from maternal caecal contents and cytokines were measured in plasma and small intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes (SI IEL). 16S rRNA genes were amplified using degenerate primers, hybridised to the G3 PhyloChip TM and scanned using GeneArray® (Affymetrix). Microbial sequences were filtered and analysed using PhyCA-Stats TM software to determine bacterial abundance scores. Associations between the microbiome and inflammatory markers (Adonis test; p<0.05) and between individual taxa and cytokine levels (Spearman; q<0.05) were determined. RESULTS: 599 of 836 taxa had significant abundance differences between dietary groups. Structure of the microbial community was associated with an altered inflammatory cytokine signature in plasma: Mothers with different microbiomes had dissimilar levels of plasma TNFa, IL-17, IL-1a, IL-12(p70), MIP-1a and RANTES. Moreover, microbial community structure was associated with differences in the signature of cytokines (IL-1b, IFNg, IL-12(p70), IL-2, MCP-1, MIP-1a, eotaxin and GM-CSF) produced by SI IEL. Significant relationships between distinctive taxa and levels of specific cytokines emerged. For example, members of Pseudomonadaceae were correlated with plasma cytokines and members of Corynebacteriaceae were correlated with SI IEL cytokines. CONCLUSIONS: These novel data are consistent with a model in which diet restructures the microbial community and microbiota influence locally resident immune cells, which in turn affects the peripheral immune system. We suggest that microbiota influence maternal health and adaptation to pregnancy through effects on immune function and nutrient metabolism. Such adaptations will also impact fetal development. Recent studies describe the differential expression of miRNAs in chorioamniotic membranes with advancing gestation or histological evidence of chorioamnionitis, and also in the human cervix following term labour. The aim of this study was to identify labour associated microRNAs in the myometrium at term. METHODS: MicroRNA extracted from myometrial biopsies collected before (n=9) and after the onset of labour (n=9) was analysed using the miRCURY TM LNA array. Multivariate modelling was used to examine phenotype related variability in microRNA expression. miRCURY LNA TM RT-PCR was used to technically and then biologically validate the findings in an independent population (n=9, each group). Putative target genes were identified using web-based predictive algorithms and cross-referenced with genes shown to be down-regulated in labouring myometrium. Studies examining expression levels of target microRNAs were conducted using primary human myometrial cell cultures as well as monocytes and lymphocytes isolated from pregnant women. RESULTS: 441 microRNAs were detected in all samples. Multivariate analysis described clear separation of the two populations, demonstrating a characteristic microRNA expression profile of labouring and nonlabouring myometrium. The onset of labour was consistent with reduced expression of specific microRNAs including hsa-miR-876, hsa-miR-873, hsa-miR-29c, hsa-miR-3653, hsa-miR-29b and hsa-miR-200c as well as increased levels of hsa-miR-3687 and hsa-miR-223. These results were technically validated using RT-PCR. Hsa-miR-223 was found to be significantly increased in further biological validation. Expression of hsa-miR-223 was not detected in cultured myocytes, but was present in monocytes and neutrophils known to significantly infiltrate the uterus during parturition. The labouring phenotype is associated with the differential expression of microRNAs. We identified hsa-miR-223 as a putative microRNA biomarker of labour. Previous reports show hsa-miR-223 is increased in the labouring cervix and in fetal membranes with chorioamnionitis. Hsa-miR-223 may be introduced to the myometrium by neutrophils to initiate or respond to the inflammatory mechanism of labour. INTRODUCTION: Ultrasound (USS) indicated cervical cerclage is commonly used to prevent or delay preterm delivery (PTD) in women found to have a shortened cervix. The efficacy of USS indicated cerclage compared with conservative management has been assessed with mixed results. The variability in outcomes may be secondary to differences in cerclage position within the cervix. We sought to examine outcomes in women undergoing USS indicated cerclage relative to the position of the suture within the cervix. We performed a retrospective cohort study of women with a singleton pregnancy undergoing trans-vaginal USS-indicated cerclage in two UK tertiary referral centres between 2001-2011. USS-indicated cerclage was defined as suture insertion with a cervical length <25 mm and a closed external os. The cohort was divided according to cerclage distance (mm) from the external os or height as a percentage of total cervical length (CL), at first USS after suture insertion. RR of preterm delivery (PTD) prior to 37 weeks was calculated. RESULTS: 130 women underwent USS-indicated cerclage at a median gestation of 18 weeks (range 13-25 weeks). 54(41%) women delivered prior to 37 weeks gestation. When cerclages were placed <20mm from the external os the risk of PTD was increased; RR1.15 (95%CI 1.03-1.29, p=0.027) and when more distal this risk was increased further: <15mm RR1.58 (95%CI 1.20-2.08, p=0.0014) and <10mm RR1.94 (95%CI 1.0-3.51, p=0.027). When cerclages were placed in the distal 50% of the total CL, risk of PTD also increased; RR2.07 (95%CI 1.30-3.3, p=0.0017). Most women (87%) exhibited cervical lengthening at the first post-stitch USS (median 10mm, range 1-30mm). Women who had a static or further shortening CL were more likely to deliver preterm; RR 2.58 (95%CI 1.02-6.55, p=0.038). CONCLUSIONS: This is the largest reported cohort of USS-indicated cerclages and shows the higher a stitch is placed, the lower the subsequent risk of preterm delivery. Improved outcomes in higher placed sutures may reflect the longer CLs in this subgroup, however risk of PTD was also increased when stitches were placed in the distal half of the cervix, regardless of total CL. Women whose cervices fail to elongate or shorten following cerclage should remain under close surveillance as this group is most at risk of PTD. The switch from a quiescent phenotype to a contractile state during pregnancy likely involves the integration of multiple signaling networks generated from both hormonal and mechanical signals. Identifying how these networks change and interact is crucial to understanding the biochemical processes involved in the induction of labor. We have conducted phosphoproteomic studies to identify and quantitate the global phosphorylation changes that occur in pregnant human myometrial cells in response to acute progesterone and/ or mechanical stretch. We performed 18% biaxial stretch experiments in the presence or absence of 600 nM acute progesterone treatment to elucidate signaling pathways activated by the hormone and mechanical distention in pregnant human uterine smooth muscle cells. Protein samples were extracted and subjected to western blotting or enriched for mass spectrometry based analysis. For mass spectrometry based analysis, samples were digested with trypsin and phosphopeptides were enriched using Ti0 2 affinity columns. Enriched samples were differentially TMT labeled. Quantification and identity were measured using reverse phase liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry. RESULTS: We observed increased activation of the MAPK/ERK signaling pathway in response to stretch as evidenced by increased phosphorylation of ERK1, ERK2, and the upstream signaling molecules FAK and MEK. CONCLUSIONS: Identifying how the global signaling changes and interactions that occur in response to myometrial stretch will improve our understanding the biochemical processes involved in the induction of term and preterm labor. Supported by NIH 5K99HD067342 (HRB). The two-pore domain K + channel TREK-1, which hyperpolarizes the myocyte membrane causing relaxation, is gestationally regulated. Recently, five genetic splice variants of TREK-1 were identified in the myometrium of mothers who experienced spontaneous PTL. This discovery led to the hypothesis that TREK-1 variants could interfere with proper TREK-1 expression and/or channel function. METHODS: Immunofluorescence, cell-surface assays, and electrophysiology were used to explore expression profiles and functional characteristics of each variant expressed alone and when co-expressed with TREK-1 in HEK293T cells. RESULTS: Co-expression with each variant affected TREK-1 expression and channel activity in a disparate manner; overall TREK-1 currents and expression were reduced. In HEK293T cells co-expressing TREK-1 and each variant individually, total TREK-1 and membrane TREK-1 expression decreased by ~50% on average. Basal TREK-1 currents were reduced by ~64% (4.3 pA/pF vs. 12.0 pA/pF) and NaHCO 3 activated currents were reduced by ~77% (21.4 pA/pF vs. 94.5 pA/pF) on average at 0 mV when co-expressed with each variant. Moreover, the variants demonstrated minimal currents when expressed alone. CONCLUSIONS: These data correlate the presence of non-functional splice variants to decreased TREK-1 expression and channel function, which could contribute to the failure of uterine quiescence. Continued efforts to discover the mechanism of TREK-1 inhibition by the variants will utilize Alpha Technology to explore heterodimerization between TREK-1 and splice variants.  Flexercell 6-well silicon bottom plates coated with collagen type I, and treated with 10mM of the FAK inhibitor, PF 573, 228, 1 hour prior to being subjected to 16% static stretch for up to 6 hours. For FAK gene silencing, cells were transfected with 200 pmol of FAK siRNA using the Lonza kit and subjected to 16% stretch for up to 6 hours. ERK-1/2 phosphorylation was investigated by western analysis. Total RNA was extracted from human myometrial tissues using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen, UK) and mRNA was converted to cDNA. Q-PCR was carried out using a Rotor-Gene TM (Corbett Research, Australia) to investigate COX-2 mRNA expression. The use of a chemical inhibitor, PF-573,228, significantly reduced the stretch-induced increase in ERK-1/2 phosphorylation by 85% after 30 minutes stretch (n=4). No significant change was seen in COX-2 mRNA expression after inhibitor treatment. siRNA gene silencing and transient transfection was also used to knockdown FAK expression. Stretch-induced ERK-1/2 phosphorylation did not seem to be affected by partial knockdown of FAK and no significant change of COX-2 mRNA expression was observed. However, a partial knockdown of FAK seemed to attenuate stretch-induced COX-2 expression after 30 and 360 minutes 16% stretch (n=3). All significant changes reported are p<0.05. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that FAK acts as a molecular component upstream of the ERK-1/2 MAPK cascade mediating the stretch-induced up-regulation of COX-2. We will need this in vitro experimental model to further investigate other components of mechanical stretch of human myometrium. Placenta are not fully elucidated. Premature cervical remodeling may contribute to preterm delivery. The cervix consists mostly of extracellular matrix with an abundance of collagen. We hypothesize that collagen expression, as well as content and structure are reduced in the cervix of women with preterm cervical ripening compared to that at term. We aimed to investigate possible differences in collagen gene and protein expression between PTL and term labor (TL). METHODS: Cervical biopsies were obtained from 62 women, PTL (N=19), TL (17), preterm not in labor, PTnotL (N=6), term not in labor, TnotL (N=16) and non-pregnant (N=4). Real time RT-PCR was performed to analyze gene expression of collagen I and III. Hydroxyproline concentration was measured to estimate collagen concentration in the cervix. The cell nuclei/area (methyl green stained) and optical density (picrosirius red dye) was used to assess collagen content and structure in cervix sections. RESULTS: Groups in labor both at preterm (PTL) and term (TL) had significantly lower mRNA expression than the groups not in labor (PTnotL and TnotL). There was a tendency towards higher mRNA expression of collagen I and III in PTL group compared to TL. Higher hydroxyproline concentration was measured in PTnotL group compared to PTL, TL, and TnotL. There was no difference in hydroxyproline concentration between PTL and TL. Cell nuclei density, as well as collagen content and structure were reduced in the TnotL compared to NP women, though extracellular collagen was not different from other groups. CONCLUSIONS: Aspects of the remodel process in the cervix in women that delivered preterm may be similar to that at term. Whether degradation of extracellular collagen in the cervix is advanced with preterm birth requires further study. During the last decade we have been working on the role of EG-VEGF, a new placental cytokine, and showed its importance in the placenta during the first trimester of human pregnancy. EG-VEGF is also called Prokineticin 1 in relation to its effects on contractility. However, to date no data is available in regards to its expression and role in the human fetal membranes (FMs), near parturition. Here we investigated the expression and role of EG-VEGF and its two receptors PROKR1 and PROKR2 in the mechanism of parturition towards the term of the human pregnancy. METHODS: Total fetal membranes, chorion, amnion and sera were collected at different gestational ages. Immunohistochemistry, Western Blots, qPCR and ELISAs were used to determine the localization and expression of EG-VEGF and its receptors during the third trimester of pregnancy. Primary chorion trophoblasts were isolated and used to determine the effect of EG-VEGF on metalloproteases (MMP2 and MMP9) activities and on PGDH, PROKR1 and PROKR2 expression. RESULTS: EG-VEGF and its receptors were found in the FMs and their expression increased towards term. The circulating levels of EG-VEGF increased towards term compared to preterm. More importantly, the production of EG-VEGF was higher in the FMs compared to the age matched control placenta . The treatment of chorion trophoblast cells with EG-VEGF (10-50ng/ml) lead to a decrease in the MMPs activities, as well as to a decrease of EG-VEGF receptors. In contrast EG-VEGF significantly increased PGDH expression. These data demonstrate that EG-VEGF is a new FMs cytokine that acts locally to maintain a quiescence of the uterine tissues during the third trimester of pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, EG-VEGF and its receptors are shown to be expressed in the human FMs. We propose that this tissue is an important source of local EG-VEGF, and that the system EG-VEGF/ PROKR1 and PROKR2 might ensure fine regulations of the parturition process near term. Labour is associated with inflammatory changes both in the myometrium and systemically that include an increase in neutrophil and monocyte numbers. The mechanisms regulating such altered leucocyte dynamics are not well understood but may be critical in identifying novel targets for the prevention of preterm birth. We investigated local and systemic leucocyte trafficking prior to and at labour, comparing with myometrial chemo-attractant and pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. METHODS: Myometrium, blood, lungs, and placental tissue were collected on gestation days 16, 17, 18 and during spontaneous labour of the CD1 mouse pregnancy. Samples were analysed using flow cytometry to determine neutrophil, resident macrophage and monocyte Ly-6C high subset numbers and expression of COX-2 and CD86 on myometrial macrophages. Chemokine and cytokine mRNA and protein levels in the myometrial samples were measured using RT-PCR and multiplex assay. RESULTS: Neutrophil, macrophage and Ly-6C high monocyte numbers in the myometrium increased daily and peaked on day 18. However, in labouring myometrium, densities of macrophages and Ly-6C high monocytes were reduced substantially compared to E18 (p<0.001 and p<0.01 respectively). Expression of COX-2 on myometrial macrophages peaked prior to labour on day 18 but reduced significantly during labour (p=0.01), while CD86 reached a peak on E17. In contrast to these labour-associated reductions, myometrial mRNA levels of chemokines and inflammatory cytokines (CCL2, CXCL1, CCL5, IL-1b, TNFa and IL6) were highest at labour. Systemically, neutrophils and Ly-6C high monocytes in the blood and lung microvasculature showed maximal densities on E17 or E18. As with the labouring myometrium, densities of Ly-6C high monocytes in the blood and lungs decreased significantly during labour. CONCLUSIONS: Increases in myometrial myeloid cells and their activation state prior to labour were followed by their abrupt reduction during labour. However, this pattern was not mirrored by chemokine and cytokine mRNA and protein levels in the myometrium, suggesting alternative mechanisms control leucocyte behaviour and phenotype during parturition. Similar kinetics in the circulating and lung populations to those in the myometrium may indicate a common or linked regulatory pathway. (-) decidual natural killer (dNK) cells. The latter promote trophoblastic remodeling of spiral arteries, but also express high levels of latent cytototoxic molecules whose rapid activation can combat infectious microbes. We found that IP-10 can recruit CXCR3 expressing circulating CD56 bright /CD16 (-) NK cells to the decidua. Hypothesizing that in early pregnancy viruses can alter subsequent maternal inflammatory responses; we primed cultured DCs with agonists of toll like receptors (TLRs) that mediate specific viral infections, which has been shown to be associated with low birth weight. The effects of this priming were then assessed on expression of IP-10 induced by subsequent incubation of the DCs with cytokines. METHODS: Confluent, leukocyte-free DCs were primed for 7 days with 10 -8 M estradiol + 10 -7 M medroxyprogesterone acetate then switched to a defined medium (DM) with the steroids ± Imiquimod (5 µg /ml), a TLR-7 agonist, or CPG ODN (1 µg /ml), a TLR-9 agonist, for 48 hrs before incubating with 1 ng/ml of TNFa, IFN-g, or TNFa + IFN-g for 24 hrs. Conditioned DM supernatants were assessed by ELISA for IP-10. Comparisons between groups utilized mean± SEM and one way ANOVA (n=3). condition control with TLR-7 agonist with TLR-9 agonist IP-10 raw data (pg/ml) for n=3 different decidual preparations (mean ± S.D.). Data presented as mean ±SD (pg/ml). * Compared to control. CONCLUSIONS: TNFa and IFN-g synergistically enhanced DC expressed IP-10, which recruits peripheral CD56 bright /CD16 (-) NK cells to the decidua. Blocking such augmentation by pretreatment with imiquimod, a TLR-7 agonist that mimics HIV or CPG ODN, a TLR-9 agonist that mimics Herpes Simplex Virus 1 and 2, suggests a mechanism by which viral infections may inhibit peripheral NK cell recruitment to the decidua and may contribute to low birth weight pregnancies. The initiation of both term and preterm labour is widely accepted to be an inflammatory event. Pro-inflammatory cytokines secreted by invading innate immune cells bring about a NF-kB-dependent increase in contraction-associated protein expression, hence precipitating labour. The aim of this study was to further elucidate the pathways leading up to a non-infective process of preterm labour, induced by the progesterone receptor (PR) and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) antagonist, RU486. METHODS: Pregnant CD1 mice were administered an intraperitoneal injection of 150mg RU486 on gestational day 16. Gestational day 16 and day 17 CD1 mice were used as controls. Myometrium from the experimental arm was harvested at 4.5 hours, 9 hours and 13.5 hours post-RU486, and after delivery of the first pup, which occurred approximately 18 hours post-injection. Left myometrial horns were disrupted by using bead homogenization in a Precellys machine (Stretton Scientific Limited, Stretton, UK). Total RNA was extracted and converted to cDNA. Quantitative real time PCR for IL-1a, IL-1b, IL-6, TNFa, CCL2, CCL5, CXCL1, CCL20, CXCL5, IL-4, IFNg, GCSF and GAPDH were performed using a Rotor-Gene (Qiagen Limited, Manchester, UK). Protein was extracted and subjected to SDS-PAGE followed by Western blotting for the contraction-associated proteins, phosphorylated MAPKs and the relevant transcription factors. RESULTS: At the level of gene expression, IL-1b (p<0.001), IL-6 (p<0.01) and CXCL5 (p<0.001) rose significantly post-RU486 injection versus gestational day 16 controls with the onset of labour. Other proinflammatory cytokine levels did not vary significantly. Connexin-43 (p<0.01) and oxytocin receptor (p<0.05) proteins rose significantly at 9 hours post-RU486 injection versus gestational day 16 controls. Phospho-p38 (p<0.05) and phospho-p65 (p<0.05) protein levels also rose significantly at the same time point. COX-2 protein levels showed a trend towards decreasing. CONCLUSIONS: PR/GR inhibition leads to a phospho-p38-and phospho-p65-dependent increase in certain contraction-associated proteins, which is sufficient in precipitating preterm labour in mice. Additionally, stimulation of the inflammatory cascade appears to be a late event in RU486-induced preterm labour. Collectively these findings indicate that inflammation may not be such a key player in the initiation of labour in this model. Beyond the Intra- Our previous studies support a role for IGFBP-1 hyperphosphorylation, which results in reduced IGF-I availability, in the development of fetal growth restriction (FGR). Hypoxia, which is common in FGR fetuses, has been shown to increase the phosphorylation of IGFBP-1, however the underlying mechanism is not known. We tested the hypothesis that IGFBP-1 hyperphosphorylation in hypoxia is caused by inhibition of Mammalian Target of Rapamycin Complex 1 (mTORC1). METHODS: Using HepG2 cells, we inhibited mTORC1+C2 signaling either using mTOR inhibitor rapamycin (100nM, 24 hrs), or transfecting cells with combined siRNA targeting raptor+rictor. Further, we activated mTORC1+C2 by transfecting cells with siRNA targeting the endogenous mTOR inhibitor DEPTOR and activated mTORC1 targeting TSC2 (scrambled siRNA as control). Silencing was performed for 72 hours with the last 24 hrs either in 1% or 20% O 2 . Silencing of target proteins and inhibition/activation of mTORC1+C2 activity were confirmed using Western blotting. IGFBP-1 secretion and phosphorylation were assessed in cell media using phospho-site (pS101, 119 and 169) specific IGFBP-1 antibodies. RESULTS: Hypoxia resulted in decreased mTORC1 (p4E-BP1 Thr70 , -51%) but not mTORC2 (pAkt Ser473 ) activity, and induced IGFBP-1 secretion (+56%) and phosphorylation (+102%). Combined hypoxia+rapamycin inhibited mTORC1 (p4E-BP1 Thr70 , -50%) and mTORC2 (pAkt Ser473 , -55%) activity, and induced IGFBP-1 secretion (+74%) and phosphorylation (+109%) to similar levels as hypoxia alone. Similarly, in cells in which mTORC1 and mTORC2 were inhibited following silencing of raptor (mTORC1) and rictor (mTORC2) IGFBP-1 secretion and phosphorylation were induced to the same extent in normoxia and hypoxia (n=3). DEPTOR silencing increased mTORC1 (p4E-BP1 Thr70 , +88%) but did not influence mTORC2 activity and inhibited IGFBP-1 secretion (-30%) and phosphorylation (-50%). Importantly, hypoxia failed to induce IGFBP-1 secretion and phosphorylation in DEPTOR silenced cells. CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of mTORC1 constitutes a mechanistic link between hypoxia and increased IGFBP-1 secretion and phosphorylation. This study provides novel insights into mechanisms modulating IGF-I bioavailability and potentially fetal growth under hypoxic conditions. analyzed on d20 of pregnancy given their delayed onset of parturition. Chicago Blue Dye was used to observe the timing of embryo implantation. Intact uteri as well as individual implantation sites (IS) weights were recorded. On d15, d19 and d20, uterine-fetal weights (including the uterus, amniotic fluid, pup and placenta) as well as uterine and individual placental or pup weights were recorded. A calcium (Ca2 + ) assay was used to compare oxytocin (OT)-induced intracellular-Ca2 + release in primary uterine myometrial (UT-Myo) cells from Cox-1KO and WT mice. In addition, spontaneous and OT (10 -11 -10 -6 M)-induced contractile activity was compared using longitudinal myometrial strips. At least N=4 litters per genotype per gestational day were analyzed, using t-tests to determine significant (p<0.05) differences between Cox-1KO and WT. RESULTS: Cox-1KO females had normal timing of embryo implantation based on similar IS weight and number observed on d5 and d6 of pregnancy compared to WT females. A slight (but significant, p<0.05) decrease in Cox-1KO pup weight was noted on d15 and d19 of pregnancy, but was not accompanied by differences in total intact uterine-fetal weight, placental or uterine weight alone. Finally, we observed no difference in OT-induced intracellular-Ca2 + release in UT-Myo cells from Cox-1KO and WT mice, nor spontaneous and OT-induced uterine isometric contractility (amplitude, frequency and AUC/sec) between Cox-1KO and WT females on day15 and 19 of pregnancy, nor between d20 Cox-1KO and d19WT. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the delayed parturition phenotype observed in Cox-1KO mice is not due to mistiming of embryo implantation or impaired uterine contractions. Quantitative PCR Highly Correlates with the Nugent Score.  We conducted a secondary analysis of stored vaginal samples from a prior trial in which women were randomized in the mid-trimester to antibiotics or placebo to examine the effect on PTB. All women had risk factors for PTB including: positive fetal fibronectin, BV and a prior PTB, or BV and a pre-pregnancy weight <50 kg. Vaginal bacterial counts were measured using qPCR of 16S rRNA for total microbial load and individually for Atopobium species, Gardnerella vaginalis, and BV-associated bacteria (BVAB) 1, 2, and 3. A standard curve was generated using serial dilutions of specific 16S rRNA for absolute quantitation. Spearman coefficients were utilized to correlate bacterial loads with pH and Nugent score (0-10). RESULTS: 243 vaginal samples were available for pre-treatment analysis: 123 in the antibiotic group and 120 in the placebo group. Treatment groups did not differ by risk factors for PTB. Baseline bacterial load did not differ by treatment group (p=0.87). For all samples, total microbial load and individual organisms showed highly significant, but moderate, correlations (p<0.01 for all coefficients) with vaginal pH, Nugent score and each of its specific bacterial components (Mobiluncus hominis, Gardnerella vaginalis, and Lactobacillus spp.) While qPCR correlates with Nugent score, correlation coefficients were <0.8 indicating that qPCR may allow for a finer classification of the flora than possible with the categories employed in the Nugent score. More comprehensive assessment of bacterial load, including uncultivable bacteria, may allow for a better understanding of the vaginal flora and its association with pregnancy outcomes.  We conducted a secondary analysis of stored vaginal samples from a prior trial for PTB prevention in which mid-trimester women were randomized to antibiotics (metronidazole and azithromycin) or placebo. All women had risk factors for PTB including: positive fetal fibronectin, BV and a prior PTB, or BV and a pre-pregnancy weight <50 kg. Vaginal bacterial counts were measured using absolute quantitation qPCR of 16S rRNA for total microbial load and individually for Atopobium species, Gardnerella vaginalis, and BV-associated bacteria (BVAB 1, 2, and 3). Individual patient differences were examined with Wilcoxon signed-rank test, and pre-and post-treatment differences compared with Wilcoxon rank-sum test. RESULTS: 243 paired vaginal samples were available for pre-and posttreatment analysis: 123 in the antibiotic group and 120 in the placebo group. Treatment groups did not differ by risk factors for PTB. Baseline bacterial concentrations did not differ by treatment group (p=0.76). Using qPCR, we were able to demonstrate that individual patient total bacterial load and individual species concentration decreased significantly posttreatment in women who received antibiotics, but not placebo (p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: qPCR is a useful technique for the assessment of the vaginal bacterial concentration in pregnancy. The technique is able to demonstrate changes in the total and individual bacterial concentrations following antibiotic treatment and may be able to provide insight into changes leading to genital tract infection and colonization. (BV) . We sought to determine whether qPCR bacterial load quantification could be applied as a tool for PTB prediction. We conducted a secondary analysis of stored vaginal samples from a trial in which women at high risk for PTB were randomized in the mid-trimester to metronidazole and azithromycin or placebo for PTB prevention. Vaginal bacterial counts for total microbial load, Atopobium species, Gardnerella vaginalis, and BV-associated bacteria (BVAB) 1, 2, and 3 were measured using qPCR for 16S rRNA with absolute quantitation. Relative risks (RR) and 95% CI for PTB were calculated for BV diagnosed by Nugent criteria, and for high levels of total and individual bacteria counts. High levels were defined as those above the 75%ile of the pretreatment bacterial load. RESULTS: 243 paired pre-and post-treatment vaginal samples were analyzed: 123 in the Abx group and 120 in the placebo. Overall, 44/243 (18.1%) delivered <37 weeks. The rate of PTB did not differ between antibiotic and placebo groups (p=0.24). Pretreatment, with the exception of BVAB2, none of the total or individual bacterial concentrations were associated with a significantly different RR of PTB. Post-treatment, regardless of treatment group, there was no difference in the risk of PTB when women with the highest pre-treatment quartiles for total or individual bacterial concentrations were compared to the lower 3 quartiles, except for BVAB2 (Table) . In the antibiotic group, those with high levels of BVAB2 had a RR 2.27 for PTB pre-treatment, but post-treatment no women with high levels pre-treatment experienced PTB. Despite an ability to quantitatively assess vaginal bacterial load, results from qPCR of these organisms and total bacterial load were not predictive of PTB. The reduction in preterm birth following antibiotic treatment among women with the highest concentrations of BVAB2 requires further exploration. Outcomes Associated with Maternal Tobacco Use in the Setting of Gestational Diabetes.  Of 760 subjects included in the analysis, 130 (17%) selfreported maternal tobacco use. The risk of select outcomes are seen in table 1. Smokers did not require a significantly higher dose of glyburide to attain glycemic control, nor did they more frequently require insulin. Neonatal acidemia was significantly more common in the smokers. The odds of a small for gestational age (SGA) infant was significantly increased, even after adjusting for obesity and chronic hypertension. Maternal tobacco use in the setting of gestational diabetes is associated with increased risks for SGA infants and neonatal acidemia without associated decreases in the risk of macrosomia or birth injury. Cerclage in Triplet Pregnancy. Eduardo J Aguin, Elizabeth S Langen, Cosmas Van De Ven, Marjorie Treadwell. Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. INTRODUCTION: Triplet pregnancies are frequently complicated by prematurity with its concomitant increase in perinatal mortality and morbidity. No current data address the impact of cerclage placement in patients with a short cervix by ultrasound in patients with higher order multiple gestations. The objective of this study is to evaluate the impact of cervical cerclage in triplet pregnancies complicated shortened cervical length. We conducted this retrospective cohort study of triplet gestations with a cervical length less than 2.5cm between 16 and 30 weeks gestation. Group 1 consisted of patients who underwent cervical cerclage placement, and patients of Group 2 were managed expectantly without cerclage. Patients who did not deliver at our institution were excluded. Data including demographics and other obstetric and neonatal outcome information was abstracted from the medical records. Outcomes were measured using Student's T-tests. We identified 31 triplet pregnancies with a cervical length less than 2.5 centimeters between 2007 and 2013. 4 patients were excluded. Group 1 consisted of 7 patients with 20 patients in Group 2. The two groups were similar in the selected demographic characteristics such as age, ethnicity, parity, history of previous preterm delivery, and cervical length at the time of diagnosis of short cervix. However, gestational age at the time of diagnosis of short cervical length was less in Group 1. Gestational age at time of delivery was significantly decreased in Group 1 with mean gestational age of 26.96 weeks versus 31.36 weeks in Group 2 (P<0.05). No other statistically significant obstetric or neonatal outcomes differences were identified. CONCLUSIONS: Cerclage placement in triplet pregnancies complicated by a short cervix does not prevent preterm birth, and may be associated with a significantly decreased gestational age at the time of delivery compared to the patients who did not undergo cerclage placement. Although, the difference in outcomes may reflect only the early gestational age of cervical shortening and not the fact cerclage was placed. Our results should be interpreted with caution. Umbilical cord blood gases measurement are the most direct method to rule out fetal metabolic acidosis with a medicolegal importance, and unfortunately they are measured after the delivery. Management of the second stage of labor can be difficult including decisions regarding intervention after a prolonged second stage. Although most studies have shown that perinatal outcomes are not compromised with a prolonged second stage of labor, there is always the concern of the potential benefit of cesarean delivery in specific cases. METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was done. The patient population included pregnancies presenting with prolonged second stage of labor. The exposed group consisted of cases with a cesarean delivery after a prolonged second stage, and the unexposed group consisted of cases with a vaginal delivery after a prolonged second stage. Analyses were performed to compare demographics, umbilical blood pH and base deficit in both groups. The patient population included 101 cases; exposed group (n=8) and unexposed group (n=93). Umbilical blood pH was increased significantly in the group exposed to the cesarean delivery (p<0.05). Gestational age, neonate birth weight and umbilical cord blood base deficit were not found to be significantly different between the exposed and unexposed group. CONCLUSIONS: Cesarean delivery after a prolonged second stage of labor is associated with higher umbilical cord blood pH than vaginal delivery, and this finding should be considered. However decisions regarding intervention such as cesarean delivery must be individualized. The analysis of the results of the 19 patients at 'high risk', also, showed significant changes in OEA (p=0.057) levels both in an 11-week RTDI, and with 10-week intervals (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: OfFN has a limited value in predicting PTB in asymptomatic high-risk women, while IGFBP-1 shows an insignificant contribution. Even though the IGFBP-1 kit costs the NHS ≤20-30, ofFN kits are universally 4 times more expensive. Mass Spectrometry Analysis of one sample costs the NHS only ≤20-30. These data are very promising, indicating that a conservative 8 week period and a more variable 10 week period can be provided for the preparation of primary prevention, with plasma OEA, in particular, in seemingly a good predictor of the RTDI in asymptomatic women. analysed by UHPLC-tandem mass spectrometry and the pregnancy outcomes categorised into term and preterm delivery (>37 and <37 completed gestational weeks, respectively). Women also had cervical IGFBP-1 (threatened PTB group) and/or ultrasound cervical length (CL) (high risk clinic group) measurements. Plasma ECB levels were analysed individually and ROC analyses undertaken to determine specificity, sensitivity, NPV and PPV values. These were compared to values obtained for cervical IGFBP-1 and CL (<25mm). RESULTS: Plasma AEA levels were significantly (p=0.025; Student's t-test) higher in women who delivered prematurely (0.6± 0.38nM) than in those at term (0.4 ± 0.24nM), whilst OEA and PEA levels were not significantly different. ROC analyses of plasma AEA values indicated a sensitivity of 66.67% and specificity of 69.70%, with a PPV of 47% and NPV of 21%. Cervical IGFBP-1 gave a sensitivity of 54%, specificity of 64%, PPV of 37% and NPV of 78%, whilst the specificity for the CL measurements was 77% and the NPV 89%. Both the sensitivity and PPV were 0%. There were no correlations (Spearman) between cervical IGFBP-1 measurements or CL and plasma AEA levels. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that plasma AEA is a better predictor of PTB than cervical IGFBP-1 and CL measurements, however, the numbers tested (n=51) are relatively small and our results will need to be confirmed in larger trials. Furthermore, the actual role of plasma AEA in the aetiolopathology of PTB requires further examination. The etc) . The purpose of this study is to evaluate how the adaptation of an Electronic Medical Record (EMR) system has changed the medication errors at one institution. Records of self-reported medication errors were analyzed at one hospital over a period of four years which included the introduction of an EMR. Errors were reported with information about the phase of care and ward on which they occurred, the error category and type, the medications involved and a brief description of the event. These were reviewed and scrutinized for accuracy. Independent-samples t-tests were used to compare the proportion of errors before and after EMR implementation. The error rate (# of errors/patient days of care) was equal before and after the adaptation of the EMR (0.3%). The distribution of errors by location was significantly greater on the Labor and Delivery ward and reduced in the ante/postpartum ward (47% vs. 84% and 53% vs. 16% respectively, p<0.001). Changes in the distribution of errors by category, phase and error type were not statistically significant. The data showed a trend toward fewer errors reaching the patient (Category C or higher), fewer errors in the documenting and dispensing phases and fewer wrong administration technique errors. CONCLUSIONS: Implementation of an EMR does not reduce overall medication error rates but may be helpful in reducing how many errors actually reach the patient. In addition, an EMR may result in a shift of error rates from less acute to more acute clinical areas with further implications for patent safety. Further study is warranted to determine how EMR could be made more effective in reducing medication errors. A year later, she had an uneventful pregnancy with vaginal delivery of a healthy newborn, weighing 3100 gm. Her postpartum period was uneventful and the newborn did well. Her BHCG levels were followed up for a year-normal. We came across pregnancy following successful treatment of term chorioca with cerebral mets in 5 additional patients, details of which are reported in English literature, although a reference but no details of future pregnancies in these patients have been reported. A Sufficient disease free interval following term index chorio-ca with brain metastasis having undergone multi chemo and even if no neurosurgery, can have a favorable outcome. CONCLUSIONS: Successful outcome of pregnancies can occur after treatment of choriocarcinoma with brain metastasis. Thus, treatment with fertility preservation is an option worth consideration, but in view of the rarity of the condition, more data are necessary. (HbA1c) is measured in early pregnancy to assess recent glycemic control, particularly among obese women at risk of glucose intolerance. However, it is unclear if HbA1c, with lower pregnancy compared with non-pregnancy values, is an optimal marker of inadequate glycemic control in early pregnancy across all body mass index (BMI) values. We quantified the association between first trimester BMI and HbA1c, separately for normal weight, overweight, and obese women. We enrolled 293 non-diabetic women with singleton pregnancies in a prospective observational study. The association between BMI and HbA1c between 11 0/7-13 6/7 weeks gestation was quantified. Mean HbA1c across BMI classes [normal weight (18.5-24.9 kg/m2), overweight (25.0-29.9 kg/m2), and obese (≥30.0 kg/m2)] was compared using ANOVA. Within each BMI class, the linear association between HbA1c and BMI was evaluated. Mean ± standard deviation (sd) and correlation (r) with significance at the 0.05 level are reported. RESULTS: Enrolled women were non-Hispanic White (62%), non-Hispanic Black (23%), and Hispanic (10%), a mean age of 29 ± 6.2 years, and 56% were parous. Mean BMI was 28.7 ± 7.3 kg/m 2 , and mean HbA1c (%) was 5.2 ± .3 (range 4.4-6.2). Mean HbA1c was statistically different across normal, overweight, and obese BMI classes (5.1 v. 5.2 v. 5.3, p=.001). HbA1c was positively correlated with BMI within the obese class (r=.33, p=0.008) but not within the normal or overweight classes. CONCLUSIONS: Early pregnancy BMI is positively correlated with HbA1c only among obese women. However, the clinical significance of our findings is unclear, as mean HbA1c was clinically normal in each BMI class. Thus, HbA1c may not be a reliable sole marker of glucose tolerance. Other early pregnancy serum markers may improve our ability to quantify glucose tolerance among women and identify those at risk of future GDM. are the most common birth defects in humans, occurring in roughly 1% of all live births. We sought to evaluate perinatal outcomes among women with simple and complex CHD. This was a retrospective cohort study of 143 women that received care at a single institution from 2008-2013. CHD was categorized as simple or complex. Maternal and neonatal outcomes were compared between women with CHD and those with acquired cardiac disease (ACD) (valvular, cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias) , and between women with simple & complex CHD. Prenatal genetic referral was assessed. Statistical comparisons were made using univariate analyses; p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: From 143 women, 86 had CHD; 41(48%) simple; 45(52%) complex.CHD were significantly more likely to undergo an operative vaginal delivery (OVD) (28% vs. 14%, p=0.05) & have more chorioamnionitis (9% vs. 0%, p=0.02) when compared to ACD. Complications: preeclampsia, GDM, postpartum hemorrhage, abruption, PTD, prolonged hospital stay, & need for ICU admission were not significantly different. Neonatal outcomes: gestational age at delivery, birth weight, rates of 5 minute Apgar scores <7, & NICU admission were similar. When women with simple CHD were compared to complex CHD, vaginal delivery rates (76% vs. 68% p=0.45) & OVD rates (24% vs. 29%, p=0.79) were similar. When we assessed the pattern of referral for prenatal genetic, 45 % (39) CHD women were not referred. Of those referred, only half (51 %) were referred for the proper indication -CHD. Fetal Echo where done in late gestation in 31.9 %. None of the patients had invasive prenatal diagnosis. CONCLUSIONS: CHD pregnancies are more likely to undergo OVD, and similar perinatal outcomes , regardless the baseline cardiac anomaly. Our multidisciplinary approach to coordinate care for cardiac patients might have favorably modified outcomes. However,there was a lack of primary provider's awareness and patient acceptance regarding CHD and the potential risk to herself and her unborn child.Therefore, education and active pattern of referral for genetic evaluation in women CHD needs to be encouraged. Maternal obesity is increasing in most countries and is associated with increased perinatal risks. These risks further increase if obese women gain more than recommended by the institute of medicine (IOM). Studies about effects of gestational weight loss (GWL) in obese women and pregnancy outcomes are starting to emerge. Therefore, the aim of this systematic review is to examine the effect of gestational weight loss in obese pregnant women on pregnancy outcomes. METHODS: We performed a thorough search in PUBMED, CINAHL and EMBASE with the keywords 'obesity', 'pregnancy', 'pregnancy outcomes', 'weight loss', 'weight gain' and 'weight reduction'. The quality of the articles that met the inclusion criteria were reviewed by the quality check of the Cochrane guideline from 2008. RESULTS: The first literature search produced 175 citations and based on predefined eligibility criteria, 152 were excluded. The remaining 23 articles were read in full text. Additionally, 9 articles were identified by the snowball method. Finally, 14 studies were selected for quality assessment. Thirteen were cohort studies and 1 was a randomized controlled trial. The sample size of included studies ranged from 841 to 709 575 singleton pregnancies. All studies show that GWL in obese women is associated with more small-for-gestational-age (SGA) babies, but less large-for-gestational-age (LGA) babies, and less caesarean section. More specifically, in obese from class I, GWL is associated with more SGA and less caesarean section; for those from class II and III with GWL, less LGA-infants are reported; and obese from class III with GWL showed less gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). Because of the wide variety of results in the various studies, further in depth investigation is needed. CONCLUSIONS: GWL in obese women reduces the risk of elective caesarean and LGA-infants at the expense of an increase in SGA infants. The effects differ across different classes of BMI and therefore more epidemiological data are required to provide updated guidelines. Cesarean Delivery and Risk for Subsequent Spontaneous Abortion. Zachary S Bowman, 1 Ken R Smith, 2 Robert M Silver. 1 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 2 Population Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. INTRODUCTION: Prior cesarean delivery (CD) has been reported to increase risk of subsequent miscarriage, but results have been mixed and studies have been limited by small sample size. Our objective was to examine the risk of subsequent spontaneous abortion (SAb) in women with history of CD. METHODS: Retrospective cohort study of women whose first birth occurred in Utah from 1996-2011. Women who underwent at least one CD (exposed) were identified from the Utah Population Database (UPDB) by birth certificate data and discharge diagnosis codes and compared to women with vaginal delivery only (unexposed). The outcome was defined as (1) dilation and curettage for SAb following a given live birth or (2) the time to SAb as identified by ICD9 and CPT codes from statewide Ambulatory Surgery and Inpatient Discharge records. Incomplete, illogical or inconsistent records were excluded. Data were analyzed by multivariate logistic regression and restricted to women at the time of their first, second or third live birth. Covariates in the models included maternal age, Hispanic ethnicity, marital status, education level, gravidity, and prior SAb. RESULTS: 260,249 women with at least one live birth were identified in the UPDB. Analysis was limited to 3 prior births. After exclusions, 255,082, 154,930, and 70,228 women were analyzed who had at least one, two, and three prior live births and 6067, 2795 and 1007 subsequent SAb identified, respectively. Results of the analysis models are shown in the table. Women with one prior CD and at least 1 or 2 live births were not at increased risk for subsequent SAb. Women with 1 of 3 or 3 of 3 prior cesareans had an odds ratio (95%CI) for subsequent SAb of 1.29 (1.04-1.6) and 1.22 (1.00-1.50), though this is not likely clinically significant. The reported prevalence of antiphospholipid antibodies in women with a chief complaint of pregnancy loss (PL) varies, as does the reported risk of adverse outcomes in subsequent pregnancies. Our objective was to assess (1) prevalence of antiphospholipid antibodies meeting revised Sapporo thresholds among women presenting with a chief complaint of PL and (2) risk in subsequent pregnancies. METHODS: Retrospective cohort of patients presenting for recurrent PL from 2003-2012. Antiphospholipid antibodies were checked at providers' discretion. Patients were considered positive if at least one of the following was present: lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin IgG or IgM (≥40U), or anti-b2 glycoprotein 1 IgG or IgM >99th percentile (>40 SU). Patient data was obtained by review of medical records. RESULTS: 338/390 (87.2%) women with a chief complaint of pregnancy loss had antiphospholipid antibodies tested. 22/338 (6.5%) tested positive for at least one antiphospholipid antibody. 2 were negative on repeat testing. 9 had isolated recurrent PL ≤ 14 weeks, 11 had PL plus history of either venous thromboembolism (VTE), delivery <34 weeks for pre-eclampsia or placental insufficiency, or fetal demise >14 weeks. Subsequent pregnancy outcomes were available for 13/20 patients (Table) . Subsequent obstetric morbidity was significantly more likely in those patients with history of VTE and SLE compared to women with recurrent PL alone (p=0.015).  Prevalence of positive antiphospholipid antibodies in women with a chief complaint of PL and without either autoimmune disease or prior thrombosis was very low (2.7%). Among these women, subsequent pregnancy outcomes were largely favorable and uncomplicated.  We conducted a retrospective cohort analysis of 1,886 obese women who delivered a singleton pregnancy at our institution from 2009-2012. Women were stratified based on pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) into subclasses of obesity: class I (BMI 30.0-34.9 kg/m2), class II (BMI 35.0-39.9 kg/m2), and class III (BMI ≥ 40.0 kg/m2). The primary outcome was cesarean delivery. Secondary outcomes are listed in the table. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated based on weight gain less-than or greater-than the recommended 11-20 pounds. Weight gain within guidelines was the referent for each class. RESULTS: Prior to pregnancy, 957 women were obese class I, 508 women were obese class II, and 421 women were obese class III. During pregnancy, 60.1% of women gained more than the recommended amount of weight; only 18.7% of women gained the recommended 11-20 pounds. Women with class I obesity increased their risk of hypertensive disorders and LGA with excessive weight gain. Women with class II obesity increased their risk of cesarean delivery with excessive weight gain. Women with class III obesity increased their risk of cesarean delivery and hypertensive disorders with excessive weight gain. Less than recommended weight gain had no clear associations. It provides a unique resource with which to explore the impact of perinatal events on long term outcomes. We used data from the CPP to evaluate the relationship between maternal body mass index (BMI) and offspring IQ. The analysis was restricted to women who delivered singleton infants at term (n=40,450). We compared the Stanford-Binet IQ scores at age 4 years among the children of women in the following BMI groups (kg/m2): normal (18.5-24.9), overweight (25-25.9), obese (30-34.9) severely obese (35-34.9), and morbidly obese (≥40). Associations between BMI and IQ were evaluated through generalized linear models with adjustments for maternal age, race, parity, education, smoking, income, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and chronic hypertension; intracluster correlation was corrected with generalized estimating equations. Of the eligible children, 29,576 had an IQ test at age 4. In the unadjusted analysis, compared with children of women with normal BMI, the children of overweight, obese, severely obese, and morbidly obese women had IQ scores that were lower by 2.2 (P<0.01), 2.7 (P<0.01), 2.8 (P<0.01), and 4.5 (P<0.01) points, respectively. After adjusting for confounders, the trend remained signifi cant, but the IQ defi cits were much smaller. Maternal education and income were the covariates that contributed most to this attenuating effect (table) . CONCLUSIONS: Higher maternal BMI is associated with lower offspring IQ. The confounding factors that most attenuated the association were the markers of maternal socioeconomic status (SES), primarily maternal education and income. The prevalence of obesity is four times higher now than when this cohort was followed. This question should be evaluated prospectively in a contemporary cohort that collects information about maternal IQ and SES. To examine the relationship between insulin action and insulin response in women with normal glucose tolerance (NGT) and gestational diabetes (GDM) in early, relative to pregravid and late pregnancy. METHODS: Insulin sensitivity was assessed using the euglycemic clamp and insulin response to an intravenous glucose challenge in 34 women. Eighteen NGT (11 lean and 7 obese) and 16 GDM (9 lean and 7 obese) were evaluated prior to pregnancy, in early (12-14 weeks) and late (34-36 weeks) gestation. The relationship between insulin action and insulin response was assessed using the disposition index (DI) and correlated with reproductive hormones, leptin and cytokines in early pregnancy. RESULTS: From pregravid through early pregnancy there was an increase in insulin response; lean NGT and GDM (p=0.002) and obese NGT and GDM (p=0.02). In lean NGT and GDM there was an increase in insulin sensitivity, pregravid through early pregnancy (p=0.005) and a trend in obese NGT and GDM (p=0.06). The DI in early pregnancy was significantly higher compared to pregravid and late pregnancy (p=0.0001). In early pregnancy plasma leptin correlated with insulin response (r=0.62, p=0.01) and insulin sensitivity (r=-0.75, p=0.0008). There was a negative correlation between TNF alpha and insulin sensitivity (r=-0.69, p=0.003). CONCLUSIONS: The increases in both insulin response and insulin sensitivity in early gestation are unique metabolic adaptations during pregnancy. The hyperbolic relationship between insulin response and insulin sensitivity, present prior to pregnancy and during late pregnancy, is not evident in early pregnancy for both lean and obese NGT and GDM. We speculate that the increase in insulin response is a unique manifestation of anabolic metabolism in early gestation. The Sky High Costs of Air Ambulance Transport of Patients in Suspected Preterm Labor. Linda R Chambliss, 1 Miha Luconvik, 2 Robert Garfield. 1 1 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center, Phoenix, Az, USA; 2 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University Medical Center, Ljublijana, Slovenia. INTRODUCTION: Patients with suspected preterm labor are often transported from small hospitals to larger institutions. Patients can be transported by either ground or air ambulance. Air ambulance transport is more expensive and may not always be medically necessary. In this day of heightened awareness of health care costs, the use of an air ambulance should be re-evaluated to determine if the extra costs can be justified. We sought to determine how often patients who are transported by air ambulance for suspected preterm labor are discharged undelivered or deliver at least 24 hours after arrival to our tertiary facility. We sought to determine the cost of transporting these patients. We performed a retrospective chart review of the transport log at one large institution which received patients transported for suspected preterm labor by air ambulance from 1/1/11 to 12/31/11. We reviewed the patients' charts to determine if they were discharged undelivered or delivered more than 24 hours after reaching our referral center. We calculated the cost of the air ambulance transport using the Arizona Department of Health Services rate schedule which calculates the charge based on a base rate as well as a mileage charge. RESULTS: Between 1/1/11 and 12/31/11 fifty nine patients were transported to our facility by air ambulance for suspected preterm labor. Twenty six (46%) were discharged undelivered and 17 (28%) delivered more than 24 hours after arrival. The total charges for these transports were approximately $1,043,270.00. CONCLUSIONS: Patients at low risk for imminent preterm birth are being transported using air ambulances. This excessive use of air ambulances substantially increases health care costs without improving outcomes. testing is increasingly used to target women at risk of spontaneous preterm birth (sPTB) to determine corticosteroid administration, hospital admission and in utero transfer. We sought to compare the management of women at risk of sPTB with and without the use of qualitative fetal fibronectin (fFN) in a tertiary referral centre in both high-risk asymptomatic women attending a preterm surveillance clinic (PSC) and on the antenatal day unit. We also determined whether use of fFN had an impact on hospital resource use. We performed a prospective study comparing management and resource use with and without fFN over a two-year period (2007) (2008) (2009) . Symptomatic women attending the antenatal day unit and all high-risk asymptomatic women (history of sPTB between 16-34 weeks, preterm pre-labour rupture of membranes, cervical surgery and uterine anomalies) attending the PSC for cervical length assessment had fFN testing (22+0 and 34+6 weeks' gestation) over a one-year period. RESULTS: The sPTB rate <37 weeks during the period in which fFN testing was used in clinical management was lower than when it was not in use (8.0% vs 15.6%, p=0.03). Within the PSC, there was no significant difference in corticosteroid/tocolytic administration or the rate of hospital admission with or without the use of fFN. However, a positive fFN in symptomatic women led to increased tocolytic administration (16.7% vs 1.0%, p<0.001), increased corticosteroid administration (47.6% vs 9.1%, p<0.001) and increased hospital admission (90.5% vs 46.6%, p<0.001). The availability of fFN testing was not associated with a significant increase in neonatal admissions (p=1.0) or length of stay on the neonatal intensive care unit (p=0.89). The costs of hospital resource use were similar regardless of fFN use. The use of fFN testing in preterm birth management has the potential to enhance the care algorithm, resulting in a difference in the preterm birth rate without an adverse effect on neonatal outcome or hospital costs. Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) is a component of the innate immune system and is related to the susceptibility of infection. MBL2 gene polymorphisms are associated with quantitative and qualitative MBL abnormalities in the plasma. It is not known whether the MBL gene deficiency and a low second trimester plasma MBL level is a significant risk factor for preterm birth. We conducted a prospective case-control study exploring the associations of MBL2 gene single-nucleotide polymorphisms with preterm birth in 51 mothers who developed preterm births and 255 mothers with term deliveries at a tertiary center in Taiwan. The blood samples were collected at 16 to 23 weeks of gestation for all mothers and 11 mothers with term delivery and 9 with preterm birth had further blood samples at delivery. DNA was isolated and polymorphisms in exon 1 and promoter region of MBL2 gene were determined using sequence specific primers by PCR. The plasma concentrations of MBL were measured by ELISA. The expected correlation between genotypes and second trimester plasma MBL levels was confirmed in mothers with term and preterm deliveries. Among mothers who developed preterm births, the frequency of genotypes associated with MBL deficiency was not significantly increased. The second trimester plasma MBL levels were not significantly different between mothers who developed preterm births (n=51) and term deliveries (n=255). However, among mothers (n=11) with term pregnancies, the MBL plasma level significantly increased from second trimester to delivery, whereas the MBL level did not alter in mothers (n=9) who developed preterm delivery. CONCLUSIONS: Genotypes known to cause low MBL plasma levels during pregnancy are not associated with an increased risk of preterm births. The low second trimester plasma MBL level is not a risk factor for the development of preterm birth. Vigorous Neonates with Acidemia at Term. Cecily Clark-Ganheart, 1 Julia Timofeev, 1 Annelee Boyle, 1 Samuel Smith, 2 Rita Driggers, 1 Patrick Ramsey. 1 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medstar Washington Hospital Center, Washington, DC, USA; 2 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medstar Franklin Square, Baltimore, MD, USA. INTRODUCTION: To compare outcomes among vigorous neonates (5 minute Apgar score ≥7) with acidemia (arterial cord pH ≤ 7) at birth to vigorous neonates without acidemia (arterial cord pH ≥7.1). METHODS: A retrospective case-control study was performed using the Medstar PeriBirth labor database. Universal cord gas analysis was adopted at Medstar Washington Hospital Center in 2009. All singleton term deliveries between 37.0-42.0 with arterial cord pH ≤7.0 and 5-minute Apgar score ≥7 from 2010-2012 (Cases, n=170) were matched using controls with arterial cord pH ≥7.1 and 5-minute Apgar score ≥7 (Controls, n=170). Neonatal outcomes were examined. Two-sample t-test with normality assumption and chi-squre tests was used for analysis. Statistical significance was defined as p≤0.05. RESULTS: Of 4,107 term, singleton deliveries in which cord blood gas analysis was available, 170 vigorous, acidemic neonates were delivered (incidence of 4.1%). No significant differences obstetric or medical risk factors were identified between the 2 groups. Cases and controls did not differ in the NICHD category of fetal heart tracing (p = 0.54). Cases were more likely to be delivered by emergent cesarean section (25.5% vs 14.7%, p=0.004). Case neonates had an increased NICU admission (OR 2.68 95% CI 1.6-4.5). INTRODUCTION: Gestational weight gain has been shown to be influenced by early second trimester maternal insulin concentration, with high insulin concentration resulting in excessive weight gain. The association of insulin and weight gain may differ by body mass index (BMI). The objective of this study was to evaluate the association of early gestational weight gain (GWG) on second trimester insulin resistance (IR) and IR on late GWG and whether these are influenced by baseline BMI in non-diabetic women. A secondary analysis of a multi-center trial of vitamins C/E to prevent preeclampsia in low risk women. Insulin and glucose were measured at 22-26 weeks gestation and used to quantify IR using the homeostatis model assessment (HOMA-IR). BMI was measured at baseline (7-16 weeks). Women diagnosed with gestational diabetes, missing a weight measurement at the blood draw or within two weeks prior to delivery were excluded. Rates of early and late GWG per week were the difference between blood draw weight and baseline or delivery weight, respectively, divided by the number of elapsed weeks. Excessive GWG was GWG per week above the 2009 IOM guidelines for 2nd and 3rd trimester rates of GWG per week (1.3 underweight, 1.0 normal weight, 0.7 overweight and 0.6 obese). Multivariable models adjusted for baseline BMI, race, maternal age, smoking, treatment group and either gestational age (GA) at baseline (early) or GA at blood draw (late).  Between the years 2000-2010 we identified 48 women with twin pregnancy who had PPROM and a latency period greater than 24 hours. We compared the neonatal morbidity and mortality between the presenting and non-presenting twins, assuming that the membranes rupture occurred in the lower sac. Importantly, in 30 women we were able to identify the ruptured sac by ultrasound examination demonstrating oligohydramnion. In these 30 cases, we compared neonatal outcome among fetuses in the ruptured sac and those that were in the intact membranes sac. RESULTS: The median gestational age was 31 weeks (range 28-33) with median latency between PPROM and delivery of 9 days (IQR 1-18). In 30 women where we were able to identify the ruptured sac, 90% (27/30) of the membranes rupture occurred in the lower sac (presenting twin). There were no significant differences between the presenting and non-presenting twin regarding neonatal morbidity and mortality. Moreover, no differences were found when fetuses with ruptured sac were compared to those with intact membranes sac ( While the adverse effects of maternal obesity on pregnancy outcome (e.g. increased rates of preeclampsia and gestational diabetes) are well recognised, the specific mechanisms underlying such effects remain poorly understood. Because circadian rhythms are integral to metabolic homeostasis and undergo substantial adaptations in pregnancy, they may provide a mechanistic link between obesity and adverse pregnancy outcomes. This study examined the impact of obesity on maternal circadian variation in core body temperature (CBT) and clock gene expression in metabolic tissues. It was hypothesised that obesitydriven disturbances to the circadian system may disturb key maternal adaptations that normally occur in pregnancy. Female Wistar rats were fed either chow alone (CON) or chow supplemented with a cafeteria diet (CAF) to induce obesity prior to mating. iButton temperature loggers were implanted and programmed to record CBT every 15 min throughout pregnancy. CBT rhythms were assessed by cosinor analysis to derive mesor, amplitude and acrophase. Maternal liver and adipose tissue samples were collected at four hourly time points across day 15 and 21 of gestation. Expression of core clock genes was analysed in these tissues by RT-qPCR. RESULTS: Obesity reduced mesor CBT during pregnancy (0.18°C; P<0.01) but did not affect amplitude or acrophase of the temperature rhythm. There was a significant interaction (P<0.02) between diet and pregnancy stage, such that the pre-partum decline in CBT (typically observed in rats) commenced by day 16 in both groups, but was smaller in CAF animals such that CBT values converged in the CON and CAF mothers near term. Preliminary gene expression analysis at 12pm showed hepatic expression of Bmal1 was decreased (43%; P<0.05) while Per2, Per3 and Reverbα were all increased (57%, 64%, 43%; P<0.05) in the CAF group. In contrast, the CAF diet had no effect on clock gene expression in adipose tissue at 12pm. CONCLUSIONS: Diet-induced obesity altered maternal CBT regulation throughout pregnancy without affecting temperature rhythmicity. Hepatic, but not adipose, clock gene expression was also affected by the CAF diet at 12pm. This indicates that obesity disturbs the circadian molecular machinery in a tissue-specific manner. Further analyses across all circadian time points are needed to define the full impact of maternal obesity on the circadian profile of hepatic and adipose clock genes.  We provide further support for the association of the two functional polymorphisms with a modest increase in risk. These variants are thought to alter the functions of MTRR and SHMT enzymes. This study provides no evidence for a substantial contribution of common (MAF>0.05) polymorphisms in the folate pathway to risk of siPTB. It is, to our knowledge, the largest cohort of well-phenotyped siPTB cases to date. The Pregnancy determines the offspring and mother's future health. Maternal nutrition is a major factor in the intrauterine environment, implicated in the aetiology of many pregnancy disorders. Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM) is one such disorder; long-term consequences include increased risk of offspring obesity, cardiovascular disease (CVD), hypertension, and type 2 diabetes. With the global obesity epidemic, and CVD the leading cause of death in the developed world, prevention of GDM is of paramount importance. Metabolomics, an analytical approach which allows for the appraisal of small molecular mass compounds present in biofluid, has been used previously (fetal growth restriction/preeclampsia) to differentiate between cases and controls in early gestation. The aim of this pilot study was to investigate associations between early gestation metabolite profile, maternal diet and GDM development. Maternal serum at 20 weeks' gestation and dietary data were obtained from the New Zealand cohort of the SCOPE study -an international pregnancy cohort. Forty eight participants were used (22 subsequently developed GDM, 26 controls with uncomplicated pregnancies). Metabolic profiling was performed using gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry. Metabolites were identified using R software and an in-house MS library, and statistical analysis was performed using SPSS v21 and MetaboAnalyst. RESULTS: A partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) based on the profile of unidentified metabolites in spectral bins showed clear separation between GDM cases and controls. Forty eight metabolites in the profile were identified thus far. Of these, cysteine level was significantly higher in the GDM group compared to the control group (p=0.006), as was itaconic acid level (p=0.001). No significant differences were found in dietary intake between cases and controls (p>0.05), and a canonical correlation revealed no statistically significant linear relationships between dietary intake variables and identified metabolites. The separation in the PLS-DA of unidentified compounds demonstrates the potential of the early gestation metabolite profile to differentiate between women that will develop GDM, and those with uncomplicated pregnancies. Placental alpha-microglobulin-1 (PAMG-1) is highly concentrated in amniotic fluid. An immunoassay can be used clinically to determine the presence of PAMG-1 in vaginal secretions and aid in the diagnosis of ruptured membranes. Our objective was to determine if the presence of PAMG-1 in women with intact membranes and evidence of preterm labor is a useful predictor of preterm birth. A prospective cohort study of women between 16 and 34 weeks gestation presenting with symptoms of preterm labor and intact membranes was conducted at two academic institutions. The presence of PAMG-1 was determined using a commercially available kit (AmniSure ®) designed to diagnose ruptured membranes. Women with suspected or confirmed ruptured membranes were excluded. Subjects with uterine contractions and either cervical dilatation >/= 1cm, effacement >/= 50%, cervical length < 30 mm, or a positive fetal fibronectin test were eligible. Women with cervical dilatation of > 6 cm, multiple gestation, preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction, or placenta previa were excluded. The primary outcome was delivery within seven days. Odds ratios were calculated and multiple logistic regression was used to control for potential confounders. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive were calculated. RESULTS: A total of 100 women were enrolled and 86 had outcome data available. PAMG-1 was detected in 19/86 (22.1%) subjects and they were more likely to deliver within 7 days than those without PAMG-1 detected [6/19 (31.6%) vs. 5/67 (7.5%), OR 5.7, 95% CI 1.5 to 21.6]. These findings persisted after adjusting for potential confounders including gestational age at PAMG-1 test, maternal age, race, and history of preterm birth (adjusted OR 6.7, 95% CI 1.3 to 33.8). For delivery within 7 days, the sensitivity was 54.6% and the specificity was 82.7%. The positive predictive value was 31.6% and the negative predictive was 92.5%. CONCLUSIONS: Placental alpha-microglobulin-1 is often present the vaginal secretions of women with evidence of preterm labor and intact membranes. Its presence is associated with a high risk of delivery within seven days. Whole blood serum levels of heavy metals including cadmium, lead, and mercury, and urinary levels of barium, beryllium, cobalt, cesium, platinum, antimony, thallium, and tungsten were measured. Results were compared between subjects with a history of PTB versus those without a history of PTB. Chi-square, t-test, and analysis of covariance were used as indicated. Significance was set at p < 0.05. Multiple logistic regression analysis of risk factors for CS showed that after controlling for possible confounders, epidural was not found to be an independent risk factor for CS in any of the classes. CONCLUSIONS: Epidural does not represents a risk factor for CS. The CONCLUSIONS: Uterine rupture of an unscarred uterus is rare but is associated with high rates of maternal morbidity and neonatal morbidity and mortality. Clinicians should be vigilant regarding the possibility of this complication, particularly during late labor (9+ cm dilated) or immediately postpartum in the setting of heavy vaginal bleeding and severe pain. Our objective was to examine potential predictors for perineal complications among women undergoing vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC). METHODS: This is a secondary analysis of the NICHD/MFMU Network Cesarean Registry. We examined term singleton pregnancies of women undergoing VBAC and compared women with no or minor lacerations (up to second-degree) to women with severe laceration (third-or fourthdegree). Univariate regression analyses were performed and significant (p<0.1) variables were included in multivariate logistic regression model. RESULTS: A total of 4,075 women with VBAC were included in the analysis. SPC occurred in 17.3% cases (n=704); 82.7% had no or minor complications (n=3,371). After adjustments, SPC remained significantly related to vacuum and forceps extractions and increased neonatal weight. The risk of SPC was decreased by prior vaginal delivery, African American or Hispanic race, age <24 years and BMI ≥40. (EFT) has been reported as a cardiometabolic risk factor in adults, though not previously characterized in the fetus. Fetuses of diabetic mothers have altered adiposity, increased insulin resistance, increased inflammation, and hypoxia, all suggestive of an adverse intrauterine environment. We sought to compare EFT in fetuses of pregnancies complicated by maternal pregestational diabetes mellitus (DM) with those of fetuses from non-diabetic gestations. We performed a retrospective case control evaluation of fetal echocardiograms to determine EFT in pregnancies complicated by DM (n=25) in comparison to non-diabetic controls (n= 32). Using standard cardiac four-chamber and left ventricular outflow tract images obtained during fetal echocardiography, EFT (mm) was measured in a standardized fashion and compared with maternal body mass index kg/m 2 (BMI) and estimated fetal weight (EFW) in grams using linear regression and Student's t-test. Two reviewers were blinded to echocardiography indication and clinical agreement of less than or equal to 0.1 mm in EFT measurement during random sampling assured inter-observer clinical correlation. All data are presented as mean ±SEM. RESULTS: With the exception of two patients with suspected small ventriculoseptal defects, all fetal echocardiograms demonstrated normal fetal cardiac structure and function. EFT was greater in DM compared to non-diabetic pregnancies (1.45±0.07 mm vs 1.20±0.05 mm; p<0.005). No differences in EFT were noted between non-obese (BMI<29) vs. obese (BMI>30) patients (1.30±0.06 mm vs 1.31±0.06 mm; p=0.95) even though maternal BMI was higher (34.3±1.8 vs 29.8±1.3; p<0.05) in DM compared to non-diabetic pregnancies. There was no difference in EFW between DM and non-diabetic pregnancies (776±62 vs 809±99; p=0.77). EFW was also not different between non-obese (BMI<29) and obese (BMI>30) patients (736±78 gm vs 833±78 gm; p=0.4). CONCLUSIONS: Fetal epicardial fat thickness is increased in diabetic pregnancies, independent of estimated fetal weight and maternal obesity status. Fetal epicardial fat thickness may represent a novel sonographic marker for maternal glycemic control and indicative of future cardiometabolic risk. Appropriate and Timely Betamethasone Administration: Can We Do Better? Stephanie Guseh, 1 Jeffrey Ecker, 2 Anjali Kaimal. 2 1 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Brigham and Women's Hospital; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 2 Division of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Vincent Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Antenatal corticosteroid administration optimally precedes delivery by at least 2 and less than 7 days, but uncertainty in prediction of preterm delivery makes achieving this difficult. We sought to evaluate the use of betamethasone (BMZ) at a single academic institution. METHODS: Women who delivered at <34 weeks were identified, as well as women who received BMZ, but ultimately delivered at ≥34 weeks. Chi-squared statistics and multiple logistic regression were used to identify clinical and demographic factors predictive of BMZ use and preterm birth. RESULTS: 3596 women delivered at ≥24 weeks in our institution in 2012; 95 (2.6%) women delivered at <34 weeks and 83 (2.3%) women received BMZ but delivered at ≥34 weeks. Of deliveries at <34 weeks, 93 (98.0%) received at least one dose of BMZ, 69 (72.6%) were BMZ complete (BC) (delivery > 48 hrs after 1st injection, received 2 injections), and 50.5% received an optimal course (2-7 days prior to delivery). Women who were obese (aOR 2.0 [95% CI 1.03-3.9]) and who initially presented at <26 weeks (aOR 3.1 [95% CI 1.2-7.9]) were more likely to deliver at <34 weeks; there were no other significant differences between women who delivered before and after 34 weeks. Gestational age of <26 weeks at the time of BMZ was associated with a greater likelihood of being BC at the time of delivery (aOR 16.5 [95% CI 1.9-140]) and of receiving an appropriate course of BMZ (aOR 3.5 [95% CI 1.1-10.7]). CONCLUSIONS: Almost all women who delivered at <34 weeks received at least one dose of BMZ and the majority were BC. Women who presented with concern for preterm delivery at <26 weeks were more likely to deliver at <34 weeks and to receive timely and appropriate BMZ, suggesting appropriately heightened vigilance for preterm birth rather than overuse in this population. Further research is needed to identify additional factors to aid in optimizing steroid administration for those who deliver preterm and potentially to decrease excess use in women who will ultimately deliver at a later gestational age. Here, we show that chronic fetal hypoxia accelerates vascular dysfunction in adult offspring independent of shortened vascular telomere length. METHODS: Female Wistar rats were randomly divided into normoxic (N: 21% O 2 , n=13) or hypoxic (H: 14% O 2 , n=13) pregnancy from days 6-20 of gestation. This experimental model of hypoxia does not affect maternal food intake. In adult offspring (1 male per litter), femoral artery endothelial function (in vitro wire myography) and aortic telomere length (Southern blot) were investigated at 4 and 15 months. RESULTS: In offspring from normoxic pregnancy, endothelial function and telomere length declined with age ( Fig. 1) . Offspring of hypoxic pregnancy showed accelerated endothelial dysfunction without shortening of telomeres length at 4 months. CONCLUSIONS: Chronic fetal hypoxia accelerated endothelial dysfunction without accelerating vascular telomere shortening in adult life. Accelerated telomere shortening cannot provide a mechanistic link between hypoxia in utero and developmental programming of increased cardiovascular risk. Supported by the British Heart Foundation. In utero exposure to maternal smoking is associated with small infant size at birth and several studies have reported that IUGR is associated with placental loss of imprinting (LOI). We hypothesized that placentas from women exposed to first-hand tobacco smoke might also demonstrate genomic LOI patterns compared to non-smokers. METHODS: We conducted a cohort study with placentas from the Indiana University Building Blocks of Pregnancy Biobank and the Vitamin C Study for Pregnant Smokers at Oregon Health & Science University. Subjects were consented for placenta collection for research. Pregnancies with known complications were excluded. Placentas of smokers were matched by gestational age with placentas of mothers without known exposure to first-hand tobacco smoke. Tissue specimens were obtained from the placenta in a standardized manner. Novel high resolution melt (HRM) assays were used to genotype single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in CD44, DLK1, H19, IGF2, MEG3, PEG3, and PEG10 genes. RNA from placentas heterozygous for the selected SNPs was further analyzed for LOI. A total of 155 placentas were screened for RNA quality and SNP heterozygosity. Of these 155 samples, 51 were smokers. After excluding for poor RNA quality or other pregnancy complications, 18 cases and 18 controls were identified for analysis. Each SNP was found to be heterozygous in 4 to 21 sample placentas and minor allele frequency was noted to be similar between cases and controls. In total, 17 placentas showed LOI for a single SNP; however, no significant differences in LOI patterns were observed between smokers and nonsmokers. All heterozygous CD44 samples (7 cases, 4 controls) demonstrated LOI, suggesting that this gene may not be imprinted in term placenta. CONCLUSIONS: Though inadequate sample size limits our conclusions, we found that CD44 is not imprinted in human term placenta. Additional samples and imprinted genes will be analyzed to better investigate the effect of maternal tobacco use on LOI in human placentas with the aim to improve clinical therapeutics and counseling. Perinatal Iron Deficiency Increases Susceptibility to Diet-Induced Obesity: Effects of Prenatal Resveratrol Treatment. Stephane L Bourque, Alison S Care, Sandra T Davidge. Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Prenatal ID (PID) during gestation has been shown to cause long-term circulatory dysfunction and increased susceptibility to metabolic derangements in the adult offspring. Here, we sought to determine whether PID would cause increased fat deposition when offspring were fed a high-fat diet. In a separate study, we also sought to determine whether prenatal treatment with resveratrol-a phytoalexin known to confer beneficial metabolic effects-would mitigate the development of obesity in adult offspring. METHODS: Female Sprague Dawley rats were fed a low-iron diet prior to (3 mg/kg Fe) and throughout (10 mg/kg Fe) gestation, and a control diet thereafter; control rats were fed the control diet throughout the entire study. At 3 wk of age, offspring from both groups were fed either a high fat "Western Diet" (WD; 45% fat energy), or a normal diet (ND, 16% fat energy). At 12 wk of age, offspring were instrumented with radiotelemetric transducers for continuous assessments of blood pressure. Body composition was assessed at 24 wk of age at the time of euthanasia. In a separate cohort of rats, pregnant dams from the control and iron-restricted group were treated with and without resveratrol (RESV, 4g/kg diet) throughout pregnancy. Offspring were randomized to receive the WD or ND at 3 wk of age, and assessed for metabolic outcomes at approximately 20 wk of age. RESULTS: At birth, offspring in the iron-restricted group exhibited signs of severe anemia and fetal growth restriction. All offspring fed the WD had higher body weights and had increased visceral adipose tissue (VAT) accumulation compared to their ND-fed littermates, albeit these effects were exacerbated in the PID group. Blood pressure was elevated only in the PID offspring fed the WD (P<0.05), and BPs correlated with VAT weights in the PID group (P<0.05), but not in the control group. Maternal RESV treatment had no discernable adverse effect on pregnancy outcomes, and preliminary data suggest maternal resveratrol treatment during pregnancy mitigated the accumulation of VAT in the PID group (PID+WD: +26.0±6.4% VAT, PID+WD+RESV: +17.8±4.5%; P<0.01) but not the control group (Ctl+WD: +14±8.7% VAT, Ctl+WD+RESV: +11.3±4.5%) compared to their ND-fed littermates. CONCLUSIONS: PID increases the susceptibility to diet-induced obesity, and prenatal RESV treatment may be a therapeutic intervention that mitigates the programming of metabolic dysfunction caused by PID. Intervention Against Programmed Cardiovascular Disease in High Risk Ovine Pregnancy. KL Brain, 1 BJ Allison, 1 Y Niu, 1 CM Cross, 1 N Itani, 1 A D Kane, 1 EA Herrera, 2 DA Giussani. 1 1 Physiology Development & Neuroscience, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom; 2 Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Chile. INTRODUCTION: Chronic fetal hypoxia is a common condition in complicated pregnancy. We and others have reported that in rodents chronic hypoxia programmes cardiovascular disease in the adult offspring. However, relative to humans and sheep, rodents are born immature and the maternal investment in rearing a litter is different. Therefore, the relative contributions of prematurity, maternal attention and chronic fetal hypoxia in the programming mechanisms remain unclear. We have created isobaric hypoxic chambers able to maintain pregnant sheep for the duration of gestation. Here, we report that hypoxic pregnancy in sheep programmes severe hypertension and vascular dysfunction in female offspring during early adulthood and that maternal treatment with antioxidants prevents these effects. METHODS: Catheterised sheep carrying female singletons were exposed to normoxia or hypoxia (10% inspired O2) ± vitamin C (maternal 200 mg.kg -1 i.v. daily) for the last third of gestation (105-138 days; term~145 days). Naturally delivered offspring were reared under normoxia until early adulthood (9 months). At this age, lambs were instrumented with catheters and a femoral Transonic flow probe. Five days later, basal cardiovascular function and the femoral constrictor responses to phenylephrine (0.25-64µg/kg i.a.) were established in vivo. Animals were euthanized, the non catheterised femoral artery excised and its endothelial function determined in vitro by wire myography. RESULTS: Maternal PaO 2 was similarly decreased during hypoxia (106±2 to 47±1 mmHg, P<0.05). Offspring of hypoxic pregnancy showed greater resting arterial pressure, enhanced femoral constrictor responses to phenylephrine in vivo and impaired relaxation to methacholine in vitro (Fig.1) . These effects no longer occurred in pregnancies treated with vitamin C. CONCLUSIONS: Chronic fetal hypoxia programmes significant hypertension and peripheral vascular dysfunction in female offspring at young adulthood in sheep. Maternal antioxidant treatment during pregnancy is an effective intervention. The British Heart foundation and The BBSRC.  We have previously shown that a single course of betamethasone (BET) for induction of fetal lung maturation is associated with decreased fetal growth. Less is known about the effect of antenatal BET treatment on the developing HPA-axis and placental 11ßHSD-2 as a barrier for the transplacental endogeneous cortisol transfer. We therefore analysed the sex-specific effects of a single course of BET treatment on maternal and fetal cortisol and ACTH plasma levels and placental 11ßHSD-2. METHODS: BET (2x12mg, given between 23+5 and 34+0 weeks of gestation (wks)) exposed women (n=86), who delivered between 24+2 and 41+6 wks, were compared to aged-matched controls (n=92). Maternal and umbilical cord blood samples and placental tissue were obtained at delivery. P-values were adjusted for major confounders such as maternal weight gain, smoking etc. In mothers with male fetuses, delivered during the daytime by spontaneous delivery or secondary caesarean section ≥37wks, BET treatment sig. lowered plasma ACTH and cortisol levels compared to controls. Placental 11ßHSD-2 protein levels were sig. increased after BET treatment in male fetuses born <37wks, but were sig. lower compared to females. In male fetuses born >37wks, no sig. differences in 11ßHSD-2 protein levels were found after BET. Umbilical cord ACTH and cortisol levels in BET males were not different from controls. In females, BET treatment had no effect on maternal plasma ACTH and cortisol levels compared to controls. Placental 11ßHSD-2 protein levels were sig. lower after BET treatment compared to controls in fetuses born ≥37wks. Umbilical cord ACTH plasma levels in females were sig. lower after BET treatment compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal ACTH and cortisol blood levels were lower in BET treated women pregnant with male fetuses only, indicating a sex-specific suppression of the maternal HPA-axis. In female fetuses, cord ACTH plasma levels were significantly lower. We speculate that significantly lowered 11ßHSD-2 protein levels in females after BET resulted in a higher placental transfer of maternally derived cortisol to the fetus, thus suppressing female fetal adrenal cortisol production near term. Women with endometriosis exhibit a reduced endometrial sensitivity to progesterone (P), at least partially due to alterations in P receptor (PR) expression. Reduced endometrial P responsiveness compromises fertility and promotes development of experimental endometriosis in animal models. Using a murine model, we recently demonstrated that a P insensitive "endometriosis-like uterine phenotype" can occur as a consequence of direct or ancestral toxicant exposure. In our model, adult female mice exposed in utero to 10 ug/ kg dioxin (F1) exhibit reduced uterine PR expression and sub-fertility at sexual maturity. Additionally, while 39% of animals achieving pregnancy spontaneously deliver preterm, all pregnant F1 mice exhibit an increased sensitivity to lipopolyscaccaride-induced preterm birth. Significantly, we have also documented sub-fertility and a heightened inflammatory response in F1 males. In both sexes, these phenotypes persisted into the F2 and F3 generations. In the current study, we examined whether F1 males can transmit the endometriosis-like phenotype to his female offspring. METHODS: F1 males were maintained on standard rodent chow or fish oil supplemented chow for three weeks prior to being mated to control females. Adult female offspring were examined for uterine PR expression, fertility and pregnancy outcomes. RESULTS: Female offspring of males maintained on the standard diet exhibited reduced uterine PR expression compared to offspring of unexposed controls. Following multiple mating attempts, only 37% of F2 females became pregnant and 29% of the fertile animals subsequently delivered preterm (prior to E19). In contrast, offspring of F1 males provided preconception fish oil exhibited a near normal pattern of uterine PR expression, improved fertility (79%) and 96% delivered healthy pups at term. CONCLUSIONS: Our studies indicate that the endometriosis phenotype can be inherited as a consequence of paternal toxicant exposure. Significantly, paternal preconception dietary modification protected the reproductive health of female offspring. Identification of risk factors for the development of either endometriosis or preterm birth is currently focused on the female patient. Our data suggest that her father and/or male partner may also contribute to her reproductive phenotype. Support: R01ES14942; P30 ES000267. In conjunction with disturbances in myocardial perfusion, cardiac IR is characterized by changes in glucose metabolism which may lead to alterations in cardiac function. Recent evidence suggests that IR may arise from adverse in utero environments, particularly in situations resulting in low birth-weight (LBW). In addition, the prevalent western diet (WD) is also a known contributing factor in the development of IR. However, the interactive effects of in adverse utero environment and postnatal WD on IR development are not fully understood. Our objective was to utilize non-invasive imaging techniques to identify changes in the LBW heart associated with IR development. We postulated that a postnatal WD would exacerbate the LBW cardiac IR phenotype. METHODS: The guinea pig uterine artery ablation model was used. At weaning, pups were categorized as normal birth weight (NBW) or LBW (≥20% reduction in mean birth weight), and were placed on either a control diet (CD) or WD. At 50 and 110 days, animals underwent study with computed tomography (CT) and Positron Emission Tomography (PET). Myocardial perfusion was determined using CT Perfusion, and glucose metabolism was determined using Standardized Uptake Values (SUV) calculated from PET images. Animals were then sacrificed at day 140, and body and heart weights were recorded. RESULTS: Guinea pigs of LBW/WD demonstrated a reduction in bodyweight compared to NBW/CD over the 140 day period. However, relative heart weights were not altered between each group. At 110 days, female LBW/WD demonstrated a significant 36% reduction in myocardial perfusion and reduced SUV compared to NBW/CD animals. In contrast, male guinea pigs did not show significant reductions in myocardial perfusion or SUV. CONCLUSIONS: A LBW with WD negatively impacts upon cardiac perfusion and associated glucose metabolism. This indicates an in utero induced alteration in insulin sensitivity and cardiac function, which is observed when subjected to an adverse postnatal diet. Data also suggest a possible "double hit" insult and sex difference with development of cardiac IR. In conclusion, the combined LBW and WD insults lead to development of the IR phenotype in early adulthood. The epigenome may act as a biological memory explaining how an adverse intra-uterine environment can be associated with disease several decades after exposure. We sought to determine how abnormal fetal growth is associated with modifications in cytosine methylation in a single population of multipotent hematopoietic stem cells. METHODS: Cord blood was collected from 3 groups of neonates (n=20/ gp): 1)IUGR-birthweight (BW) and ponderal index (PI) <10th percentile 2)LGA-BW and PI>90th percentile 3)Con-BW and PI>10th and <90th percentile. CD34+ cells were isolated by immunomagnetic selection. For quantitative genome-wide assessment of cytosine methylation, we used the massively-parallel sequencing-based HELP Tagging. In functionally significant regions of the genome (eg promotors or enhancers), methylation status has been shown to correlate well with gene expression. However, these regions are cell type specific and not easily defined. So we generated a new genome annotation for our purified cell population using public chromatin mapping data for CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells, which enabled us to define candidate regulatory sites (enhancer/promotor) Technical (same cohort) and biological (new cohort) validation was run in 24 samples (8/group). Loci of Interest (LOI) were determined using a linear regression associated with ANOVA and two-sided Tukey-test for locus-specific difference in average methylation between groups and magnitude of methylation difference between groups mean. RESULTS: We found an over-representation of our LOI in enhancer and promotor regions compared to other features. Both IUGR and LGA showed increases in methylation compared to Con with greater sensitivity for male IUGR and female LGA. Interestingly, our LOI are targeted to genes involved in proliferation and self-renewal of stem cells, such as Notch1, DNMT3A, WNT6 (WNT pathway), DUSP4 (MAPK pathway). CONCLUSIONS: Alterations in DNA methylation observed in biologically relevant regions (enhancer/promotor) associated with abnormal fetal growth are sex-specific and may have altered replicative capacity of hematopoietic stem cells with functional implications for an aging phenotype. and fetal cytokine responses which may result in fetal central inflammatory responses. As maternal inflammation is associated with offspring cerebral palsy, cognitive limitations, and altered behavior, we postulated that fetal cytokines may impair developmental neurogenesis. The fetal hippocampus is replete with NPCs which proliferate and ultimately differentiate to neurons and astrocytes to regulate memory and neurobehavior. We determined the effect of TNFa on hippocampal NPC proliferation and neurogenesis, and investigated if TNFa effects were mediated via putative bHLH transcription factors. METHODS: Hippocampal NPCs from e20 fetal rats were cultured in complete (proliferation) and differentiating (neurogenesis) media. At day 8 of culture, NPCs were treated with TNFa (0.2, 2, 20 ng/ml) or DMSO (control) for 72h. NSC proliferation was assessed by MTT assay and protein expression (Western) of the NPC marker (nestin). Neurogenesis was assessed by expression of neuronal (Tuj1) or astrocyte (GFAP) cell markers. Mechanisms of TNFa action were explored by assay of bHLH proliferative (Hes1) and proneurogenic (Mash1) factors. RESULTS: TNFa (0.2, 2 and 20ng/ml) exhibited significant dosedependent suppression of NPC proliferation (12, 20, 25%) with proportionate reductions in nestin (0.6, 0.5, 0.4-fold). In neurogenesis studies, TNFa significantly reduced neuronal (Tuj1: 0.9, 0.8, 0.6-fold) and increased astrocyte (GFAP: 1.1, 1.3, 1.4-fold) differentiation. TNFa significantly downregulated Hes1 (0.7, 0.5, 0.4-fold) and upregulated Mash1 (1.0, 1.2, 1.4-fold) expression. CONCLUSIONS: TNFa suppressed NPC proliferation and promoted preferential differentiation towards astrocyte versus neuronal lineage, with effects likely mediated via Hes1 and Mash1. Inflammation-induced reduction in neurogenesis and increased astrogenesis may have critical consequences for newborn hippocampal function, including cognition and behavior. At last year's meeting we reported that mRNA for TRPC4 and TRPM2 were significantly increased following antenatal GC. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of these channels in the enhance response to endotelin (ET-1) in isolated arteries. METHODS: Pregnant sheep were treated with two IM doses of betamethasone (Bmon the , 0.17 mg/kg) or vehicle (V) 24 h apart at 80 days of gestational age and allowed to deliver at term. Sheep were euthanized at 1.5 yr of age. Arteries (300 mm) obtained from the brachial vascular bed in V (n=8) and BM animals (n=10) were mounted on a wire myograph for measuring isometric force. Responses to increasing concentrations of Endothelin-1 (ET-1) and KCl were assessed in the absence and in presence of inhibitors of TRP channels, i.e. tolfenamic acid (TFA) and N-(p-Amylcinnamoyl)anthranilic acid (ACA). Data are expressed as Mean±SEM and were analyzed by ANOVA. RESULTS: As previously shown, the response to ET-1 was significantly higher in arteries of BM sheep. Although TFA and ACA inhibited ET-1 induced contraction in both groups, the effect of TRP channel blockers on ET-1 vasoconstriction was significantly more pronounced in arteries of GC exposed. Our data provide direct evidence for a mechanism to explain the increased sensitivity to ET-1 following antenatal BM exposure. We have shown that in addition to the increased mRNA expression, the non selective ion channels of the TRPC family are functionally linked to the enhanced effects of ET-1 following antenatal GC exposure. HL 68728. Role of Transient Receptor Potential Channels (TRPC) on Vascular Reactivity Responses to Endothelin in Sheep Exposed Antenatally to Betamethasone. Jorge P Figueroa, Jie Zhang, Angela G Massmann. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. INTRODUCTION: Exposure to glucocorticoids (GC) in the perinatal period is associated with several cardiometabolic alterations. We and others have shown elevations in blood pressure and increased in vitro and in vivo vascular responses to endothelin (ET).The enhanced response to ET-1 is mediated in part by activation of the ADP ribosyl cyclase pathway. The aim of this study was to determine if TRP channels are downstream in the regulation of peripheral vascular resistance and in the vascular response to ET-1 in the femoral bed. METHODS: Pregnant sheep were treated with two IM doses of betamethasone (BM, 0.17 mg/kg n=6) or vehicle (CTR, n=8) at 80 days gestation and allowed to deliver at term. At 1 y of age sheep were chronically instrumented under general anesthesia to place vascular catheters and a femoral artery flow probe. Tolfenamic acid (TFA) a TRP channel blocker (0.1 mg/Kg/h) and niacinamide a cADPR synthesis inhibitor([NIAC] 10 mg/Kg/h iv were administered for 1 hour prior and during an 8-dose (0.18, 0.40, 0.81,1.6, 3.25, 6.50, 8.12, 13 .0 and 16.25 ng/ kg/min ) cummulative intraarterial infusion of ET-1. Blood pressure and flow were recorded continuously and femoral artery vascular resistance (FVR) derived from them. Data Mean±SEM were analyzed by ANOVA. RESULTS: As previously reported FVR was significantly increased by ET in a dose-response manner in both groups. BM was associated with a differential response to TFA in both males and females. While TFA decreased the response to ET-1 in CTR sheep, it induced a significantly higher increase in FVR at higher ET-1 doses. In contrast, the effect of NIAC was significantly greater in Beta. We have shown that antenatal GC treatment significantly increases blood pressure and vascular reactivity in sheep. Here we show that the TRP channels are important mediators of the response to ET-1. The vascular response to ET-1 is mediated by the cADPR/RyR pathway which includes activation of TRP channels. We interpret this finding to be the result of an upregulation of TRP channels in smooth muscle and endothelium. HL 68728 HD 04784. Visceral Fat Modulates the Effects of Antenatal Glucocorticoids on Epicardial Fat Depots in Adult Sheep. Angela G Massmann, Jie Zhang, Jorge P Figueroa. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. INTRODUCTION: Antenatal exposure to glucocorticoids (GC) is associated with significant cardiometabolic alterations. Adipose tissuederived inflammatory mediators and components of the RAS are thought to participate in the regulation of blood pressure. Our working hypothesis states that GC alters the development of white adipose tissue (WAT) which will contribute to the development of metabolic alterations in the adult offspring. Epicardial adipose tissue (EAT) is the visceral fat of the heart and it also adipokines and proinflammatory mediators. These mediators are though to have a direct effect in myocardium and coronary vessels. The aim of this study is to ascertain 1) if antenatal GC alters EAT development and function in the adult particularly the expression of RAS components and 2) if ablation of abdominal visceral fat can improve the EAT alterations. METHODS: Pregnant sheep were treated with two IM doses of betamethasone (Beta, 0.17 mg/kg) or vehicle (V) 24-h apart at 80 days gestation and allowed to deliver at term. In four GC-exposed sheep omental and perirenal fat was removed under general anesthesia (FRB) at 2 mo of age. At 1 y of age EAT was harvested from Beta (n=6), V (n=6) and FRB 9n=4) . EAT proteins were extracted for determining expression levels of adipokines and components of the Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) and measured using western blot. Data are expressed as Mean±SEM and analyzed by ANOVA and two sample t test. RESULTS: Beta sheep showed a trend for angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) 1 to decrease (p=0.08) and for ACE-2 to increase (p=0.06). However, the ACE1/ACE2 ratio was significantly decreased. Most noticeable, the Beta effect was reversed in FRB. Bar with different letters are statistically significantly different. Our data show that prenatal exposure to a single course of GC at 0.55 gestation has long-term effects on adipose tissue function. A significant alteration in the expression of components of the RAS in EAT may be an important contributor for the increased risk for developing coronary heart disease in offspring exposed antenatally to GC. HL 68728 and HD 04784. Sheep. Jie Zhang, Angela G Massmann, Jorge P Figueroa. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. INTRODUCTION: Antenatal exposure to glucocorticoids (GC) is associated with significant cardiometabolic alterations. Our working hypothesis states that GC alters the development of white adipose tissue (WAT) which will contribute to the development of metabolic alterations in the adult offspring. Preadipocytes (PA) the precursor stem cell of adipocytes secrete inflammatory mediators. To improve the understanding of the effects of antenatal GC exposure on WAT we examined the effect of antenatal GC exposure on in vitro adipocyte differentiation. The aim of the study was to investigate 1) in vitro adipocyte differentiation in adult sheep exposed as fetuses to high levels of GC and 2) the role of angiotensin II in adipogenesis. METHODS: Pregnant sheep were treated with two IM doses of betamethasone (Beta, 0.17 mg/kg) or vehicle (V) 24-h apart at 80 days gestation and allowed to deliver at term. At 1 y of age WAT was harvested from Beta (n=6) and V (n=6). WAT was dissociated with 0.15% collagenase I and stromal cells plated. Once 90% confluent, cells were cultured in induction media. Cells were harvested at Day 0, 2 and 7 of induction with and without losartan (1mM). We measured mRNA abundance for PPARg, UCP-1, TNFa, adiponectin and leptin by real time PCR and data analyzed by ANOVA (Mean±SEM). RESULTS: At Day 0 TNFa (0.6±0.19 vs 3.0±1.17) and UCP-1 (0.9±0.25 vs 2.1±0.49) mRNA were significantly higher in Beta. On Day7 PPARg mRNA increased in both Beta and V, but was significantly higher in Beta (2.3±0.54 vs 3.7±0.63 p<0.05). On Day 7 TNFa mRNA expression was not different between groups. Leptin mRNA expression increased significantly in both groups by Day 7. On Day 2 UCP-1 expression was significantly higher in Beta and this effect was negated by losartan treatment. In vitro adipogenesis is a valuable tool for studying the effects of antenatal GC on different cell populations in WAT. The differential response of adipocytes obtained from Beta suggests that the effects of antenatal GC on WAT are conserved throughout life in the precursor cells. Resistance Vessels and Hypertension in Adult Offspring. Clint Gray, Clare M Reynolds, Claudia Harrison, Mark H Vickers. Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. INTRODUCTION: Normal fetal development depend on the fetoplacental circulation, and decreased blood flow is associated with intrauterine fetal growth restriction and increased risk of elevated blood pressure during adult life. Increased maternal salt and fat intake can independently perturb placental function and can increase risk of cardiovascular disease by increasing resting blood pressure of offspring during later-life. Despite its relevance to modern western-style dietary habits, the interaction between increased maternal salt and fat intake has not been examined. We therefore aimed to investigate the effect of excessive maternal salt and/or fat intake on the vascular function in mothers, placental inflammation and angiogenesis and subsequent fetus, weanling endothelial function. Female Sprague-Dawley rats were fed either a standard control diet (CON), 4% salt control diet (SD), 45% fat diet (HF) and 4% salt & 45% fat combined diet (HFHS) three weeks prior to and throughout pregnancy and lactation. At day 18 of pregnancy, intact uterine artery, fetal lower branch aorta and at postnatal day 21, weanling mesenteric vessels were mounted on a pressure myograph. Responses to pressure, agonist-induced constriction and endothelium-dependant vasodilators were investigated to determine vascular function. RESULTS: SD dam uterine vessels demonstrated a reduced vasodilator response to acetylcholine (Ach) in the presence of L-NAME and Indomethacin (INDO) and reduced vasodilator responses in HF, HFSD dams in response to ACh in the presence of INDO, Apamin and TRAM-34. Furthermore, changes in vascular function were mirrored in the fetal aorta and again, in weanling mesenteric vessels. Our results indicate that a reduction in endothelial derived hyperpolarising factor (EDHF) and/or calcium mediated vasodilation pathways were affected by maternal salt intake and a reduction in NO pathways of maternal fat-fed dam uterine arteries, fetal aorta and weanling vessels. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that developmental programming of hypertension may be caused by vascular adaptations to maternal diet in the uterine artery. We hypothesise that subsequent reduced nutrient flow and placental function could be perturbing fetal vascular development, affecting overall vascular tone which may be a major contributing factor to the subsequent increased blood pressure observed in adult offspring. We hypothesize that exposure to maternal high fat diet during development leads to an accelerated aging phenotype mediated by epigenetic dysregulation. METHODS: SD dams were fed standard chow (Con) or western diet (WD) from 3 wks through gestation/lactation. All litters culled (8/lit) and fed standard chow postweaning. Massively-parallel sequencing-based (HELP-tagging) assay was used to examine cytosine methylation levels at >1.6 million loci in the liver of female offspring at 9 wks from Con and WD and aged Con at 19-20 months (Old), n=6/grp. Cross analysis between Con vs Old and Con vs WD were used to identify loci of interest (LOI) with matching differentially methylated regions. LOI were uploaded to Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Redwood City, CA) and GSEA (Broad Institute) to determine ontology and pathway enrichment. 15 Genes relevant to metabolism and aging were selected for validation with q-PCR. RESULTS: While Old demonstrated global hypomethylation in liver compared to Con, no global methylation differences were seen between WD and Con at 9wks old. For preselected significant loci between Con and WD, self-sorting heatmaps demonstrate more similar methylation pattern between WD and Old compared to Con. Identified LOI corresponded to statistically significant changes in gene expression in 5/15 genes evaluated in the 9wk WD offspring. However, 9/15 genes had changes in expression in 6 mo WD offspring and tended to be more exaggerated than Old (Figure 1 ). We use an epigenome-wide DNA methylation assay as a discovery platform to identify functionally significant and perturbable loci consistent with an aging phenotype in liver of female offspring exposed to intrauterine maternal high fat diet. Further, epigenetic dysregulation detected in young may be predictive of transcriptional changes later in life. Offspring. Sara L Hillman, 1 Sarah Finer, 2 Melissa C Smart, 2 Vardhman Rakyan, 2 Graham A Hitman, 2 David J Williams. 1 1 Institute for Women's Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom; 2 Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University London, London, United Kingdom. INTRODUCTION: Successful fetal growth requires the coordinated interaction of the feto-placental genome with the maternal environment. Low birth weight is also associated with adult cardio-metabolic disease risk. DNA methylation is a mechanism through which environmental and genetic influences come together and may cause disease. We investigated whether there are whole genome methylation differences in the umbilical cord blood and placentae of offpsring born with growth restriction. METHODS: We identified otherwise healthy pregnant women with either growth restricted (FGR) or appropriately grown for gestational age (AGA) offspring. We took an unbiased approach by using the Infinium Human Methylation 450 Beadchip® to investigate the whole methylome of umbilical cord blood and placentae from these FGR and AGA offspring. We validated our findings with another dataset and used objective bioinformatic tools to identify cellular pathways likely to be affected by the most differentially methylated positions (DMPs). RESULTS: We identified 76,249 DMPs in cord blood and 20,893 DMPs in the placenta (adj. p<0.05) using gestational age in a linear regression analysis. An external dataset validated our placental methylation results. To eliminate gestational age effects, we then analysed just term samples. 839 DMPs reached genome-wide significance (adjusted p<0.05) in DNA from umbilical cord blood of FGR offspring (n=19) compared with DNA from cord blood of AGA offspring (n=18). DMPs were mostly hypermethylated (blue on volcano plot). GO pathway analysis of the 839 DMPs in FGR cord blood uncovered cellular pathways fundamental to gene regulation and transcription, related to important metabolic and vascular functions. The Marmal-aid database identified these DMPs within invariate, normally unmethylated regions of the genome. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified distinct DNA methylation profiles in cord blood of FGR offspring. Persistence of these DMPs might explain their predisposition to future disease. The thrifty phenotype hypothesis proposes reduced nutrition alters the trajectory of development of metabolic regulatory systems to produce a phenotype better fitted to an environment of decreased later-life nutrient availability. Aggressive behavior (AB), especially in the context of feeding competition, may be advantageous in such environments. Our prior study shows male juveniles who were intrauterine growth restricted (IUGR) exhibit increased impulsivity (Reprod Sci 2012; 19:493) . We hypothesized IUGR males demonstrate higher AB rates. METHODS: With The Observer XT, 87 total hours (~7.2 hrs/ea) of behavioral observations were conducted on 12 juvenile male baboons (Papio sp., ages 3-5 yrs, human equivalent 12-20) living in groups at SW Natl Primate Research Center. IUGR (n=4) were offspring of mothers fed 70% the feed eaten by control (CTR) mothers in pregnancy and lactation. CTR (n=8) were offspring of mothers fed ad lib. RESULTS: IUGR, compared to CTR, show increased rates of behaviors in two categories (Fig 1) : Total Aggressive Behavior (TAB; t(10)=-3.1, p=0.011) and Aggressive Display Behavior (ADB; t(10)=-3.8, p=0.003). TAB contains all aggressive behavior, e.g., aggressive chase, flee from aggressor. ADB is a subset of TAB containing only threat displays, e.g., canine display, mantle shake. The presentation will include video of these behaviors. CONCLUSIONS: Increased AB in offspring that experienced poor nutrition during development may represent an Aggressive Behavioral Phenotype enhancing survival and reproductive success. We previously showed delayed frontal cortex development in IUGR offspring (PNAS 2011; 108:3011) and have data (unpub) showing decreased function in the serotonin (5-HT) system, providing potential mechanisms for this phenotype. Unraveling this dynamic relationship is essential for understanding how early experiences affect lifelong behavior. The impact of growth normalization (estimated fetal weight (EFW) ≥ 10% at the final ultrasound prior to delivery) in fetuses diagnosed with fetal growth restriction (FGR) compared to those with persistent FGR (EFW <10% at the final ultrasound) is not well understood. METHODS: Retrospective cohort of all singleton, non-anomalous, fetuses who had umbilical artery (UA) Doppler studies for FGR and delivered at our institution from January 2008 to July 2012. Maternal characteristics and delivery outcomes were compared for both groups. Neonatal outcomes of interest were tabulated and compared with composite neonatal morbidity (CNM) defined as: intubated for 24 hours, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, respiratory distress syndrome, intraventricular hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis, pulmonary hypertension, seizure, HIE or death within 28 days. RESULTS: Of 11,785 evaluated at our center, 789 had FGR and 546 met inclusion criteria. 412 patients had persistent FGR and 134 showed growth normalization. Maternal demographics were not different between groups. Fetuses with persistent FGR were more likely to be delivered prior to 34 weeks (OR 3.30, 95% CI 1.28-8.47) or 37 weeks (OR 3.26, 95% CI 1.93-5.51), require NICU admission (OR 3.98, 95% CI 2.33-6.8), require respiratory support (OR 4.69, 95% CI 1.67-13.2), and be diagnosed with RDS (OR 3.81, 95% CI 1.49-9.74). Of note, those with persistent FGR more often required preterm delivery (<37 weeks) based on our institutional FGR protocol: abnormal growth, abnormal UA Dopplers, or oligohydramnios (55 vs 18.2%, p=0.02). Of term (≥37 weeks) infants, those with persistent FGR were more likely to require NICU admission (OR 4.44, 95% CI 1.71-11.5), however, there was no significant difference in CNM (OR 5.32, 95% CI 0.68-41.39). CONCLUSIONS: Persistent FGR increases risk of preterm delivery, which is frequently iatrogenic. When delivered at term, those infants have similar rates of morbidity as infants whose growth normalized by delivery. Placental dysfunction and associated fetal growth restriction (FGR) are associated with increased placental and fetal oxidative stress. We hypothesise that maternal administration of melatonin will reduce maternal, fetal and placental oxidative stress, and thereby reduce brain injury and improve neurodevelopmental outcomes in FGR neonates. We undertook an open, single arm trial of maternal melatonin in women with severe FGR (estimated fetal weight <10 th centile + abnormal fetoplacental Dopplers). Women received 4mg melatonin oral BD. Maternal blood was collected weekly until delivery and umbilical cord blood and placenta at delivery for measurement of malondialdehyde (MDA) and 8-isoprostane (8IP). Fetal growth, wellbeing and fetoplacental Dopplers were monitored until delivery. Recent, historical gestation matched FGR controls were used for comparisons. RESULTS: To date 9 women have completed the study. Melatonin administration increased mean±SE maternal melatonin levels from 24.7±7.4 to 8133.83±2448.3pg/mL. Umbilical vein melatonin levels in the treated and control groups were 4095.3±1957.4 and 20.66±2.72 pg/ml, respectively. In 5 of 9 women, fetoplacental Doppler studies improved, including normalization of abnormal uterine artery flow velocity and improvements in ductus venosus waveforms. Placental MDA was significantly lower in the treated group compared to the control group (2.6±0.5 vs 4.7±0.6 nmol/mg, p=0.02). There was no difference in placental 8IP (47.5±12.2 vs 48.8±7.7 pg/mg, p=0.9). There was a nonsignificant trend for the diagnosis to delivery interval for treated women to be greater than controls (37±1 vs 26±5 days, p=0.3). In women with FGR, maternal melatonin improved fetoplacental Doppler studies in some but not all pregnancies and significantly decreased placental MDA but not 8IP. Melatonin may be a useful antenatal therapy in FGR. Using Ultrasound, What Best Predicts Pathologic Discordance in Diamniotic Dichorionic Twins? Brianne E Bimson, Lois Brustman, Elizabeth Murphy, Kimberly Herrera, Janelle Foroutan, Barak Rosenn. OB/ GYN, St Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, NY, USA. INTRODUCTION: In dichorionic diamniotic (DADC) twins: 1. Which trimester (tri) ultrasound (US) best predicts discordant growth? 2. What percent discordance predicts pathologic growth? METHODS: Data was retrospectively collected on deliveries and US of DADC twins during each tri from 1/2006-3/2013. Discordant growth was calculated in a standard fashion: 1st tri CRL in millimeters; 2nd and 3rd tri estimated fetal weight (EFW) in grams; and actual birth weight (ABW) in grams. Pathologic discordance is defined as >20% and 25%. Discordant twins (ABW ≥20%) were compared to concordant twins at delivery via linear regression models and ROC curves. Ability to predict ABW discordance >20% and 25%, and optimal cut-off points by percent discordance, were calculated from the areas under the ROC curves for each tri. RESULTS: Of 566 twin sets, 336 met inclusion. 54 (16%) had >20% and 27 (8%) had >25% growth discordance at delivery. For ABW discordance >20%, 3rd tri EFW discordance was significantly more predictive (AUC=85.40%) than 1 st tri (AUC=51.99%; p<0.0001) or 2nd tri (AUC=63.03%; p<0.0001) (Fig.1 ). An EFW discordance of >11.45% in the 3rd tri represents the optimal cut-off for prediction of ABW discordance (sensitivity 74%; specificity 84%). For ABW discordance of >25%, 3 rd tri EFW discordance was significantly more predictive (AUC=90.18%) than 1 st tri (AUC=54.88%; p<0.0001) or 2 nd tri (AUC=60.30%; p<0.0001) discordance. 3rd tri EFW discordance of >12.34% is the optimal cut-off for prediction of ABW discordance >25% (sensitivity 89%; specificity 83%) (Fig.2) . Our study suggests that 3rd tri US is the best predictor of DADC twin discordance. It also implies that clinicians should be using a significantly lower percent discordance than 20% in the 3rd tri US for DADC twins. To determine if ultrasound (US) can accurately predict diamniotic dichorionic (DADC) twin growth discordance at birth. METHODS: Data was retrospectively collected on deliveries and US of DADC twins from 1/2006 to 3/2013. Twins were included if they had an estimated fetal weight (EFW) within 2 weeks of delivery in the 3 rd trimester. The Bland and Altman method was used to assess the accuracy of US in predicting actual birth (ABW) discordance at the 20% and at the 25% levels of discordance. RESULTS: Of 566 twin sets, 291 met inclusion. The mean (±SD) gestational age at the time of US was 35w2d±2w and the mean gestational age at delivery was 36w2d±2w. The mean interval from US to delivery was 7±4 days. The mean ABW discordance was 11.55± 8.97% and the mean US EFW discordance was 8.56±7.87% (p<0.0001). US underestimated the magnitude of birth weight discordance by 2.99±7.15% (mean ±SD); 95% limits of agreement [-17.00, 11.02] . 49 sets of twins (16.8%) had ABW discordance ≥20% and 25 sets (8.6%) had ≥25%. Table 1 depicts the sensitivities, specificities, PPVs and NPVs of US in predicting ABW discordance at the 20% and 25% levels. Figure 1 graphically depicts the number of correctly and incorrectly predicted outcomes in the study population. To test the hypothesis that in diamniotic dichorionic (DADC) twin pregnancies ultrasound tends to overestimate the weight of twin A and underestimate the weight twin B. METHODS: Data was retrospectively collected on deliveries and ultrasound of DADC twins from 1/2006 to 3/2013. Twins were included if they had an estimated fetal weight (EFW) within 2 weeks of delivery. Statistical analyses were performed using the Bland and Altman method to assess the accuracy of ultrasound at predicting actual birth weight (ABW) within 2 weeks of delivery. RESULTS: Of 566 twin sets delivered, 293 delivered within 2 weeks of ultrasound. In this group, mean (±SD) gestational age (GA) at delivery was 36-2/7 (±2) weeks, mean GA at ultrasound was 35-2/7±2 weeks, and the mean interval from ultrasound to delivery was 7 ±4 days. Mean EFW for twin A and B were 2439 ± 462g and 2405 ± 474g, respectively. Mean actual birth weight for twins A and B were 2492 ± 476g and 2410 ± 490g, respectively. In 36% of these twin pregnancies, the EFW of both twin A and B were underestimated, in 25% both were overestimated, in 26% twin A was underestimated and twin B was overestimated, and in 13% twin A was overestimated and twin B underestimated. Table 1 depicts the magnitude of ultrasound error (in grams and percent) compared to actual birth weight within the various subgroups. Mean ( Figure 1 illustrates the correlation between estimated and actual birth weights. Regardless of twin order, there is no systematic error (underestimation or overestimation) in the estimation of actual birth weight. The n-3 long chain polyunsaturated fatty acid (LCPUFA) docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and the n-6 LCPUFA arachidonic acid (AA) are essential nervous system components that increase in concentration in the brain and retina throughout the third trimester of gestation and parallel the rapid stages of brain development. The neurotrophins, brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), nerve growth factor (NGF), neurotrophin (NT)-3 and NT-4, are small basic peptides crucial for fetal brain development. DHA supplementation during pregnancy has been advocated to enhance fetal neural development. We evaluated whether amniotic fluid DHA and AA concentrations were correlated with increased intraamniotic neurotrophin levels. METHODS: Amniotic fluid was obtained at 15-19 weeks gestation from 65 women undergoing amniocentesis. Aliquots were tested for BDNF, NGF, NT-3 and NT-4 by ELISA. Concentrations of DHA and AA were determined by gas chromatography. Associations between components were analyzed by the Spearman rank correlation test. The mean ratio of AA to DHA in amniotic fluid was 2.10. Median neurotrophin levels (pg/ml) were 34.5 for NT-4, 27.6 for BDNF, 5.2 for NT-3 and 1.4 for NGF. NT-4 (p<0.0001) and BDNF (p=0.0099) levels, but not NT-3 or NGF, were positively correlated with the amniotic fluid DHA concentration. Only NT-4 (p=0.0002) and marginally BDNF (p=0.0522) were also correlated with the AA level. Intraamniotic NT-4 and BDNF levels were also correlated (p=0.0013). NT-3 and NGF levels were unrelated to each other or to BDNF or NT-4. There were no associations between DHA, AA, or any neurotrophin and maternal age, gestational age at time of amniocentesis, body mass index, parity or gestational age at delivery. CONCLUSIONS: Elevations in intraamniotic NT-4 and BDNF with increasing levels of DHA and AA suggest a mechanism whereby exogenous administration of these LCPUFAs are advantageous for fetal brain neurogenesis. Our objective was to assess fetal sex specific differences in fetal growth patterns and fetoplacental resistance, measured by the pulsatility index of the umbilical artery (PI-UmA). This study is embedded in the Generation R study, a prospective cohort study. Live singleton pregnancies were included (N=8631). In 1st, 2nd and 3rd trimester of pregnancy ultrasound measurements of crown-rump-length (CRL), head circumference (HC), biparietal diameter (BPD), femur length (FL) and abdominal circumference (AC) were assessed. PI-UmA was measured. Subgroup analyses were made regarding uncomplicated (n=7260) and complicated pregnancies (including pre-eclampsia, pre-term birth, small for gestational age, n=1371). Linear regression analysis and repeated measurements were performed to assess effects of fetal sex on these indices. In the total group male CRL was 0.12 SD greater than in females (95% CI 0.03;0.22). The male AC was 0.09 SD higher in 2nd trimester and 3rd trimester (for both 95% CI 0.05;0.14). In males HC was 0.30 SD higher in 2nd (95% CI 0.26;0.34) and 0.38 SD higher in 3rd trimester (95% CI 0.34;0.42). BPD was 0.38 SD higher in males in 2nd (95% CI 0.33;0.43) and 0.38 SD higher in 3rd trimester (95% CI 0.34;0.43). On the contrary FL was 0.21 SD smaller in males in the 2nd and 3rd trimester (for both 95% CI 0.17;0.26). Repeated measurement analyses showed similar effects with tracking of all biometrical indices. No differences between growth patterns in complicated and uncomplicated pregnancies were observed. PI-UmA was 0.04 lower in 2nd (95% CI 0.03;0.06) and 0.03 lower in 3rd trimester (95% CI 0.02;0.04) compared with female fetuses. CONCLUSIONS: Fetal sex affects fetal growth with different biometrical indices already from 1st trimester onwards. This indicates that not only the placenta is of importance but also intrinsic factors may play a significant role. No differences are observed in the fetal growth pattern of a male of female fetus in relation to a pregnancy being complicated or not. This study compares perinatal outcomes between gastroschisis-affected infants when delivered prior to versus at or beyond 37 weeks gestation. We conducted a hospital-based retrospective cohort study of all pregnancies complicated by gastroschisis with delivery and neonatal care in a single Florida hospital between 01/01/2005 and 10/01/2012. Cases were initially identified using a combination of ICD-9-CM diagnosis and procedure codes indicative of gastroschisis, and confirmed through medical record review. We restricted our analyses to singleton cases without another major birth defect. Cases were categorized based on gestational age in weeks (<37 or ≥37). Selected perinatal outcomes included length of stay in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) and duration of total parenteral nutrition. We identified 43 maternal-infant dyads meeting inclusion criteria. Delivery at ≥37 weeks of gestation was associated with lower rates of respiratory compromise (71% vs. 35%, p=0.03) and fewer mean number of days requiring mechanical ventilation (6.5 vs. 3.6, p=0.05). We hypothesize that HH induces brain inflammation, which can be reduced or prevented by pretreatment with ketamine (KET), an NMDA receptor antagonist. The present study was designed to test this hypothesis. METHODS: Ovine fetuses were chronically catheterized at 123±3 days of gestation (n=3-5/group), and tracheostomy was performed on the ewe for inducing HH by administering nitrogen gas. Ketamine (3 mg/kg) was administered intravenously to the fetus 10 min prior to 30 min HH. Fetal hippocampus was collected 24 hrs after HH. mRNA was extracted, labeled, and hybridized to ovine Agilent 15.5k microarray. Significant differences in gene expression between control (NC and NC+KET) and treatment (HH and HH+KET) groups were determined with F-statistics using the limma package for R (P<0.05). Differentially up-and downregulated genes were analyzed by gene ontology and network analysis, identifying statistically significant overrepresentation of biological processes (P<0.05, Benjamani correction). The validity of the array data was confirmed with real-time PCR of selected genes (CASP8, MYD88, and NFKB) and normalized to b-actin. In response to HH, 256 and 289 genes were significantly upand down-regulated, and HH+KET, 121 and 126, respectively. There were 68 common genes up-regulated by HH and down-regulated by HH+KET. The enriched biological processes for the overlap genes were regulation of apoptosis, inflammatory response, and response to cytokine stimulus. The mRNA expression of CASP8, MYD88, and NFKB showed 2.5, 1.6, and 1.5-fold increase from NC with HH, and decreased to 1.4, 1. is reliably present in the maternal circulation after 10 weeks gestation in viable pregnancies, however, little is known regarding the ability to isolate cffDNA in the setting of an intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD) or other non-viable pregnancy conditions. The standard evaluation of a fetal demise includes karyotype analysis of the fetal tissues, with reflex microarray. The goal of the study is to determine whether ccffDNA is reliably present in the setting of a failed pregnancy. We conducted a prospective cohort study approved by the Institutional Review Board at Medstar Washington Hospital Center from June 2013 until January 2014. Women diagnosed with miscarriage or IUFD were recruited for study participation. Women with completed or incomplete abortion, those with intrapartum stillbirth, and women under the age of 18 were excluded. Participants with IUFD were offered the standard evaluation for fetal death per the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. CffDNA samples were processed by Sequenom, Inc. The investigators and processing labs were blinded to the results. The target enrollment is 50 patients. Thirty patients were enrolled at the time of the abstract submission. Ten (33%) of the subjects were 20 weeks or greater gestational age, 11 were first trimester, and 3 were 13-20 weeks. Of the first trimester patients, 5 had anembronic gestations with only gestational sac or yolk sac noted on ultrasound, while 6 had a fetal pole without cardiac activity. 3 participants had anomalies diagnosed on ultrasound prior to the fetal demise. The initial analysis will include the percentage of samples with cffDNA, fetal fraction, the ability to identify cytogenic abnormalities including deletions and duplications, and result accuracy. CONCLUSIONS: We anticipate that apoptosis of the placenta continues in the presence of fetal demise and miscarriage. Given that the pregnancy remains inutero at the time of blood sampling, we believe that cffDNA is present in the setting of miscarriage and IUFD prior to the evacuation of the uterus. Our study will provide insight into which clinical settings of nonviable pregnancy maternal serum cffDNA testing may be useful. The key pathology underlying fetal growth restriction (FGR) is uteroplacental insufficiency, involving vascular dysfunction and/ or impaired nutrient transport. Vascular tone in the placenta is critically regulated by nitric oxide (NO), and aberrant NO production or action is associated with FGR in both humans and animal models. Here, we test the hypothesis that nitrite (NO 2 -) improves vascular function and fetal growth in a mouse model of FGR associated with reduced NO, the endothelial nitric oxide synthase knockout (eNOS -/-) mouse. METHODS: Pregnant C57Bl/6J (wildtype; WT) and eNOS -/mice were treated with sodium nitrite (NaNO 2 , 50mg/L) in drinking water from E12.5. Untreated control mice received standard drinking water only. At E18.5, fetal and placental weights were measured and uterine arteries (UtA) isolated for assessment of vascular function using wire myography. UtA were mounted on a wire myograph and constriction (phenylephrine [PE]; 0.1-10000nM), endothelium-dependent (acetylcholine [Ach]; 0.1-10000nM) and -independent (sodium nitroprusside [SNP]; 0.1-10000nM) relaxation assessed. In addition, relaxation responses to NaNO 2 (10nM-1mM) were assessed in pre-constricted UtA of untreated mice. RESULTS: UtA from untreated WT and eNOS -/mice exhibited dosedependent relaxation in response to NaNO 2 (10nM-1mM); the response was significantly enhanced in eNOS -/animals compared to WT (p<0.001), as was relaxation to SNP (p<0.001). In UtA from NaNO 2 -treated mice, constriction to PE was reduced compared with untreated mice, but this effect reached significance only in WT mice (p<0.05). Preliminary data suggest that maternal NaNO 2 treatment increases fetal weight and fetal:placental weight ratio compared with untreated controls, an effect seen in both WT and eNOS -/animals. CONCLUSIONS: These data show that NO 2 induces relaxation in UtA vessels, consistent with findings in other vascular beds, and indicate an enhanced response in eNOS -/mice suggestive of upregulated downstream NO signaling in these animals. Improved UtA function is suggested by reduced contractile potential following maternal treatment with NaNO 2 . Further studies are required to determine the mechanisms by which NO 2 alters uteroplacental vascular function in pregnancy and whether it can significantly improve fetal growth. (Antonow-Schlorke et al., 2011) with decreased cell proliferation in female and increased cell proliferation in male compared with controls (CTR). We hypothesized that protection from the consequences of IUGR differs between the older hind brain (HB) and newer fore brain (FB) and shows sex differences. METHODS: Baboon tissues were collected at 0.9 gestation fetuses from CTR and IUGR (dams fed 70% of CTR dams from 30dG -165dG). Gene expression profiling was performed (Illumina BeadChips) on CTR female and male FB and HB (n=3 per group). Differentially expressed genes were identified (GeneSifter) and network analysis performed (Ingenuity Pathways). RESULTS: In female FC we found 459 up and 283 down and male 460 up and 127 down regulated genes. In female HB we found 12 up and 99 down and male 557 up and 153 down regulated genes. Only 4 genes were common to female and male HB and 20 genes were common to female and male FB. Unique to male HB differentially expressed genes included dopamine receptor D3 (down), cannabinoid receptor (CR -up) and amyloid precursor protein (up). Functional analyses of differentially expressed genes showed activation of genes related to central nervous system development in HB of IUGR versus CTR males. This functional network was not activated in female IUGR HB or female or male FB compared to CTR. More extensive network analyses consistently showed lack of differences between female IUGR and CTR HB. In contrast male showed activation of pathways and networks related to cell proliferation and neural development. The HB has integrative functions for cardiovascular control, alertness and awareness. D3 is expressed in older brain regions and may play a role in cognitive and emotional functions. CR plays a major role during pre-and postnatal development and regulates short-term plasticity. Transcriptome profiling and network results suggest that the term female but not male HB is protected fro the adverse consequences of IUGR. (FAS) . Mechanisms of neurotoxicity have been explored in animal models and in vitro human models, but data from in vivo human models is scarce. METHODS: Fetal brain tissue was collected from women following elective pregnancy termination. A detailed EtOH questionnaire was administered to identify cases and controls. Women reporting significant EtOH exposure were compared to gestational age matched controls. Synaptic and cytoplasmic extracts were prepared. Caspase-3 levels were assessed using the Caspase-Glo 3/7Assay. Nonparametric statistical methods were utilized. RESULTS: Four EtOh exposed patients were compared to 4 controls. Caspase-3 levels were significantly higher in the cytoplasm (p=0.03) and trended higher in the syntaptosome (p=0.11) of EtoH exposed fetal brain tissue (Fig 1) . Levels of Caspase-3 in synaptic membranes and cytoplasm were similar (p=0.57, related samples Wilcoxon). Synaptic caspase-3 levels were highly positively correlated with gestational age (r=0.73, p=0.04). Additional pathways will presented (data not shown). CONCLUSIONS: We present novel data on the mechanism of neurotoxicity in a human in vivo model of FAS. We demonstrate that EtOH exposure is linked to significant increases in apoptosis as assessed by Caspase-3. Further, we demonstrate a strong association between gestational age and increasing apoptosis. This suggests that controlled apoptosis is a critical neurodevelopmental process as human brain development progresses but that an imbalance towards uncontrolled excess apoptosis is problematic. Our model presents an ideal platform for further investigation of basic mechanisms, dose-response and windows of gestational vulnerability with direct translational potential. Moved to O-097 Observations in Women at Reproductive Ages. Elena Ashkinadze, Valeria Di Stefano, Stacey Rickard, Joaquin Santolaya-Forgas. Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. INTRODUCTION: Genetic testing in women at reproductive ages can affect reproductive behaviors and the patients life. For these reasons, pangenetic testing must be offered in a sensitive and tactful manner to avoid stigmatization and genetic selection. In most cases, patient's need time to process the complexity of the information presented to make informed decisions. We sought to analyze the responses to a 3-step algorithm for pan-genetic testing that includes: (i) counseling, (ii) providing a home saliva collection kits and additional information to review at home, and (iii) genetic analysis if the patient sends the kit to the laboratory. METHODS: This was a nested study using data from women at reproductive ages referred for genetic consultation from 6/10/10 through 5/31/13. Patients who expressed interest in pan-genetic testing were encouraged to submit the testing-kits to the laboratory as a couple. RESULTS: A total of 727 patients ( 388 couples and 51 individual patients) accepted saliva collection kits. 63% (n=212/388) couples and 55% (n=28/51) individuals submitted samples to the laboratory. CONCLUSIONS: These pilot study addresses the importance of the informed consent process prior to offering pan-genetic testing. Presently, all the health care systems are not equally equipped with the logistics, trained personnel and monetary resources to counsel patients' in different geographical areas and with diverse economical and cultural backgrounds concerning : 1) the types and natural history of diseases included in pangenetic screening panels, 2) accuracy and residual risks after negative result, 3) importance of concurrent couples-based testing, and 4) the reproductive options in at risk pregnancies. In the choroid plexus, site for the blood-CSF barrier, exchange occurs between blood and CSF solutes. This exchange may be particularly important in the fetus when the plexus is comparatively large and the brain itself less vascularized. The structural basis for the blood-CSF barrier is junctional complexes between the epithelial cells, necessary for selective transfer of compounds across this barrier. Most previous knowledge on barrier properties is gained from rodent studies. In these studies we have examined the primate choroid plexus during fetal development in the baboon (P.hamadryas) since it has very similar placentation and timing of brain maturation to humans. METHODS: RNA sequencing was used to determine the transcriptome of the fetal choroid plexus at gestational day (GD) 90/120/165 (n=4/4/6, mixed sexes), equivalent to about 20/28/36 weeks in humans. Sequencing was performed on the Illumina platform and Pathway analysis conducted using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software focusing on barrier-associated proteins. To examine protein expression, brain sections from fetal baboons were examined using antibodies to barrier proteins. RESULTS: The tight-junctional signaling pathway was significantly enriched (p<0.001) between GD90 and GD165, with 67% of genes significantly changed; 45% of genes significantly down-regulated and 22% up-regulated in this pathway. The epithelial adherens junction signaling pathway was significantly enriched (p<0.001) between GD90 and GD165 with 78% of genes significantly changed; 52% down-regulated and 26% up-regulated. Immunohistochemistry showed that several barrier associated proteins are already expressed in epithelial cells of the fetal plexus. CONCLUSIONS: Junctional signaling pathways were significantly enriched suggesting high gene regulation during fetal development with the majority of genes being down-regulated with age. Together with barrier proteins being present on choroidal epithelial cells, this implies that in primates the junctional complexes, the fundamental structures for a functional blood-CSF barrier, are established at an early stage of fetal development with important implications for neuronal exposure to endogenous and xenobiotic agents. Implications for Regulatory Mechanisms. Alexander A Elias, 1 Brad Matushewski, 2 Lin Zhao, 2 Timothy RH Regnault, 1,2 Bryan S Richardson. 1,2 1 Physiology and Pharmacology, Univeristy of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada; 2 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Maternal undernourishment in guinea pigs results in placental structural abnormalities that reduce nutrient transport contributing to fetal growth restriction (FGR). However, whether O 2 transport and thereby fetal oxygenation is also reduced as a further mediator of altered growth and development remains unknown. Our purpose was to determine the extent to which MNR in pregnant guinea pigs as a causative factor for FGR also impacts fetal EPO levels as a known marker for tissue hypoxia. METHODS: Guinea pig sows were fed ad libitum (Control) or 70% of the control diet pre-pregnant switching to 90% at mid-pregnancy (MNR). Animals were necropsied near term for fetal-placental growth measures, blood metabolites, and EPO protein levels in the fetal kidney, liver and placenta as the tissues known to produce EPO in the fetus promoting erythropoiesis. Results are presented for grouped means with significance assumed for p< 0.05. RESULTS: Eight control (28 fetuses) and six MNR (20 fetuses) animals were necropsied with MNR fetal and placental weights decreased 33 and 23%, respectively, placental to body weight ratios increased 19%, and ponderal index increased 11%. Select control (n=14) and MNR (n=14) fetuses underwent full necropsy, with brain to liver weight ratios increased 54%, blood glucose values decreased 24%, and Hb values increased 9% in MNR fetuses, although the latter was not significant. In these fetuses, EPO protein was increased 275%, 136%, and 45% in kidney, placenta, and liver tissues, respectively, although the liver change was not significant. CONCLUSIONS: MNR prior to and continuing through pregnancy in guinea pigs results in FGR with placentas that are large relative to body weight and likely a reactive process to nutrient deficiency, and livers that are small relative to body weight and likely reflecting a degree of blood flow redistribution; changes which are also characteristic of the asymmetrical FGR seen with "placental insufficiency". These fetuses also have EPO levels which are substantially higher in the kidney and placenta in keeping with their higher Hb values and implicating fetal hypoxemia in these animals as an additional mediator for growth restriction and altered development. Decoding Fetal Brain-Gut Communication during Systemic Inflammation. HL Liu, 1,3 L Garzoni, 4 LD Durosier, 1 M Cao, 1 C Herry, 6 P Burns, 5 P-Y Mulon, 5 G Fecteau, 5 A Desrochers, 5 C Faure, 4 MG Frasch. Higher levels of vagal activity are associated with lower systemic levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and activation of macrophages, mediated by the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway (CAP). The gut represents the biggest vagus-innervated organ. Fetal heart rate variability (fHRV) serves as a proxy marker of CAP activity. Consequently, fHRV changes may reflect changes of gut's inflammatory status. We hypothesized that fHRV can identify fetuses with gut inflammation. METHODS: Near-term fetal sheep were surgically prepared with vascular catheters and ECG electrodes (N=27 controls, N=14 lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation). Fetal arterial blood samples were drawn at baseline and seven selected time points to profile inflammation. At 54 h post LPS, necropsy was performed. Blood samples were analyzed for IL-1b, IL-6 and TNF-a. A novel measure of inflammation, temporal cytokine variability (CV), was defined as coefficient of variation of cytokine secretion to further quantify differences observed in control vs. LPS-induced inflammatory profiles. FHRV was quantified by Continuous Individualized Multivariate Variability Analysis (CIMVA) for Skewness, asymmetry index (AsymI), SampEn and Complexity. The time-matched fHRV measures were correlated to the levels of IL-1b, IL-6 and TNF-a and to the Iba1+ cell density in terminal ileum to quantify the degree of macrophage activation in relation to CAP activity. Results are reported for P<0.05. RESULTS: LPS resulted in a pronounced gender-independent ileum inflammation. In the LPS, but not in the control group, at 3 hours post LPS, IL-6, but not IL-1b and TNF-a, was elevated and AsymI and Skewness of fHRV correlated to Iba1+ cell density (R=-0.53 and R=0.60, respectively). IL-1b CV and TNF-a CV were decreased in the LPS group and fetuses with lower IL-1b CV showed higher Iba1+ cell density (R=-0.70). IL-1b CV was higher in fetuses with higher fHRV complexity at 24 hours (R=0.71). CONCLUSIONS: Confirming our hypothesis multiple fHRV measures correlated to the degree of intestinal macrophage activation and CV. This supports the notion of a common neuroregulatory mechanism via CAP. Non-invasively obtained fetal CAP response signatures may help identify babies at risk of developing life-threatening gut inflammation. Trophoblast differentiation into a multinucleate syncytium is a key biological mechanism. Transcriptional regulation of fusogenic genes to promote fusion and capacity for placental hormonogenesis, is achieved by coordinated action of signals such as cAMP and MAPKs. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), acts as a placental growth signaling sensor, and has been implicated in the pathophysiology of diseases such as IUGR, associated with abnormal trophoblast differentiation. mTOR is also implicated in the pathological mechanisms of diabetes associated with excess nutrient availability and insulin resistance. We investigated expression and activity of mTOR, in placentae obtained from gestational diabetes (GDM) patients and BMI matched controls. Five GDM (BMI >30) and 6 BMI-matched controls were used. To investigate the role of mTOR in vitro, in the trophoblast differentiation mechanisms, we used the BeWo choriocarcinoma cell line, a model of cAMP-dependent trophoblast differentiation. Cells were syncytialized with forskolin treatment for 24h with or without rapamycin or other suitable signalling inhibitors. Protein expression and phosphorylation were detected by immunoblotting using specific antibodies. RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry showed increased mTOR expression and phospho-mTOR (Ser 2448/2481) staining n GDM placenta compared to controls. In vitro studies showed that inhibition of mTOR by rapamysin, reduced forskolin-induced hCG release whereas, syncytin-1 and -2 mRNA expression was substantially augmented. These findings led us to investigate the effect of forskolin-driven adenylyl cyclase activation on mTOR expression and activity. Forskolin treatment for 24h significantly reduced mTOR mRNA and protein expression. Moreover, within 10min of forskolin treatment there was a substantial reduction in basal mTOR phosphorylation at Ser2481 and Ser2441, which is required for mTOR activity. This was associated with decreased phosphorylation of p70S6K, at Ser371. CONCLUSIONS: Our results identify distinct actions of mTOR on the biochemical and morphological differentiation of BeWo trophoblasts. Pathological states of Increased expression and activity of the mTOR pathway such as GDM, might lead to impaired functions. Mitochondrial Biogenesis Is Reduced in IUGR Placental Trophoblast Cells. Gaia Maria Anelli, Chiara Mando, Chiara Novielli, Carlo Personeni, Irene Cetin. Biomed.Clin.Sciences L.Sacco, Univ.Milan, Milan, Italy. INTRODUCTION: Nuclear Respiratory Factor 1 (NRF1), PPARgcoactivator 1a (PGC1a) and Estrogen-Related Receptor g (ERRg) are important regulators of mitochondrial (mt) biogenesis, by controlling mtDNA transcription and activating nuclear genes involved in mt biogenesis. We previously showed higher mtDNA levels in placental tissue of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) compared to control pregnancies. Here, we studied mtDNA levels and the expression of mt biogenesis regulators in placental cells of IUGR and normal pregnancies. METHODS: Cytotrophoblast cells were isolated from control (C) and IUGR placentas, collected at elective caesarean section, with enzymatic digestion followed by Percoll gradient. DNA and RNA were isolated by Trizol Reagent. The mtDNA content was measured by Real Time PCR normalizing the quantity of a not-polymorphic mt gene (Cytochrome B) with a single copy nuclear gene (RNAse P) (2^-DCt). mRNA levels of NRF1, PGC1a and ERRg were measured by Real Time PCR and data were analysed by geNorm method relative to HPRT and YWHAZ housekeeping genes. Results were analyzed using independent-samples T-test with the statistical package SPSS. Cytotrophoblast mtDNA levels were significantly lower (p=0,007) in IUGR cases (118±42) compared to C (105±37). mRNA levels of mt biogenesis regulators were significantly decreased in IUGR cytotrophoblast cells compared to C (NRF1: IUGR=7±3, C=24±10, p=0.05; PGC1a: IUGR=37±6, C=58±10, p=0.02; ERRg: IUGR=35±10, C=50±3, p=0.015). We found decreased mtDNA levels in IUGR cytotrophoblast cells. These are likely due to the significantly lower expression of genes involved in mt biogenesis, NRF1, PGC1a and ERRg, which may be due to altered oxygenation and/or oxidative stress, typical features of IUGR placentas. Indeed, ERRg mediates oxygen dependent expression of genes involved in human trophoblast differentiation. Moreover, in other tissues the tandem interaction between PGC1a and HIF1a to adjust mt biogenesis depending on oxygen supply was previously reported. Future studies are needed to assess oxygen dependent NRF1-PGC1a-ERRg expression in placental cells. Effect of Folate Deficiency In Vitro on Placental Amino Acid Transport. Bernadette C Baker, Susan L Greenwood, Karen Forbes, Alexander EP Heazell, Rebecca L Jones. Maternal and Fetal Health Research Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. INTRODUCTION: Folate deficiency in pregnancy is associated with reduced fetal birth weight and increased incidence of SGA infants. Our recent studies have identified placental dysfunction in teenagers with low folate status in the third trimester, including reduced placental nutrient transport, increased trophoblast apoptosis and dysregulation of placental hormones. To verify folate deficiency as a causative factor, in vitro culture models were developed to assess the direct effects of folate depletion on placental function. We hypothesized that folate depletion in vitro leads to reduced placental nutrient transport, in particular amino acid transport via System A. METHODS: BeWo choriocarcinoma cells (n=3-6) or isolated human term villous cytotrophoblasts (n=2) were cultured in folate free RPMI1640 medium, supplemented with 1nM (folate deficient), 25nM (physiological) or 6000nM (standard culture conditions) folic acid, for up to 12 days or 114hr respectively. Intracellular folate concentration was assessed by a microbiological assay utilizing folate-dependent Lactobacillus rhamnosus. Placental system A amino acid transporter activity was assessed by Nadependent uptake of 14 C-MeAIB. RESULTS: BeWo intracellular folate declined by 90% and 99% 4 days after decreasing media folate from 6000 to 25 or 0nM respectively (p<0.01, 0 vs. 6000nM, Kruskal-Wallis). Folate depletion did not affect system A activity at 4 and 8 days of culture but after 12 days there was a 15% reduction in activity in folate deplete cells (0 vs. 25nM folate; p<0.05; Wilcoxon matched pairs test).Similarly, system A activity in isolated term cytotrophoblasts was reduced at 114hr by 40% in cells cultured in folate deficient conditions compared to physiological folate levels of 25nM. CONCLUSIONS: Intracellular folate concentration can be manipulated in trophoblast cells, producing useful in vitro models in which to assess the direct effects of folate on cell function. The reduction in trophoblast nutrient transport by reduced folate in vitro reproduces that observed following maternal folate deficiency in vivo, adding support to the hypothesis that folate depletion directly inhibits placental nutrient transport, thus contributing to SGA birth.Ongoing studies will correlate intracellular folate levels in cytotrophoblasts with system A activity and investigate underlying mechanisms. Abstract Withdrawn Exploring ) is a drug ubiquitously used to treat preeclampsia, arrest preterm labor, and for neuroprotection of preterm fetuses. However, the mechanism of action is poorly understood. Mg 2+ is thought to stabilize neurons in the setting of preeclampsia and fetal brain injury, as well as serve as a calcium channel blocker in uterine myometrium in the setting of preterm labor. However, we hypothesized that Mg 2+ prevents maternal seizures, preterm birth, and cerebral palsy by reducing systemic inflammation. METHODS: Placental macrophages were cultured with (Mg Sup) and without (CTRL) MgSO 4 supplementation and stimulated with LPS. The % macrophages producing cytokines IL-1b, TNF-a, and IL-6 were assessed by ICS (intracellular cytokine staining) and flow cytometric analysis. THP-1 cells cultured at increasing MgSO 4 concentrations were exposed to LPS and released TNF-a was quantitated via ELISA at 4, 6, and 8h. CBMCs were stimulated +/-LPS and +/-2.5mM Mg for 1 hour, lysed, and proteins resolved via SDS-PAGE. Phosphorylated NF-kB was detected via electrochemiluminescence. RESULTS: Mg 2+ reduced TLR-mediated cytokine production in purified placental macrophages ( Fig 1A) and THP-1 cells ( Fig 1B) in a dose dependent manner. Mg 2+ exposure also reduced NF-kB activation of LPS-stimulated CBMCs, as evidenced by decreased phosphorylation of NF-kB p65 (Fig 2) . Placental macrophages, THP-1 cells, and CBMCs exposed to LPS demonstrate decreased cytokine production and MgSO 4 is an effective treatment for multiple inflammation-associated obstetric conditions. Mechanisms  We suggest that IUGR placentas express increased signs of senescence as part of the impaired telomere homeostasis. One of the factors that mediate telomere shortening in those placentas is decreased hTERT mRNA, leading to decreased protein expression and therefore, reduced telomere elongation. Telomere capture, which is a healing process, is increased in IUGR trophoblasts as a compensatory mechanism. Biglycan is a proteoglycan localized either on the cell surface or in extracellular matrix, where it is thought to induce migration and invasion in many cell types. However, the biological role of biglycan in the trophoblast has not been elucidated. In this study, we aimed to verify biglycan-mediate responses in extravillous cytotrophoblast (EVT) cells, a cell population deeply involved on the invasion of decidual stroma and uterine spiral arteries. Here, we analyzed the localization and expression of biglycan in first trimester, term placental tissues, isolated EVT and SGHPL-5 cell line cultures. It was also investigated the role played by biglycan on trophoblast invasion patterns and AKt as a signaling pathway in this process. RESULTS: Immunofluorescence of chorionic villi and basal decidual sections revealed expression of biglycan in all subtypes of cytotrophoblast in early placentas, but not in EVT at term placentas. Flow cytometry indicated expression of biglycan at the cell surface of trophoblast SGHPL-5 cells and co-expression of HLA-G1 and biglycan in first trimester EVT. Western blot analyses confirmed biglycan expression in first trimester EVT and SGHPL-5 cells. Purified and recombinant biglycan promoted migration and invasion on SGHPL-5 cells and, first trimester and term EVT, whereas cell proliferation was not affected. Biglycan stimulated phosphorylation of AKT at Thr308 and Ser473 in both SGHPL-5 cells and fi rst trimester EVT cells, but did not promote activation of ERK and NF-kB. Finally, gene silencing of AKT1 in SGHPL-5 cells using small-hairpin microRNA, abolished the stimulatory effects of biglycan on trophoblast invasion. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, our data indicate that biglycan increases the motility of fi rst trimester and term trophoblast by specifi cally promoting AKT signaling activation. Our previous studies showed that maternal MgD led to intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Therefore, we examined the effect of MgD on placental growth and health in mice and in vitro using a human placental cell line. From gestational day 6 (GD6), SW dams were fed diets containing 100%Mg (control) or 10%Mg (Mg-defi cient, MgD) until euthanasia (GD17), when placental weight and fetal demises were assessed. Placental histology was examined following H&E staining and apoptosis was determined by TUNEL (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling) staining. In vitro: The effect of various Mg concentrations (2%-100%) on BeWo placental cell proliferation and viability was assessed by counting and neutral red staining, respectively. In vivo data were analyzed using Student's t-tests comparing controls vs. MgD mice; in vitro data was analyzed by ANOVA/Bonferroni post hoc. RESULTS: Maternal MgD decreased GD17 placental weights ( Fig  1A, P<0 .005) and increased fetal demises; mean+SEM (0.17+0.12 vs.3.99+1.56, P<0.05). GD17 MgD placentas showed increased focal necrosis, but no difference in apoptosis when compared with controls. Using BeWo cells, we observed signifi cantly decreased viability and cell proliferation following MgD (Fig 1B, P<0 .05). CONCLUSIONS: Using a mouse model of mild-moderate Mg defi ciency (shown to induce IUGR), maternal MgD signifi cantly decreased placental growth and increased fetal deaths. Smaller placentas from the MgD dams showed increased focal necrosis but no increase in apoptosis when compared to controls. Mechanistic studies using the BeWo placental cells confi rmed that MgD signifi cantly reduced placental cell viability and proliferation. These results warrant further studies of the effect of Mg/ MgD on placental development and function. Prior studies reported that short cervix is a predictor of emergent delivery for hemorrhage in placenta previa cases. We investigated the value of this sonographic parameter in our population. METHODS: Chart review from 2004 -2012 of placenta previa cases with transvaginal cervical length (CL) measured at the fi rst ultrasound performed after 28 weeks of gestation. Short cervix was defi ned as CL <3 cm. Exclusion criteria: multiple gestations, polyhydramnios, cerclage, fetal growth restriction, fetal anomalies, maternal uterine anomalies, history of conization. Primary outcome: emergent cesarean delivery (CD) for hemorrhage. Secondary outcomes: gestational age(GA) at CD, estimated blood loss, blood transfusion, birth weight, arterial cord PH, 5 minute APGAR score, NICU admission. Mann Whitney, Chi-square or Fisher's exact test were used. RESULTS: Of the 42 placenta previa cases, 13 had emergent CD (31%) and 29 (69%) had scheduled CD. The index CL did not differ between cases with emergent vs. scheduled CD. Only 2/42 cases (4.8%) had a short cervix at the index ultrasound, and both had a scheduled CD. Emergent CD was associated with lower birth weight and GA at delivery, more antepartum bleeding episodes and NICU admissions(Table1). There was no difference in estimated blood loss at delivery, blood transfusion, cord PH or 5 minute APGAR score between emergent and scheduled CD. CONCLUSIONS: Although emergent CD for bleeding in previa occurred in 31% of our study population, cervical length was not a useful predictor of risk. Large prospective studies are needed before sonographic cervical length is used to guide timing of delivery for placenta previa.  Variable Scheduled CD n=29 (69%) Emergent CD n=13 (31%) p-value Index CL(cm) 3.30±0.68(3;2-5) 3.38±0.65(3;3-5) NS Short CL<3cm 2/29(6.9%) 0/13(0%) NS GA This study is embedded in the Generation R study, a prospective cohort study. Live singleton pregnancies were included (N = 6040). In the fi rst trimester of pregnancy soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase (s-Flt), placental growth factor (PLGF), plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-2) and homocysteine (tHcy) levels were assessed. Linear regression was performed to assess the effect of sex on placental biomarkers. Interaction analyses was performed to assess interaction of fetal sex with environmental infl uences. Fetal sex specific differences in all placental biomarkers were observed in uncomplicated pregnancies but not in pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia (PE), preterm birth (PTB) or intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). Defective deep placentation (failure of invasion and transformation of the spiral arteries by the trophoblast) may cause preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction and preterm birth. Early reports suggested that DHA rich diet reduces the incidence of deep placentation disorders. We postulate that DHA improves placentation and reduces deep placentation disorders. Here we aimed to demonstrate that DHA improves trophoblast migration in vitro. METHODS: Migration will be studied by the "wound-healing" assay in an immortalized extravillous trophoblast cell line (HTR-8/SVneo) either in the presence or absence of DHA (100 µM) and different oxygen conditions. HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cells (100,000), were seeded in each well on cover slides in 24-well plates containing 500 ml complete medium for 24 hours. Cells were then washed with PBS and the wound was generated by removing cells in the center of the well with a sterile pipette tip. The experiments were performed in reduced serum (5% FBS). Initially incubations in the different experimental conditions were carried out for 6, 10, 14 and 24 hours. We then incubated for 10 hours, time in which maximal differences among treatments were observed. The migration assay was performed 4 times in duplicate; three images were obtained along the wound and quantified using ImageJ v.1.34 software. The area of the wound was measured and the "healing" of the wound was measured as the area recovered by cells at the end of the experiment. RESULTS: After 10 h of experiment the wound was healed by 54% (20% O 2 ) -60% (8% O 2 ) -53% (2% O 2 ) in control conditions. The incubation with DHA did not improve trophoblast migration at none of the oxygen conditions (48% -60%-52%). Our data does not support a beneficial effect of DHA on in vitro trophoblast migration. The effect of DHA on in vitro trophoblast invasion needs to be studied. Also the in vivo effect of DHA cannot be discarded. Hypoxia inducible transcription factor-1 and -2a (HIF-a) are elevated in preeclamptic (PE) placentas at delivery contributing to increased expression and secretion of sFlt1. Proteasome activity is markedly inhibited in PE placenta. Because HIF-a is degraded by the proteasome, we hypothesized that proteasome inhibition may contribute to increased sFlt1 secretion by trophoblast (Tr). METHODS: HTR-8SVneo cells were grown in 12-well plates (250,000 cells/well) with 1 mL of RPMI medium supplemented with fetal bovine serum. Following 48 hr of incubation, cells were switched to serum free media with the proteasome inhibitor (PI) MG-132 (0.5 µM) or vehicle, with or without the pancaspase inhibitor (CI) Q-VD-Oph (100 µM) or vehicle. One 12-well plate was exposed to a "normoxic" environment (room air), and the other to a hypoxic environment (1% O 2 ) for 12 hr. The 12-hr time point was chosen to minimize PI-induced apoptosis. The conditioned media (CM) was stored for analysis of sFlt1 by ELISA. Total cellular protein was determined using the DC Protein Assay and was used to normalize sFlt1. RESULTS: There was a significant main effect of PI treatment (p<0.001 by 2-way ANOVA), but not of oxygen environment on the secretion of sflt1 (p>0.05). PI increased sFlt1 in CM on average by 3-fold. sFlt1 secretion was increased by PI under normoxic and hypoxic conditions (p<0.01 and p<0.05 vs untreated, respectively). CI did not significantly alter sFlt1 secretion induced by PI under either oxygen condition (p>0.05 vs PI alone). The vehicles for PI and CI (dilute DMSO) did not significantly affect sFlt1 secretion. Removal of microvesicles from the CM by centrifugation reduced sFlt1 concentration by 14+2%. CONCLUSIONS: Proteasome inhibition increased secretion of sFlt1 by cultured human trophoblast. This increase was largely unaffected by pancaspase inhibition or removal of microvesicles from the CM suggesting that it was independent of apoptosis. The findings are consistent with elevated HIF-a (and hence sFlt1 transcription) resulting from reduced HIF-a degradation by the impaired proteasome, although other mechanisms may be at work and further investigation is needed. In summary, reduced proteasome activity in PE placentas may be an additional mechanism for enhanced placental secretion of sFlt1 into the maternal circulation during preeclampsia. (VUE) is an inflammatory condition reported to occur 5-15% of term placentas and is associated with fetal growth restriction; there is some evidence of an association with recurrent miscarriage and stillbirth. VUE has been characterised in live births, but not in stillbirths; reports imply that macrophages and T-lymphocytes predominate with few B-lymphocytes or neutrophils present. We hypothesized that the cells involved in VUE would be comparable between stillbirths and live births. We aimed to phenotype the immune cells present in VUE lesions in placentas from stillbirth and to ascertain whether altered infiltration occurred in the placenta in stillbirths. Placental tissue was obtained from pregnancies ending in stillbirth whose cause of death after post-mortem was recorded as VUE (n=5). Serial tissue sections underwent immunohistochemistry for CD45, CD68, CD4, CD8 and neutrophil elastase. Inflammatory foci were identified, serial images taken and image analysis software used to count the number of DAB+ cells in the samples. To assess leukocyte infiltration, the number of CD45+ cells were counted in 10 random images of tissue sections from stillbirths (n=5) and healthy controls (n=12). RESULTS: VUE lesions were present in 22/26 sections from stillbirths. A population of CD45+ leukocytes of 1112/mm 2 was observed. Macrophages and CD4 T-cells contributed 43% and 40% of total CD45+ cells respectively. CD8 T-cells were present in all sections, accounting for 13% of total CD45+ cells. There were few neutrophils. The proportion of leukocytes ranged from 7-15% in stillbirth and 1-6% in controls (P=0.002). The total number of villous nuclei/mm 2 was reduced in stillbirth (1957 versus 2639) (P=0.007). The inflammatory infiltrate of VUE in stillbirths differs in immunological composition to VUE in liveborn infants. This may prove significant in predicting poor outcome. Though VUE is focal in nature, there was a pan-placental increase in the number of leukocytes, suggesting a wider inflammatory response. The reduction in total nuclei in the stillbirth samples supports previously described loss of villous integrity. Consequences of Reduced Taurine Pre-eclampsia (PE) is a serious disease of pregnancy associated with altered renewal of syncytiotrophoblast (STB), the transport epithelium of the placenta. Renewal occurs by proliferation and differentiation of underlying cytotrophoblasts, and their subsequent fusion with the multinucleated STB. In non-placental tissues the amino acid taurine regulates proliferation, differentiation and fusion. Here we compare maternal plasma taurine concentration in PE with normal pregnancy (NP) and test the hypothesis that STB renewal is compromised by a low maternal plasma taurine concentration. METHODS: Maternal plasma taurine concentration in women experiencing PE (n=5) and NP (n=8) was determined by High Performance Liquid Chromatography. Placental villous explants from NP at term (n=6) were cultured for 7 days in either low (~9mM taurine contributed by serum) or high taurine medium (100mM added taurine). During explant culture, STB sheds and thereafter is regenerated by processes resembling STB renewal in vivo 1 . Immunohistochemistry was used to assess villi undergoing STB shedding and renewal using the epithelial marker cytokeratin 7, and proliferation was examined using ki67. Maternal plasma taurine concentration in PE (median: 26, range:22-45mmol/l) was significantly lower than in NP (median: 41, range:37-54mmol/l; p<0.05). In explants fixed on culture day 7, the proportion of intact villi, and villi with evidence of STB shedding, were comparable in low and high taurine media However, the proportion of those villi with evidence of STB shedding that were regenerating was significantly lower in taurine deplete than in taurine supplemented medium (p<0.05, Mann Whitney). The proportion of villi with proliferating cells was also significantly lower in low taurine compared to high taurine culture conditions (p<0.01, Mann Whitney). CONCLUSIONS: STB renewal in vitro is compromised in conditions of low taurine. We have shown previously that STB taurine transporter activity is significantly lower in PE than in NP 2 . Lower maternal plasma taurine in combination with reduced STB taurine uptake in PE could contribute to the altered STB renewal and placental pathology that is evident in this pregnancy complication. Maternal obesity during pregnancy results in an adverse intrauterine environment and affects placental function. Nitric oxide (NO) regulates placental function via effects on fetoplacental vascular tone, gene expression, platelet adhesion to trophoblast, and cellular respiration. Placental NO synthase expression and NO production are increased with preeclampsia and gestational diabetes, both associated with maternal obesity. The interaction of NO with superoxide produces peroxynitrite an oxidant that induces nitrative stress (protein nitration). Nitration of mitochondrial enzymes inhibits mitochondrial respiration under conditions of maternal obesity. We show increased nitration in the placenta. We tested the hypothesis that maternal obesity alters placental nitric oxide production and antioxidant capacity leading to altered activity of the mitochondrial protein MnSOD. METHODS: Placental villous tissue was randomly sampled at term (~40 weeks) after c. section (no labor) from two groups of women based on pre-pregnancy BMI: normal (BMI 22.61+0.31, n=10) and obese (BMI 36.16+0.37, n=10) . Each group contained equal numbers of male and female placentas. Mitochondria were extracted using differential centrifugation and lysed. Mn-SOD was measured by western blot in mitochondrial lysate and in the immunoprecipitate from a nitrotyrosine antibody and normalized to voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC) and amido black, respectively. Total NO (measured as nitrite/nitrate), total SOD and MnSOD activity, and total antioxidant capacity were quantified in placental homogenates of normal and obese women using commercially available kits. RESULTS: Total NO production, total antioxidant capacity, SOD activity, MnSOD protein levels and nitrated MnSOD were significantly decreased (P<0.05) in placentas of obese women compared to normal BMI. ANOVA revealed a significant fetal sex-dependent increase (P<0.05, SNK) in total antioxidant capacity and in SOD activity in placentas of normal male fetuses vs normal female and obese male and female. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal obesity appears to reduce NO generation/ availability in the placenta in parallel with reduced antioxidant defenses, perhaps due to increased nitrative stress which consumes NO. The protection seen in the male placenta of a normal BMI pregnancy appears to be lost with maternal obesity. The decreased MnSOD expression and activity reinforces our observation of placental mitochondrial dysfunction with obesity. Low maternal serum concentrations of pregnancyassociated plasma protein A (PAPPA) in the first trimester has been attributed to suboptimal placentation and associated with higher incidence of adverse pregnancy outcomes, including preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction. Women with pre-existing medical co-morbidities are at higher risk for these complications and more intensive surveillance is typically recommended. We conducted a retrospective cohort study of women with singleton pregnancies and pre-existing medical co-morbidities (pregestational diabetes, renal disease, collagen vascular disease or chronic hypertension) who underwent first trimester screening and delivered at Magee-Womens Hospital 2006-2012. Adverse pregnancy outcome was defined as a composite of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, HELLP or eclampsia), intrauterine growth restriction (<10% by birthweight), intrauterine fetal death or placental abruption. Low PAPP-A was defined as below 10 th % (<0.57 MOM). The c 2 and Fisher's Exact tests were utilized for statistical analysis. Of 479 women meeting inclusion criteria, 18% of the women had low PAPP-A on first trimester screen. 26% of these women went on to experience an adverse composite outcome as compared to 16% of women with normal PAPP-A (p=.395) . Maternal age, parity, race, BMI, and smoking status did not differ between the groups. Additional analysis utilizing a lower threshold PAPP-A of <5% did not improve discrimination. The category of maternal co-morbidity did not impact the results. CONCLUSIONS: Low first trimester PAPP-A does not reliably identify women with medical co-morbidities at risk for adverse pregnancy outcome. The mechanisms for hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and fetal growth restriction are potentially different. PAPP-A is a metalloprotease that cleaves insulinbinding protein 4 and thereby regulates the availability of insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1), a mitogenic peptide that facilitates multiple cell functions, including trophoblast invasion and placental growth. In addition to aneuploidy, low concentrations of PAPPA in the first trimester have been associated with disorders of impaired placentation. We sought to evaluate the relationship between first trimester PAPP-A, placental size at delivery and select adverse pregnancy outcomes. We conducted a retrospective cohort study of women with singleton pregnancies who underwent first trimester screening, delivered at Magee-Womens Hospital and had placenta sent for pathologic evaluation 2006-2012. Women with pregestational diabetes, renal disease, collagen vascular disease or chronic hypertension were excluded. Adverse pregnancy outcome was defined as a composite of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, HELLP or eclampsia), intrauterine growth restriction (<10% by birthweight), intrauterine fetal death or placental abruption. Low PAPP-A was defined as below 10 th % (<0.57 MOM). Placental size was designated small if placental weight was < 10 th percentile, adjusted for gestational age at delivery. The c 2 and Fisher's Exact tests were utilized for statistical analysis. RESULTS: Of 2928 women meeting inclusion criteria, 328 (14%) of these women had low PAPP-A on first trimester screen. 124 (38%) of these women met criteria for the composite outcome; 51 (34%) if small placental size and 69 (63%) if normal size (p<.001). In subgroup analysis, small placental size was associated with hypertensive disorders (p<.001) and IUGR (p<.001). Abruption was not impacted by placental size; there was only 1 fetal demise in the cohort. Maternal age, parity and smoking status did not differ between the groups, but race (p=.002) differed significantly. CONCLUSIONS: Women with low PAPP-A and normal placental size at delivery had lower incidence of adverse outcome compared to women with small placental size. This finding could be explained by recovery from transient first trimester placental dysfunction. Placental Autophagy in Early Human Pregnancy. is an inducible catabolic process by which cells degrade and recycle materials in response to environmental cues. To evaluate the presence of autophagy in early human pregnancy, we collected specimens from first trimester voluntary abortions, with the aim to assess autophagy involvement during the early phase of gestation. METHODS: Villous and decidual specimens were collected at the time of suction curettage in 14 voluntary abortions at 9 ± 1.1 weeks of gestation. In all cases fetal heart beat was present before surgery and karyotype normal. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence and Western blotting analysis were used to identify autophagosomes and to evaluate the expression of Beclin 1 and microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 (LC3), markers of the early and late stage of autophagosome formation, respectively. Mitochondria were evaluated in villous trophoblast and in decidua by TEM to explore the correlation between A and mitochondrial content. Moreover, the interrelationship between A expression and Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 a (HIF-1 a) was evaluated. A was found both in villous and decidual samples. Cytotrophoblast, syncytiotrophoblast, extravillous trophoblast and decidual stromal cells presented autophagosome in different stages of formation. The expression of A markers was higher in villi than in decidua, directly proportional to the expression of HIF-1 a, [ Figure 1 ] and inversely proportional to the mitochondrial content. Our study adds new information on the localization and expression of autophagy in human pregnancy. The presence of autophagy at the feto-maternal interface during the early weeks of gestation may represent a physiological event that is needed for the normal evolution of pregnancy. In the placenta, SERT transports serotonin and amphetamines to the fetus. Prenatal exposure to drugs, which triggers changes in placental SERT expression, may also change fetal synaptic serotonin and serotonergic neurotransmission. . Maternal drug exposure may also alter SERT activity resulted in increasing and/or decreasing fetal exposure to medications in early gestation. METHODS: Membrane vesicles were prepared from fresh 1st and 2nd trimester human placentas collected following elective pregnancy termination. Maternal questionnaires determined prenatal exposure to medications/drugs. Subjects admitted to chronic opioid use and were compared to gestational age matched controls. Vesicle proteins (50ug) were separated by gradient SDS-PAGE and transferred to NC membrane. Proteins were detected using specific primary antibodies and secondary IRDye® antibodies with the Odyssey® CLx Imaging System. RESULTS: Maternal opioid exposure was associated with consistent alteration of the SERT protein band pattern compared to controls across gestational age. Antibodies to the N-terminal of SERT did not recognize either of the smaller (30 kDa) paired bands (data not shown). The secondary band seen in the opioid group may represent a hypophosphorylated SERT fragment. Studies are ongoing examining the in vitro activity of SERT across vesicles from the same subjects. We present the novel finding that maternal opioid exposure alters SERT expression in the human placenta in early gestation. If we confirm these changes are associated with changes in the transport activity, this suggests that maternal opioid use may alter fetal exposure to other medications. Placental changes may be a marker for altered fetal brain serotonergic neurotransmission, which may have neurodevelopmental implications. NICHD R01HD069238. Mammalian protease-activated-receptor-1 and -2 (PAR 1 &PAR 2 ) are activated by proteases found in the flexible microenvironment of early placenta invasion as well as in tumor cell in invasion. We suggest hereby that PAR 1 and PAR 2 , act together as a functional unit regardless of either the physiological or the malignant invasion processes. METHODS: H&E stained serial sections of extravillous trophoblast organ model (EVT).Analysisof impact of shRNA-hPar2 silencing on the depth of EVT invasion. shRNA constructs we used a U6 promoterdriven and lentivirus -mediated delivery cassette of shRNA, stem and loop based on a 19-nucleotide sequence hPar2 coding region. PAR 1 and PAR 2 activation and antagonist. Thrombin 1U/ml (e.g., 10nM). Selective PAR 1 activation by either TFLLRN or TFLLRNPNDK; PAR 2 activation by SLIGKV. PAR 1 antagonist; SCH79797. The morphology of the villous trophoblast and EVT outgrowth columns assessed. The EVT invasion into Matrigel reached as deep as 110 µm (5 µm serial sections). The shRNA-hPar2 viral vector treated EVTs following activation of PARs (e.g., Thrombin, TFLLRNPNDK, SLIGKV) showed reduced EVT invasion,levels maximum70 -80 µm. In-contrast, activation of PARs (e.g., thrombin and/or TFLLRNPNDK and SLIGKV) in the presence of either scrambled or control cells, showed deeper invasion (110µm ). Also the number of cells per HPF, for each of the treatment was evaluated at an equal level of invasion (60µm)and had a significant similar pattern: p = 0.0001 within groups,ANOVA Tukey HSD of multiple comparison. CONCLUSIONS: A significant inhibition was observed in the presence of shRNA-hPar2 lentiviral vector following the different activation treatments (e.g., thrombin, TFLLRNPNDK and SLIGKV). Silencing of hPar2 significantly inhibits thrombin induced EVT cell invasion. Altogether we speculate that PAR 2 is essential for PAR 1 invasion function, acting as a functional unit in placenta-uterus interactions. Recent studies have shown that vitamin D intake in pregnancy is beneficial to both maternal and fetal health. However, the beneficial effects of vitamin D on placenta are largely unknown. Increased oxidative stress and increased thromboxane (TXA 2 ) production are characteristics of placental dysfunction in preeclampsia (PE). In this study, we specifically tested if vitamin D could suppress increased oxidative stress-induced TXA 2 production by placental trophoblast cells (TCs). METHODS: 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 was used as bioactive vitamin D. CoCl 2 , a hypoxic mimic reagent, was used to induce trophoblast oxidative stress. TCs were isolated from normal placentas (n=6) and cultured with DMEM supplemented with 5% FBS and antibiotics. After syncytialization, cells were incubated with 500nM of CoCl 2 for 24hrs with or without pretreatment of 20nM of 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 . Untreated cells were used as the controls. Medium levels of TXB 2 , 6-keto PGF1a (6K), and soluble phospholipase A 2 (sPLA 2 ) were measured by ELISA. TXB 2 and 6K are stable metabolites of TXA 2 and prostacyclin. Protein expression for HO-1, COX-1, and COX-2 were determined by Western blot. Data were analyzed by ANOVA and paired t-test. A p level < 0.05 was set as statistically significant. RESULTS: Cells treated with CoCl 2 produced significantly more TXB 2 and 6K than untreated controls, p<0.01. The increased TXB 2 production and increased ratio of TXB 2 to 6K induced by CoCl 2 were significantly reduced in cells pretreated with 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 , p<0.05 and p<0.01. Expression of HO-1 and COX-2, but not COX-1, were increased in cells treated with CoCl 2 . 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 had no effect on COX-1 and HO-1 expression, but blocked CoCl 2 induced up-regulation of COX-2 expression. To determine if inhibition of COX-2 up-regulation by 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 is responsible for reducing TXB 2 production, COX-2 inhibitor NS-398 was used. We found that inhibition of COX-2 blocked CoCl 2 induced TXB 2 production by TCs, p<0.01. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that inhibition of COX-2 activation could be a mechanism that 1,25(OH) 2 D 3 suppresses oxidative stressinduced thromboxane production by placental trophoblast cells. COX-2 is an inflammatory mediator. Thus, we speculate that vitamin D has the ability to inhibit oxidative stress induced inflammatory response and to reduce TX production by placental TCs.  Proteins released by placenta to the maternal circulation are implicated in aberrant activation and inflammation of the maternal endothelium in PE. Inflammatory cytokines including TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-8 are elevated in maternal serum in PE, yet their role in endothelial response remains unelucidated. The maternal compartment of dual in vitro placental perfusion simulates syncytial release of proteins to maternal blood, and has been used to study pathophysiology in PE. Our goal was to use maternal perfusate (MP) derived from perfusion, endothelial cell lines, and function-blocking antibody (Ab) to assess the specific role of placental-derived TNF-a in eliciting inflammatory responses by endothelial cells (ECs). METHODS: MP was obtained from perfusions (n=5) carried out for 6 h in three 2 h phases. To examine the effect of secreted placental factors on ECs, MP was diluted 1:4 with EC medium and added to human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human endometrial endothelial cells (HEECs) for 24 h and levels of cytokines in conditioned media and cytokine mRNA were measured by ELISA and qPCR, respectively. MPinduced changes in EC cytokine secretion were examined in the presence of a function-blocking mouse anti-human TNF-a Ab (clone 28401) or mouse control Ab. Results were analyzed by ANOVA or Student's t test and P<0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS: A significant 5-fold increase in MP TNF-a levels from 0.56 to 2.8 ng/ml was noted between 2 and 6 h of perfusion. The addition of the 6 h MP to HUVECs promoted significant 36-and 7-fold increases in levels of secreted IL-6 and IL-8, respectively, and 39-and 22-fold increases in levels of their mRNAs, respectively. The presence of TNF-a Ab significantly reduced the MP-associated increase in secreted HUVEC IL-6 and IL-8 by 71% and 63%, respectively and HEEC IL-6 and IL-8 by 86% and 52%, respectively. Conversely, the addition of control Ab did not affect MP-associated stimulation of cytokine secretion in either cell type. This study demonstrates that placental-derived TNF-a is a key regulator of pro-inflammatory responses in endothelial cells. This suggests that agents which block TNF-a action should be considered as a strategy to ameliorate maternal symptoms associated with PE. Expression INTRODUCTION: p32/gC1qR is a conserved eukaryotic protein which is primarily expressed in the mitochondria. p32 is highly expressed in tumours, where it has been shown to regulate cell proliferation, migration, invasion and glucose metabolism. As the placenta shares common attributes with tumours, we sought to examine the expression and function of p32 in the human placenta. METHODS: p32 expression and localisation in human placenta was determined by quantitative PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry. Knockdown of p32 protein in the syncytium of term placental explants was achieved using two different p32specific siRNA sequences, and was compared to explants treated with a non targeting (NT) siRNA sequence. Knockdown was confirmed by quantitative PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemistry. The effect of p32 knockdown on cytotrophoblast (CTB) proliferation and apoptosis was quantified by immunostaining for Ki67 and M30. Necrosis was assessed by measuring lactate dehydrogenase release. Glucose extraction from culture medium and lactate production were quantified as markers of glycolysis. Accumulation of MitoTracker dye in explants was examined by fluorescence microscopy, as an indicator of mitochondrial function. RESULTS: p32 mRNA and protein expression was significantly higher in the first trimester than at term (P<0.01; Mann Whitney U test). p32 was highly expressed in the syncytium, the underlying CTB, the vascular endothelium and by a proportion of cells in the villous stroma. Syncytial p32 expression was reduced in placentas from women with FGR, compared to placentas from healthy controls (P<0.01; Mann Whitney U test). p32 knockdown in term explants significantly reduced the number of Ki67-positive CTB (P<0.05; Kruskall Wallis test) but did not alter CTB apoptosis or necrosis. p32 knockdown significantly increased lactate production (P<0.05; Kruskall Wallis test) and reduced glucose extraction from culture medium (P<0.001; Kruskall Wallis test). p32 knockdown was also associated with reduced MitoTracker dye accumulation in trophoblast mitochondria. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that p32 is important for CTB proliferation, perhaps via a mechanism involving regulation of normal mitochondrial function and metabolism. As p32 expression is reduced in FGR, this may contribute to some of the associated placental pathologies [1], such as reduced CTB proliferation.  The alpha-Arrestin ARRDC3 Is Expressed by Trophoblast and Impacts Trophoblast Cell Migration. The a-arrestin ARRDC3 has been shown to be highly expressed by the placenta, but its role is unknown. In breast tumors, ARRDC3 was found to suppress breast cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Based on its actions in other tissues, we hypothesized that ARRDC3 would influence trophoblast cell invasion. This study investigates the pattern of expression of ARRDC3 in the placenta and whether it plays a role in regulating placental invasion. METHODS: Placenta was collected according to an IRB-approved protocol and the tissue was fixed, sectioned, and stained for ARRDC3 and HPL, a positive control for syncytiotrophoblast cells. ARRDC3 expression across gestational age was measured by qPCR on RNA extracted from whole placental tissue. The choriocarcinoma cell line JEG-3 was found to express ARRDC3, and siRNA knockdown of ARRDC3 was performed in these cells to ascertain differences in cell migration and invasion. The migration of ARRDC3 siRNA-transfected cells was assessed using a wound-healing assay. RESULTS: ARRDC3 appeared to primarily localize to the syncytiotrophoblast cell layer as it colocalized with HPL. The qPCR results indicate that ARRDC3 expression increases over gestational age five-fold from the first to the third trimester. Compared to control siRNA transfection, there was a 50% decrease in migration in cells transfected with ARRDC3 siRNA. CONCLUSIONS: ARRDC3 is expressed in the placenta and increases over gestation. Knockdown of ARRDC3 results in decreased migration in a choriocarcinoma cell line. Further studies are required to determine the function of ARRDC3 in noncancerous trophoblast cells. We previously found that human placenta undergoes global DNA methylation modification during normal gestation. Our preliminary data assessing the methylome of decidua-placental interface of the most common aneuploidies, trisomy 13, 18 and 21 (T21, T18, T13) showed differences from the euploid control. Herein, we further investigated the extent and the nature of these differences to yield better diagnostic and therapeutic advancements. METHODS: 2 nd trimester decidua-placental interface samples from T21 (n=10), T18 (n=6), T13 (n=4) and euploid controls (n=5) were collected. Ploidy was confirmed by interphase FISH. DNA methylation was assessed using Illumina Infinium 450K platform. R program, UCSC genome browser and DAVID database were used for statistical analysis, genomic location, and pathway analysis. RESULTS: Differentially methylated probes were selected based on statistical significance using Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test and b-value≥0.2. Compared to control, T18 had the most differences, followed by T21 and T13. Also, majority of differentially methylated CpG sites were hypermethylated in T18 and T21, while hypomethylated in T13. When comparing the trisomies to each other, T21 vs. T13 and T21 vs. T18 showed more differences than T18 vs. T13. Assessment of chromosomal distribution of the differentially methylated CpG sites did not reveal a significant enrichment of chromosomal hotspots, but when compared to percent chromosomal representation in 450K, some chromosomes showed a varying involvement in each comparison. When comparing genomic location in trisomies vs. control or vs. each other, differentially methylated CpG sites were located 40% in CpG islands (CGI), 7% in CGI shelves, 23% in CGI shores, and 30% in non-CGI regions. Pathway analysis in trisomies compared to control revealed Cadherin, cell adhesion, and calcium binding to be abnormal in the three trisomies, and HOX, transcription factor regulation, and sequence-specific DNA binding in both T18 and T21. We found embryonic morphogenesis, pattern specification, and embryonic skeletal development were affected in T18, and neuron differentiation and cell fate commitment were affected in T21. CONCLUSIONS: We observed significant differences in DNA methylomes of T21, T18, and T13 placenta suggestive of involvement of epigenetic mechanisms in developmental abnormalities and underscoring the significance of elucidating molecular mechanisms in the common aneuploidies. INTRODUCTION: Pre-eclampsia (PE), intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are major sources of clinical morbidity and mortality in pregnant women worldwide. The mechanisms underlying these gestational diseases are complex and not yet fully understood, but one factor contributing to their development is impaired maternal-fetal nutrient transport. Therefore, we aimed to identify candidate membrane transporters involved in transplacental nutrient transfer associated with PE/IUGR or GDM. METHODS: Using in silico strategies, we analysed various gene expression data sets generated on different platforms focusing on solute carriers, ABC transporters and TRP channels in order to identify transporters that are differently expressed between patients and gestational age-matched controls. These bioinformatic analyses were combined with literature data to define a catalogue of target transporters that could be involved in the development of PE/IUGR or GDM. Transporters of interest were then analysed for gene expression using qRT-PCR in placental tissues of patients and controls. For validating the results on protein and functional level, we started to establish an in vitro assay using freshly isolated primary cytotrophoblast cells polarized on the Transwell ® system. RESULTS: Using bioinformatics approaches, we initially identified 37 target membrane proteins which were mainly associated with the transport of amino acids, vitamins, and trace elements. At the current state of analysis, the amino acid transporters SLC7A7, SLC38A2, SLC38A5, and the thiamine transporter SLC19A3 showed significant differences in placental mRNA expression between controls and patients affected by PE and/or IUGR. Subsequent gene expression analysis in our in-house GDM placental tissue bank is still ongoing. CONCLUSIONS: Based on our in silico analyses, literature data and first follow-up in vitro validations, we were able to define potentially interesting candidate transporters implicated in PE/IUGR or GDM. To date, additional newly defined candidate targets are being analysed on mRNA level in PE/IUGR and GDM. Subsequent analyses on protein and functional level will reveal whether these targets could be of diagnostic or therapeutical interest in these pregnancy pathologies. The specific consequences of hyperglycemia on placental metabolism are incompletely understood but likely contribute to the poor pregnancy outcomes associated with diabetes mellitus (DM). This study aimed to identify biological pathways which are altered in trophoblast exposed to hyperglycemia, using an interactome model to integrate transcriptomic and metabolomic data. METHODS: BeWo were cultured in DMEM/F12, 5mM D-glucose for 24h then switched to media containing either 5 or 25 mM D-glucose for a further 48h (n=6), as a model of the placenta in DM. The effect of hyperglycemia on gene expression and metabolite profile was determined by microarray analysis of pooled BeWo RNA and LC-MS & GC-MS analysis of cells and culture media, respectively. Interaction of genes and metabolites which were significantly altered due to hyperglycemia (fold change (FC) ≥±1.3), was assessed using the Metscape interactome database to generate a network model. RESULTS: An interactome model of 5632 genes and 41 metabolites (15604 interactions) was generated. Metabolic pathways which most highly responded to hyperglycemia included fatty acid b-oxidation (evidenced by changes in e.g. hexadecanoic acid (FC+1.7); genes encoding hydroxysteroid (17-β) dehydrogenase 1 (FC+2.18) and palmityl-protein thioesterase 1 (FC+1.8)) and glycerosphingolipid metabolism (sphingosine (FC+1.3); UDP-GlcNAc:betaGal beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 2 (FC+1.5)). Responses in purine metabolism (Adenine (FC+2);lactoperoxidase (FC-1.8)) and phospholipid metabolism (lysine (FC+2.59); diacylglycerol kinase beta (FC-1.14) were also observed. CONCLUSIONS: We have characterised an interactome map of BeWo cell response to hyperglycemia which revealed metabolic pathways with known, as well as potentially novel, relevance to placental dysfunction associated with DM. Further understanding of signaling within these pathways may lead to identification of new targets for therapeutic intervention. The Small Placenta: Who Are the Babies with Placental Weight <10 th Centile? Hussam Inany, Beata Dygulska, Carolyn Salafia, Pramod Narula, Nayaab Khawar. Pediatrics, New York Methodist Hospital, Brooklyn, NY, USA. INTRODUCTION: Much attention has been paid to term low birth weight (BW). There is no literature regarding neonatal outcomes associated with low placenta weight (LPW). We hypothesize within an LPW sample, a proportion will have BW and fetoplacental weight ratios (FPR) within normal range and no placental pathology. These "constitutionally small" infants are predicted to have no neonatal risks. We predict second group of babies with growth restriction proportionate to placental pathology, and a third group of babies overly large for placental size (high FPR). We predict Group 2 (pathologically small) would have increased neonatal risks and that Group 3 (high FPR) will also be at risk, although the risks may not be identical. METHODS: At NYMH all placentas are submitted for pathology examination. Using criteria for the 10 th and 5 th centiles of placental weight at term, we collected LPW placentas measured after trimming of membranes and umbilical cord at 37-41 weeks gestation. Exclusion criteria:multiple gestation, intrauterine fetal demise, extramural delivery and congenital anomalies. Maternal and neonatal records extracted for parity, height and weight and complications including diabetes, preeclampsia and admission to neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Contingency tables and nonparametric and parametric tests of continuous variables considered p<0.05 as significant. RESULTS: 70 cases (8% total births) met criteria from January 2013-February 2013. Maternal BMI at delivery was 29.6 + 6.2, BW centile 27+ 18 (median 25), FPR 8.0 + 0.9, and ponderal index 2.8 +/-0.4. One (1.4%) were diagnosed preeclamptic (hospital rate 2%) and 5.7% and 1 (1.4%) were diagnosed as gestational and pregestational diabetic, respectively (hospital rate 4%). 71% of the population had no placental pathology, e.g. no chronic placental inflammation, maternal or fetal vascular pathology. Maternal BMI uncorrelated with PW, FPR or PI. 50% with multiple placental pathology were admitted to the NICU. CONCLUSIONS: We predicted LPW group would be enriched for preeclampsia and selected against diabetes. Neither prediction was valid. Despite LPW, the mean PI was "high", providing little support for "placental insufficiency" despite LPW. Additionally, FPR was at the 75 th -90 th centile despite high PI/ increased newborn fatness. Our sample showed median BW centile at the 25 th when PW is <10 th centile. A larger sample will give us better understanding of the fetoplacental environment and neonatal outcomes. PON 2 Expression in Labour and Pre-Eclampsia. Ekram Abdulsid, Sammy Abdulsid, Fiona Lyall. Medical Genetics, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. INTRODUCTION: PON2 is an anti-oxidant and may also protect cells against pathogens. The aim of this study was to investigate the hypothesis that PON2 is expressed in the placenta, is spatially regulated and expression is altered in labour and pre-eclampsia. METHODS: Western blotting was used to determine expression of PON2. Pre-eclampsia and control (labor and non labour) placentas (n=6 per group) were studied. Inner , middle and outer areas of the placenta were sampled and prepared as described previously (Abdulsid A et al, Plosone 2013). Overall there was no significant difference between the three areas of the placenta in PON2 Iso 1 or 2 expression for the non-labour group (Friedman test p>0.-05) Overall there was no significant difference between the three areas of the placenta in PON2 Iso 1 or 2 expression for the labour group ( p>0.05). There was no significant difference in PON2 expression in the non-labour compared to the labour group at inner zone of placenta for both isoforms (p>0.05). There was a significant increase in PON2 expression of the non-labour group compared to the labour at the middles zones of placentae for both isoforms ( p=0.002 and 0.006 respectively). There was no significant increase in PON2 expression in the preeclampsia non-labour group compared to the control non-labour group in the inner zones for both isoforms (p>0.05). There was a significant increase in PON2 expression in the control non-labour group compared to the preeclampsia non-labour group in the middle zones for both isoforms (p=0.02 for both). CONCLUSIONS: Labour and pre-eclampsia are associated with spatial changes in PON2 expression. This is the first report of PON2 in labour and pre-eclampsia and futures studies are required to understand what the role of PON2 may be. George. Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. INTRODUCTION: Inhibition of Nitric Oxide Synthase (NOS) attenuates uterine vascular adaptation (remodeling and reactivity) in pregnancy; although it is unknown whether this is directly due to reduced NO signaling, or an indirect result of hypertension. Also, some evidence exists that the vascular effects of NO may be mediated by mechanisms other than the canonical sGC-cGMP-PKG pathway. The goal of this study was to test the hypothesis that direct stimulation of Guanylate Cyclase (sGC) in the presence of NOS inhibition restores normal gestational adaptations (vascular remodeling and reactivity). A second aim was to determine whether restoration of adaptive changes is achieved by treatment with an antihypertensive. METHODS: In addition to pregnant controls (C: n=11), pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were treated with L-NAME alone to induce NOS inhibition (L: n=14), or co-treated with either BAY41-2272 (L+B: a sGC stimulator; n=9) or diltiazem (L+D: a calcium channel blocker; n=9) during the second half of gestation (days 10-20). Measurements included mean arterial pressure (MAP) on day 15, as well as main uterine artery (MUA) and arcuate artery diameters, and pup weights on day 20/22. Arcuate arteries were dissected, mounted in an arteriograph, preconstricted with phenylephrine, and exposed to increasing concentrations of a NO donor (DETA/NO) to evaluate vessel reactivity. RESULTS: Co-treatment with BAY41-2272 and with diltiazem prevented hypertension (C: 96±5.4 mmHg; L: 129±2.8 mmHg*; L+B: 94±2.4 mmHg*; L+D: 96±2.9 mmHg*;* =p<0.05 vs. C). MUA outward remodeling was fully restored by sGC stimulation but not by BP normalization with diltiazem (C: 228±10 µm; L: 172±12 µm*; L+B: 222±7 µm; L+D: 170±12 µm*). A similar pattern was seen with arcuate artery remodeling. Pup weights were lower in the L and L+D groups, whereas the L+B group trended toward normalization (C: 2.43±0.02 g; L: 2.20±0.04 g*; L+B: 2.26±0.04 g; L+D: 2.22±0.07 g*). Vessels from both L and L+D rats showed increased sensitivity to DETA/NO compared to controls (EC 50 values: C: 35±3.6 µM; L: 12±5.2 µM*; L+D: 6±2.1 µM*), while the L+B group showed an intermediate response(EC 50 value: L+B: 16±7.2 µM; p=0.06). CONCLUSIONS: Abrogation of structural and functional uterine vascular adaptation in the presence of NOS-inhibition is primarily due to a loss of NO signaling rather than systemic hypertension, and is reversed by direct sGC stimulation. Profiles. Thushari I Alahakoon, 1 WeiYi Zhang, 1 Brian Trudinger, 1 Vincent Lee. 2 1 Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Sydney at Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW, Australia; 2 Renal Medicine, University of Sydney at Westmead Hospital, Westmead, NSW, Australia. INTRODUCTION: Maternal circulating angiogenic factors have been well described in preeclampsia (PE). Their role in intrauterine fetal growth restriction (IUGR) is less well defined. We evaluated the levels of pro-and anti-angiogenic factors in PE and IUGR. Their potential as biomarkers in distinguishing normal from pathological pregnancies was evaluated. METHODS: A prospective case control study was conducted on singleton pregnancies. Patients were recruited into four clinical groups: (1) Normal pregnancy (N) (n=29); (2) PE ( n = 15) , (3) PE+IUGR (n=16), (4) IUGR only (n=24). PE was defined as de novo systolic blood pressure (BP) ≥140 mmHg and/or diastolic BP ≥ 90 mmHg on ≥2 occasions > 4 hours apart and proteinuria (300 mg/day or a spot urine protein to creatinine ratio ≥ 30mg/ mmol). IUGRwas defined as birth weight <10th centile with umbilical artery Doppler S/D or RI>95th centile. Maternal plasma concentrations of placental growth factor (PlGF), soluble fms like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1), soluble kinase domain receptor (sKDR) and soluble Endoglin (sEng) as well as fetal umbilical artery sFlt-1 levels were determined with ELISA. One way analysis of variance or Kruskal-Wallis non parametric equivalent was used to test for differences in the distribution by group. ROC curves were used to quantify the global performance of each individual marker and their ratios in terms of predicting normal versus complicated pregnancies affected by preeclampsia and/or intrauterine fetal growth restriction. RESULTS: Angiogenic profiles howing elevated sFlt-1, sEng and reduced PlGF, sKDR were observed in PE, PE+IUGR and IUGR only groups. However, sEng was significantly elevated in PE+IUGR compared to all other groups. sEng as a single marker and sFlt-1*sEng/PlGF as a composite marker appeared to have the best potential to differentiate pathological pregnancies from normal pregnancies. CONCLUSIONS: PE and isolated IUGR of placental origin have broadly similar pro and anti-angiogenic profiles. However, in our cohort sEng levels will predict if a preeclamptic pregnancy will be complicated by IUGR. sEndoglin should be further evaluated as part of a biomarker profile for predicting PE+IUGR. The observation that sKDR, a traditional "anti-angiogenic" factor is reduced in PE and IUGR requires further investigation. Evidences for EG-VEGF Involvement in the Development of Preeclampsia: Direct and Indirect Effects. Pascale Hoffmann, 2 Vanessa Garnier, 1 Aude Salomon, 1 Frederic Sergent, 1 Sophie Brouillet, 2 Mohamed Benharouga, 3 Jean Jacques Feige, 1 Nadia Alfaidy. 1 1 Biologie du Cancer et de l'Infection. iRTSV-CEA Grenoble, INSERM U1036, Grenoble, France; 2 Obstetrics and Gyneacology, Grenoble hospital, Grenoble, France; 3 LCBM-iRTSV-CEA Grenoble, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France. INTRODUCTION: Endocrine gland derived-VEGF (EG-VEGF) is a new placental angiogenic factor. We have recently shown that this factor plays a major role in placental development. To date, we have demonstrated that EG-VEGF i) and its receptors, PROKR1 and PROKR2 are abundantly expressed in the human placenta ii) controls extravillous trophoblast invasion and promotes placental angiogenesis iii) expression is up regulated by hypoxia, iv) circulating levels are the highest during the first trimester of pregnancy, and are increased in preeclampsia (PE). Taken together these data suggested that maintenance of EG-VEGF over the first trimester of pregnancy might cause PE . METHODS: We tested this hypothesis in a mouse model (EG-VEGF expression peaks at day 10.5 of gestation). Osmotic minipumps were inserted subcutaneously into timed pregnant OF1 mice on day 11.5. The pumps were loaded to continuously deliver either vehicle (control group) or EG-VEGF (0.7µg/day). Mice were sacrificed at day 15.5 and the following parameters were assessed; i) Litter size, placental and fetal weight, ii) Placental immunohistochemistry and histology (vascularization, degree of trophoblast invasion), iii) degree of placental hypoxia, iv) maternal blood pressure, v) renal histology and function and vi) measurement of, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFLT1). RESULTS: Our data show that EG-VEGF treated mice developed symptoms of severe PE. The mice developed hypertension, proteinuria, and elevated levels of sFLT1. These symptoms were associated with significant defects in placental function and organization. There was maintenance of placental hypoxia, along with an abnormal trophoblast invasion. Glomerelosclerosis and proteinuria were observed in the kidneys. Treatment of male mice with the same doses of EG-VEGF for the same duration did not show any effects of EG-VEGF on kidney function suggesting that EG-VEGF effects in the gravid mice were secondary to its primary effects on the placenta. CONCLUSIONS: Altogether these data bring strong evidence for direct effects of EG-VEGF on placental development and suggest that deregulations in the expression of EG-VEGF might be associated with PE. Hence EG-VEGF levels could be used as a biomarker of PE development. The Significance of Placental Lakes in Normal and High-Risk Pregnancies. Salwan Al-Nasiry, Ghislaine Gruiskens, Marc Spaanderman. Obs&Gyn, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands. INTRODUCTION: Abnormal placentation is implicated in the etiology of preeclampsia (PE). Placental ultrasound in PE frequently suggests abnormal structure and thickness. There is little literature on the significance of hypoechoic lesions in the placenta, known as placental lakes (PL). We aimed to conduct a literature review on ultrasound abnormalities of placental structure. We summarize lesion characteristics and the correlation to pregnancy outcome and placental histology. METHODS: We searched abstracts from various databases on "placental lakes", "placental ultrasound", "adverse pregnancy outcome", "placental pathology" and their alternative MeSH terms. Additional abstracts were obtained by cross-referencing. RESULTS: From a total of 90 reviewed abstracts, 71 were excluded for irrelevance to the research question or unavailability as full text. PL were defined as homogenous, sonolucent vascular spaces of ≥2x2cm. Other popular terms used included echogenic cystic lesions (ECL) and hypoechogenic lesions. The minumum largest diameter for PL to be considered significant varied between 0,5-5cm. The general incidence of PL on antenatal scans ranged widely and was 3-27%. in high risk pregnancies (such as placenta insufficiency). Most articles used a gestational age of 18-22 weeks in scanning for PL. Adverse pregnancy outcome was frequently correlated to the size of PL. Abnormal placental structure, and specifically PL, was associated with an increase in preterm delivery (RR 2.3) and low birth weight (RR 2.0). PL were more common in patient who had first trimester vaginal bleeding and fetal acidosis in PE. In combination with abnormal placental structure, abnormal uterine artery Doppler was strongly predictive of stillbirth (sensitivity 81), and abnormal maternal serum AFP of placental abruption (RR 9.0). Woman with normal placental profile had a decreased risk for placental syndromes. The finding of PL predicted intervillous thrombosis on histology with 50% sensitivity of and PPV of 25%, and predicted villous infarcts with 37% sensitivity and 63% PPV. Localization wires during postpartum placental scan increased the pathological detection rate to 89%. CONCLUSIONS: There is considerable heterogeneity in literature on interpreting the ultrasound finding of PL. Larger lesions especially in combination with abnormal placental function tests is associated with placental insufficiency. Histologically, these lesions correspond to intervillous thrombosis and villous infarcts. INTRODUCTION: Pregnancy complications that lead to perinatal morbidity and mortality, such as pre-eclampsia (PE), are largely resistant to prophylaxis and new therapeutic options are needed. Anti-angiogenic proteins from the oxidatively stressed placenta during PE promote maternal endothelial dysfunction, long postulated to be central to its pathogenesis. We have identified a novel link between abnormal early placental and endothelial dysfunction associated with PE based on the complement of TXA 2 receptor isoforms expressed. METHODS: A mixture of biochemical (ELISA, western blotting), molecular (PCR), histological (IHC) and cell biology (proliferation, angiogenesis, migration) assays, as well as in vivo mouse models, were used to characterize the role of TXA 2 receptor isoforms (TPa, TPb) in the pathogenesis of PE. RESULTS: TPb was absent in normal placental tissues but strongly expressed in PE placentae using IHC, whereas TPa expression was similar. TPb expression was independent of the severity of the PE (pre-or post-34 weeks onset) or the presence/absence of growth restriction. This is exciting as the two known ligands of TPb (TXA 2 and isoprostanes) are elevated in PE and linked to its pathogenesis. We have demonstrated that TPb activation reduces angiogenesis (83±13%) and promotes endothelial dysfunction through ablation of VEGF signalling, NO production and promotion of endothelial activation (5 fold increase in ICAM-1 and 10 fold for VCAM and E-selectin). We now show that TPb expression on trophoblasts impairs migration (40±12%), proliferation (3±.6 fold) and differentiation (50±12%) consistent with the phenotypes observed in PE. Moreover, our transgenic mice (TPb-Tg; over express TPb) are a robust model of PE. Pregnant TPb-Tg mice spontaneously develop hypertension (20±7 mmHg rise) in the second half of pregnancy, a mild proteinuria (3±0.51 fold), elevated circulating levels of soluble Flt-1 (7± 1.5 fold) and robust placental expression of MMP14 (5±0.68 fold). Moreover, the pups display a 30±12% decrease in size confirming the previous reports of IUGR. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data strongly implicate TPb in the endothelial damage and poor placentation associated with PE. These data refine our understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of PE and create a platform for development of new therapies to reduce the impact of PE on maternal and fetal health. Regulated by Fetal Well-Being. Ofer Beharier, 1 Ron Charach, 1 Adi Y Weintraub, 1 Eyal Sheiner, 1 Irit Solodkin-Szaingurten, 2 Y Mashiach, 1 Relika Hershkovitz. 1 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel; 2 Physiology and Cell Biology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. INTRODUCTION: Placenta growth factor (PlGF), a member of the vascular endothelial growth factor subfamily, is expressed mainly by trophoblast cells and may serve as a possible biomarker for placental related disorders (preeclampsia and IUGR). In order to evaluate whether PlGF concentrations are regulated by fetal well-being, we investigated PlGF concentrations in maternal circulation before and after acute fetal distress induced by feticide. METHODS: Blood samples were drawn prospectively between January and July 2012, before and after feticide at predetermined time points (0, 30, 60 and 120 minutes). Placental vitality was monitored by measuring LDH concentrations in maternal circulation. PlGF concentrations were measured by standard human ELISA. RESULTS: Six pregnant women were included in the study. Following the procedure (60 and 120 minutes) PlGF concentrations decreased significantly compared to the concentration before feticide (reduced by 23.8%±4.6 and 24.2%±12.2 of the concentration before feticide, respectively, P<0.01). LDH concentrations did not change before and after feticide. CONCLUSIONS: PlGF concentrations significantly decrease following feticide. It provides the first direct evidence that fetal distress actually affects PlGF concentrations. Overall, it supports the idea that fetal wellbeing affects PlGF concentrations in the maternal circulation. Angiogenic Factors and the Prediction of Complications in a High-Risk Pregnancy Cohort. Samantha Benton, 1 Yuxaing Hu, 1 Laura Magee, 2 Peter von Dadelszen. 1 1 OB/GYN, UBC, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2 Medicine, UBC, Vancouver, BC, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Identification of women at risk of developing placentally-mediated adverse outcomes is a priority in obstetrical care. Within a group of high risk women, the ability to predict who will develop an adverse outcome would have clinical utility. We evaluated the performance of circulating angiogenic factors measured in the second trimester to predict placentally-mediated outcomes in a high-risk pregnancy cohort. METHODS: Plasma was collected from women with an unexplained abnormal serum screen result and/or pre-eclampsia /IUGR/stillbirth in a previous pregnancy (high-risk cohort). Placental growth factor (PlGF), soluble Fms-like tyrosine kinase (sFlt) and endoglin (Eng) were measured. The performance of each analyte to predict a placentallymediated outcome (early-onset PET (<34wks), IUGR (AC<10 th centile for GA on ultrasound and birthweight<10 th centile), stillbirth, abruption) was evaluated. Women who devloped no complications (term delivery, appropriately grown fetus, n=133) served as controls and their marker concentrations were used to derive 5 th centile (PlGF) and 95 th centile (sFlt, Eng) cutoffs for a positive test result. RESULTS: Thirty-three (14%) women developed one or more placentally-mediated outcomes. Group characteristics are presented in Table 1 . Performance of each analyte is shown in Table 2 . Table 1 . Characteristics of the study groups (medians, IQR).  PlGF had the highest sensitivity and specificity but its performance was low. Multivariable modeling with PlGF, clinical risk factors and Doppler may improve the prediction of placentally-mediated outcomes in this high-risk cohort. EVT can be captured from the endocervical canal in a non-invasive procedure similar to a PAP test and isolated free of maternal cells. We hypothesize that serum biomarkers of IUGR and PE are dysregulated in EVT earlier in gestation than their altered levels can be detected in serum. METHODS: PAP specimens were collected at 5-20 weeks of gestation using a cytobrush. Medical records were later searched for diagnosis of PE or IUGR. EVT cells (500-1500) were isolated from a selected cohort of specimens (N=23) using HLA-G antibody coupled to magnetic nanoparticles. Cells (~50) were affixed to slides using a Cytospin 3 cytocentrifuge, assessed for purity with anti-b-hCG, and labeled by immunofluorescence with antibodies (R&D Systems) against galectin 13 (LGALS13, a.k.a. PP13), galectin 14 (LGALS14), placental growth factor (PGF), pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPPA), alpha fetal protein (AFP), endoglin (ENG), or fms-related tyrosine kinase 1 (FLT-1). Fluorescence intensity (FI) was quantified for individual cells by image analysis. FI values of 20 cells were averaged for each patient and compared by ANOVA between normal and adverse outcome groups, using a Tukey post-hoc test. have different sodium handling, endothelial and renal function compared with normotensives individuals, which could contribute to hypertensive complications. Furthermore, the longitudinal study of placental markers in women with CHT is limited. Our aim was to assess changes with gestation in neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin (NGAL), B-Natriuretic Peptide (BNP) and Placental Growth Factor (PlGF) in women with CHT compared with healthy controls, in order to identify potential predictive markers of superimposed pre-eclampsia, and/or mechanistic insight into underlying pathophysiology. METHODS: Longitudinal samples were taken at 12-14, 18-20 and 26-28 weeks' gestation from women with CHT and healthy controls. Superimposed pre-eclampsia was defined as the new development of proteinuria >30mg/mmol creatinine, or >300mg/24 hours after 20 weeks' gestation. Plasma concentrations of NGAL, BNP and PlGF were analysed with Alere Triage® System. P<0.05 was considered to be significant. RESULTS: 89 women with CHT and 91 healthy controls were included. Fourteen women with CHT developed superimposed pre-eclampsia. NGAL concentrations were significantly higher in all timepoints in women with CHT than healthy controls but did not change with gestation (12-14w:65.8±26.5v57.0±20.1ng/ml; 18-20w:71.4±28.1v59.0±19.4ng/ ml; 26-28w:67.4±28.3v59.8±28.7ng/ml), and BNP concentrations at 18-20 (16.2±10.3v18.5±9.7pg/ml) and 26-28 weeks' gestation (13.0±9.2v14.9±7.5pg/ml) were significantly lower in women with CHT compared to controls, but neither marker was associated subsequent superimposed pre-eclampsia. There was no difference in PlGF concentration between women with CHT who did not develop superimposed pre-eclampsia, and healthy controls. However, PlGF was significantly lower at 26-28 weeks in women with CHT who later developed superimposed pre-eclampsia compared with those who did not develop the condition (143.0±104.3v258.8±176.7pg/ml). CONCLUSIONS: NGAL and BNP in pregnant women with CHT are higher and lower respectively than controls, but neither are predictive of superimposed pre-eclampsia. PlGF at 26-28 weeks' was lower in women with CHT who subsequently developed superimposed pre-eclampsia, than women with CHT who did not. (2012) reported, primarily in endothelial cells, that oxysterols (upregulated with hypoxia) increase soluble endoglin (sEng) production, a key antiangiogenic factor central to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. They demonstrated that this was via binding of oxysterols to the Liver X Receptor (LXR). We characterised LXR in severe early onset preeclamptic placenta and assessed whether oxysterols regulate sEng production in primary placental tissues. We used immunohistochemistry and real time PCR to quantify LXR in placenta. The synthetic oxysterol (22R) was added to primary placental tissues and sEng release was assessed by ELISA. The effects of oxysterols on MMP 14 and TIMP 3 (inhibitor of MMP 14) mRNA expression were assessed by real time PCR. RESULTS: LXR protein and mRNA expression was significantly elevated in the placentas of severe preeclamptics (n=27) compared to gestationally matched preterm controls (n=25; p<0.05). Primary trophoblasts isolated from term placenta (n=3) were syncytialised and treated with oxysterols. There was a significant (p<0.05) dose dependent increase in sEng levels following oxysterol treatment. Similarly, a significant (p<0.05) dose dependent increase in sEng production was also observed following oxysterol treatment of placental explants and primary HUVECs. We previously reported MMP14 is the protease responsible for cleaving endoglin to produce sEng in placenta. Excitingly we confirmed an increase in MMP 14 and a significant decrease in TIMP 3 (inhibitor of MMP 14) mRNA expression following oxysterol treatment in primary cells. CONCLUSIONS: LXR is upregulated in preeclamptic placental tissue. Furthermore, oxysterols are able to increase MMP 14 and reduce its inhibitor TIMP 3 in primary placental tissues, and increase sEng. This data suggests that oxysterols may play a major role in the regulation of sEng production in severe preeclampsia. (Ang II) , a potent vasopressor. Despite this, blood pressure is maintained. This is due, in part, to vascular insensitivity to Ang II. In contrast, women with preeclampsia (PE) have decreased circulating levels of Ang II, yet are hypersensitive to its' actions. Recent evidence from our laboratory and others have provided evidence that altered circulating anti-angiogenic state mediated by placental secretion of anti-angiogenic factors such as sVEGFR1 (also referred to as sFlt1) can explain the maternal syndrome of preeclampsia. We hypothesize that sFlt1 may directly induce Ang II sensitivity and that this may be related to alterations of the angiotensin II receptors (AT1) in the vasculature. METHODS: Blood pressure and heart rate were monitored continuously using radiotelemetry. Ang II response was tested in female CD-1 mice by bolus injection of 30ng (1ng/ul) intravenous as non-pregnant, then at gestation day (gd) 10, 14, 17 and post-partum. A mouse model of PE used adenoviral overexpression of sFlt1 to determine the effect of excessive sFlt1 on Ang II. Angiotensin receptor bias was examined in tissues via RT-PCR. RESULTS: Prior to pregnancy, all mice responded to bolus Ang II with ~25mmHg rise in mean arterial pressure (MAP) over 15 minutes. In the same mice when pregnant, the response to Ang II infusion is blunted at gd10, but then becomes refractory at gd14 (P<0.05 for MAP and HR). In mice overexpressing sFlt1, the response to Ang II during pregnancy remains similar to non-pregnant mice. mRNA data from non-pregnant mice shows that sFlt1 increases message for AT1 receptors in the kidney compared to CMV-null injected control mice. CONCLUSIONS: Ang II resistance is conserved in mouse and human gestations. Excessive circulating sFlt1 appears to cause Ang II hypersensitivity, as observed in preeclampsia. Further work is being done to elucidate mechanistic pathways. Factor H  Our results indicate that FH is increased in preterm PE, locally in the placenta, but not systemically in either the maternal or fetal compartments. The placental increase in FH may be a compensatory response to inhibit the alternative complement activation (Bb) seen in preterm pregnancies complicated by PE. INTRODUCTION: Traditional methods to assess autonomic activity in pregnant women result in contradictory findings unable to discriminate between uncomplicated pregnancies and those complicated by hypertensive disorders. The Phase-Rectified Signal Averaging (PRSA), a novel method of heart rate variability analysis, has never been applied to maternal autonomic activity evaluation. The aim of this study was to assess the autonomic function in pregnant women affected by intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (HDP) by means of this new methodology. Pregnancy. D Casati, 1 T Stampalija, 2 E Rosti, 1 S Lupini, 1 V Maggi, 1 K Rizas, 3 A Bauer, The study included singleton pregnancies between 25 and 40 weeks of gestation divided in following groups: 50 IUGR, 29 HDP with IUGR, and 113 controls (define as no fetal and maternal complications), respectively. Maternal and fetal ECG at admission were acquired through a trans-abdominal device (Monica AN24, UK) at a sampling frequency of 900 Herz. Each maternal R-R interval time-series was analyzed by PRSA to assess average acceleration/deceleration capacity (AAC/ADC) of maternal heart rate. Data were compared by means of non-parametric tests. RESULTS: No significant differences were observed in demographic maternal characteristics. AAC and ADC were significantly higher in pregnancies complicated by HDP with IUGR (AAC median -8.23ms, IQR -5.23÷-9.93; ADC median 8.73ms, IQR 6.44÷10.22) than in those with IUGR alone (AAC median -5.92ms, IQR -4.72÷ -8.12; ADC median 6.85ms, IQR 5.57÷8.53; p=0.03), and in controls (AAC median -5.84ms, IQR -4.12÷-7.23; ADC median 6.61ms, IQR 5.33÷8.01; p=0.001). There were no differences between pregnancies with IUGR and controls (p=0.3). The maternal heart rate analysis by means of the PRSA technology showed a significant autonomic activation in pregnancies complicated by HDP with IUGR, while no differences were found between pregnancies with IUGR and controls. These data suggest that the underlying mechanism of autonomic activation is associated with endothelial dysfunction and not to placental insufficiency. Pregnancy-related complications such as preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction are attributed to placental abnormalities. Therapeutic interventions for such conditions do not currently exist; a major barrier to their development is the risk of sideeffects caused by systemic delivery. Peptide-mediated targeting of nanocarriers to the placenta may provide a means to avoid such sideeffects. We have identified two novel placental-specific homing peptides and coupled them to liposomes. Here we investigate the time course of liposomal targeting and tissue distribution in a pregnant mouse model. METHODS: Liposomes were synthesised by lipid film hydration of DSPC (325mM), cholesterol (150mM), DSPE-PEG (25mM) and DSPE-PEG-maleimide (2.5mM), and were extruded to form liposomes of approximately 140nm diameter. Fluorescent targeting peptides were covalently coupled to free maleimide groups on the liposomal surface; unbound peptide was removed by dialysis. Time-mated C57/BJ6 mice (E15.5) were intravenously injected with 100mL of peptide-conjugated liposome suspension, which were allowed to circulate for 6, 24 or 48h. Mice were then sacrificed by cardiac perfusion to remove unbound peptide. The placentas, fetuses and maternal organs were collected, fixed in formalin, embedded in OCT, cryosectioned and visualised by fluorescence microscopy. RESULTS: Targeted liposomes (TL) were observed throughout the placental labyrinth and within maternal uterine blood vessels, specifically the spiral arteries. Co-localisation of both the peptide (red) and the liposome (green) was observed, with signal being greatest in the labyrinth at 6h, with some reduction in peptide signal by 24h and a vast reduction in both peptide and liposome by 48h. TL were not observed in the maternal heart, lung, brain or fetuses. TL were seen in the liver and spleen at 6h; the fluorescent signal was decreased by 24h and 48h. CONCLUSIONS: TL bound to the labyrinth and spiral arteries of the mouse placenta indicating successful targeting. TL were not observed in maternal organs or fetuses demonstrating selective targeting of the placenta. As expected, TL were seen in the clearance organs, the liver and spleen at early time points. These data demonstrate that TL decorated with novel, placental specific homing peptides may be utilised for targeted delivery of cargo to the placenta. Prospective INTRODUCTION: Risk stratification in early pregnancy is currently based on medical and/or obstetrical history and may be improved by prediction models for common pregnancy complications. The aim of the multicenter RESPECT-study is the development of prediction models for preeclampsia and gestational diabetes, both substantially contributing to adverse pregnancy outcomes. Moreover, preeclampsia and gestational diabetes are strongly associated with overweight, type 2 diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease in later life. In a prospective cohort of 4000 pregnant women we will validate established algorithms and develop new ones. The focus is primarily on external validation in the general Dutch population of the most common prediction models for preeclampsia and gestational diabetes. The algorithms are based on maternal characteristics, arterial blood pressure, biochemical serum markers (PAPP-A and PlGF) and second trimester uterine artery Doppler ultrasound for preeclampsia. An adjusted model is used for gestational diabetes (maternal characteristics and first trimester blood glucose levels). Sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV and appropriate cut-off points of the different models will be determined. Results of an external validation of prediction models for preeclampsia and gestational diabetes from 2000 pregnancies will be available in early 2014 and presented at the meeting. CONCLUSIONS: Valid prediction models will allow early risk stratification for pregnancy complications, enabling customized targeted interventions. Based on the individual risks and needs of a pregnant woman a multidisciplinary care pathway can be designed which contributes to timely recognition and intervention, and improved pregnancy outcome. On the other hand, women at low risk for these pregnancy complications will not be subject to unnecessary testing and interventions with this strategy. In this way we will contribute to the development of personalized obstetric care and improve the utilization of health care resources. COX-2, NF-kB, and IL-8 Expression in the Placenta in Severe Preeclampsia. Kathleen R Dorfler, Neelima Chandra, Thomas D Kimble, David F Archer, Gustavo Doncel. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, USA. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia is a serious disease of pregnancy, causing fetal and maternal complications. Studies have reported increased reactive oxygen species in placentas of preeclamptic pregnancies. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is an inducible enzyme that makes prostaglandins in inflammation. Nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) activates COX-2. Interleukin-8 (IL-8) is a neutrophil chemotactic agent that is expressed in the peripheral tissues of preeclamptic pregnancies. Because oxidative stress may be a key factor in preeclampsia, and preeclampsia resolves after the removal of products of conception, it follows that the placenta may be a location of inflammation. METHODS: Placental blocks were identified and classified into three groups. The negative control group included ten blocks from women who had a scheduled cesarean delivery and did not experience labor. The positive control group included ten blocks from women diagnosed with chorioamnionitis. The study group included ten blocks from patients with severe preeclampsia at term, did not labor, and had a cesarean delivery. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed targeting COX-2, NF-kB, and IL-8. Slides were photographed and the intensity of staining was quantified. RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed that COX-2, NF-kB, and IL-8 were expressed mainly in syncytiotrophoblasts. Baseline COX-2 expression was brightly expressed in the positive control and preeclamptic group. Staining intensity of the positive control and preeclamptic group were significantly higher than the negative control. NF-kB staining of the positive control was significant compared to negative control, however preeclamptic staining of NF-kB was not significantly different. Staining of IL-8 in the positive control was higher than in negative control, but staining of preeclamptic placentas was not statistically different. The study shows that COX-2 expression in severe preeclampsia is nearly as high as the expression seen in chorioamnionitis. COX-2 produces a precursor for thromboxane A 2 , a vasoconstrictor, which has been shown to be upregulated in the systemic circulation of severe preeclamptics. Expression of NF-kB was not increased in severe preeclampsia, indicating that COX-2 may be regulated by another factor in syncytiotrophoblasts. IL-8 expression was also not increased in severe preeclampsia, suggesting neutrophil recruitment to the fetomaternal junction may not be a component in severe preeclampsia. and VEGF-C were assayed using ELISA. Maternal demographics, pregnancy and fetal/neonatal outcomes were collected by chart review. Serum angiogenin and VEGF-C were assayed using ELISA and the results were compared between patients with normal and adverse pregnancy outcomes, including pre-eclampsia, IUGR, spontaneous preterm birth, placental abruption, or stillbirth. Mean serum angiogenin and VEGF-C concentrations were compared using a two-tailed t-test, with p<0.05 being considered significant. Subgroups were compared using non-parametric ANOVA (significant p<0.05), or Mann-Whitney test (significant p <0.01). RESULTS: Serum angiogenin was significantly higher in women who went on to develop any adverse placental outcome (394.9 ± 10.5 ng/ml) than those with normal outcomes (365.6 ± 6.7 ng/ml). When adverse outcomes were subdivided, differences amongst the means remained statistically significant (p=0.009). Women who later developed severe pre-eclampsia (p=0.0108) or spontaneous preterm labour (p=0.0068) had significantly higher levels of angiogenin than those with normal outcomes. There was no significant difference between those with normal outcomes and those with mild pre-eclampsia. Serum VEGF-C did not differ significantly between the normal and adverse placental outcome groups. CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that second trimester serum angiogenin is increased prior to the onset of clinical disease, in women who develop adverse placental outcomes, particularly severe pre-eclampsia and spontaneous preterm labour. This suggests that angiogenin may be a marker of abnormal placental angiogenesis. Urinary Additional systemic inflammation from other sources may also predispose to an increased risk of PE. As urinary tract infection (UTI) represents a common source of inflammation during pregnancy, we tested whether presence of a UTI during pregnancy increased the odds of developing PE. METHODS: Women aged 18 years and older (n=2,619) were recruited and followed prospectively from the initiation of prenatal care through delivery at three regional academic centers. PE was defined by ACOG criteria and was independently validated by a physician panel. UTI was defined by the presence of clinical symptoms necessitating treatment in addition to supportive laboratory evidence. Multivariate logistic regression models controlled for maternal age, race, parity, BMI, hypertensive, diabetic, IVF, and smoking status. RESULTS: 129 women were diagnosed with UTIs and 235 with PE. Patients with UTI in pregnancy had higher rates of PE (31.1% vs 7.8%, p <0.001) compared to those without reported UTI. The mean gestational age (SD) for UTI diagnosis in PE cases and controls was 25.6 (10.4) and 21.9 (10.9) weeks, respectively (p=0.08). The unadjusted odds ratio (OR) for PE in the setting of UTI was 5.29 (95% CI 3.54-7.89). After controlling for confounders, UTI was associated with an OR for PE of 3.2 (95% CI 2.0, 5.1) ( Here we investigate if these dNK cells have the ability to "remember" pregnancy and report for the first time the innovative result that dNK cells of the innate immune system have the ability to remember. METHODS: dNK cells were isolated from first trimester elective pregnancy terminations obtained from nulliparous and parous women. The dNK cell receptor repertoire was analyzed by using FACS. RESULTS: Significant differences in dNK receptor (P=0.0008 (2-tailed)) were detected in the nulliparous versus parous women. This finding was specific for the dNK population but not observed with other cells such as T cells. CONCLUSIONS: This observation suggests that dNK which play a role in remodeling the maternal fetal interface may additionally possess the unexpected ability to "remember" pregnancy. This finding may give insight to the etiology of preeclampsia with increased risk in first pregnancy. (1) patients with uncomplicated pregnancies (n = 11); (2) patients with a preconception risk of developing PE and/or IUGR (n = 15); and (3) patients with a current risk of developing PE and/ or IUGR (n = 18). Blood samples were collected at each prenatal visit or during hospitalization, scheduled at 4-5 week intervals from early second trimester until delivery. Plasma concentrations of PlGF were measured using commercially available ELISA kits. Serum placenta growth factor levels were analyzed according to pregnancy outcome. Changes in the maternal plasma concentrations of PLGF were compared among normal patients and those destined to develop PE or IUGR. The sensitivity and specificity of PlGF were, respectively, (95%, 78%) for PE/IUGR. Serum PlGF levels were significantly lower among women who developed PE/IUGR compared with controls (p < 0.0001). In group 2, relatively decreased levels of serum placenta growth factor occur before the onset of adverse outcome (two weeks about). CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms that maternal serum PlGF concentration is significantly lower in pregnancies destined to develop PE/ IUGR. Changes in the maternal plasma concentration of PlGF precede the clinical presentation of adverse outcome. PlGF may be a good indicator for timing the complications in women with a high risk for PE/IUGR. Potential Urine Biomarkers for Gestational Hypertension and Preeclampsia. Hong-Xia Guo, 1 Shi-Peng Gong, 2 Jin-Yan Hu, 1 Shui-Wang Hu, 3 Chen-Hong Wang. The quantity and composition of the urine protein deem to be changed in different types of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy. We applied differential proteomic techonogy to identify the urine proteomic profile of gestational hypertension and preeclampsia. METHODS: Urine samples were collected from 10 gestational hypertension patients, 10 mild preeclampsia, 10 severe preeclampsia and 10 normal pregnancies. All samples were analyzed by 2-D difference gel electrophoresis, followed by protein spots picking and in-gel digestion, and then differential proteins were identified using matrix assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry. A total of 65 protein spots with a significant alteration were detected and after mass spectrometry analysis 27 differential proteins were found. Compared with normal pregnancies, ceruloplasmin, Igg-3 chain C region and pancreatic alpha-amylase were all up-regulated in hypertensive disorders in pregnancy, howerver, hemopexin, antithrombin-III, kininogen-1, alpha-2-HS-glycoprotein, vitamin D-binding protein, actin cytoplasmic 2, apolipoprotein A-I and chorionic somatomammotropin hormone were all down-regulated. For alpha-1B-glycoprotein, cadherin-11, pregnancy-specific beta-1-glycoprotein 11, gelsolin, interalpha-trypsin inhibitor heavy chain H4, keratin type II cytoskeletal 2 epidermal, protein AMBP, vesicular integral-membrane protein VIP36, filamin-A-interacting protein 1, semenogelin-1, prostaglandin-H2 D-isomerase, Igkchain V-III region WOL, perlecan, mannan-binding lectin serine protease 2, fibrinogen alpha chain and long palate,lung and nasal epithelium carcinoma-associated protein 1, the contents in gestational hypertension were higher than that of normal pregancies, but lower in mild and severe preeclampsia. On the contrary, serum albumin and alpha-1-antitrypsin were lower in gestational hypertension when comparing with normal pregnancies and higher in mild and severe preeclampsia. The results show that the urine proteomics is a useful tool to idenitfy new potential boimarkes to distinguish different types of hypertensive disorders in pregnancy. Vivek K Gupta, 1 Nicholas P Illsley, 2 Abdulla Al-Khan, 2 Stacy Zamudio. CTAD reduced the median to 0 pg/mL (0-20.6, p < 0.0001) with 80% undetectable. The reduction in values obtained with CTAD was 83% (60-100%). Median PlGF was 228 pg/mL (97-997) in serum and decreased to 144 pg/mL (51-643) in CTAD (p < 0.001), a 29% decrease (11-66%). CTAD reduced median serum sFlt-1 from 10.7 ng/mL (3.4-53.1) to 9.3 ng/mL (2.3-44.4) in CTAD (p < 0.001), a reduction of 20% (1-69%). PE: VEGF was not measured. Serum PlGF was 160 pg/ml (42-364) and decreased with CTAD to 113 pg/ml (21-317), a decrease of 30% (0-71%). Median sFlt-1 was 42.9 ng/ml (6-352) and was reduced by CTAD to 28 ng/ml (3-228), a decrease of 41% (13-71%). This decrease is more than 2-fold greater than in normotensive pregnancy (p<0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: Blood collection techniques/reagents alter measures of the circulating concentrations of AGFs. For the first time, we show that there is peripheral cell release of PlGF, and that the quantitative contribution of peripheral cell release to sFlt-1 levels is greater in PE than normal pregnancy. These data render questionable both the source of altered AGFs in PE and to what extent they are causally involved versus a correlate of the syndrome. Support: NIH HD042737, TW007444, HD046982, NSF BCS-0309142. Correlations were evaluated using Spearman's correlation coeffi cient, with statistical signifi cance defi ned by a=0.05. RESULTS: Compared to both controls, severe preeclampsia was characterized by increased plasma sFLT-1, decreased plasma VEGF and PlGF, decreased urinary PlGF, and increased urinary C5b-9. There was no pattern of change in bFGF, C3a or C5a unique to preeclampsia. Urinary C5b-9 correlated strongly with angiogenic imbalance in preeclampsia. Increased urinary excretion of C5b-9 correlated with: 1) increased plasma sFLT-1 (r=0.66, p<0.0001); 2) decreased plasma VEGF (r=-0.39, p=0.0007) and; 3) decreased PlGF in both plasma and urine (r=-0.68, p<0.0001 and r=-0.44, p=0.0001, respectively). In contrast, plasma levels of C5b-9 did not differentiate chronic hypertension from severe preeclampsia; levels correlated with plasma VEGF and PlGF, but not sFLT-1. C3a and C5a in plasma and urine also failed to correlate with plasma sFLT-1. CONCLUSIONS: Urinary excretion of C5b-9 is strongly correlated with angiogenic factors in severe preeclampsia and may be a useful measure that links complement and angiogenic dysregulation in active disease. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is a key cytoprotective molecule decreased in preeclampsia, increased HO-1 reduces sFlt1 and sEng. Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), commonly prescribed for gastric refl ux, have recently been shown to potently induce HO-1 in gastric epithelium. We hypothesized that PPIs would induce HO-1 in trophoblast and endothelial cells, leading to reduced secretion of sFlt1 and sEng. METHODS: Primary trophoblast and human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were isolated and treated with fi ve PPIs (0-100mM). Endothelial dysfunction was modeled in vitro; HUVECs treated with TNFa (10mg/mL), were then subsequently treated with the PPI lansoprazole. Media and cell lysates were collected to assess sFlt1, sEng, HO-1 production and markers of endothelial dysfunction (VCAM1 and Endothelin 1 (ET1)). Primary trophoblast and HUVECs demonstrated a signifi cant dose dependent increase in HO-1 mRNA and protein and potent reduction in sFlt1 and sEng secretion with increasing doses of PPIs. PPIs induced nuclear translocation of Nrf2, a key transcription factor that induces HO-1. Finally, lansoprazole rescued TNFa induced endothelial dysfunction, attenuating VCAM1 and ET1 expression (dose dependently). CONCLUSIONS: PPIs 1) potently induce HO-1, 2) potently reduce sFlt1 and sEng secretion from primary endothelial and trophoblast cells and 3) quench TNFa induced endothelial dysfunction. This data suggests PPIs may represent a highly novel candidate therapeutic for severe preeclampsia. Given PPIs are safe in pregnancy, they could potentially be fast-tracked to clinical trials. Newborn. E Herzog, 1 E Steegers, 1 S Willemsen, 2 K Wijnands, 1 J Chen, 3 A Roks, 4 R Steegers-Theunissen. We hypothesize that PE is associated with alterations in epigenetic programming of the placenta, but also of the fetus, in a tissue-specifi c manner. Objective: To examine the epigenome of PE and control pregnancies in 1. placental tissue and 2. newborn umbilical cord white blood cells (WBC) and umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). We conducted a case-control study of PE and control pregnancies within a hospital-based cohort study. Directly after delivery, placental tissues (PE n=20, controls n=24) and newborn umbilical cord WBC (PE n=20, controls n=24) were sampled. HUVECs (PE n=18, controls n=22) were obtained by collagenase perfusion of the umbilical vein and purifi ed by magnetic activated cell separation. DNA methylation of cytosine-guanine dinucleotides (CpGs) was measured by the Illumina HumanMethylation450K BeadChip. Statistical analysis was performed after Dasen normalization in R, by a multiple linear regression model predicting methylation b values by disease state, adjusted for sample-plate. Bonferroni correction was used to estimate epigenome-wide signifi cance (a: 1.099x10 -7 ). The Manhattan plots display several strongly associated CpG loci for PE in three tissues. We observed 6 signifi cantly hypomethylated loci: 4 in placental tissue, 1 in umbilical cord WBC and 1 in HUVECs. After adjustment, the loci remained signifi cantly different, except for HUVECs ( Fig.1) . For the fi rst time, tissue-specifi c epigenomes in association with PE in placenta and newborn tissues are shown. We will present more details on the identifi ed loci, validation and comparisons to pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restriction and preterm birth. This data may provide novel target loci for a better understanding of the pathophysiology of preeclampsia and consequences for offspring's future health. Chymotrypsin Induce Soluble Fms-Like Tyrosine Kinase 1 Release through the Protease-Activated Receptor 2. Chihiro Hirai, Motoi Sugimura, Shintaro Makino, Atsuo Itakura, Satoru Takeda. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan. INTRODUCTION: Soluble FLT1 (sFLT1) is known to be increased in preeclampsia however its releasing process remains unclear. Serine protease including thrombin and chymotrypsin is related to proteinaseactivity, coagulation system, and cell activity. In the present study, we investigated whether chymotrypsin is involved in the production and secretion of sFLT1 through protease-activated receptor (PAR) 1 and 2. METHODS: After the presence of chymotrypsin activity in the placenta was confi rmed, the term placenta-derived immortalized human trophoblast (TCL-1) cells were cultured with thrombin, a-chymotrypsin, PAR-1 agonist or antagonist, and PAR-2 agonist or antagonist for 1 and 6 hours. Then the secretion of sFLT1 was measured by ELISA and total mRNA of sFLT1 was examined by RT-PCR. RESULTS: Thrombin immediately increased expression of sFLT1 mRNA and secretion of sFLT1 through PAR-1. On the other hand, chymotrypsin showed signifi cant induction of sFLT1 production and release trough PAR-1 and 2 comparing with thrombin at 6 hours. CONCLUSIONS: The chymotrypsin emitted due to placental dysfunction may be involved in release sFLT1 through PAR-2 rather than PAR-1. It is reasonable to suggest that chymotrypsin may have original sFLT1 releasing system. Melatonin as an Antioxidant to Treat Preeclampsia (PAMPR Trial  We report current preliminary fi ndings of the PAMPR trial with data from the fi rst 3 participants. Figure 1 shows that melatonin prolongs pregnancy beyond that expected from historical controls. Figures  2A & 2C show that from day 0 (pre) to day 3-4 (post), melatonin decreases mean arterial blood pressure & uterine artery pulsatility index (PI), while Figure 2B shows no difference in proteinuria. Our group proposes the PAMPR Trial investigating the use of melatonin as an antioxidant treatment for preeclampsia, with preliminary results appearing promising. Role Markers for endothelial activation such as Endothelin-1 (ET-1), ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 are all elevated in preeclampsia. Activin A, which is increased in the maternal circulation in preeclampsia, may be responsible for the elevations in these circulating factors. The activin-binding protein follistatin is proposed as a potential therapeutic in preeclampsia worthy of further investigation. Objectives: 1. To assess if activin A could induce endothelial cell dysfunction in vitro; 2. To assess if follistatin, the major activin-binding protein, could mitigate any activin effects on endothelial cell function; 3. To explore whether follistatin can mitigate the effects of preeclamptic serum on endothelial cell function. as an in vitro model for in vivo vascular endothelium. HUVECs were cultured for 24 hours with either activin A or 20% human serum from established serum pools collected from either normal pregnant or preeclamptic women and then with/without follistatin-288 for a further 24 hours. Markers for endothelial cell function were assessed by endothelin-1 (ET-1), intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) transcription quantitated by real-time reverse transcription qPCR. We determined that transcription of ET-1 ( Figure 1A ), ICAM-1 ( Figure 1B ) and VCAM-1 ( Figure 1C ) were all up-regulated in HUVECs exposed to activin A (AA). Furthermore, the addition of follistatin (FS) mitigated the increased expression back down to control levels for all outcomes. Plasma levels of homocysteine, cysteine and cystathionine were analyzed from the same patients during healthy pregnancy or PE. The association of the alleles with PE development was tested with logistic regression, Mann Whithey U test was used to compare plasma values between groups. RESULTS: Severe PE patients less often had the minor allele for rs11203172 (OR[95%CI]=0.46[0.22-0.95]). Mild PE patients more often had the minor allele for rs234706 (4.83[1.30-18.06]). Healthy controls with the minor allele for rs11203172 had increased plasma cysteine levels (p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: SNPs in the CBS gene are associated with both decreased (rs11203172) and increased (rs234706) risk to develop PE. Furthermore, healthy pregnant women having the minor allele for rs11203172, a protective allele, have decreased cysteine levels. This may be due to an increased conversion of cysteine to H 2 S by CBS. As a result these women might have higher H 2 S levels, positively affecting placentation and vascular function during pregnancy and decreasing their risk to develop PE. Much recent work has attempted to identify biomarkers that can be measured early in pregnancy to predict the later onset of preeclampsia (PE). Circulating maternal levels of angiogenic factors, including placental growth factor (PlGF) and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 receptor (sFlt-1), differ between normal pregnancies and those complicated by PE. However, levels of PlGF and sFlt-1 measured at single time-points in pregnancy have been found to lack clinically useful predictive power. We assessed whether longitudinal trends in PlGF and sFlt-1 concentrations across pregnancy might prove more informative. METHODS: Study participants were enrolled during the fi rst trimester at three tertiary care centers. This analysis was restricted to the 2,439 women with singleton pregnancies who delivered after 24 weeks' gestational age. Of these, 193 (7.9%) were diagnosed with PE. PlGF and sFlt-1 were measured at 10, 18, 26, and 35 weeks. Relevant clinical information was obtained by questionnaire or from medical records, and a physician panel validated PE diagnoses. Linear mixed effects models were used to generate random slopes and intercepts for the angiogenic markers over time. Quartiles of the random slopes were then generated and used as predictors in adjusted logistic regression models. RESULTS: After adjusting for maternal age, race, BMI, parity, use of assisted reproductive technology, and gestational diabetes diagnosis, individuals with lowest-quartile slopes in PlGF had 4.8 times greater odds (95% CI: 2.9, 8.1) of being diagnosed with PE when compared to individuals with highest-quartile slopes in PlGF. Looking at sFlt-1, individuals in the highest quartile had 5.2 times greater odds (95% CI: 3.2, 8.5) of being diagnosed with PE when compared to the lowestquartile group. CONCLUSIONS: Measuring trend in circulating angiogenic factors segregates those at increased risk from those at lower risk of PE and suggests that the longitudinal evaluation of angiogenic factor concentrations across pregnancy adds predictive utility. Pregnancies with Severe Preeclampsia Exhibit Perturbed Von Willebrand Factor Parameters. Kara K Hoppe, 1 Danielle N Drury-Stewart, 2 Kerry W Lannert, 2 Hilary S Gammill, 1 Dominic W Chung, 2 Jill M Johnsen. 2 1 Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of Washington, USA; 2 Puget Sound Blood Center, Research Institute, USA. INTRODUCTION: Von Willebrand Factor (VWF) and Factor VIII (FVIII) are elevated in healthy pregnancy (HP) and furthermore in preeclampsia (PE). We hypothesized pregnancies with severe PE (SPE) have changes in other VWF-associated parameters. METHODS: SPE subjects were compared with subjects from a HP repository at similar gestational ages. We tested plasma VWF antigen (VWF:Ag), VWF propeptide (VWF:pp), and FVIII antigen (FVIII:Ag) by ELISA. Factor VIII activity (FVIII:C) was measured using a one-stage assay. Activity of ADAMTS13 was determined by enzyme-linked peptide substrate cleavage. RESULTS: Forty-two SPE subjects and 39 HP controls were eligible. There was no difference in maternal or gestational ages between the cohorts. SPE subjects had higher VWF:Ag, VWF:pp, and FVIII:Ag compared the HP control cohort (p<0.001). FVIII:Ag and FVIII:C were similar, therefore FVIII:Ag was used for all analyses. The VWF:FVIII ratio trended higher in SPE (p=0.058). The ADAMTS13 activity in SPE was lower than HP controls (p<0.001). In SPE, VWF:Ag and FVIII were significantly elevated compared to HP, as expected. VWF:FVIII ratios trended higher in SPE, while the activity of the VWF-cleaving protease, ADAMTS13, was modestly but significantly decreased. Two subjects with thrombocytopenia (<50 x 10 9 /L) had ADAMTS13 activities >85%, indicating the thrombocytopenia was not due to a TTP-like microangiopathy. We conclude patients with SPE exhibit VWF biology that is distinct from HP. These changes likely reflect the perturbed endothelial state in PE, and may contribute to or perpetuate vascular pathogenesis. Pre-eclampsia and eclampsia are a common cause of maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality in low-and middle-income countries. The treatment of choice for both prevention and treatment of eclampsia is magnesium sulfate. Although known to be lifesaving, the administration of IV magnesium sulfate can be technically challenging and cumbersome requiring additional supplies and close monitoring. The easier IM route is disadvantaged by the pain of injection. However, the addition of lidocaine would lessen this pain, providing a more tolerable and accessible route of administration appropriate for widespread use. The physical compatibility and chemical stability of admixtures of magnesium sulfate commercially available (50%) and reconstituted from salt (61%) with lidocaine hydrochloride (2%) were studied. Two storage conditions were evaluated: room temperature (25 0 C) and a humidified incubator (40 0 C). For all preparations, physical characteristics including pH, color and formation of precipitate, were evaluated every 14 days over 168 days. The concentration of lidocaine was determined by a stability-indicating HPLC method while the concentration of magnesium was determined by an automated chemistry analyzer (UniCel DxC 600i Synchron). Stability was defined as the retention of at least 90% of the initial concentration of each drug. No changes in pH, color or precipitates were observed in either storage condition for up to 168 days. The 95% confidence interval of the slope of the curve relating concentration to time, determined by linear regression, indicated that only the admixture of commercially-available magnesium sulfate and lidocaine as well as the reconstituted magnesium sulfate salt alone maintained at least 90% of the initial concentration of both drugs at 25°C and 40 0 C at 168 days. The combination of commercially-available magnesium sulfate and lidocaine hydrochloride is physically and chemically stable in a pre-filled syringe for at least 168 days at high heat and humidity. The There was no association between mode of delivery and abnormal conduct, emotional problems or pro-social behaviour. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that emergency CS children face more behavioral difficulties compared to those born by SVD. We found little evidence to support an association between elective CS & abnormal behavioral problems.  We included 115 women with a history of PE and 50 women with an uncomplicated pregnancy (CO). We performed automatic blood pressure measurements, blood analysis for fasting glucose levels and lipids and used a validated questionnaire about lifestyle and family history. We subdivided the PE group into those with anti hypertension treatment (HTPE) and without (NTPE). The Framingham risk calculator was used to estimate the 10 and 30 year risk for developing CVD. Data was analyzed by the Mann Whitney U test and the Kruskal-Wallis test. RESULTS: In formerly PE and CO, the 10 and 30 year CVD median risk is 1.6% and 1.5% (p=0.25), 9.0% and 9.0% (p=0.49), respectively. In HTPE relative to NTPE, the 10 and 30 year CVD median risk is 3.1% and 1.4% (p<0.01), 19.0% and 8.0% (p<0.01), respectively. Based on the Framingham risk score, women with a history of PE without chronic hypertension have comparable future risk to develop cardiovascular events relative to women with an uncomplicated pregnancy. In contrast, women with a history of PE who had chronic hypertension seven years postpartum have approximately twofold higher chance to develop a cardiovascular event in the next 10 to 30 years. We have developed an unbiased technique to adapt readily available ultrasound (US) and neonatal information to examine longitudinal trends in fetal growth as a function of pregnancy characteristics. We demonstrate the technique by examining differences in fetal growth trajectories from mothers with normal pregnancy compared to those with severe preeclampsia (sPE). METHODS: Between 2007 and 2012, 37,640 live, singleton, nonanomalous pregnancies underwent first trimester US, second trimester fetal survey and ultimate live delivery at our center. Crown-rump length (CRL) was obtained at the first trimester screening and standard fetal anthropometrics were obtained at the survey, which were combined into a summary size estimate (SE) using Hadlock's formula. We then calculated reference means and standard deviations for US metrics and birth weight (BW) by individual week of gestation: CRL (week 5-14); SE (week 15-23); and BW (week 24-42). To demonstrate the utility of this reference, we also created Z-scores for CRL, SE, and BW for 706 singleton live births delivered in our study cohort in 2012. Using cross-sectional and longitudinal analysis we compared fetal growth in pregnancies with and without sPE. Cross-sectional comparisons showed that fetuses of mothers with sPE had significantly lower Z-scores for growth measures at all three time points, including CRL (B=-0.89, 95% confidence interval [CI]=-1.55, -0.22, p=0.01), SE (B=-0.72, 95%CI=-1.33, -0.12, p=0.02), and BW (B=-0.79, 95%CI=-1.43, -0.14, p=0.02). Longitudinal analysis demonstrated a constant difference in the trajectories of these two groups across pregnancy (B=-0.81, 95%CI=-1.24, -0.37, p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: By creating a standard for US measurements and birth weights, we present a technique for examining longitudinal trends in fetal growth as a function of pregnancy characteristics. We demonstrate that for pregnancies ultimately complicated by sPE, fetal growth is already poor in the first trimester and remains so through birth. We believe this technique can assist in identifying windows of fetal growth vulnerability as a function of other less understood maternal pregnancy characteristics and exposures. LGA neonates are at increased risk of obesity throughout life. Adherence to the Institute of Medicine (IOM) GWG recommendations attenuates maternal-fetal obstetrical risk. In Canada, the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) recommend a more conservative upper limit of gain (i.e., 7kg) for patients with obesity compared to IOM (i.e., 9kg). We aimed to compare the effects of eGWG for patients with obesity using IOM and SOGC guidelines. METHODS: From the Ottawa and Kingston (OaK) birth cohort a total of 699 mothers with obesity (BMI≥30) and their infants were used to examine the independent effect of eGWG with respect to IOM and SOGC recommendations. Multivariate logistic regression (controlling for gestational and maternal age, prepregnancy weight, parity, smoking) were performed and odds ratios (ORs) calculated. RESULTS: Only 28.5% (199/699) and 20.9% (146/699) of women met IOM and SOGC GWG targets, respectively. Adjusting for smoking, parity, age, maternal height and achieving guideline-specific recommended GWG, pregravid obesity was associated with higher rates of LGA using both IOM (OR 2.47; 95% CI 1.94-3.14, p<0.01) and SOGC (OR 2.34; 95% CI 1.83-3.00, p<0.01) recommendations compared to women with normal BMI. However, a 6% increased likelihood of LGA was demonstrated with the IOM compared to SOGC guidelines. CONCLUSIONS: For patients with obesity, eGWG with respect to IOM and SOGC guidelines strongly increase a woman's chance of having a larger baby. In this dataset, the more conservative SOGC guideline for obese patients yielded a 6% decrease likelihood of giving birth to a LGA neonate relative to the IOM recommendations. On a population level, more conservative GWG recommendations for patients with obesity may yield a substantial reduction in fetal overgrowth. Strategies that increase patient uptake of GWG guidelines are urgently needed. The rising prevalence of gastroschisis worldwide is a global health concern. The objective of this study was to determine if gastroschisis is a result of poor maternal nutrition, environmental exposures to alcohol and/or vasoactive stimulants. METHODS: A matched case-control study was designed, with enrollment of singleton pregnancies at time of gastroschisis (G) diagnosis. Controls(C) were matched by race and age. Demographics, periconceptual exposures, nutritional biomarkers and illicit drug hair analysis were evaluated. Data analysis was by Chi-square, Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel, and conditional logistic regression, with data reported as mean, percent, standard deviation, Odds Ratio (OR), and 95% Confidence Intervals (CI) as appropriate. RESULTS: Thirty-eight gastroschisis cases and 76 controls matched for age and race were enrolled. Mean age was 22.17years+/-4.52 years (range 15-34 years), with diverse ethnicity. There was no difference in education, insurance status, first trimester bleeding , BMI at conception, ferritin, iron, B6, B12, folate, or zinc levels. One-third of both groups smoked or had direct exposure, and history of illicit drug was similar (G9.7% vs. C9.2%, p0.6) Hair analysis for any illicit drug was positive in G3.23% vs. C13.89%, p0.4. Matched analysis revealed alcohol exposure was significantly associated with gastroschisis (OR3.7, p.05 (CI 2.2, 5.7). Neither BMI nor first trimester tobacco were independent risk factor (tobacco OR 1.43, p.40, 95% CI 0.6, 3.4; BMI OR 0.3, 95% CI 0.11.2). By conditional logistic regression, the effect of alcohol appeared stronger amongst women over 20 (OR 5.3, 95% CI 1.3, 22.5), however race had no impact on this relationship. The relationship with alcohol persisted when controlled for either tobacco (OR 3.1, 95% CI 1.0, 11) and when controlled for both tobacco + BMI (OR 3.0 95% CI 1.0, 8.9). CONCLUSIONS: A periconceptual association with alcohol in those pregnancies complicated by gastroschisis was identified. Preconception education programs on alcohol abstinence may result in reversing the rising gastroschisis prevalence worldwide. Confirmation of this association in future studies by objective means is encouraged. Gyamfi-Bannerman, Cande V Ananth. Obstetrics & Gynecology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. INTRODUCTION: For the first time in over two decades, the rate of preterm delivery (PTD) has declined in the US. We evaluated temporal changes in twin PTD and examined the extent to which such trends are influenced by obstetrical interventions. METHODS: We utilized the US vital statistics data based on the 2003 revision of birth certificates and restricted the analyses to women that delivered twin live births between 2005 and 2011. PTD was defined as delivery occurring between 24 and 36 weeks. Overall PTD rates and indicated versus spontaneous delivery rates were described by year. The proportion of indicated to spontaneous PTD was also assessed. All analyses were based on the best obstetrical estimate of gestational age. RESULTS: There were 548,099 twin births between 2005 and 2011. During this period, the twin PTD rate declined by 8.3%, with the decline in spontaneous PTDs substantially accounting for this finding in comparison to indicated PTDs (declines of 16.5% versus 9.3%, respectively). In comparison to spontaneous preterm deliveries, indicated preterm deliveries were 2.67-fold higher, and this ratio remained fairly stable during the study period. INTRODUCTION: Birthweight (BW) discordance is predictive of perinatal mortality in twin pregnancies. However, whether it can also predict neonatal morbidity is not fully elucidated. METHODS: The aim of this study was to investigate the performance of birthweight discordance in predicting neonatal morbidity in twin pregnancies. This was a retrospective study of twin pregnancies of known chorionicity from a large regional cohort over five years. Intertwin birthweight discordance was related to neonatal morbidity of one or both twins. Analysis was restricted to those delivered at or beyond 34 weeks' gestation. The primary outcome was a neonatal outcome composite consisting of one or more of the following: neonatal death, respiratory distress syndrome, early onset culture-proven sepsis, stage 2 or 3 necrotizing enterocolitis, bronchopulmonray dysplasia, grade 3 or 4 intraventricular hemorrhage, periventricular leukomalacia, pneumonia, or severe retinopathy of prematurity. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC), survival (Kaplan Meier) and logistic regression analyses were performed to evaluate the contribution of weight discordance to neonatal morbidity. RESULTS: A total of 940 twin pregnancies were included. Logistic regression analysis found that BW discordance (OR: 1.05, 95% CI 1.03-1.08), gestational age (OR: 0.45, 95% CI 0.38-0.53), but not chorionicity (p=0.24) or individual fetal size percentile (p=0.64), were independently associated with neonatal morbidity. Birthweight discordance of 17% had the highest AUC for the prediction of neonatal morbidity (AUC=0.61; 95% CI:0.56-0.67). The detection rate was 34.2% (95% CI was 26.6-42.5%) for a false positive rate of 13.6% (95% CI 17.0-10.6). The Kaplan Meier analysis between monochorionic and dichorionic twin pregnancies shows no significant difference in the morbidity trend between the two categories. CONCLUSIONS: Birthweight discordance is associated not only with perinatal mortality but also with neonatal morbidity in twin pregnancies born late preterm and at term. However its predictive value appears to be limited. We have previously shown a decrease in mortality in women following HS-OC compared to age matched referents. This mortality reduction was statistically significant for lung cancer deaths. This study attempted to assess why these women had decreased lung cancer mortality. METHODS: Our original cohort included 3,816 women who underwent HS-OC for benign indications from 1/1/1965-12/31/2002 in Olmsted County MN. Their referents were age-matched women who had not undergone hysterectomy as of the index year. We conducted a nested case-control study within our original HS-OC cohort. Cases were 41 women who had HS-OC and developed lung cancer. Controls for each case were two age matched women with HS-OC who did not develop lung cancer (n=82). Data were abstracted from medical records. We estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) using logistic regression models. RESULTS: Cases were more likely to be smokers and smoked for a longer duration than controls. The odds of exposure to ERT in cases was 0.44 times compared to controls. The inverse association with ERT was stronger in multivariable analysis. CONCLUSIONS: Estrogen receptors have been detected in lung cancer, thus estrogen may be involved in tumorogenesis. Our findings suggest that among women who underwent HS-OC, not only smoking but also the absence of ERT is associated with increased odds of dying from lung cancer. This association deserves further investigation. (CS) has been reported to increase the risk of childhood type 1 diabetes (T1D). The gut microbiota have been proposed to play a significant role in this association. We investigated the association between mode of delivery and T1D, and if the association remains after accounting for familial confounding using sibling-matched design. We conducted a population-based cohort study of all singleton live births in Sweden between 1982 and 2009 followed by a sibling-matched analysis. T1D diagnoses before age 15 years were identified from the Swedish Hospital Register using ICD-8 (250), ICD-9 (250) and ICD-10 (E10). Information on mode of delivery and potential confounders was retrieved from the Medical Birth Register. Mode of delivery was categorized into spontaneous vaginal birth (reference group), instrumental vaginal birth (IVD), emergency CS and elective CS. The statistical analysis was conducted in two steps. First, log-linear Poisson regression was used for cohort analysis adjusting for offspring age and calendar year as time dependent variables, maternal diabetes and gestational age. Adjustment for several other variables including maternal education, body mass index and major pregnancy complications did not change the results. Second, to account for unmeasured familial confounding, such as home environment and life style, and partly for genetic factors, sibling-matched analyses were conducted using multivariate conditional logistic regression. In this analysis siblings who were discordant for both mode of delivery and T1D were included. RESULTS: In the cohort analyses (N=2,755,074), there was an association between T1D and elective CS (RR=1.15[95% CI: 1.1-1.30]) and IVD (RR=1.14[1.1-1.2]). However, there was no association between emergency CS and T1D (RR=1.02[0.9-1.1]). In sibling-matched analyses, the RRs for elective CS (RR=1.07[0.8-1.5]) and IVD (RR=0.99[0.8-1.2]) were no longer statistically significant. CONCLUSIONS: There is a small association between elective CS and IVD and childhood T1D. However, the sibling-matched results suggest that these findings are not consistent with a causal effect of mode of delivery on the risk of T1D and may be due to unmeasured confounding such as home environment. We aimed to investigate the association between gestational age and the risk of childhood type 1 diabetes (T1D), and if the association remains after accounting for familial confounding using sibling-matched design. We conducted a population-based cohort study of all singleton live births in Sweden between 1973 and 2009 followed by a sibling-matched analysis. T1D diagnoses before age 15 years were identified from the Swedish Hospital Register using ICD-8 (250), ICD-9 (250) and ICD-10 (E10). Gestational age and the potential confounders were retrieved from the Medical Birth Register. Gestational age was categorized as follows: very preterm <33 weeks; preterm 33-36 weeks; early term 37-38 weeks; term 39-40 weeks (reference group) and postterm 41+ weeks. The statistical analysis was conducted in two steps. First, log-linear Poisson regression was used for the analysis of the cohort study adjusting for offspring age and calendar year as time dependent variables, maternal diabetes. Adjustment for several other variables including maternal education, body mass index and major pregnancy complications did not change the results. Second, to account for unmeasured familial environmental confounding, such as home environment and life style, and partly for genetic factors, sibling-matched analyses were conducted using multivariate conditional logistic regression. In this analysis siblings who were discordant for both gestational age and T1D were included. RESULTS: In the cohort analyses (N=3,628,980), there was a reduced risk of childhood T1D among very preterm (RR=0.70, [95% CI:0.6-0.9]) and post-term children (RR=0.87[0.8-0.9]). The estimates were similar in the sibling design analysis although became non-statistically significant. Children born preterm (RR=1.17[1.1-1.3]) or early term (RR=1.11[1.1-1.2]) had an increased risk of childhood T1D and the association remained significant when sibling-matched analysis was performed. CONCLUSIONS: Preterm birth and early term births are associated with a small increased risk of T1D in Swedish children. The findings are consistent with a causal association and therefore have important public health implications considering the increasing number of preterm and early term births and the significant burden of T1D. We matched them to control women of the same age who did not have prior H-OC. Using a case-control design, we compared CV risk factors (diabetes, hyperlipidemia, HTN, obesity, and metabolic syndrome) and events (myocardial infarction (MI), coronary artery disease (CAD), congestive heart failure (CHF) and stroke) that occurred prior to H-OC. RESULTS: All risk factors for CVD except diabetes were higher in the H-OC group. In contrast, CV events prior to H-OC were similar between groups. Long-term effects of unilateral oophorectomy (UO) on disease outcomes are understudied, despite the growing evidence that bilateral oophorectomy at younger ages has detrimental effects. Our goal was to investigate morbidity after UO, in particular the risk of metabolic syndrome. METHODS: Using the Rochester Epidemiology Project records-linkage system, we identified all women who underwent UO with or without hysterectomy between 1950 and 1987 in Olmsted County, MN. Women with UO were compared to an age and calendar year matched referent cohort. Morbidity was determined using diagnostic codes from medical records in the records-linkage system and from death certificates. Women with pre-existing metabolic syndrome were excluded from analyses. Results are shown in strata by concurrent hysterectomy status, age at UO, indication for UO (medical indication for UO or no medical indication) and pathology (abnormal includes cancer, endometriosis and benign tumors). We estimated hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) using Cox proportional hazard ratio models, using age as a time scale. RESULTS: Over a median follow-up of 32 years, the risk of de novo metabolic syndrome was significantly increased in women who had undergone UO. Risks were higher if UO was performed without hysterectomy, at ages younger than 37 years, and without medical indication. Normal pathology was associated with an increased risk of metabolic syndrome.  H-OC Risk or event H-OC (N) Referent (N) OR 95% CI P-value The risk of metabolic syndrome is increased in women who have undergone UO and may be related to hormonal changes, similar to the effects of premature menopause. Further research is needed to clarify the long-term effects of UO, particularly in younger women. Depression is associated with an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Women who suffer from preeclampsia (PE) are at increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity later in life. We hypothesised that women with increased Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) scores during pregnancy would have an increased risk of developing PE. We also examined whether these associations were age dependent. METHODS: We utilised data from 5575 healthy nulliparous women with singleton pregnancies recruited to the Screening for Pregnancy Endpoints (SCOPE) study, a prospective cohort study. Women were interviewed at 15 and 20 weeks' gestation. Depressed mood was assessed using the EPDS score (range 0-30). EPDS was categorised as A) EPDS <5: unlikely to experience depression post partum B) EPDS 5-9: increased risk of depression in the next year C) EPDS >9: very likely depressed. The association between EPDS categories and PE was examined using logistic regression with robust estimation. To examine the effect of age, the associations were examined in women <30 years of age and ≥30 years of age. Adj Efavirenz-based combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) regimens are the preferred initial regimens for HIV-infected patients. Efavirenz is a non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) and known teratogen. Thus, cART regimens that do not contain efavirenz should be strongly considered in women of reproductive age who do not use contraception. Our study aim was to examine the prevalence of efavirenz use among HIV-infected women and to evaluate whether they use an FDA-approved method of contraception. We established a nationally representative, commercially insured cohort of HIV-infected women receiving medical care between 2007-10. We included women if they had a claim containing the ICD-9 code for HIV (042) or a prescription for one of the 26 FDA-approved antiretroviral medications. Women with incident exposure to common first-line cART were then identified. Contraceptive use was defined by national drug codes and procedure codes. We calculated the proportion of efavirenz-based initial cART regimens as well as the proportion of these women with a companion claim for a form of contraception. To examine factors associated with receiving an efavirenz-based regimen, we used logistic regression to generate prevalence odds ratios and associated 95% confidence intervals. We identified 231 HIV-infected women with an incident cART regimen. The mean age was 43 (SD=10) and 50% were white. Fifty-two percent of women received NNRTI-based (52%, N=120) regimens. Ninety-six percent of NNRTI-based regimens contained efavirenz. Among the women receiving regimens containing efavirenz, 93% of women (112/120) were not on an FDA-approved method of contraception. Multivariate logistic regression models did not identify statistically significant predictors of receiving a efavirenz prescription over other standard cART regimens. CONCLUSIONS: Despite the fact that efavirenz is a known teratogen, we found a large proportion of HIV-infected women of reproductive age who were prescribed cART regimens with efavirenz but who were not concurrently on an FDA-approved form of contraception. These results demonstrate an opportunity for provider/patient education regarding the risks of efavirenz use and importance of concomitant use of contraception. is limited evidence about whether these associations persist into childhood or are overcome with increasing age. The objective of this study was to examine the association between maternal alcohol use during pregnancy and offspring weight and height from birth to 10 years using linear spline multilevel models. We examined the association between maternal alcohol use during pregnancy and trajectories of offspring weight and height from 0-10 years in 7,597 women in the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children. Height and weight at birth, 3 months, 1, 3, 7 and 10 years was predicted for all individuals using linear spline multilevel models. To strengthen the inference that can be made from our results, we adjusted for measured confounders and compared maternal alcohol use with partner alcohol use during the woman's pregnancy, which is an approach that can partially control for unmeasured confounding. RESULTS: Maternal occasional or light daily drinking during pregnancy was not associated with reduced birth weight or length or adverse growth trajectories up to age 10 in offspring. The infants of maternal heavy drinkers were born 0.78cm shorter -0.78 (95% CI -1.34, -0.22) and 0.22 kg lighter -0.22 (95% CI -0.34, -0.09) than infants of pregnancy abstainers but these differences were overcome with age such that offspring of maternal heavy drinkers were 0.59cm taller 0.59 (95% CI -0.93, 2.11) and 0.41 kg heavier 0.41 (95% CI -0.70, 1.52) by age 10. These associations were not observed for heavy partner drinking. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal occasional or light daily drinking is not associated with birth weight, birth length or postnatal growth up to age 10, but residual confounding may be masking harmful effects. Maternal heavy drinking appears to have an intrauterine effect on reduced offspring birth weight and length that is overcome by increased postnatal growth rates during childhood. Obstetrics and Gynecology departments receive the lowest amount of NIH research funding and have the lowest NIH application success rates. The development of NIH training grants (K awards) and field-specific scholars programs have been one strategy implemented by the NIH to help interested clinicians develop into clinician-scientists. Current systematic reviews of Ob/Gyn training award recipients is lacking in the literature. The purpose of this study is to describe the cohort of Ob/Gyn clinician-scientists who were K award recipients and to identify predictors of success in obtaining an R01 award. We hypothesized that gender, subspecialty, type of K award, and having a PhD would impact R01 success rates. METHODS: K08, K12, and K23 award recipients from 1986-2013 were identified from the NIH Research Portfolio Online Reporting Tools (RePORTER) and the websites of the Reproductive Scientist Development Program (RSDP) and the American Association of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Foundation (AAOGF). Data was stratified by gender, educational degree, subspecialty, type of K award, and year of K award. RESULTS: 211 K award recipients were identified. Pre-1992, men were more likely to receive a K award, 56% vs. 44% (p<0.065), while from 2003 onward, women were more likely, 72% vs. 28% (p<0.05). 83% of awardees were MDs, while 17% were MD/PhDs. K12 awards made up 72% of all K awards, while K08 and K23 made up 17% and 11%. Those in Maternal-Fetal Medicine (MFM), Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility (REI), and Gynecology-Oncology (GYN-ONC) represented 84% of all K recipients. GYN-ONCs were the most successful at obtaining K awards from 1998-2002 (31%; p<0.007), while MFMs were the most successful from 2008-2013 (51%; p< 0.039). Overall, 35/211 (17%) of K recipients were successful at obtaining an R01 award. Among those who received a R01, 57% were K12 recipients (p<0.032) and 31% were K08 recipients (p<0.013). There were no significant differences in R01 success rates by gender, educational degree, year of K award or subspecialty. CONCLUSIONS: Gender, subspecialty, and educational degree did not impact an Ob/Gyn trainee's ability to obtain an R01 award. However, K08 and K12 awards were associated with increased R01 success rates. These findings validate the continued need to support K awardees and other clinician-scientist career development programs which enable Ob/ Gyns to make the leap towards achieving independent research funding. with Normal Fertility. L Pastore, 1 L Silverman, 2 A Manichaikhul, 3 X Wang, 3 J Finkelstein. 4 1 OB/GYN, Univ of Virginia, USA; 2 Pathology, Univ of Virginia, USA; 3 Public Health Sciences, Univ of Virginia, USA; 4 Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, USA. INTRODUCTION: The FMR1 gene is associated w/ ovarian dysfunction: Premutations (55-199 CGG repeats) are associated with premature ovarian failure (POF), and both "gray zone" and high normal repeats (45-54 and 35-44 CGG's, respectively) are associated with primary ovarian insufficiency (POI; clinical diagnoses of POF and diminished ovarian reserve). Little is known, however, about the CGG distribution in "normal" women and whether it varies by ethnicity. METHODS: DNA from women participating in the Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN), a US-based cohort of women of varying race/ethnicities was analyzed for FMR1 CGG repeats. From 1996-1998 SWAN enrolled women age 42-52 who had at least 1 menstrual period in last 3 months and belonged to one of the site's designated race/ ethnic groups. Additionally, to be eligible for this study women had to have had at least 1 pregnancy, no history of infertility or hormonal therapy, menopause at age ≥46 years, and have provided DNA for future analyses. Chi-square and Fisher's exact tests were used to analyze differences by 5-repeat bands between 35-55 CGG's plus the premutation range; this range was selected based on the associations with POI. : DNA was available from 601 women: 292 Caucasians, 58 Chinese, 62 Japanese, and 189 Blacks. Only 2 (0.5%) premutation carriers were identified and <2.5% of subjects had a "gray zone" allele. The proportion of women with 35-39 CGG repeats varied overall by race (p=0.0002), with the most extreme difference between Blacks (3.7%) and Chinese (19.0%, p=0.033). The proportion of women with 40-44 CGG repeats was borderline significant by race (p=0.055), with the lowest % in Japanese (0%) and highest in Caucasians and Chinese (7.5% and 8.6%, respectively, p=0.019 and 0.024 vs Japanese). CONCLUSIONS: FMR1 premutation carriers are rare (<1%) and women with "gray zone" alleles are uncommon (<2.5%) in this normal, fertile, multi-ethnic female population. Comparison cohorts from the literature (<375 women, from Japan, Canada, France) had lower estimates of 35-39 CGG's (3.1-3.7%) and 40-44 CGG's (0-1.0%) than we observed. Our findings highlight the importance of considering race-ethnicity in studies of the FMR1 gene, and the importance of knowing phenotype information of those cohorts in order to arrive at accurate conclusions. Timely initiation of antenatal care is important because it provides the opportunity for prenatal screening and the detection of modifiable risk factors for adverse pregnancy outcomes. Almost all prior research on late initiation of antenatal care has focused on individual level predictors. Yet factors on a neighborhood level may also play a role in health care seeking behavior of pregnant non-western women. In this study we investigated the association of neighborhood social capital, neighborhood level ethnic density with timely initiation of antenatal care in the Netherlands. METHODS: Data on time of initiation of antenatal care and other individual level characteristics were obtained from the Netherlands Perinatal Registry (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) , which includes 96% of all pregnancies in the Netherlands. We derived the neighborhood level data from three other national survey and registration-based sources. Neighborhood social capital was calculated using an 'ecometrics' procedure. In the analyses we included 1.237.282 pregnancies in 3422 neighborhoods. Multi-level logistic regression was used to assess the associations of individual and neighborhood level determinants with initiation of antenatal care after 14 and 22 weeks of gestation. RESULTS: In our analyses we found subtle but significant neighborhood level effects on late initiation of antenatal care. Ethnic density was associated with a lower risk of late initiation of antenatal care for non-Western women as compared to Western women (OR 0.88; CI 0.86-0.89; p<0.001). The opposite was the case for neighborhood social capital (OR 1.09; CI 1.07-1.12; p<0.001). Neighborhood socioeconomic status had no association with late initiation of antenatal care. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that neighborhood contexts can influence the timing of entry into antenatal care in the Netherlands. Higher ethnic density seems to foster timely initiation of care for Non-Western women, but not for Western women. We hypothesize that women benefit from information in their networks on when and how to access the obstetric health care system.  Examination survey 2000-2010. Data analysis was based on 771 women who reported a history of a macrosomic (> 9 lbs.) delivery and 3454 women who denied a history a macrosomic delivery. Statistical analysis including hierarchical linear regression was used to detect significant associations with demographic factors, heavy metals, and industrial chemical exposure. RESULTS: Women with a history of macrosomic delivery had significantly higher body mass index, ponderal index measures, and glucose levels. They were more likely to be born in a Hispanic country, have a history of gestational diabetes, less likely to be Non-Hispanic-Blacks and more likely to achieve a lower educational status. Women with macrosomic deliveries had significantly lower cotinine, cadmium, and Benzophenone-3 (an ingredient in sun-blocking agents) levels. However they had increased molybdenum, some phalate esters and methylarsonic acid derivatives levels (these are inorganic arsenic metabolites) {table 1}). Hierarchical logistic regression analysis showed that cadmium, dimethylarsonic acid and molybdenum levels were independently predictive of macrosomic delivery. CONCLUSIONS: The study confirms the associations of ethnic variations, increased body mass index, higher glucose levels and decreased smoking with macrosomia. A new finding is that some heavy metals such as cadmium, arsenic, and molybdenum may be associated with macrosomia. The Effect of Maternal Grandmother Age and Maternal Age on the Risk of Down Syndrome among Grandchildren. Michael Varner, 1 Marcia L Feldkamp, 2 Robin Tillery, 1 Heidi Hanson, 3 Michael Hollingshaus, 3 Kenneth Smith. 3 1 Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 2 Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 3 Human Development and Family Studies, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. INTRODUCTION: Although the risks of fetal aneuploidy increase with maternal age (especially > age 35), the majority of pregnancies complicated by fetal Down Syndrome (DS) occur in younger women. It has been suggested that the age of the mother's mother (fetuses' maternal grandmother) at the time she delivered the fetuses' mother may at least in part explain this phenomenon. METHODS: All live born DS cases in the Utah Birth Defect Network that could be linked to 3-generation matrilineal pedigrees in the Utah Population Database were included (N=516). Ten gender/birth yearmatched controls per case were identified. Non-adoption was confirmed for all pedigrees. Maternal and grandmaternal ages were categorized by 5-year intervals, with modal ages serving as the reference category (age 25-29 for mothers and ages 20-24 for maternal grandmothers). We created a constellation model to study the age combination of maternal and grandmaternal age. RESULTS: A 6x5 analysis of maternal and grandmaternal age combinations demonstrate a predominant influence of maternal age on DS odds ratios (Figure) . ORs tended to increase with grandmaternal age but did not achieve statistical significance net of maternal age (Table; * = p<0.05). In this population-based model the predominant influence on DS risk was maternal age at delivery. We were unable to demonstrate a significant independent influence of grandmaternal age on the DS risk. Grandmaternal The endometrium is one of the most dynamic tissues that undergoes cyclical changes during the menstrual cycle involving a multitude of gene expression changes that can be monitored at the mRNA level, a situation that becomes more complex in pathological conditions, such as in endometrial cancer. When comparing gene expression changes in the malignant endometrium, the selection of appropriate stable endogenous control reference genes becomes vital if the investigation of mRNA levels using sensitive techniques such as the quantitative realtime polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) is to be accurate. Therefore, in order to test the stability of endogenous controls in non-endometrioid and endometrioid adenocarcinoma, we sought the most consistent specific endogenous control reference genes. The stability of 32 candidate endogenous control genes in a 96 well validated TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays plate was evaluated on triplicate cDNA samples derived from mRNA extracted fromendometrioid (type 1; grade 1(n=3), 2 (n=3)and 3 (n=3)) and nonendometrioid adenocarcinoma (type 2; serous (n=3) and carcinosarcoma (n=3)). The most stable endogenous controls were calculated using the software packages geNormqBasePLUS2 and NormFinder (NormFinder takes into account the intra-and inter-variability between the study groups). RESULTS: geNorm (average M ≤ 0.5 and V < 0.15), revealed the best endogenous control gene combinations to be IPO8 and ELF1 (for type 1 cancer), HMBS and PSMC4 (for type 2) and PGK1, CDKN1B, PPIA, MRPL19 for all cancers. NormFinder revealed that PSMC4 was the best normaliser for type 1 cancers and CDKN1B for type 2 cancers, while the best combination was the geometric mean of PSMC4 and YWHAZ for type 1, and CDKN1B and PUM1 for type 2 and for endometrial cancers (type 1 and 2) as a whole. Since MIQE guidelines recommend using more than one endogenous control gene for better normalisation in qRT-PCR studies, different endogenous control reference genes should be combined and that combination will be different depending on the types of groups being studied. Combining control genes in this way will provide more accurate interpretations of gene expression data in endometrial cancer. Sox2 Gene Amplification Impacts Survival in Epithelial Ovarian Cancer. Although rates of HPV vaccine administration had previously increased annually, coverage has recently plateaued. This finding is particularly concerning amongst AAW who have the lowest rates of vaccination but the highest rates of mortality from cervical cancer. As perceived susceptibility and severity are components of many health behavior models, the objective of this study was to evaluate if perceived susceptibility to and severity of HPV and cervical cancer impacts HPV vaccination rates amongst AAW. AAW aged 18 to 70 attending a community fair were recruited to participate in this survey study. Demographics and details of personal and family HPV vaccine administration were collected. Accurate data entry was confirmed, and data analysis was performed using SPSS (v. 18). RESULTS: 215 AAW with a mean age of 48.3 years completed the survey. There were significant correlations between women's perceived risk of getting HPV (p=.001), and of developing cervical cancer (p=.004), and HPV vaccination rates. Susceptibility and severity scores were totaled, and those who had been vaccinated had the highest scores (p=.016). There were also significant correlations between women's perceived risk of their children getting HPV (p=.001), and concerns about their children and grandchildren getting HPV (p=.010), and children's vaccination rates. In addition, there was a correlation between women's perceived risk of getting HPV (p=.003) and vaccinations in these women, their children, and their grandchildren. There was also a correlation between women's perceptions on cervical cancer mortality and vaccination rates in these three groups (p=.048). CONCLUSIONS: Several measures of perceived susceptibility to and severity of HPV and cervical cancer were correlated with HPV vaccination rates. Given that HPV is the most common sexually transmitted disease in the United States, it is imperative that AAW are counseled so that they can accurately assess their risk of contracting HPV and developing cervical cancer. Proper education may improve vaccination rates. treatment of women at high-risk (HR) for ov ca with the anti-androgen flutamide (flut) may identify tissue biomarkers not only of androgen action, but those that have a mechanistic role in ov ca initiation. In vivo studies examined the role of androgens in tumorigenicity. In a phase 2 study of 59 HR women, the effect of flut treatment (125 mg/day for 6 weeks; 12 patients) vs. 47 HR controls was studied in the adnexal tissues harvested at the time of RRSO. 47% carried a BRCA mutation. IHC analysis of candidate proteins CSF-1, CSF-1R, ErbB4 was performed, with scores separately analyzed in epithelium (epith) and stroma, in ampulla, fimbria, ovary, and ov endosalpingiosis (ES). RESULTS: Androgen ablation in male nude mice resulted in a 24-fold decrease in tumor burden, using serous ov cells. We recently showed that elevated levels of CSF-1 and ErbB4 in the adnexa correlate with HR/BRCA positive status, when compared to low-risk controls, as did the presence of ES, which may derive from the tubal epithelium. We now find the effect of flut on the 3 candidate markers compared to HR controls is dramatic. Flut significantly decreased the levels of the following biomarkers: CSF-1 in ov epith (p=.01), stroma (p=.0006), ES (p=.01), fimbria epith (p=.07) or stroma (p=.01); ErbB4 in ov epith (p=.006), stroma (p<.0001), or ES (p=.005); CSF-1R in ov epith (p=.04), stroma (p=.01), ES (p=.009). Receiver operating curves clearly distinguish flut treated from HR controls. ErbB4 and CSF-1 in ov stroma achieved an AUC=0.99, with 100% sensitivity and 97% specificity. CONCLUSIONS: CSF-1/CSF-1R signaling is established as having a role in ov ca progression; evidence also suggests a role in its initiation. ErbB4 may be a marker which increases along the continuum from normal ov to ca. Our data suggest that flut reverses the elevated levels of CSF-1 and ErbB4 which correlate with HR status, even after a short 6 week exposure, in particular of CSF-1 and ErbB4 in ov epithelium, stroma, and in ov ES. Marker changes in epithelium and stroma within the adnexa by flut suggests a component of microenvironment effect more than direct anti-androgen effects. The current analysis finds more significance in marker changes within the ovary than tube, by flut. We anticipate global approaches will identify more markers of flut action, in several adnexal locations. Oncological 1.5cm in longitudinal diameter, and 1.0cm depth. Following the excisional procedure, 76.2% had negative margins. Cervical cone volume was not significantly associated with positive margin status (OR 0.98, 95% CI: 0.71,1.36). 9 (13.8%) patients underwent re-excision, and 1 (1.5%) declined re-excision. 12 (18.5%) had recurrence with 6 (9.2%) CIN I or below. Overall, 12 (18.4%) women had a preterm delivery; 5 (41%) of these women had a prior preterm delivery (p = 0.004). While median cone depth was greater among women with preterm delivery compared to those with term deliveries (1.3cm vs. 0.9cm), cone depth was not significantly associated with odds of preterm delivery (OR 1.57, 95% CI: 0.51, 4.82). Median age of excision of women with preterm delivery was 21.0 years vs. 25.0 years for women with full term deliveries (p=0.02). Prior excision was not significantly associated with preterm delivery (p=0.6). 13 (20%) women had cervical insufficiency during pregnancy, of which 3 (4.6%) ultimately had full term deliveries. CONCLUSIONS: Cone dimensions were not significantly associated with margin status, recurrence, or preterm delivery following excisional procedure. received gemcitabine and docetaxel, and 14% received other combinations of chemotherapy. There was no difference in median survival based on initial chemotherapy regimen (p=.11). 18% of patients were placed on aromatase inhibitors. Median survival for stages I and II was 81 months compared to 37 months with stages III and IV LMS (p=.008). Initial surgery by a gynecological oncologist, additional staging via lymph node dissection and omentectomy had no effect on survival (p=.86, p=.31, and p=.87, respectively). Although not statistically significant, tumors greater than 10cm in size, greater than 10 mitotic figures (MF) per high power field, and with severe atypia were associated with a poorer median survival. Intraoperative frozen section was performed in 57% of surgeries and accurately diagnosed a sarcoma in 84% of cases. Preoperative tissue sampling identified LMS in 53% of cases, whereas preoperative imaging by CT scan, MRI, or TVUS identified suspicion of malignancy in 69%. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that preoperative tissue sampling is not accurate at diagnosing LMS, whereas radiographic suspicion of malignancy is often correct. Initial surgery by gynecological oncologist and additional staging including lymph node dissection and omentectomy does not affect overall survival. Earlier stage of diagnosis is associated with improved median survival. Relevant areas of frozen tissue (~10-50 mg) were dissected on dry ice and homogenised in ice-cold 15% methanol. After addition of internal standards and solid phase extraction, samples were analysed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Data were normalised to protein (Bradford assay) and analysed by ANOVA/Kruskall-Wallis tests with post-hoc Fisher's LSD/Mann-Whitney-U tests, respectively. We detected 29 lipid mediators (COX/LOX metabolites) in endometrial tissues. There were no significant differences in COX metabolite levels between normal and either hyperplastic or cancerous endometrium. Stepwise increases in 5-LOX and 15-LOX metabolites were observed between normal, hyperplasia and Type I EC tissues. Type II ECs had a broadly similar profile to Type I ECs. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to directly and comprehensively profile eicosanoid mediators in clinical EC specimens, since previous studies have been inferential and based on immunohistochemical analysis of enzyme expression (e.g. COX-2). The lack of COX metabolite elevation (especially PGE2/PGF2a) in EC relative to normal endometrium may reflect the physiological roles played by these mediators in the normal endometrium. Our study has identified the LOX pathway (specifically 5-/15-LOX) as potentially being involved in endometrial carcinogenesis and suggests that these enzymes may be candidate chemopreventative/ chemotherapeutic targets. The risk of breast cancer is in part developmentally programmed. Previously, BPA exposure in utero has been linked to abnormal mammary gland development and breast cancer in rodents. Carcinogenesis also involves an aberrant immune response.Innate and adaptive immunity play a role in tumor suppression via NK cells and Th1 cells.We show that in utero BPA exposure leads to dysregulation of both the innate and adaptive immune response within the mammary gland. METHODS: Eight pregnant CD-1 mice were continuously treated with BPA (5 mg/kg/day) or vehicle via osmotic minipumps on days 9-18 of gestation.2 wks after birth, the mammary glands of half the female offspring were isolated and RNA extracted.At 6 wks,remaining female offspring were oophorectomized;at 8 wks they were treated with a single IP injection of 300 ng estradiol or vehicle,and the mammary glands removed. RNA was extracted,reverse transcribed to cDNA, real time PCR performed and normalized to b-actin.All assays were performed in duplicate.Student t-test was used for statistical analysis.p<0.05 was accepted as significant. RESULTS: BPA exposure in utero significantly decreased the expression of CXC family chemokines(Cxcl4 and Cxcl2),interleukin 1 gene family(Il1b and Il1rn),interleukin 2 gene family(Il7 receptor),and interferon gene family(Irf9 and Irg1).The response of these genes to estradiol was also altered in BPA exposed mice.Finally, BPA exposure in utero significantly decreased ERa receptor gene expression and significantly increased ERb receptor gene expression. The mechanisms by which BPA exposure affects mammary tissue development and leads to increased breast cancer is unknown.Here we show that in utero exposure of BPA results in significant developmental programming of the inflammatory milieu within the mammary tissue of exposed offspring.The inflammation is associated with the increased expression of ERb,with its known immunomodulatory functions.We suggest that dysregulation of inflammatory cytokines(both pro and anti-inflammatory) lead to a microenvironment that promotes disordered cell growth and an inhibited immune response against abnormal cells.This altered immune status may lead to the increased the risk of cancer.  Specimens of fallopian tube were collected from women (n=20) undergoing distal salpingectomy between postpartum days 0 and 2. Histologic examination of these specimens confirmed that the postpartum fallopian tube is lined by pseudostratified columnar epithelium consisting of both ciliated and non-ciliated cells. Prominent intercalated cells and a diffuse lymphocytic infiltration were also observed in all specimens. The tubal epithelium in 4 subjects was characterized by heaped regions suggestive of enhanced proliferation. These regions were observed scattered throughout the isthmus, ampulla and fimbrae. Tubal epithelia from these four subjects were also characterized by a diffuse, enhanced expression of Ki-67. Increased numbers of epithelial mitoses were observed in one subject. Patchy (wild type) expression of TP53 was observed throughout the tubal epithelia of all 20 subjects. CONCLUSIONS: Proliferative features are commonly observed in the epithelia of the postpartum fallopian tube. These features do not fulfill established criteria for serous tubal intraepithelial carcinomas and their clinical significance is currently unknown. Further work is necessary to better understand the unique biology of the fallopian tube in recently gravid women. Biomarkers' Sensitivity (S), specificity (Sp), PPV and NPV were also assessed in prediction of treatment failures defined as CIN2 or worse. RESULTS: A total of 282 women were included; the histology showed CIN2+ in 162 (57%) cases. Twenty-eight women had repeat cone and 21 of those had CIN2 or worse in histology. The HPV biomarkers positivity rates before treatment were significantly correlated to the grade at treatment (p<0.05). The positivity rates for the biomarkers post-treatment were higher for women that had a treatment failure when compared to the whole population.HPV-DNA appeared to be positive in 32.9% at the second follow-up visit and in 36.4% of the cases 2 years post-operatively. The mRNA by NASBA was positive prior to the treatment in 45% of the cases, and 5% at 24 months. HPV DNA test had the highest sensitivity (81%) for the prediction of CIN2+ and mRNA by NASBA the highest specificity (85.7%) with a follow-up of 60months. CONCLUSIONS: CIN treatment leads to a significant reduction in positivity for all HPV-related biomarkers. The application of HPV-related biomarkers (single or combinations) during follow-up could enhance the early prediction of recurrent disease and may be incorporated in a risk scoring system that could allow individualised tailored management.  We included 205 women. Of those, 36% were eventually treated, while 64% regressed spontaneously to low-grade or normal findings. There were no cases of invasion. One in five defaulted from surveillance at least once (21%). Low-grade cytology or colposcopy, young age, small lesions and HPV subtype other than 16 were related to a high likelihood of regression. HPV DNA test had the highest sensitivity (94%), while the combination of NASBA mRNA and p16 optimal specificity (92%); these could be integrated into a clinical algorithm. CONCLUSIONS: A substantial proportion of CIN2 lesions in young women spontaneously regress. Some combinations of biomarkers appear to have significant accuracy in identifying misclassified lesions and in predicting lesions likely to regress. This could allow conservative management for women at low risk and avoidance of unnecessary treatment. Three women were submitted to assisted conception unsuccessfully. All women except one that underwent hysterectomy at the center had invasive endometrioid cancer. There was one case with early myometrial invasion. No women died from the disease. The data suggest that fertility-sparing treatment with high-dose MPA appears to be safe for selected women. Women should aim to maximize the chances of pregnancy during the period of complete response as the rate of recurrence is high. Twenty-five women (12%) conceived following treatment; of those 21 had a live birth. Seventeen women delivered at term, one at 29, one at 33 and two at 35-36 weeks of gestation. The gestation at delivery correlated significantly with the proportion of volume (p<0.001, r=-0.884) and length (p=0.01, r=0.705) excised and with the cone volume (p=0.04, r=-0.598) (Pearson's correlation). The suggested approach appears to be feasible and confirms a substantial variation in the proportion of volume/length excised that appears to correlate to the gestation at delivery. If those results are reproducible in larger-scale studies, this evaluation pre-treatment may stratify the individual risk and identify women after treatment that need intensive surveillance when pregnant. Ovarian Cancer (EOC) and its high expression proved to be an independent prognostic factor of rapid tumor recurrence and poor prognosis.The aim of the study was to compare CD157 expression in primary tumors (P) and synchronous metastatic lesions (D) from advanced ovarian carcinoma, and to assess whether this parameter has a predictive or prognostic relevance. at the Sant'Anna Hospital (Torino, Italy) were included and subjected to immunohistochemical analysis. The expression of CD157 was quantified by histological score (H-score). RESULTS: CD157 was expressed in 34(75.56%)P and 35(77.78%)D. The H-score was higher in lymph node metastasis (p<0.005 ANOVA) than in other intra-pelvic sites.The H-score was compared in P and the corresponding D:in 24 cases(53.3%) the expression of CD157 was higher in D than in P (P<D), while in 21 cases (46.6%) was equivalent to or lower in D than in P (P≥D).Patients were divided into two groups based on the trend of the expression of CD157: P<D vs P≥D. The trend in H-score was correlated with the clinical-pathological features of the tumors.The increase H-score in D(P<D) was positively associated with tumor stage and overall survival.Univariate analysis of survival according to Kaplan-Meier method in 40 patients (5 patients were lost at follow up) highlighted that P≥D group had a significantly higher overall survival (OS) than P<D group[P≥D n=18 medianOS not reached P<D n=22,medianOS(95% CI)=27(28,68-51,13)months; HR(95% CI)=3.439(1.493-7.922)](log-rank test p=0.002).The multivariate analysis according to Cox method showed that the increase in the expression of CD157 in D (P<D) is an independent factor of poor prognosis[HR(95% CI)=2.837(1.177-6.840)p=0.020]. The results of this study demonstrate that the difference in the expression of CD157 was positively associated with tumor stage and overall survival. The increase in the expression of CD157 in D compared to P was shown to be an independent factor of poor prognosis. CD157 may indicate a highly aggressive tumor requiring specific treatment.Moreover, it may help to classify ovarian cancers into molecular subtypes with different outcome. Cytokine levels were standardised against total protein (Lowry assay). Data were tested for normality (Anderson-Darling test) and analysed by Kruskall-Wallis tests with post hoc Mann-Whitney-U tests. Correction for multiple comparisons was applied using the False Discovery Rate and correlative heat maps were created in R. RESULTS: Significant differences in the levels of 28 cytokines were observed between the four groups. Morover, cytokine profiles matched the robust histology-based discrimination between normal, hyperplastic and cancerous endometrial tissues, including differentiating between Type I/II cancers. These differences were also reflected in cytokine interrelationships. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a functional role for cytokine involvement in endometrial carcinogenesis. While some differences may indicate altered tissue composition (e.g. reduced stroma and fibroblast growth factor), others may represent the greater inflammatory/immune effector cell infiltration associated with malignancy. Others still may reflect local microenvironmental signalling modulating neoangiogenesis, invasion and immune evasion, although the relative contribution of each cytokine in these processes is unclear. To investigate this further, the present data are being used to construct hierarchical Bayesian networks so as to highlight likely causal cytokine interrelationships and the microenvironmental network deregulations involved in endometrial carcinogenesis. Depression AAW have the lowest rates for HPV vaccination and the highest cervical cancer mortality rates. A number of models exist to help us understand and predict patient behavior. A patient's perceived severity of and susceptibility to a given disease have been shown to be key factors in these models. METHODS: A convenience sample was obtained from attendees at a community fair. Qualifying participants were English-speaking AAW aged 18 to 70 who finished >50% of the survey. Participants were given a survey to assess their knowledge and perceived susceptibility and severity of HPV, cervical cancer and HPV vaccination. For each participant, a cumulative knowledge, susceptibility, and severity score was determined. RESULTS: 242 surveys were collected and 215 met the eligibility criteria. The participants' mean age was 48.3 ± 12.1 years. The mean combined cumulative susceptibility and severity score was 70.4 ± 22.5 from a maximum score of 125. The Kruskal-Wallis analysis indicated that being at risk for getting HPV, having the ability to avoid HPV infection, feeling the HPV vaccine is safe, and having the ability to avoid cervical cancer were all significantly correlated with a higher cumulative HPV knowledge score. CONCLUSIONS: Knowledge of HPV, cervical cancer, and HPV vaccination influenced the perceived susceptibility and severity of HPV and cervical cancer in AAW. AAW who felt they could contract HPV, contract cervical cancer, and understood these diseases were serious, had a higher knowledge score than those who did not. However, most participants reflected low knowledge, susceptibility, and severity scores, indicating that better education on HPV, its sequela, and its prevention are needed. Overexpression The goal of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of in vivo Raman Spectroscopy combined with colposcopy to non-invasively detect different stages of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) in a racially and ethnically diverse population. METHODS: Ninety one patients undergoing colposcopy for abnormal pap smears were recruited. Raman measurements were obtained prior to routine colposcopic-directed biopsies. A total of 163 spectra were analyzed and compared to pathology reports. The spectra were correlated with corresponding biopsy pathology reports as CIN 1, 2 and 3. Data were analyzed and classified using a generalized linear model. Two patient variables, body mass index (BMI) and parity, were previously determined to be influential variables and thus were taken into consideration during this study. RESULTS: Without the inclusion of patient variables, high grade lesions (CIN 2+) were detected with 83% sensitivity and 100% specificity. Incorporating BMI and parity into the predictive model yielded 100% classification accuracy for high-grade lesions compared to biopsy pathology reports. Detection rates of low-grade lesions were initially 68% sensitive and 100% specific. After accounting for BMI and parity, sensitivity for CIN 1 improved to 96%. CONCLUSIONS: Raman spectroscopy paired with colposcopy exhibited high accuracy for detecting and differentiating between normal, CIN 1, and CIN 2+ cervical tissues, particularly high-grade lesions. Grouping patients according to BMI and parity improved the diagnostic accuracy for low-grade and high-grade lesions. expression (the so-called REST-less phenotype) has been associated with more aggressive disease. In neural tumors, however, REST acts as an oncogene. The role of REST in ovarian cancer has yet to be fully characterized. The objective of this work is determine the relationship of REST expression in ovarian cancer with respect to tumor characteristics and survival data. METHODS: Protein microarray analysis of ovarian cancer tissue was used to determine protein expression levels for REST and FANCD2 (a homologous recombination protein previously associated with early ovarian cancer recurrence and platinum resistance). REST expression was validated by Western blot. Tumor characteristics and clinical data were analyzed for correlation with levels of protein expression for 160 patients with ovarian cancer, using chi square and Kaplan-Meier methods. is produced in the cytoplasm, but is then imported into the nucleus to carry out its DNA repair functions. This study examines the subcellular location of FANCD2 and relationship with prognostic factors and patient survival in women with ovarian cancer. METHODS: Protein microarray analysis of ovarian cancer tissue was used to determine protein expression level of FANCD2 proteins. Correlation with clinical and pathologic parameters in 202 patients with stage I-IV and grade 3 ovarian cancer was analyzed using Chi square, Kaplan-Meier method. These results were corroborated in the independent set of ovarian cancer samples using Western blot separating nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions of FANCD2 protein. Women whose tumors were cFANCD2 positive had better survival (median = 52 months) than women who did not (median = 38 months). Although the difference in the survival curves appears modest, (1) it confers a non-inconsequential increase in median survival (14 months), (2) women with cFANCD2 still relapse, but at a delayed pace, suggesting that the initial response to platinum agents is greater in these patients. The mechanisms underlying better prognosis in patients with cytoplasmic FANCD2 have not been delineated, but presents two alternative hypotheses. One is that cFANCD2 renders cells sensitive to DNA cross-linking agents because the protein is not being imported into the nucleus or alternatively that FANCD2 plays an anti-cancer role in the cytoplasm. These results open the possibility for testing small molecules inhibitors of FANCD2 nuclear import as a new approach for treatment of ovarian cancer. The Endometrial polyps are one of the most commonly observed endometrial pathologies in post menopausal women. They cause abnormal uterine bleeding and have the potential to undergo malignant transformation. The LNG-IUS reduces the risk of developing endometrial polyps in women using tamoxifen as adjuvant treatment for breast cancer. Given that tamoxifen primed endometrium treated with the LNG-IUS assumes the 'decidual' phenotype and demonstrates an increase in IGFBP-1 expression, we propose firstly that decidualisation can be induced using tamoxifen (TX) and levonorgestrel (LNG) and secondly that the process of endometrial stromal cell (ESC) decidualisation modulates the expression of two genes (Beta Catenin and Notch 2) that have been shown to be significantly down regulated in endometrial polyps. METHODS: ESCs were harvested from pre-menopausal uteri (n=3) and benign postmenopausal endometrial polyps (n=3) and grown to confluence in culture. Once confluent, ESCs were plated onto 12 well plates and maintained in culture for 21 days. Decidualisation was induced using 8-bromoadenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) with the addition of either estradiol and medroxyprogesterone actate (E2+MPA) or LNG+TX. Treatments were repeated in triplicate. Total RNA was isolated from the decidualised ESCs using trizol reagent and DNase 1 treatment. After conversion into cDNA with AMV-RT, quantitative RT-PCR was used to determine the expression levels of prolactin (as evidence of decidualisation), Beta Catenin and Notch 2 relative to that of the housekeeping gene GAPDH. Fold changes for each gene were calculated using the 2 -DDCT method. RESULTS: Prolactin was up-regulated in both uterine and polyp ESCs with E2+MPA (9.4 fold) and TX+LNG (2.5 fold). Beta Catenin was also up-regulated in uterine ESCs with both decidualisation treatments. In polyps however, Beta Catenin was only up-regulated with E2+MPA. Notch 2 was up regulated in both uterine and polyp ESCs with both decidualisation treatments. CONCLUSIONS: Decidualisation can be induced in vitro with TX+LNG, confirming the observations made in vivo. In addition, Notch 2 and Beta Catenin which have previously been shown to be highly down-regulated in endometrial polyps relative to endometrium are up-regulated in this model of decidualisation. These findings support the hypothesis that modulation of these genes is essential to polyp inhibition. Female sexual dysfunctions (FSDs) are common, distressing conditions. Bremelanotide (BMT) is a novel cyclic heptapeptide known to act as a melanocortin-receptor-4 agonist. METHODS: After a screening diagnosis-confirmation month, premenopausal women with hypoactive sexual desire disorder and/or female sexual arousal disorder received an in-clinic subcutaneous (SC) placebo dose followed by 4 weeks of SC placebo self-dosing (baseline period), and were then randomized to double-blind SC placebo or BMT 0.75, 1.25, or 1.75 mg as 2 in-clinic doses followed by 12 weeks of athome self-dosing. Outcome measures included change from baseline to end of study in the 4-week number of satisfying sexual events (SSEs) and in total score on the Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) and the Female Sexual Distress Scale-Desire/Arousal/Orgasm (FSDS-DAO). From receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, the minimum clinically important difference (MCID) for each endpoint was computed as the value simultaneously maximizing the sensitivity and specificity in predicting benefit. Each MCID then served as the cut-off for a responder analysis. RESULTS: Of 397 randomized subjects, 327 used at-home study drug and provided data (for SSEs, 324). The computed MCIDs were +1.0 for number of SSEs, +2.1 for FSFI total score, and -7.0 for FSDS-DAO total score. Using these cut-offs, the SSE responder rate was 37% for placebo, versus 38% for BMT 0.75 mg, 48% for BMT 1.25 mg, 55% for BMT 1.75 mg, and 51% for BMT 1.25/1.75 mg pooled. The FSFI responder rate was 46% for placebo, versus 45%, 61%, 69%, and 65%, respectively, for BMT. The FSDS-DAO responder rate was 45% for placebo, versus 49%, 60%, 69%, and 64% for BMT. For all three endpoints, the difference from placebo was statistically significant (p <0.05, CMH test, stratified by diagnosis) at 1.75 mg and at 1.25/1.75 mg pooled. CONCLUSIONS: In premenopausal women with FSDs, selfadministered SC BMT showed a clear, dose-dependent increase in responder rates defined by MCIDs for 3 widely used, clinically relevant FSD measures, attaining statistically significant separations from placebo at the BMT 1.75 mg dose. Feasibiity of Intraperitoneal Administration of Alpha-Emitting Isotopes Against Microscopic Cancer: Production, In-Vtro, and In-Vivo Studies of the Isotope Bismuth-212 (Bi-212). Jacob Rotmensch, 1 Summer Dewdney, 1 Liaohai Chen. 2 1 Gynecologic Oncology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA; 2 Department of Chemistry, Utah State University, Logan, UT, USA. INTRODUCTION: Alpha-emitting isotopes recently are reported in clinical studies to be effective against microscopic carcinoma. This study presents a method of production of clinical quantities of an alphaemitting isotope, Bi-212, and in-vitro and in-vivo studies supporting intraperitioneal (IP) administration Bi-212 against microscopic ovarian cancer. METHODS: A cation-ion exchange system based on the natural decay and regrowth of the isotope Lead-212 (Pb-212) to produce quantities of activity useful for IP administration in the clinical setting is presented. The relative biological effectiveness of Bi-121 against cell lines grown in monolayer and spheroids is compared x-ray and P-32 therapy. The effectiveness of IPl treatment with Bi-212 of tumor bearing mice inoculated intaperitoneally with Ehrlich-Lettre Ascites tumors is determined. Studies showing the biodistribution and toxicity associated of Bi-212 in determined. Based on these studies, doses of Bi-212 necessary for eradication of microscopic ovarian cancer after IP administration while minimizing toxicity is determined. Allowing the parent isotope to serially regrow onto and cationic exchange column produce clinical quantities of Bi-212 for IP use. The calculated yield over a 24-hour period yields 7.635 mCi of Bi-212 for each mCi of the parent isotope Pb-212 loaded onto the column. The actual yield of Bi-212 is up to 20 mCi of activity per elution. Bi-212 showed a higher relative biological effectiveness wth RBE of 1.4 for P-32, 1.5 for x-ray, and 3.19 for Bi-212 therapy. Imaging rabbits up to 3 hours after IP instillation of B-212 in 200 cc of saline showed even distribution in the peritoneal cavity with 80% of the activity remaining in the peritoneal cavity. Bi-212 is effective in eradicating intraabdominal tumors in Ehrich-Lettre ascites bearing mice. In 40 % of mice there was a cure with no evidence of disease at 3months. Based upon these in-vitro and in-vivo studies, there is acceptable toxicity to normal human tissue after IP administration. A contemplated dose of 100 mCi to a human produces an alpha dose to any organ of less than 15c GY. CONCLUSIONS: The alpha-emitter Bi-212 is a feasible isotope for treatment of microscopic ovarian carcinomas confined to the peritoneal cavity. Application of Phage Technology for Targeted Imaging and Therapy Against Gynecologic Malignancies. Jacob Rotmensch, 1 Liaohai Chen. 2 1 Gynecologic Oncology, Rush University Medical Center, USA; 2 Department of Chemistry, Utah State University, USA. INTRODUCTION: Bacterial phages can be used as targeted imaging and therapy against gynecologic malignancies. The DNA of the capsid core is extracted and replaced by imaging/ therapy isotopes for directed therapy. Phage specificity to tumors is obtained by peptide insertion on to the capsid surface. In this study, fabrication of imaging/therapy capsids inserted with isotopes into the core is described. METHODS: T7 "ghost" phages are fabricated by extracting DNA from the capsid core with osmotic shocking. Capillary zone electrophoresis and electron microscopy confirm the generation of "ghost" phage. Based on the peak areas of the "ghost" particle and intact phages, the yield is approximately 55%. To visualize the "ghost" particles, phage samples are negatively stained with uranyl acetate (1%) and examined by Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM, Philips CM-120). RESULTS: The T7 "ghost" phages formed act as carriers for imaging agent and directed isotope therapy. "Ghost" phages incorporate metallic cobalt inside its core to occupy the volume previously taken up DNA. To visualize these "magnetic" phages, samples are immobilized on a gold-coated TEM grid and imaged by TEM. Uniform cobalt particles (42 ± 2 nm) are visually seen inside the hollow phage. 99m technetium oxide hybrid radiophages are formed and confirmed by TEM imaging. Uniform 99m technetium oxide particles (~40nm) are visualized inside the "ghost" T7 shells. In order to maximize sensitivity for molecular MRI imaging, superparamagnetic nano-particles are synthesized in the T7 ghost to produce a large net magnetic moment that affects magnetization beyond the boundaries of the phage particle. CONCLUSIONS: Bacterial phages act as vehicles to deliver imaging and therapy agents against gynecologic malignancies. It is well established that germline mutations such as BRCA1/2, are associated with a predisposition for ovarian cancer at a rate of only 20-40%, suggesting the presence of unknown mutations in other predisposition genes. We sought to investigate the association of several known functional SNPs in key oxidant and antioxidant enzymes including catalase (CAT, rs1001179), the NAD(P)H oxidase p22 phox subunit encoded by the CYBA gene (rs4673), myeloperoxidase (MPO, rs2243828), inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS2, rs2297518), hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1a (rs11549465), glutathione reductase (GSR, rs1002149), glutathione peroxidase (GPX, rs3448), and superoxide dismutase (MnSOD, rs4880), with increased risk of development of ovarian cancer. METHODS: Patients (49 ovarian cancer with only 7 BRACA1 positive) and 91 high-risk non-cancer with 25 BRACA1 positive) were recruited from the Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI for genetic counseling based on personal and family histories. DNA was extracted from blood followed by TaqMan® SNP Genotyping utilizing QuantStudio™ 12K Flex Real-Time PCR System. Data was analyzed using SPSS, utilizing Chi-squared and regression analysis. RESULTS: Patients were 92.1% female and 7.3% male and ages ranged from 18-90, with 92.1% White, 5.2% Black and 0.5% Asian. Except for the GSR SNP, there was a significant association between all SNPs analyzed and ovarian cancer as compared to the minor allele frequencies reported for the general population (p<0.04). There was no significant difference in SNP frequencies between high-risk non-cancer and ovarian cancer patients (p>0.05). Multiple logistic regressions adjusted for sex, race, age at primary diagnostic in BRCA1/2 positive and negative, was unable to detect statistically significant predictive power for any of the SNP variants included in the models. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that SNPs in key oxidant and antioxidant enzymes may serve as potential predictive biomarkers for ovarian cancer and high-risk individuals. Granulosa Cell Tumors of the Ovary; Prognostic Factors and Ethnicity-Based Survival Differences. Sharif S Sakr, Zaid Al-Wahab, Robert Morris. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA. INTRODUCTION: Granulosa Cell Tumors (GCT) comprise 2-5% of all cases of ovarian cancer diagnosed each year. Because of its rarity, most of the published data is on a small scale. The aim of this study is to evaluate the factors affecting the prognosis of GCT (Adult and Juvenile types). METHODS: Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) database was searched for Patients diagnosed with Adult and Juvenile types of GCT. A total of 1225 and 33 patients were identified with Adult type and Juvenile, respectively. Demographic characteristics and prognostic factors including age, race, marital status, FIGO stage, surgery, radiation therapy, and lymphadenectomy were analyzed using Univariate and Cox regression analyses and Kaplan-Meier survival curves. RESULTS: In Adult GCT, median survival was 203 months in Caucasian compared to 151 months in African American patients and 114 months compared to 201 months in radiotherapy-treated and non-treated patients respectively. Univariate analysis showed a higher survival in Caucasian compared to African American patients (HR 0.74,P:0.011) and in surgically-treated patients (HR 0.64,P:0.015) but worse survival in Radiotherapy-treated patients (HR 1.5,P:0.05). Cox regression analysis also showed Caucasian with a higher survival compared to African American patients (HR 0.77,P:0.024) and in surgically-treated patients (HR 0.61,P:0.006)but worse prognosis in Radiotherapy-treated patients (HR 1.6,P:0.001). In Juvenile GCT patients, no statistically significant differences were observed in the prognostic factors.Overall Median survival was 276 months. CONCLUSIONS: Adult GCT has a significantly better survival in Caucasian compared to African American patients. Surgically-treated patients have a good prognosis where as Radiation therapy is associated with worse outcomes. (MSAs) such as epothilone B and Taxol, are able to induce the accumulation and phosphorylation of p53, a tumor suppressor protein shown to play a role in apoptosis. Post-translational modifications of p53, including phosphorylation and acetylation, stabilize and activate the p53 protein. The signaling pathways that impinge on p53 after treatment are not well defined. Missense mutations in p53 frequently occur at 'hotspot' amino acids which are highly conserved and represent regions of structural or functional importance. In human ovarian carcinomas, p53 is frequently mutated. The influence of hot spot mutations of p53 in response to MSAs was evaluated. METHODS: To evaluate the effect of different hot spot mutations of p53 in response to epothilone B, ixabepilone and Taxol, the human ovarian wild-type p53 cell line A2780 which was stably transfected with plasmids carrying no p53 mutation (CMV), or p53 mutated at codon 175 (m175), 248 (m248), or 273 (m273) were used. Doubling time of each cell line was determined and the IC50 for the above MSAs was analyzed. The effect of epothilone B on the expression p53, phosphorylated p53 (Ser15), acetylated p53, p53 regulated protein p21 and a negative regulator of p53, mdm2, were examined by Western blot analyses. The expression of p53 target genes, such as p21, GADD45, BAX, PIDD, NF-kB2 and PAI-1, as well as the MDR1 gene also was evaluated by RT-PCR. : PARP cleavage, cell growth and cytotoxicity studies demonstrated that the p53 mutatnt m248 is resistant to epothilone B. M273 is 2-3-fold resistant to Taxol, most likely due to its higher expression of MDR1. M248 was not acetylated after treatment with epothilone B, compared to all other cell lines. P21 and PAI-1 were induced by epothilone B in A2780 cells. Expression of p21, GADD45 and PAI-1 in mutant cell lines was generally down-regulated. CONCLUSIONS: These data provide evidence that ovarian cancer cells harboring mutant p53 were resistant to MSAs, such as Taxol and epothilone B. It is suggested that the hot spot mutation of p53 may be involved in the pathways leading to Taxol resistance in ovarian cancer. Interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) may play a inhibitory factor against IL-1and IL-1b as pre-inflammatory cytokine. We examined the immunohistochemical expression of keratin 6A/13and IL-1Ra in uterine cervical lesions. METHODS: Specimens from 21 patients with uterine cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) or uterine cervical invasive carcinoma were immunohistochemically evaluated for the expression of the 2 markers keratin 6A/13and IL-1Ra. Of the patients from whom uterine cervical cells and biopsy tissue specimens were obtained, 9 had CIN1 lesions (42.9%), 5 had CIN2 lesions (23.8%), 6 had CIN3 lesions (23.8%), and 1 had cervical invasive carcinoma (4.8%). Immunohistochemistry staining intensity was quantitatively scored from 0 to 2+. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board. RESULTS: The positive expression rates of keratin 6A, 13 and IL-1Ra were 90% 85% and 0% in the uterine cervical cells, 100%, 70% and 0% in the biopsy tissue specimens, respectively. No significant difference in expression was noted according to the progression of lesions. The expression of keratin 6A was positive, but those of keratin 13 and IL-1Ra were negative in a case of cervical invasive carcinoma. CONCLUSIONS: IL-1Ra might not be useful as a marker for uterine cervical lesions because it was not expressed in the CIN or cervical invasive carcinoma specimens. Keratin 6A/13 could be potential immunohistochemical markers for uterine cervical lesions. and 5 cases of cervical cancer. Potential benefit was observed for three patients with stage I or II uterine cancer and positive post-procedure cytology. CONCLUSIONS: Post-procedure peritoneal cytology is feasible and may benefit patients with early stage cancer by increasing the detection of microscopic peritoneal metastasis or cancer cell seeding during surgery. Total Inhibin: A New Marker for Ovarian Granulosa Cell Tumours? Anastasia Tsigkou, 1 Felice Petraflia, 2 Fangrong Shen. 3 1 Biology, Xian Suzhou, Jiangsu, China; 2 Ostetrica and Gynecolgy, University Siena, Siena, Tuscona, Italy; 3 obstetrics and Gynecology, No.1 Hospital Suzhou, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. INTRODUCTION: Adult granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) of the ovary are hormonally active sex-cord stromal tumors. They comprise 2-5% of all ovarian cancers and are associated with a good prognosis due to early diagnosis and high survival rates. A glycoprotein that has shown interest in ovarian cancers is Inhibin (Inhibin A & Inhibin B) which is produced by the granulosa cells. Inhibin A consists of an a subunit disulphide linked to a bA [a+bA] subunit and Inhibin B consists of an a subunit and bB [a+bB] subunit. Since a subunit is also expressed by the theca internal cells, in addition to the granulosa cells levels of a-subunit mRNA in the ovary are higher than the b-subunit mRNA. The present study evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of the new total inhibin assay able to detect dimeric and free a subunitcontaining forms of Inhibin in postmenopausal women (PMW) with GCTs. METHODS: Serum samples were collected and analysed from PMW 1) PMW with Granulosa cells tumors (GCTs) (n=50). 2) Normal PMW (n=70) (55 and over). Inhibin immunoreactivity was determined on normal ovary and GCT using monoclonal antibody (Mabs) PO#12 and PO#14. RESULTS: Serum concentrations in PMW with GCTs were determined using the commercially available ELISAs inhibin A, inhibin B, pro-aC and total inhiibn. Total inhibin levels in PMW with GCTs was significantly higher then controls (p=0.00110). Inhibin B (r=0.63) and inhibin pro-aC (r=0.73) positive correlated with total inhibin (PO#23-R1) in PMW with GCTs. A strong inhibin immunoreactivity was shown in GCTs . The current work provides evidence that the new assay detects total inhibin concentrations in PMW with GCTs and may present a valid serum marker with GCTs, because of its higher sensitivity, in detecting all dimeric and free inhibin a subunitcontaining forms. Ovarian cancer is the #1 lethal gynecological malignancy in United States. miRNAs have been identified with oncogenic or tumor suppressor properties raising the potential that such miRNAs exist in ovarian cancers and if identified, provide potential therapeutic targets. METHODS: Ovarian biopsies from ovarian cancer patients (n=14) and the OVCAR-5 cell line were used. The miRNA/mRNA transcriptomes were defined in the tissue samples using the Affymetrix miRNA 3.0 and Human Exon microarrays, and potential targets confirmed by Rea-Time PCR. The effect of miR-183 on proliferation, cell migration and invasion were quantitated using a cell proliferation assay, and transwell migration and invasion assays, respectively. The miR-183 target gene was determined initially by the miRNA Prediction Database (miRanda and mirSVR), and then confirmed by Luciferase Reporter Assay. Results are reported as means ± S.E. Student's t-test was applied. RESULTS: Sixty (60) miRNA (fold>1.5, P<0.05) and 713 mRNA (fold>2.0, P<0.05) were altered in the ovaries of women with ovarian cancer. miR-183 was one of the most up regulated miRs and CPED1 (cadherin-like and PC-esterase domain containing 1) was one of the most down regulated genes in ovarian cancer. Using miRNA Prediction Database and Luciferase Report Assay, we determined that CPED1 is direct target of miR-183. miR-183 suppressed the expression of CPED1 at the mRNA and protein level, and its ability to promote cellular migration and invasion was partially reversed by overexpression of CPED1. CONCLUSIONS: miR-183 is an onco-miRNA that promotes ovarian cancer cell migration and invasion through CPED1, which encodes a transcription factor required for embryonic development and in ovarian cancer is a metastasis suppressor. We hypothesize blocking the effect of miR-183 or overexpressing CPED1 has therapeutic potential. Combinatorial Immunotherapy Enhances Survival in Patients with Recurrent Ovarian Cancer. Janos Tanyi, Emese Zsiros, Cheryl Chiang, Drew Torigan, Lana E Kandalaft, George Coukos. Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Cyclophosphamide and antiangiogenic therapy has been shown to enhance and synergize with immunotherapy. We designed a phase-I study to evaluate the safety, immunogenicity and clinical efficacy of combinatorial immunotherapy by using dendritic cell (DC)-based autologous whole tumor antigen vaccination alone and in combination with bevacizumab or with bevacizumab and cyclophosphamide in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer. METHODS: A phase-I, three-cohort, single center study with autologous oxidized whole tumor cell pulsed DC (OC-DC) vaccine administered intranodally alone or in combination with bevacizumab or bevacizumab and cyclophosphamide in patients with recurrent ovarian cancer. Patients in cohort 1 (n=5) received 5 doses of 5-10 ×10 6 DCs intranodally, while patients in cohort 2 (n=10) received the 5 doses of vaccine in combination with intravenous bevacizumab given every two weeks. Patients in cohort 3 (n=10) also received 5 doses of vaccine while bevacizumab plus cyclophosphamide was given the day before each vaccination. Patients with stable disease at the end of study were allowed to continue with additional maintenance vaccines. 50 patients with recurrent ovarian cancer who received bevacizumab with cyclophosphamide as a second line treatment were used as controls. The mean age, number of prior chemotherapies and number of prior recurrences were not statistically different across the groups. The average number of vaccines patients received was 7. The vaccine was well tolerated and only produced grade 1 toxicities. Tumor specific T cell responses were elicited against HER-2/neu, MUC1, NY-ESO-1, mesothelin and WT-1 tumor antigens. 14 patients (56%) showed clinical benefit with stable or no evidence of disease (40% in cohort 1, 50% in cohort 2, 70% in cohort 3) at end of study with some exhibiting long durable responses. Compelling progression free and overall survival benefit were elicited in cohort 3 as compared to cohort 1 and 2 and the control group of patients. CONCLUSIONS: Cell-based immunotherapies combined with immunomodulation using cyclophosphamide and antiangiogenic agents are novel approaches to enhance DC vaccines by augmenting antitumor immunity, thus improving clinical outcomes for patients with ovarian cancer. The pathophysiology of endometriosis and it's impairment on fertility is still unclear after decades of research. The role of genetics and epigenetics has the recent years been hot topics a reduced expression of the hoxa10 gene has been suggested to play an important part contributing to the infertility in these patients. The objective this study was to investigate the DNA methylation profile of the hoxa10 gene in eutopic and ectopic endometrium in humans as DNA-methylation has been implied as responsible mechanism for the altered gene expression in these patients. The study will also investigate the methylation profile of the hoxa10 gene in different ectopic tissues and thereby generate information regarding etiopathogenesis of this enigmatic disorder. METHODS: Endometrial tissue (eutopic and ectopic) from eighteen women admitted for surgery for endometriosis related pain and twelve women admitted for surgery because of non endometriotic disease (controls) underwent sodium bisulfite DNA modification, RT-PCR amplification and Pyrosequencing analysis. RESULTS: The eutopic endometrium of women with endometriosis was significantly more methylated in comparison to controls (sequence 1: 8.68% in cases and 6.25 % in controls: p=0.037, sequence 2: 11.89% in cases and 9.25% in controls: p=0.032). The eutopic endometrium was significantly more methylated than the ectopic tissue in the endometriosis patients (mean difference -3.6 sequence 1: p=0.001 and -6.0 sequence 2: p=0.0001). CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals relevant information regarding a dysregulated gene necessary for reproduction, a finding that could lead to development of new treatment strategies for the disease. Moreover it generates information regarding the nature of the different ectopic tissue which contributes to a better etiopathologic understanding of this common and complex disorder. Literature suggests that menstrual phase also affects susceptibility to HIV infection. Thus, we tested the hypothesis that menstrual phase impacts levels of VF antmicrobial peptides (AMPs) and antiviral activity. METHODS: 29 healthy women (ages 18-39) were recruited to provide self-collected vaginal fluid specimens 1 hour before and 1 hour after either PVI (with condom) or a control activity consisting of 15 min of quiet time (QT). VF was obtained using a polywick tampon for 1 hour. Samples were eluted with 2 mL sterile PBS. A 10% solution of this VF eluate was incubated with HIV-1 BaL virus prior to infecting TZM-bl luciferase reporter cells. AMPs (Trappin-2/elafin, lysozyme, lactoferrin, human beta defensin-2) were measured by ELISA. RESULTS: The mean inhibition of HIV infectivity from pre-to postactivity (either PVI or QT) differed significantly by menstrual phase (P= 0.023) in a multilevel model, accounting for the within-person correlation: inhibition of HIV infectivity decreased by 11.45% during the follicular phase and increased by only 0.53% during the luteal phase. The difference in HIV inhibition by phase remained when adjusted for activity (PVI vs QT) (P=0.022). There was also an effect of menstrual phase on lysozyme, with luteal levels (M = 7.78 mg/ml,SD = 1.40) significantly higher than follicular levels (M = 4.73 mg/ml, SD, 1.14) (P=0.007). Effects of phase on lactoferrin in the reverse direction were also apparent: there was a statistical trend (P= .068) for luteal levels (M -2.33 mg/ml, SD = 0.46) to be lower than follicular levels (M = 4.37 mg/ml, SD = 0.91). CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that antimicrobial defenses are affected by menstrual phase. This study was funded by NIAID/NIH grant 1R01AI094563 and was approved by the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board. It is unclear if self-assessment of menstrual bleeding correlates with objective measures of anemia. As AAW are at high risk of having heavy bleeding and fibroids, we evaluated whether personal assessment of bleeding is correlated with subjective and objective measures of anemia in this subset of women. METHODS: AAW ages 18-65 attending an urban community health fair were asked to participate in this survey study. AAW answered questions about menstrual history and typical menstrual bleeding. They reported experiences with either general or menses-associated symptoms of anemia. AAW also provided serum samples for complete blood counts and iron studies. RESULTS: 144 AAW completed the survey. Of the those who reported having menstrual cycles, average flow was classified as: very heavy (17.2%), heavy (32.8%), normal (37.9%) or light (12.1%). The average length of flow was also reported, with 36.8% stating that bleeding continued for 5 to 7 days or more. AAW who classified their menses as very heavy or heavy reported more general symptoms of anemia (p=.007), more frequent anemia-associated symptoms during menses (p=.028), and were more likely to have fibroids (p=.049) than those who reported normal or light menses. AAW who classified their flow as lasting more than 7 days also reported more frequent anemia-associated symptoms during menses than AAW who described shorter menses (p=.031). Laboratory testing was performed on 72.1% of the menstruating AAW. Those who reported very heavy or heavy menses had lower hemoglobin (p=.022) and hematocrit levels (p=.012) than AAW who classified menses as normal or light. In addition, AAW who reported heavy menstrual bleeding had lower ferritin levels than those who described menstrual bleeding as normal or light (p=.035). Ferritin levels were also lower in AAW who reported that bleeding lasted 5 to 7 days or more when compared to AAW who described shorter length of flow (p=.047). CONCLUSIONS: AAW with heavier menses reported more symptoms of anemia and had lower hemoglobin, hematocrit, and ferritin levels. Given that half of AAW reported heavier menses, and that an association between personal assessment of menstrual bleeding and subjective and objective measures of anemia was found, AAW with heavy bleeding should be encouraged to seek clinical evaluation.  In this survey study, AAW were recruited at an urban community health fair. Women aged 18-65 years reported on the status of their menstrual cycles, details of typical menses, and information on gynecologic care. Demographic and socioeconomic information, health insurance status, and health literacy were assessed. Complete blood counts and iron studies were also performed. RESULTS: 144 AAW completed the survey. 67% of the women with menstrual cycles had a gynecologist. Women who reported that their bleeding lasted five to seven days or longer were more likely to have a gynecologist than not (p= .024). Women with laboratory confirmed anemia were more likely to have a gynecologist than non-anemic women (p= .022). Women who had been seen as an outpatient for issues related to heavy vaginal bleeding in the past had higher ferritin (p=.044), higher transferrin saturation (p=.041), and lower transferrin levels (p=.049) than those who had not been seen. A history of outpatient evaluation for heavy vaginal bleeding was not correlated with age, body mass index (BMI), marital status, employment, education, income, insurance status or health literacy. Half of the women who had presented to clinic for heavy vaginal bleeding had also been seen in the emergency department (ED) for these issues (p<.001). The women who had visited the ED for heavy vaginal bleeding were more likely to have higher BMIs than women who did not present to the ED (p=.019). However, there was no correlation with any of the other demographic or socioeconomic factors, insurance status, or health literacy. CONCLUSIONS: Two thirds of menstruating AAW had a gynecologist. Although those who reported longer menses were more likely to seek care, there was no correlation with heaviness of bleeding. Women who were seen as outpatients for heavy vaginal bleeding had better serum iron parameters. These data suggest that AAW who suffer from abnormal uterine bleeding and seek gynecologic care will have improved blood parameters versus those who do not. Adenomyosis is a benign estrogen-dependent disease defined as "benign invasion of myometrium by endometrium". It is characterized by presence of endometrial glands and stroma, leading to an hypertrophic myometrium, offen associated with infertility. Adenomyosis seems to share many features with endometriosis; ectopic implants remain functionally responsive to sex steroid hormones, women with adenomyosis are subfertily, and in many cases painful symptoms reflect those of endometriosis. Transforming growth factors beta (TGF-beta) family includes activins and inhibins, expressed by human endometrium, acting on proliferation, differentiation, immune function, tissue remodeling and apoptosis playing also an important role in the menstrual cycle, decidualization and early pregnancy. The biological effects of activins are mediated by specific receptors (ActRs) and are primarly modulated by follistatin and cripto. Follistatin is an activebinding proteins which modulate the actions of activin betaA by binding it with high affinity and blocking its interaction with the receptors. Cripto functions as a coreceptor for activin betaA by forming a complex with activin betaA receptors and antagonizing its effects. Eutopic endometrium in patients with endometriosis has a different menstrual cycle-related pattern of activin. Activin betaA, cripto and inhibin alfa mRNA expression do not change throughout menstrual cycle and the expression of follistatin mRNA is increased during the late secretory phase. A dysfunction of activin betaA pathway in endometriotic endometrium may contribute to the development of infertility in women with endometriosis. METHODS: Tissues of matched uterine leiomyoma, adjacent normal myometrium, endometrium and adenomyosis were collected from patients with adenomyosis (n=6) who underwent hysterectomy. Total RNA was extracted from tissue homogenates and gene expression assessed by quantitative Real Time-PCR. RESULTS: We evaluated molecules involved in activin and myostatin signaling. In particular activin betaA and betaB subunits, myostatin, their receptors (ActRIIA, ActRIIB, ALK7) and binding proteins (follistatin, FLRG, crypto, inhibin alfa) were analyzed. CONCLUSIONS: The present study evaluated changes of TGF-beta family members in matched tissue from women with adenomyosis, improving our knowledge on their possible role in the pathogenesis of adenomyosis. Circulating MicroRNAs as Potential Biomarkers for Endometriosis. Recently, microRNAs have been found to be good candidate markers for various diseases. The purpose of this study is to identify serum microRNAs as potential noninvasive biomarkers for endometriosis. METHODS: Serum samples were collected from women undergoing laparoscopy for different indications including pelvic masses, pelvic pain, suspicious endometriosis, infertility, and diagnostic evaluation. Twenty women with histologically proven endometriosis and 15 endometriosisfree controls were included in this study. Total RNA was extracted from 400 µl of serum using the mirVana PARIS Kit (Ambion, Austin, TX) according to the manufacturer's instructions. We employed the Poly (A) RT-PCR method using Invitrogen NCode miRNA First-Strand cDNA Synthesis MIRC-50 kit (Invitrogen) and conventional RT-PCR was used to assay miRNA levels with the specific forward primers to let-7a-f, mir-135a,b and the universal reverse primer complementary to the anchor primer. RESULTS: There were no significant differences in age and parity between endometriosis group and controls. Mir-135a was significantly down-regulated in women with endometriosis compared with controls (p=0.014), while let 7a and 7f showed a trend toward down-regulation (p=0.085 and p=0.073, respectively). Let7d expressions strongly correlated with serum CA-125 levels with statistical significance (r=0.775, p<0.001) but, no other correlations were noted between miRNA expressions and clinical parameters. When diagnostic power of serum mir-135a expressions was evaluated, an area under the receiver operator characteristics curve yielded 0.740 (95% CI: 0.542-0.937, p=0.033) with sensitivity and specificity of 66.7% and 87.5% at the cut-off value of 0.60in discriminating endometriosis from controls. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that several circulating miRNAs are differentially expressed in sera of patients with endometriosis compared to controls. Serum mir-135a levels may potentially serve as a diagnostic marker for endometriosis. Menstruation is an inflammatory process involving vascular and immune cell-pathways which are regulated by ovarian hormones; estrogen and progesterone. Several endometrial disorders exist where resolution of inflammation or the inflammatory phenotype is perturbed, such as heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB), uterine fibroids (UF) and endometriosis. These conditions affect up to 80% of women of reproductive age worldwide. At present, no long-term effective medical therapies exist. The aim of this study was to investigate the inflammatory phenotype of endometria from women with HMB, UF and endometriosis to better understand the patho-physiology of these complaints. METHODS: Endometrial biopsy specimens were collected from 40 women (age range); 8 controls (normal menstrual bleeding, no UF or endometriosis), 4 from women with HMB (measured blood loss >85ml), 7 with UF but normal bleeding, 7 with both UF and HMB, 12 women suffering from endometriosis and 2 with both UF and endometriosis. The concentrations of mRNAs encoded by genes that act as inflammatory mediators were measured using qRT-PCR. Immunohistochemical localization of inflammatory mediators was performed. The inflammatory gene expression of the endometrium was dependent upon the clinical phenotype. The presence of UF, regardless of whether they were associated with HMB, resulted in significant differences in the pattern of expression of members of the kallikrein-kinin system (KLK1, KLK3, BDKRB1, BDKRB2) and altered expression of ALOX12 mRNA. Notably expression of KLK3 was dramatically up-regulated by 17 fold in women with endometriosis compared with controls. There was a significant decrease in ALOX12 in the both HMB and endometriosis samples (P<0.0002 for each group). CONCLUSIONS: Reduced expression of ALOX12 in women with endometriosis or HMB would be consistent with a reduced ability to synthesise the natural anti-inflammatory lipoxin A4, an essential endometrial resolution factor. The kallikrein-kinin system plays a crucial role in inflammation, vasodilation, smooth muscle contraction, vascular permeability, coagulation and pain. Hence altered expression of mRNAs encoding key members of the cascade provides a potential target for therapies addressing these symptoms in women with fibroids or endometriosis. Uterine fibroids (UF) affect 77% of women by menopause, and account for $9.4 billion in annual U.S. yearly healthcare costs. Diagnosis of type 2 diabetes (T2D) has been linked with protection from UF. Whether protection derives from effects of T2D or T2D pharmacologic treatment is unclear. To further evaluate this relationship we tested for association between T2D treatments and UF risk. We conducted a longitudinal case-control study using electronic medical record data from Vanderbilt University Medical Center. UF status after T2D diagnosis was determined from pelvic ultrasounds. Women with T2D were identified from their electronic medical record. Diabetic cases had not been previously diagnosed with a UF at the time of T2D diagnosis. We identified total of 2,321 women with T2D. Among these women 17% had an incident UF. Cox regression, unadjusted and adjusted for candidate confounders, was used to test for association between UF presence and T2D treatment (metformin, thiazolidinedione, insulin, or other treatment). We also tested for interactions between T2D treatment and race and body mass index (BMI), separately. RESULTS: Insulin, when controlling for all other T2D treatments and demographic and vital characteristics, conferred protection from UFs in European Americans (EAs) and African Americans (AAs) (EAs, adjusted hazard ratio [aHR] = 0.50, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.36 to 0.69; AA aHR = 0.53, 95% CI 0.37 to 0.74). However, we observed an increased risk for UF with metformin treatment among EAs (aHR = 1.94, 95% CI 1.37 to 2.74), but not among AAs (aHR = 1.07, 95% CI 0.76 to 1.51). Normal weight and overweight T2Ds had the most protection from UFs when taking insulin compared to obese subjects. We did not observe strong evidence for association between thiazolidinedione or other T2D treatments and UFs. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together these data suggest that T2D protection from UF may derive from insulin, and suggest that further research should be conducted to dissect the biological pathways underlying this effect. Further mechanistic research is also necessary to reconcile the increased risk of UF among EAs linked to metformin use. Understanding Mechanisms Underlying Breakthrough Bleeding in Progestin Only Contraceptive Users. Jemma Evans, 1,2 Rebecca D'Sylva, 1 Lois A Salamonsen. 1,3 1 Uterine Biology, Prince Henry's Institute, Australia; 2 Physiology, Monash University, Australia; 3 O&G, Monash University, Australia. INTRODUCTION: Unscheduled breakthrough bleeding or 'spotting' is a common problem in users of progestin only contraceptives (POC's). A major feature of POC endometria is 'fragile' luminal epithelium (LE) susceptible to shedding/bleeding. We have little information on mechanisms underlying epithelial fragility. We proposed disturbance of Wnt signalling, associated cell adhesion molecules and repair mechanisms as the cause of fragile epithelium, and that signals from decidualized stroma, resulting from POC use, mediate alterations underlying the bleeding. METHODS: Wnt5a and 7a, b-catenin, E-cadherin, DKK-1 and vimentin examined by IHC in POC (Norplant/depo-provera) and normal endometrium across menstrual cycle. Prolactin (PRL) and DKK-1 assessed by ELISA in media from decidualized (dec) stromal cells. Phospho (P)-b-catenin, vimentin and N-cadherin examined after treatment of endometrial epithelial cells with dec culture media (dec-CM) or DKK-1 by western immunoblot. Real-time proliferation assays performed using xCelligence. RESULTS: In cycling endometrium Wnt 5a and 7a, b-catenin and E-cadherin localized to luminal/glandular epithelial cells. DKK-1 localized to luminal epithelium in proliferative phase and stroma in secretory phase. Vimentin localized to stroma. In POC endometria, Wnt7a, b-catenin and E-cadherin had disappeared or displayed abnormal localization. Wnt5a localized to stroma. DKK-1 localized to decidualized stroma. Vimentin localized to epithelium and stroma. Secretion of PRL and DKK-1 was elevated in decidualized versus non-decidualized stromal cells. Treatment of endometrial epithelial cells with dec-CM or DKK-1 reduced P-b-catenin and elevated vimentin and N-cadherin. Treatment of these cells with dec-CM or recombinant DKK-1 reduced real-time proliferation. CONCLUSIONS: Wnt signalling and associated adhesion molecules are down-regulated in POC endometrium, while Wnt antagonist DKK-1 is elevated, likely further inhibiting functional signalling. Elevation of epithelial vimentin and N-cadherin suggests epithelial-mesenchymal transition due to the absence of such signals. Down-regulation of phospho-b-catenin indicates less stable inter-epithelial junctions. Inhibited epithelial proliferation in response to decidual signals such as DKK-1 suggests an endometrial epithelium that cannot repair. These data build a picture of the molecular alterations contributing to epithelial fragility in POC endometrium. Endometriosis is associated with aberrant eutopic endometrium(EUE) gene expression and P resistance. FKBP52, a cochaperone protein optimizes P signaling and is decreased in the EUE of both baboons and women with endometriosis. MicroRNA-29c(miR-29c) is significantly upregulated in endometriosis and TargetScan analysis revealed that it targets FKBP52. METHODS: miR-29c was quantified by qRT-PCR and a 3' UTR luciferase assay confirmed that FKBP52 was a target of miR-29c. EUE biopsies obtained between d21-23 from controls(n=7)and women with endometriosis(n=31) were analyzed for FKBP52. Expression of FKBP52, estrogen receptor(ESR1) and P receptor(PGR) were confirmed by IHC. Uterine stromal cells(HSC) isolated from the control and endometriosis positive women were subjected to in vitro decidualization for 8 days. Transcript levels of FKBP52, HOXA10 and PRL were measured as an index of decidualization. RESULTS: qRT-PCR analysis of miR-29c confirmed the microarray data and demonstrated a progressive increase in miR-29c expression which was correlated with a significant decrease in FKBP52 transcript and protein. In vitro 3' UTR luciferase assay confirmed the regulation of FKBP52 by miR-29c. IHC analysis revealed that EUE from control women had a significantly higher (p<0.04) staining for FKBP52 compared to those with endometriosis. Both WB and RT-PCR analysis further validated the IHC data for FKBP52. On day 8 following in vitro decidualization FKBP52, HOXA10 and the decidualization marker PRL were significantly decreased in HSC from endometriosis patients compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: Endometriosis results in increased expression of miR-29c in EUE, which leads to the decreased expression of its target FKBP52. Decreased expression of FKBP52, together with HOXA10 and PRL, in the decidualized HSC from women with endometriosis confirms the poor decidualization response observed in these patients. Collectively, these data suggest that the decrease in FKBP52 might contribute to the infertility in women with endometriosis. This indicates that women with lower 1 st trimester BMI gained more weight than women with higher 1 st trimester BMI. Higher BMI at 1 year post-partum was significantly associated with higher point Aa site measurements (more pronounced POP) after adjusting for age, smoking, POP at G36-38w and 1 st trimester BMI. A one unit increase in BMI 1 year postpartum was associated with a 0.133 cm increase in point Aa. In the model, TOL was also independently and significantly associated with higher point Aa site measurements while a very small but negative association between larger fetal weight and lower point Aa measurements were noted. First trimester BMI and a gain in BMI at 1y compared to baseline were not independently associated with point Aa. CONCLUSIONS: Higher BMI at 1 year postpartum is a crucial and modifiable predictor of decreased anterior wall support after delivery. Educating women about the potential benefits of weight modification postpartum may serve as a good strategy for the prevention of POP in some women. Endometrial higher risk of developing parasitic leiomyomas. The incidence of uterine sarcoma was 0.6% (6/941) with a mean age of 44 years ±5. 33% were menopausal at the time of morcellation. Multivariate analysis revealed that menopausal status was found to be associated with a higher risk for uterine sarcoma (OR 5.85, CI 1.05-32.56). 50% had sarcoma diagnosed on initial Pathology report, and 50% had recurrence of uterine sarcoma with benign Pathology at the time of initial procedure; average time to second presentation was 5 years. CONCLUSIONS: Younger age and uterine size >350g are risk factors for development of parasitic leiomyomas after uterine morcellation, and menopause at the time of uterine morcellation is a risk factor for uterine sarcoma. Immune vs. 11.9±11.5%). In the endometrium of women with endometriosis, mDC proportions appear to be greatest in the secretory phase while pDC peak during menstruation. Endometrial Tregs look to increase progressively through the menstrual cycle in endometriosis (menstruation = 6.5 of CD4+ cells, proliferative phase = 6.0±2.8, secretory phase = 15.0±12.3%), while proportions in the blood are highest during the proliferative phase (6.0±2.8%, compared to 3.4% in menstruation and 4.8±1.8% in the secretory phase). In endometrium, Treg proportions in the secretory phase appear to be higher in women with endometriosis compared to women without (15.0±12.3% vs. 11.0±6.2%, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Circulating and endometrial DC and Treg populations appear to be disturbed in women with endometriosis. Cyclical variations suggest recruitment into the endometrium from circulation and involvement in signalling and functional changes of the uterus. DC and Treg play crucial roles in female fertility, therefore understanding their disturbance in endometriosis may shed light on infertility in endometriosis. This study is continuing to further elucidate immune dysregulation in endometriosis pathophysiology. However, the molecular mechanism remains to be explored. This study is aimed to globally profile protein expression in PE and OVE versus matched control tissues with a proteomic approach. The long-term goal is to search for specific proteins associated with each form of endometriosis as potential diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets. METHODS: To avoid natural variation between individuals, a set of endometriotic (PE and OVE) and eutopic control tissues (peritoneum and endometrium) were obtained from the same patient by surgical resection. Proteins were extracted from these tissues and processed for isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling coupled with multidimensional liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (Wei et al, Proteomics 2009; 9:2798) . RESULTS: A total of 352 distinct proteins with P<0.05 were identified. The expression of 93 (26%) and 83 (24%) of these proteins exhibited >2fold changes in PE and OVE, respectively, when compared to matched peritoneum and endometrium. Of the 93 proteins identified in PE, 51 were upregulated and 42 were downregulated. Of the 83 proteins identified in OVE, 56 were upregulated and 27 were downregulated. Interestingly, 12 proteins were regulated towards the same direction (11 upregulated and 1 downregulated) in both PE and OVE. However, 9 proteins were upregulated in PE but downregulated in OVE. Conversely, 18 proteins were downregulated in PE but upregulated in OVE. Pathway analysis suggested that these differentially expressed proteins were involved in cell adhesion, motility, extracellular matrix organization, actin cytoskeletal remodeling, cell junction assembly, muscle development, muscle contraction, inflammation, angiogenesis, stress signaling, and metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: iTRAQ combined with LC-MS/MS is an effective tool for identification of differentially expressed proteins in different types of endometriosis. Further detailed studies of the proteins identified herein are needed for a better understanding of pathogenesis of endometriosis and development of novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Elastin in the Rat Urethra after Simulated Childbirth Injury. Elastin was most prominent in the connective tissue layer between the EUS and anterior vaginal wall. Qualitative comparison of the distribution of elastin revealed more organized, grouped and longer elastic fibers after sham VD. Animals that underwent VD had disorganized, individual and shorter elastic fibers. Continence was significantly reduced in rats that underwent VD compared to sham VD. Disruption of elastic fibers resulted in short, more isolated and shorter elastic fibers between the urethra and vagina, which may contribute to loss of continence in this animal model for SUI. Reported differences in HOXA11 and LIF expression may impair receptivity. In this study we compare the response to steroids of cultured stromal cells obtained from women with and without adenomyosis and examine the expression of decidualisation markers. METHODS: Decidualisation was induced in stromal cells grown in long term culture, by the addition of 1µM medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), 0.5 mM 8-br-cAMP and 10 nM 17-b-oestradiol in phenol-red deficient DMEM every 2 days for 21 days. mRNA was extracted and subjected to RT-PCR for the relative levels of the decidualisation markers, IGFBP-1 and prolactin, using the expression of GAPDH as the normalising gene. Experiments without MPA were used as control (N=9). RESULTS: Decidualisation was determined by the characteristic morphological changes. IGFBP-1 transcript levels were significantly higher in stromal cells derived from both normal endometria (46.35 ± 6.34fold) and from adenomyotic endometria (49.57 ± 9.46-fold) compared to the non-decidualised controls. But the increase in mRNA for IGFBP-1 was not significantly different between adenomyosis and controls. The transcript level of prolactin increased in decidualised stromal cells from the groups treated with MPA, indicating successful decidualisation. Prolactin expression was higher in stromal cells from unaffected compared to adenomyosis stromal cells (1.34 ± 0.59 fold) but the difference was not statistically significant. The experiment confirmed decidualisation in adenomyosis stromal cells both morphologically and as demonstrated by the expression of classic decidualisation makers with no statistically significant differences between the two groups. This suggests that adenomyosis may not be associated with impaired progesterone response, but further research is needed to assess the expression of markers of receptivity. The Effect of the Anaesthetic Propofol on Plasma Anandamide Levels. Misoprostol, a synthetic prostaglandin E1 analogue was used in 15 women for cervical ripening before STOP. Blood samples were taken from the volunteers on admission into the day surgical unit (DSU) hospital, before the administration of propofol and after the procedure. GraphPad Prism was used for statistical analysis and a p-value <0.05 was considered as significant. In those attending for STOP, there was a significant increase in plasma AEA and OEA levels between the first blood sample (on admission) and that taken in the anaesthetic room (p<0.05 and p<0.001). AEA levels fell thereafter, but this was not statistically significant. In the pregnant women not receiving Misoprostol, plasma AEA, OEA and PEA levels increased between admission into the DSU and in the anaesthetic room, however this was only statistically significant for OEA (p<0.01). AEA levels dropped significantly in the recovery room after surgery (p<0.05) (Figure1) . In the non pregnant women, plasma AEA, OEA and PEA levels increased in the anaesthetic room and decreased in the recovery room but this was not statistically significant (p=0.454, p=0.052 and p=0.06). Plasma AEA levels are decreased after the administration of propofol. Epigenetic The diagnosis of pelvic organ prolapse (POP) has long been dependent upon the presence of symptoms such as pelvic pressure or visualization of prolapsed vaginal tissue before treatment recommendations could be made. To date, the use of other techniques to improve diagnosis, improve clinical outcomes and make prognostic recommendations has been limited. Quantification of attenuation (loss of energy as a wave propagates through tissue) is related to collagen integrity in connective tissues. Our objective was to determine whether ultrasonic attenuation of the uterosacral ligament could discriminate between POP and normal controls. METHODS: A sample of 11 women with and without POP was recruited for the study. Raw ultrasonic data of the uterosacral ligament and a reference phantom (known attenuation) were obtained in the operating room prior to pelvic surgery from z.one, (Zonare) ultrasound system. Ultrasonic data were saved on a flash drive and processed off line using a spectral log difference Matlab® program. Descriptive statistics, means plots were conducted among the groups. The figure above displays a scan of the uterosacral ligament and stage POP decrease in uterosacral attenuation in subjects with prolapse compared to controls. The data point to the potential utility of this technology to evaluate pelvic floor integrity with attenuation. CONCLUSIONS: In this pilot study we found that ultrasonic attenuation may be a non-invasive method to visualize and recognize differences in uterosacral ligament composition and integrity in women with prolapse versus asymptomatic controls. Diffusion  The glutathione pathway was the most significantly altered canonical pathway in which the glutathione-s transferase mu 1 (GSTM1) gene was significantly over expressed (+8.03 folds) among the good responders compared to non responders. This was further confirmed by Real time PCR (p=0.024). Correlation of immunoreactive scores (IRS) for GSTM1 accumulation in leiomyoma tissue was seen with base line volume change of leiomyoma R= -0.8 (p=0.011). Furthermore the accumulation of protein GSTM1 analysed by Western Blot correlated significantly with the percentual leiomyoma volume change R= -0.82 (p=0.004). Deletion of the GSTM1 gene in leiomyoma biopsies was found in 50% of the mifepristone treated cases, with lower presence of the GSTM1 protein. The findings support a significant role for GSTM1 in leiomyoma volume reduction induced by mifepristone and explain the observed individual variation in this response. Furthermore the finding could be useful to further explore GSTM1 as a biomarker for tailoring medical treatment of uterine leiomyomas for optimizing the response to treatment. Impact Neither the male age nor any semen parameter on a continuum was associated with embryo morphology. However, low sperm concentration was significantly associated with 35% lower odds of achieving an expanded blastocyst formation (p=0.023). CONCLUSIONS: These data may suggest that sperm has an independent effect on embryo development. If true, the association between sperm concentration and impaired blastocyst development may reflect a true biological relationship potentially due to underlying genetic abnormalities leading to oligozoospermia. Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) regulates growth, differentiation and survival of neutrophil progenitors. G-CSF and it receptor are expressed in decidual cells (DCs) and trophoblast at the fetal-maternal interface where G-CSF is thought to play a key-role in implantation and in the maintenance of pregnancy. The present study investigates mechanisms controlling G-CSF expression by evaluating the effect of inflammatory cytokines on G-CSF expression by cultured first trimester (FT) DCs. METHODS: Leukocyte-free first trimester DCs were primed with 10 -8 M estradiol (E2) + 10 -7 M medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) for 7 days, then switched to serum-free defined medium (DM) with steroids, +/-1 ng/ ml TNF-alpha, IL-1beta or Interferon-gamma. After incubation, aliquots of conditioned DM supernatants, cell lysates and extracted RNA from parallel culture were frozen. Secreted G-CSF was measured by ELISA in conditioned DM and normalized to cell protein and mRNA was assessed by quantitative real time RT-PCR and normalized to beta-actin mRNA. In cultured FTDCs treated with E2+MPA, the addition of TNF-alpha,IL-1beta or IFN-gamma significantly elevated G-CSF output to 22-fold, 6,300-fold and 592-fold respectively (p<0.05). Quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated corresponding changes in G-CSF mRNA levels as found for the ELISA measurements. Concentration-dependent effects were observed for each inflammatory cytokine. CONCLUSIONS: When extrapolated to the milieu of early pregnancy, the marked increase in G-CSF elicited in first trimester DCs by proinflammatory cytokines suggests a mechanism that explains the expression and consequent biological effects of G-CSF at the fetal-maternal interface of the early pregnancy. formation are essential to ensure proper chromosome segregation during meiosis. Errors in these processes can lead to chromosome mis-segregation and ultimately, aneuploidy in humans. Yet the molecular basis of these defects is not well understood. We derived mice lacking Chtf18, the murine orthologue of CTF18, which encodes an evolutionarily conserved protein that is crucial for fertility in the fruitfly, and essential for accurate chromosome segregation in yeast. We recently demonstrated that in Chtf18-null mice meiotic recombination is defective and homologous chromosomes separate prematurely during prophase I. In addition, MLH1 foci (markers of DNA crossovers) are decreased in prophase I, suggesting a defect in crossover formation. The ultimate goal of our studies is to elucidate the defects underlying chromosome mis-segregation and aneuploidy in humans. Chtf18-null male mice were compared to wild-type male mice. Surface spread nuclei were prepared from spermatocytes and immunofluorescence microscopy was used to quantitate DNA crossovers on homologous chromosomes. Spermatocyte nuclei were stained with antibodies to SYCP3 (stains chromosome cores) and cohesin proteins, REC8 and STAG3, and fluorescence intensity is being quantitated. CHTF18 and cohesin protein, SMC3 were each separately immunoprecipitated from testis nuclear protein extracts in wild-type spermatocytes. Statistical analyses will be performed with the unpaired t-test. RESULTS: Homologous chromosomes in Chtf18-null spermatocytes contain significantly fewer DNA crossovers compared to wild-type males. Preliminary findings reveal that co-localization of cohesin proteins with SYCP3 is decreased in Chtf18-null compared to wild-type spermatocytes. Initial results demonstrate the feasibility and efficiency of performing immunoprecipitation assays from mouse spermatocytes to examine the physical interaction between CHTF18 and cohesin proteins in mammals. CONCLUSIONS: CHTF18 plays a critical role in meiotic recombination and DNA crossover formation likely through association with cohesin proteins. [PR] in GnRHa treated women vs controls. Therefore we evaluated the PR in women after exposure to gonadotoxic chemotherapy and GnRHa vs those without the agonists. A monthly depot IM injection of GnRH analogue was administered to over 250 women exposed to gonadotoxic chemotherapy, after informed consent, in parallel to, and until the end of chemotherapy. These patients were compared to a control group of over 130 patients of similar age (14-40 years), diagnoses, and treatment. The cumulative doses of each chemotherapeutic agent and radiotherapy exposure did not differ between the groups. The study was approved by the institutional ethics [Helsinki] committee. : 56 patients spontaneously conceived 86 times, and were delivered of 70 healthy neonates, in the GnRHa+chemotherapy group, vs 28 pregnancies in 18 patients in controls [p<0.05]. The age of the patients who spontaneously conceived, in the GnRHa group was 16-34 at chemotherapy compared to 16-28 y's in the control group. One patient, in the GnRHa group, spontaneously conceived three times and was delivered of three healthy neonates despite two stem cell transplantations [SCT], 11 years apart. Another patient spontaneously conceived four times and was successfully delivered of four healthy neonates. GnRH-a cotreatment was beneficial not only against regular chemotherapy but also for lymphoma patients undergoing SCT in significantly decreasing the POF rate. CONCLUSIONS: GnRHa cotreatment in parallel to chemotherapy may be beneficial in minimizing POF rate and increasing pregnancy rate in survivors. Therefore, it should be offered to every young woman before gonadotoxic chemotherapy in addition to cryopreservation of embryos, ova, and ovarian tissue. We recently discovered MFG-E8 as an endometrial epithelial cell surface protein upregulated during the window of implantation. Its receptor integrin avb3 is a critical adhesion molecule known to be expressed in endometrial epithelium and stroma. Here we investigated the role of milk fat globule-epidermal growth factor 8 (MFG-E8) and its receptor integrin avb3 in the attachment of trophoblast cells to the endometrial epithelium. METHODS: By using a well-differentiated human endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line (Ishikawa cells) and choriocarcinoma human trophoblast cells (Jar cells), an in vitro attachment assay mimicking human implantation was established. In order to investigate the impact of independently blocking MFG-E8 and integrin avb3, we pretreated the epithelial and trophoblast cells with specific antibodies against those proteins at different concentrations prior to the attachment assay. Ishikawa cells were cultured to confluence and Jar cells were allowed to form 100-200 µm spheroids, and then transferred on top of the Ishikawa monolayer in the attachment assay. Immunofluorescence was used to detect the presence of MFG-E8 and integrin avb3 in both cell types, and immunoblotting was performed to confirm expression of MFG-E8. The percentage of attached spheroids (versus non-treated controls and using negative controls with non-imune IgG) was calculated before and after pre-treatment of both cell types with antibodies against MFG-E8 and integrin avb3. RESULTS: Both cell lines expressed MFG-E8 and integrin avb3 in their cell membranes, and the presence of the expected MFG-E8 46 kD protein was demonstrated. Pre-treatment of Ishikawa cells, but not of Jar spheroids, with anti-MFG-E8 antibody caused a dose-dependent and significant (p<0.001) inhibition of spheroid attachment. Pre-treatment of both Ishikawa cells and Jar spheroids with anti-integrin avb3 antibody resulted in a dose-dependent and significant (p<0.001) inhibition of attachment. IgG pretreatment had no effect. This study showed that blocking MFG-E8 and its receptor integrin avb3 in Ishikawa cells diminished Jar spheroid attachment. In addition, blocking integrin avb3 in the trophoblastic cells also diminished their attachment to the Ishikawa monolayer. These results support a role for both molecules in the early stages of implantation. Transforming The invasive trophoblast secretes numerous factors controlling embryo attachment and invasion. TGF-b is one of the cytokines synthesized by trophoblast cells, and has been suggested to be involved in EMT in cancer metastasis studies. Here we hypothesized that TGF-b induces EMT in endometrial epithelial cells, which could potentially mediate embryo attachment and invasion process. We have tested the ability of TGF-b to induce EMT in endometrial epithelial cells by studying cytological changes, changes in markers of cell adhesion/differentiation, and by the ability to support embryo attachment. HEC-1A cells (immortalized human endometrial epithelial cells) were cultured in the presence of 20ng/ml TGF-b for 3 days. Morphology was assessed by light microscopy and by atomic force microscopy (AFM), which provides an effective means to characterize the membrane structure. The expression of E-and N-cadherin was measured by immunofluorescence and western blot, respectively. Mouse blastocysts were placed in co-culture with a confluent HEC-1A monolayer, and were monitored up to 72 hrs. The rate of trophoblast cell invasion was determined by measuring the mean area of outgrowing embryos using Image J. RESULTS: Based on deflection images, extensions around the cells (lamellipodia) were longer in TGF-b group than controls. In addition, TGF-b decreased cell height as measured from surface topographic AFM images (p<0.05 versus controls). Combined optical and AFM imaging of cells detected structural changes including filopodia and lamellopodia that were associated with cell spreading. A significant increase of E-cadherin expression and decrease of N-cadherin level were detected by both immunofluorescence and western blot (p<0.05 versus controls). This cadherin expression strongly suggested that the EMT took place. Blastocyst outgrowth was increased in the TGF-b treated HEC-1A cells as compared to controls (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate for the first time that one of the early embryonic products, TGF-b, induces EMT and promotes embryo attachment to human endometrial epithelial cells, which may reveal the role of TGF-b in trophoblast invasion and implantation. The quantitative imaging and measurements used in this study may pave the way for systematic correlation of membrane structural features with the biological status of endometrial epithelial cells. Influence of Syndecan-1. Sarah J Boeddeker, Dunja M Baston-Buest, Olga Altergot-Ahmad, Jan S Kruessel, Alexandra P Hess. Department of OB/GYN and REI, Unikid-University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany. INTRODUCTION: Trophoblast invasion in the decidua is accompanied by apoptotic cell death of endometrial epithelial cells (EECs). A suggested mechanism is via the Fas/FasL pathway whereas the role of intracellular signaling pathways remains unknown. Syndecan-1 (Sdc-1) a cytokine co-receptor fulfils many functions regarding binding and signaling of its ligands and influences apoptosis. This study enlightens if embryonic stimuli induce EEC apoptosis, which signaling pathways and regulatory molecules are involved and how far Sdc-1 affects this process. The human EEC line RL95-2 was chosen to generate a stable Sdc-1 knock down (kd). Induction of apoptosis was determined via active Caspase-3 measurement and PARP-cleavage after treatment with embryonic stimuli (anti-Fas antibody (ab), IL-1b, IFN-g, TGF-b1 and TNF-a). Furthermore the expression of apoptosis related proteins before and after induction of apoptosis was investigated. The Sdc-1 kd was generated successfully in RL95-2. Without induction of cell death the analysis of different apoptosis related proteins indicated an altered expression pattern, since proteins with an antiapoptotic impact were decreased in RL95-2 with Sdc-1 kd (XIAP, CIAPs, Survivin, HO-2, HSP-27 and -70). Incubation with anti-Fas ab induced apoptosis in both cell types. Treatment with the cytokine combination did not increase active Caspase-3 but sensitized the cells to Fas-mediated apoptosis. Furthermore, RL95-2 with Sdc-1 kd revealed higher apoptotic susceptibility displayed by higher levels of active Caspase-3. After induction of cell death the expression of apoptosis related proteins revealed an increase of death receptors Fas and TRAIL in RL95-2 with Sdc-1 kd. anti-Fas ab lead to significant activation of Caspase-3, PARP-cleavage and consequently to the induction of apoptosis. During the process of implantation an interaction of cytokines and the FasL-bearing trophoblast seems to be responsible for maternal cell death to create the necessary space for a proper invasion. Furthermore, EECs with Sdc-1 kd show a higher apoptotic susceptibility mediated by lower expression of antiapoptotic proteins before induction of apoptosis and higher expression of death receptors during apoptotic cell death. Hence, Sdc-1 seems to be involved in the regulation EEC apoptosis and therewith being a crucial mediator for regular implantation. This study focuses on exploring the progesterone-regulated genes in the stromal compartment of receptive endometrium in fertile women. Understanding the mechanism of progesterone action in stromal cells will lead to better understanding of different molecules involved in endometrial receptivity.The current findings point to the importance of stromal cells in regulating the paracrine or juxtacrine action of epithelial cells, driving the endometrium towards a receptive state. METHODS: Stromal cells from LH+7 endometrial biopsies were isolated by laser capture microdissection and RNA was extracted. Microarray was performed and reconfirmation for selective genes confirmed by using RT-PCR and immunohistochemical staining. RESULTS: 121 genes were significantly regulated with fold change greater than two. Reconfirmation of microarray results for selective genes by RT-PCR showed significant up regulation in the expression of SFRP4, CTSC, SMARCA1, CPM and HMGN5 and down regulation of MT1G, MT2A with progesterone depletion. Immunohistochemistry was performed for SCGB2A2, SNORA3, BCL11A, ATP6V0E1, CTSC and STC1 of which STC1 and CTSC showed a similar trend in the expression of protein. The major canonical and functional pathways affected by progesterone depletion were the EIF2 signaling pathway and the tissue morphology pathway, respectively, as measured by the bioinformatics platform,IPA. This study gives information about the large-scale progesterone regulated genes in the stromal compartment of human endometrium during the receptive phase and opens up opportunities to further explore their role in modulating the endometrium in order to reach the receptive state. Also, these differentially regulated genes have the potential to serve as endometrial receptivity markers. High The objective of this study is to evaluate the impact of MTX on the future fertility of women undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF) by comparing ovarian reserve and ovarian responsiveness in the IVF cycle before and after an ectopic pregnancy treated with MTX. METHODS: A systematic review was performed by searching PubMed, Embase, Scopus, and CENTRALfor studies that compared markers of ovarian reserve and measures of ovarian responsiveness during IVF before and after receiving methotrexate for an ectopic pregnancy. With IRB approval, primary data from our center was also included. Metaanalysis of the data was performed using a DerSimonion-Laird random effects model. Results are reported as weighted mean difference and 95% confidence interval. RESULTS: Five studies and our center's primary data were included, totaling 149 women. The mean time between IVF cycles was 6.7±3.4 months. There were no differences after MTX administration in FSH or AFC. AMH was reported in only one study; no difference was noted. In addition, there were no differences in endometrial thickness, total gonadotropin dose, or numbers of oocytes retrieved. Despite the same dose of gonadotropins, the post-MTX cycles required more days of stimulation (0.38, 95% CI 0.12-0.64) and resulted in lower estradiol levels (-296.56, 95% CI -440.65--152.47). No significant heterogeneity was noted in these parameters. Although no significant differences were noted between reserve parameters or oocytes retrieved, MTX appears to affect ovarian response as evidenced by the longer stimulation duration and lower peak estradiol levels. Larger studies with longer follow up are needed to further evaluate this association. Data stratification, by variables such as age, may identify cohorts of women that are more vulnerable to the effects of MTX. Opiorphin Mean±SD. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that endogenous opiorphins may increase the percent of motile sperm by reducing basal NEP activity in sperm and semen. These data also raise the possibility that reduced opiorphins may account for some cases of idiopathic male infertility and may offer new opportunities for the development of non-invasive medical treatment for infertile couples. We are presently investigating the significance of increased NEP activity and reduced opiorphins levels in idiopathic male infertility.  All women underwent ovarian stimulation either with IVF (all protocols) or the mini-stim protocol followed by IUI. The Ministim protocol consisted of daily clomiphene citrate at 100 mg days 3 -7 followed by a single injection of 150 IU of gonadotropins on cycle day 9, and IUI following the hCG injection when the lead follicle exceeded 18mm. We used a generalized linear mixed model to perform a repeated measures analysis of a binary outcome. The outcomes were success of the treatment and pregnancy outcome. Fixed effects were type of treatment (IVF and mini-stim IUI), age category (40 and ≥41) and the interaction of treatment and age. Covariates were included for BMI, FSH, antral follicle count, and estradiol levels. The PR in all women over the age of 40 was 12% (65/531) for IVF and 5% (13/239) for mini-stim IUI (p=0.004). When divided into age groups, the PR of IVF at age 40 was superior to that at age 41 and above (15% vs. 7%, p=0.002), while the PR of mini-stim IUI remains similar (3% vs. 7%, p=0.307). When comparing the outcomes of the two treatments in the different age groups, it ensued that in women age 40, IVF PR was superior to that of mini-stim IUI (15% vs. 3%, P=0.032), while in women age 41 and above, IVF and mini-stim IUI have similar PR (7% vs. 7% p=0.866). When PO were compared, the rate of livebirths was 75.38% for IVF vs. 33.33% for mini-stim IUI (p=0.0171). CONCLUSIONS: Mini-stim IUI was found to have similar pregnancy rate as IVF in women above the age of 41, validating its use in this age group as an alternative to IVF given the similar success rate, lower costs, and improved lifestyle. However, when pregnancy outcomes were compared, IVF outcomes were significantly better. A larger study is required to clarify the above results. Discovering a mechanism to explain the effect of diet-induced obesity, which leads to poor oocytes and embryos as well as growth retardation and brain abnormalities in offspring, may lead to therapeutic targets in obese women. METHODS: Four-week old female C57Bl6/J mice were fed ad libitum a control diet or an obesogenic diet (58% fat/sucrose; HFD) for 16 weeks. Mice were superovulated by an inter-peritoneal injection with PMSG alone (GV) or hCG and PMSG (MII). 48 hours later, oocytes were collected in M2 media and cumulus cells removed by mechanical aspiration (GV) or exposure to hyaluronidase (MII). Western blot was performed using antibodies against the PDHE1a subunit of PDC, the phosphorylated PDHE1a subunit, and PGC1a. Quantification of phosphorylated to unphosphorylated PDC was done using ImageJ. RESULTS: Western blot analysis was used to evaluate protein levels of the mitochondrial biogenesis gene PGC-1a and the inactivated and activated pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) by analysis of serine 293-phosphoyrlyation of the catalytic PDHE1a subunit. Western blot of GV oocytes for PDC revealed an increased ratio of the phosphorylated, inactivated PDHE1a subunit compared to total PDE1a levels. At the MII stage, there was no detectable PDHE1a phosphorylation in control diet oocytes, but there was phosphorylation in HFD oocytes. Western blot of GV oocytes for thePGC1a revealed an increased level of PGC1a in HFD mice. A transgenic mouse line will be utilized to conditionally remove one allele of the PDHE1a gene in oocytes to determine how inactivation of PDC affects oocyte quality. CONCLUSIONS: Inactivation of the PDC is occurring in oocytes from HFD mice, which could be leading to decreased ATP levels (observed previously) and abnormal spindles in oocytes of HFD mice. We expect to see a similar phenotype from mice conditionally lacking one allele of PDC in their oocytes due to these results. Additionally, GV oocytes from HFD mice have an increase in PGC1a, an important transcription factor promoting mitochondrial biogenesis. Due to the higher proportion of abnormal mitochondria in seen in oocytes from HFD mice, this increase in PGC1a suggests a compensatory increase in mitochondrial biogenesis to replace the damaged mitochondria. INTRODUCTION: New evidence suggests that paternal age at time of conception may be associated with adverse health effects in the offspring, but its effect on the offspring's reproductive performance and their long term health is unclear. METHODS: 8-to 12-wk spontaneously ovulating CF1 female mice (n=30) were mated with the same 4 B6D2F1/J males at 4, 12 and 18 mon. of age, generating 3 sets of litters with the same fathers: F4, F12, F18 (offspring whose fathers were 4, 12 or 18 mon. of age at conception). Offspring resulting from such mating (n=20/group) were followed over time. Morphometrics were measured at birth and weekly up to 20 wks. Serum levels of glucose and insulin were measured by GTT at 19 wks and organ weights were evaluated at sacrifice. Androgen and semen analyses were performed in male offspring. RESULTS: There was a trend toward a longer time needed to conceive for older fathers (F4; 17 days, F12; 22, F18; 45), but litters were not significantly different in size from those produced by younger fathers. Birth weights were significantly greater in F12 offspring but there was no difference in offspring weight gain between the three groups. In addition, there was no evidence of glucose intolerance in F4, F12 and F18 offspring. Interestingly, increasing paternal age (F4 vs. F18) was associated with offspring having a shorter anogenital distance and decreased sperm concentration and motility. Although decreased, testis weight and androgens, did not reach statistical significance. NKT cells are a unique subset of lymphocytes that bridge the innate and adaptive limbs of the immune response. We hypothesized that NKT cells play a key role in the maintenance of maternal-fetal immune tolerance and their activation may lead to preterm birth. Our aim was to investigate the effects of NKT cell activation during late gestation in a mouse model. METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were injected intravenously with either 2 mg of an NKT activator (a-galactosylceramide)/50 ml PBS (n=20) or 2 mg DMSO/50 ml PBS (control group, n=16) at 16.5 days post-coitum. Mice were monitored following injection using an infrared camera until delivery (defined as the presence of at least one pup in the cage bedding). The following parameters were recorded: incidence of successful delivery, gestational length, duration of active labor, total litter size, pup weight, and survival at 12-24h, day 7, and week 3 postpartum. Statistical analysis was performed with nonparametric statistics and a p≤0.05 was considered significant. CONCLUSIONS: Activation of NKT cells induces: 1) late preterm labor/ delivery (but not early); 2) increased rate of stillbirth and 3) a decrease in neonatal survival. These findings provide, for the first time, evidence that NKT cell activation can induce preterm labor and suggest that these cells play a role in the maintenance of maternal-fetal immune tolerance. Ezrin These changes may prepare the endometrium for implantation. We hypothesized that ezrin and radixin are differentially expressed during the normal endometrial cycle and they may be localized on glandular cells' microvilli and pinopodes, which are important structures for implantation. METHODS: Early proliferative (n = 5), mid proliferative (n = 5), late proliferative (n = 5), early secretory (n = 5), mid secretory (n = 5) and late secretory phase (n = 5) endometrial samples were analyzed for immunoreactive (ir) ezrin and radixin by immunohistochemical analysis and double immunoflorescence cytochemistry (from proliferative and secretory phases, n=3/phase). Differences in HSCORE values among different phases of normal endometrium were analyzed by using one-way ANOVA test. Differences in HSCORE values comparing glandular cells with stromal cells from the same endometrial phase were analyzed using Student's t-test. A p value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: Ir-radixin was present but ir-ezrin was absent in stromal cells throughout the normal endometrium. Ir-radixin in stromal cells reached to its highest expression during mid to late secretory phases (p<0.05). Both ir-radixin and ir-ezrin were present in luminal epithelium and glandular cells throughout the normal endometrium. Ir-ezrin was densely expressed in glandular cells during the mid secretory phase compared to that of the proliferative phase (p<0.05). Ir-ezrin and ir-radixin were clearly expressed in glandular pinopodes and microvilli. Pinopodes are spongelike smooth membrane projections that are present around the presumed time of embryo implantation. Double immunoflorescence cytochemistry confirmed the intense ir-radixin and ir-ezrin on glandular pinopodes and microvilli during the secretory phase. CONCLUSIONS: Ezrin and radixin expression on apical glandular epithelium, pinopodes, microvilli and dense stromal cells' ir-radixin during especially the mid secretory phase may have an important role in embryo implantation. Copper intrauterine device (IUD) releases an amount of copper in the human endometrial tissue that induces in the endometrial cells physiological and biochemical changes with some side effects in some women. Copper in excess is toxic in mammalian tissues and could trigger apoptosis. The objective was to investigate the apoptotic effect of copper on human endometrial stromal cells apoptosis at the same concentration that copper IUD release and study the presence of the apoptotic microtubule network (AMN) . Camptothecin (positive control, CPT) and three concentration of copper: 5.9mg/L (proliferative phase, CUP), 10.4mg/L (secretory phase, CUS) and 12.6mg/L (menstruation, CUM). Stromal cells were incubated during 48, 72 and 96 hours. Analysis was done by counting the percentage of apoptotic cells identified by immunofluorescence using three markers: b-tubulin, actin and nucleus morphology.. Apoptosis quantification was assessed by observing nuclei fragmentation, lack of actin cytoskeleton, and/or cell morphology by phase contrast microscopy. The apoptosis quantification showed that there are differences between the control group and the three copper groups (ANOVA p<0.05). However, the level of apoptosis did not increase with time of exposure. Likewise, no significant differences were observed among copper groups. CONCLUSIONS: AMN formation during apoptosis in human endometrial stromal cells is important due to the relevance of this process in this tissue, which has monthly changes. The amount of copper released by the IUD induces a higher percentage of apoptosis on these cells. These finds could explain the higher abnormal uterine bleeding in these subjects. Insulin resistance, body weight and diabetes. The role of adipokines in pregnancy continues to be studied, but has not been studied in lean vs obese pregnant women. In this study we have examined serum levels of leptin, adiponectin, sol leptin4, retinol binding protein-4 and resistin in longitudinal samples from 8 weeks of gestation to term. Comparison of results in lean (n=9) and obese (n=9) women were studied. Leptin, adiponectin, resistin and RBP4 were assayed by ELISA (Millipore) and sol Leptin R (BioVendor). RESULTS: Mean serum leptin levels were significantly elevated in obese subjects above levels in lean subjects throughout the entire course of gestation. Mean adiponectin levels decline in the obese subjects by 14 weeks of gestation while levels in lean subjects are generally higher than obese subjects, but decline after 20 weeks of gestation. Levels in both groups are similar shortly before term. Mean resistin levels are essentially unchanged over the course of gestation. Leptin levels increase in the obese pregnant women and remain low in the lean subjects. A slight increase across gestation seems evident. Adiponectin levels are higher in lean pregnant women and decline after 20 weeks of gestation. Adiponectin levels in obese women decline earlier in gestation but levels in both groups are similar by term. Mean serum resistin levels are not different between lean and obese subjects during gestation. Sol LeptinR levels were significantly greater in the lean subjects than in the obese group. Retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4) levels were generally higher in obese women but are slightly elevated in both lean and obese subjects by the end of gestation. CONCLUSIONS: Leptin levels increase with BMI over the course of gestation and the sol Leptin R levels are greater in the lean subjects, over the obese subjects. Adiponectin levels were greater in lean subjects and both lean and obese subjects demonstrate a decline which occurs earlier in the obese women and later in the lean subjects. Comparison Comparison were made between obese (n=9) or lean (n=9) subjects. RESULTS: Mean serum levels for E2 were similar starting at 8 weeks of gestation and increase dramatically through gestation. Levels are not significantly different between lean and obese subjects, although a small increase in late gestation is seen in the obese subjects. Mean serum levels of P are virtually identical until late gestation, when mean levels at 36 weeks in lean subjects (145 ng/ml) are greater than levels in obese women (106 ng/ml). Mean serum levels of T are identical in both lean and obese subjects. Levels are unchanged until the third trimester when both groups increase to max levels (120-130 ng/dl). Mean F levels are slightly but not significantly different and increase throughout gestation. CONCLUSIONS: Steroid (E2, P, T, F) in lean and obese pregnant women are not significantly different over the course of pregnancy. Any expected differences, such as those seen in non-pregnant women, were not observed. Irisin, a recently identified myokine, demonstrates a role on brown adipose tissue production and an effect on metabolism and may make a contribution to weight regulation. The production of irisin in muscle is activated by exercise, but some recent reports suggest that production may also occur in adipose tissue. In the present study, we have examined irisin levels in lean and obese pregnant women in the first, second and third trimester and, in a separate group of morbidly obese  Gene  In this study, we report the gene signature of the human endometrial Lgr5+ cell population using gene expression microarrays. We found several exclusive genes implicated in stem cell features and putative candidates of the SSC population in human endometrium.  Artificial 'menstrual' cycles were induced in mice using the following protocol: ovariectomized mice were treated with E2 (100ng/100ml in oil days 7-9), P4-secreting pellet (100mg/ml, s.c. day 13), E2 (5ng/100ml, days 13-15). Decidualization was induced on day 15 in one uterine horn using oil (contra-lateral horn acted as a control We previously demonstrated cycle and hormone regulated endometrial expression of the genes ALOX15B and ALOX5. These genes encode the enzymes responsible for converting the lipids arachidonic acid (AA) and docosahexanenoic acid (DHA) to the inflammation resolving products lipoxin A 4 (LXA 4 ) and resolvin D1 (RvD1), respectively. We also demonstrated dysregulated expression of these enzymes and the receptors for their products in the endometrial epithelium and stroma of women with endometriosis. We hypothesize this dysregulation contributes to the inflammatory phenotype of this disease. The objective of this study was to evaluate the synthesis of LXA 4 and RvD1 in a culture model of endometrial epithelium. METHODS: Ishikawa endometrial adenocarcinoma cells were treated with either 10 -5 M AA or carrier control for 30 minutes or 100 mg/mL DHA or carrier control for 2 hours. LXA 4 and RvD1 concentrations were determined in culture media using LC/MS and ELISA. Differences between the groups were assessed using Student's t-test. RESULTS: RvD1 concentrations were increased 7-fold, from 35 pg/mL to 269 pg/mL, after treatment with DHA compared to carrier controls (p=0.0001). LXA 4 concentrations were below the level of detection (1 pg/mL) in carrier controls as compared to 78 ng/mL after AA treatment (p<0.0001). Our data confirm an endometrial epithelial cell line is capable of producing LXA 4 and RvD1 and synthesis can be regulated by substrate availability. Based on these data, it is possible that nutritional supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids could modulate inflammation and its resolution in women with endometriosis. (1-7) is a heptapeptide formed by ACEindependent pathways, whose effects may be distinct, similar, or opposite to those of Ang II. The ovarian production of this peptide seems to be modulated by gonadotropins , but its role in ovulation induction for in vitro fertilization (IVF) is unkown. The objective of this study was to evaluate the alterations of Ang-(1-7) and angio II in plasma and folicular fluid (FF) during ovulation induction for IVF, and to assess the gene expression of Mas receptor, ACE and ACE2 in human granulosa-lutein (GL) cells. METHODS: Plasma samples were collected from 64 patients before and after controlled ovarian hyperstimulation for IVF the concentrations of Ang-(1-7) and Ang-II were measured by radioimunoassay (RIA). Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis for receptor Mas and ECA 2 in GL cells was performed. There was a significant increase in plasma Ang-(1-7) and Ang II levels after ovulation induction (p<0.0001). There was no difference between plasma and FF ang-(1-7) levels, whereas ang II was threefold more concentrated in FF than in matched plasma (p<0.0001). Ang-(1-7) showed a positive correlation with ang II in plasma after ovulation induction (r= 0.3721, p<0.0001) and in FF (r= 0.4011; p=0.001). There was no correlation between ang II and ang-(1-7) levels in plasma or FF. Messenger RNA expression of MAS and ACE2 was detected in GL cells. CONCLUSIONS: Ang-(1-7) and ang II levels are influenced by ovarian stimulation in women undergoing IFV and both peptides are highly concentrated in FF. The concomitant expression of MAS, ACE 2 and ACE mRNA in GL cells suggest a paracrine effect of SRA peptides in human ovary after gonadotropin stimulation. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the expression of Nodal and Cripto during the process of decidualization in vitro. Nodal is a member of TGF-beta superfamily whose biological activity is regulated by the co-receptor Cripto. Studies indicate that a disruption in their expression could be able to cause fail in endometrial decidualization and in the process of embryo implantation. However, there are no reports on the expression of Nodal and Cripto during the decidualization process in vitro. METHODS: Endometrial samples from 4 healthy women with regular cycles were obtained at the proliferative phase and were cultured in the presence of a decidualization cocktail consisting of 10nM estradiol, 1uM progesterone and 0.5mM cyclic AMP. After 8 days of treatment, the morphology of the cells was assessed. Total RNA was isolated and cDNA synthesized, followed by quantitative real-time PCR to evaluate the gene expression of Nodal and Cripto. Using Western Blot we assessed the protein levels of Nodal. Prolactin and IGFBP-1 gene expression were also measured, as standard markers of decidualization. Our results showed that the decidualization cocktail was able to induce a significant and persistent decrease in the gene expression of Cripto mRNA (p <0.05), whereas no changes were found in the expression levels of Nodal mRNA or protein. Nodal is a member of TGF-beta superfamily and initiate its actions through activation of type I and II activin receptors by the co-receptor Cripto, and subsequent activation of intracellular Smad proteins 2 and 3. These proteins interact with a common Smad 4 and this complex is translocated to the nucleus where it combines with DNAbinding proteins at the promoter regions of target genes. In addition, this mechanism could be inhibited by Smad 7. Currently, there are no reports about the regulation of these proteins by steroid hormones in human endometrial stromal cells. In this study, the effects of estrogen and/or progesterone on the expression of Nodal, Cripto, Smad 4 and Smad 7 were evaluated. METHODS: Endometrial samples from 4 healthy women with regular cycles were obtained at the proliferative phase and isolated stromal cells were cultured for 24 hours in the presence of estradiol, progesterone, or estradiol plus progesterone. Cells cultured in the absence of steroid hormones served as a control. Using quantitative real-time PCR we evaluated gene expression of Nodal, Cripto, Smad 4 and Smad 7 and using Western Blot we assessed the protein expression levels of Nodal. We found an increase of Cripto gene expression when cells were treated with estradiol plus progesterone (p <0.05) and an increase of Smad 4 and Smad 7 gene expression (p<0.04 and p<0.0001, respectively) when cells were treated with progesterone alone. Nodal protein expression was significantly higher when cells were cultured with estradiol plus progesterone (p<0.01). Our study showed that the proteins involved in Nodal signaling pathway are expressed by human endometrial stromal cells, and this pathway is regulated by ovarian steroid hormones.This study was supported by Brazilian National Institute of Hormones and Women´s Health and CNPq. Vitamin D (vitD) deficiency is common in reproductive-aged women. We have shown that vitD plays an important role in ovulatory dysfunction in an animal model. However, little is known about how vitD affects steroidogenesis in human granulosa cells (GCs), one of the most important functions of these cells. We hypothesized that the impact on ovarian function occurring with vitD treatment would be reflected by changes in GC steroidogenesis. In the first experiment, 8 reproductive-aged women who underwent controlled ovarian hyperstimulation followed by oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilization (IVF) were enrolled. GCs were cultured in media (control) with or without 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (vitD3; 50-100nM) for 24h after which mRNA was compared using RT-PCR for 3b-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3b-HSD), aromatase (CYP19A1), follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR), luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR), steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR), and P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc). In the second experiment, the effect of vitD3 on 3b-HSD activity was assessed in 5 additional participants by measuring timed progesterone (P4) production. P4 release by GCs in the culture media was measured with or without vitD3 when the precursor substrate pregnenolone (10 -7 M) was provided in excess. P4 levels were quantified in the culture media at 4h and 24h following the Moreover, an association with chronic low-grade inflammation has been investigated in PCOS women due to their high prevalence of IR and their increased CVD risk. Calprotectin is a heterodimer composed by two calcium-binding calgranulins (S100A8 and S100A9), mainly expressed in cells of myeloid lineage with intracellular signal transduction functions, that interacts with heparin-and heparan sulfate-glycosaminoglycans, the receptor for advanced glycation end-products, the scavenger receptor CD36 and the toll-like receptor 4. Elevated calprotectin levels in plasma and urines have been reported for many chronic inflammatory conditions including rheumatoid arthritis, allograft rejections, inflammatory bowel disease, cancer, CVD and type 2 diabetes (T2D Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) can morphologically differentiate to syncytiotrophoblat when exposed to BMP-4. However, whether these hESC-differentiated cells physiologically resemble primary term trophoblast remain poorly defined. We sought to determine whether hESCs could be differentiated into trophoblast cells, which are morphologically and physiologically similar to the 3 rd trimester placenta. METHODS: 1)We examined cellular morphological changes in cultured hESC in the presence of BMP4; 2) RT-PCR for CRH expression after culturing hESC with BMP4, BMP-4/dexamethasone, BMP-4/ progesterone, and BMP-4/dexamethasone/progesterone (placental CRH is positively regulated by glucocorticoids but inhibited by progesterone); 3) Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) used to assess association of RelB/p52 with the CRH gene. RESULTS: 1) BMP-4 morphologically induced hESCs differentiated to placental syncytiotrophoblast (Fig. 1B) . 2) DEX moderately upregulatedand and progesterone inhibited CRH. DEX combined with progesterone significantly upregulated CRH expression (Fig. 1C) . 3) Association of RelB/NF-kB2 (p52) with CRH gene is up-regulated by DEX or DEX/Progesterone, but down-regulated by progesterone alone in hESC cells in ChIP assays (Fig. 1D ).[ 1) hESCs can be differentiated to term trophoblast by BMP4. 2) CRH regulation is similar to the pattern observed in primary trphoblast. 3) Treatment with progesterone and DEX may induce the cells to act more like 3 rd trimester placental tissue. 4) These data strongly suggest they can be used for the investigation of the labor clock and other genes including key endocrine responses controlling human birth. Further work including characterizing whether CRH is positively regulated by the non-canonical NF-kB signaling pathway in these cells is in progress. The Role of Angiogenesis in the Selection of Dominant Follicles in the Mouse. Liat Fellus Alyagor, Michal Neeman, Nava Dekel. Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. INTRODUCTION: Dominant follicles (DF) acquire their selective advantage by creating a richer vasculature structure that allows them to accumulate higher concentrations of hormones. However, the molecular mechanisms that drive this differential angiogenic capacity between DF and the subordinate follicles (SF) are yet to be revealed. Atresia of the SF might be caused by the secretion of anti-angiogenic factors from the DF to the environment. Under this hypothesis, we expect to observe increased concentration of anti-angiogenic factors mRNA in the DF, and a high level of their protein in the SF. In addition, the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway is known to have an important role in regulating angiogenesis; hence Induced activation of AKT1 in endothelial cells is expected to cause an extensive angiogenic reaction. Such manipulation in mouse ovaries may result in the selection of a larger number of DF, whereas in the long term it might lead to premature ovarian failure. In this study we aim at characterizing the role of anti angiogenic factors and endothelial AKT1 on DF selection and ovarian reserve preservation. We used qRT-PCR to evaluate mRNA levels of soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (sFLT) in whole ovaries. Immunohistochemistry and ovulation test were used in ovaries of a mouse model that specifi cally express myrAKT1 in endothelial cells. RESULTS: qRT-PCR showed a signifi cant increase (p<0.05) in sFLT mRNA expression 5, 36 and 48 hours after PMSG injection. A further increase was observed 4 and 12 hours after hCG injection (P<0.005). To further study sFLT role in DF selection we plan to spatially determine mRNA and protein localization by in-situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. In myrAKT1 mice, increased expression of CD34 (a marker for young blood vessels) was observed around antral follicles as well as young, mainly secondary, follicles. However, no difference in number of ovulated oocytes was found. For further examination of the 3D ovarian vasculature of myrAKT1 mice we plan to use the three dimensional imaging of solvent cleared organs (3DISCO) method, that will enable a complete view on the entire ovary. CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the hypothesis regarding anti angiogenic factors secretion from the DF. The impact of the myrAKT1 induced extensive angiogenesis is not yet determined. Understanding the angiogenic process that motivates DF selection can help us improve assisted reproductive technologies and promote the understanding of fertility disorders. Maternal obesity is associated with decreased reproductive fi tness. Even in regularly ovulating women, obesity is linked with increased miscarriage, longer time to pregnancy, decreased lifetime fertility, and corpus luteum (CL) insuffi ciency. Molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. Animal models for obesity-related subfertility are needed for mechanistic studies but are currently unavailable. Vervet monkeys (Chlorocebus aethiops) are an Old World nonhuman primate that develops obesity and has a menstrual cycle similar to humans. METHODS: 10 adult regularly menstruating female vervets consumed a high fat, high fructose (HFHF) or control diet for 10 months. The fi rst day of low serum estradiol after the follicular peak defi ned luteal phase. Luteectomy was done, before and after dietary intervention on luteal days 7-9, and CL was confi rmed by histology. RNA was isolated and mRNA libraries were prepared and sequenced using TruSeq RNA kit for Illumina HiSeq. Sequences were identifi ed, and TopHat and Cuffl inks were used for alignment and discovery of differential gene expression with a false discovery rate less than 1 percent. Changes in mRNA transcripts levels in response to diet were tested by ANOVA in R. Changes in weight and fat mass (dual energy X-ray absorptiometry) were correlated with gene expression. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) was used to identify networks of interest. In women, the peptide hormone relaxin is secreted by the corpus luteum throughout the duration of pregnancy. Elevated maternal circulating relaxin concentrations during pregnancy are associated with an increased incidence of preterm birth. Relaxin has pronounced effects upon connective tissue architecture due to reorganization of collagen fi brils and regulation of matrix metalloproteinase expression. In prior studies using a rhesus monkey model, extensive effects of relaxin upon cervical connective tissue were observed including rearrangement and decreased content of cervical collagen and extensive fragmentation and alteration of elastic fi bers. Fibulin 5, a 66 kDa extracellular matrix glycoprotein, is expressed mainly in elastic fi ber enriched tissues and is essential for normal elastin fi ber formation and integrity. Mice lacking fi bulin 5 have irregular and fragmented elastic fi bers. The morphological appearance of the vagina of fi bulin 5 defi cient knockout mice closely resembles that of the relaxin stimulated rhesus monkey cervix. Thus, we tested the hypothesis that relaxin exerts its effects upon cervical elastic fi bers by regulating fi bulin 5 expression. METHODS: Human lower uterine segment fibroblasts, a well characterized in vitro model of human cervix, were plated in replicate wells, estrogen primed for 72 hours and incubated without or with human relaxin (10 ng/ml) for 72 hours. In addition, since in other cell types fibulin 5 expression is regulated by TGF-b, estrogen primed cells were also incubated with TGF-b (1 ng/ml) for 72 hours. Three independent experiments were performed, each in triplicate. Cell lysates were assessed for fibulin 5 protein concentrations by Western blot analysis using a specific mouse anti-human fibulin 5 monoclonal antibody. Data were assessed using nonparametric tests. RESULTS: Cellular fibulin 5 protein expression was inhibited by relaxin to 59.9% of that of control cells. [Median values for controls 7593 (densitometric units); for relaxin treated 4594] (p=0.03). In contrast, fibulin 5 protein was not altered by TGF-b. Expression in TGF-b simulated cells was 102% of control levels. CONCLUSIONS: One mechanism by which relaxin alters cervical elastin fibril arrangement may be regulation of fibulin 5 expression. Decreased cervical fibulin 5 due to increased maternal relaxin levels may contribute to the preterm birth associated with hyperrelaxinemia.  EpiVaginal tissue were colonized with 10 6 C. albicans strains for 24 hours at 37°C. Cytokine release was measured by ELISA and by flow cytometry using multiplex bead technology. RESULTS: Colonization by 10 6 C. albicans significantly increased the release of Th17-inducing cytokines IL-1b, TNFa, IL-17A, IL-6, IL-8, IL-22 and IL-23 in E6/E7 epithelial monolayers and full-thickness EpiVaginal tissue (p<0.01), while impairing production of Treg-promoting mediators including CCL20, TGFb, and human b-defensin 2 (p<0.019). The concentrations of Th17-inducing cytokines elicited from EpiVaginal tissue were 20-100 fold greater than from E6/E7 monolayers. Importantly, three mediators of preterm labor---IL-1b, TNFa, and PGE2---were dramatically induced by C. albicans (p<0.001). Cleavage of IL-1b was detected on Western blot. Mutant analysis indicated that C. albicans Int1 and proteins of the candidal prostaglandin synthesis pathway (Ole2 and Fet3) contributed to the release of IL-1b and PGE2, respectively. In E6/E7 cells colonized with C. albicans mutants deficient in surface mannosylation, candidal proteins Pmr1 and Mnn4 both contributed to IL-1b release, with the latter also contributing to TNFa production. Treatment of colonized E6/E7 cells and EpiVaginal tissue with heparin (500 or 1000 u/ml) significantly decreased the release of Th17-inducing cytokines IL-1b, IL-6, and IL-23 (p<0.001) and increased Treg-promoting mediators CCL20 and human b-defensin 2 (p<0.004). In vitro, colonization of vaginal epithelium with C. albicans skews the inflammatory response in favor of Th17-inducing cytokines at the expense of Treg-promoting mediators. Because heparin reverses these effects, vaginal heparin may be a therapeutic adjunct to prevent preterm labor in pregnant women with candidal vaginal colonization. immunologic changes may induce a state of increased susceptibility. Pregnancies complicated by sepsis and septic shock are associated with increased rates of fetal infection and preterm delivery. Previously, we reported that the haemodynamic response to endotoxaemia is altered during gestation, accompanied by changes in leukocyte infiltration and serum VEGF levels. In this study we investigated the roles of nitric oxide (NO) and progesterone (P4) in modulating this haemodynamic response. METHODS: Female CD1 mice were implanted with PA-C10 radiotelemetry device (DSI, Netherlands) into the left common carotid artery. Non-pregnant (nP) baseline recordings were taken for 48h, 7-10 days post-surgery. Mice were then timed-mated and recordings were resumed at mid-gestation and then at E15 until labour. Mice were given 10mg P4 or vehicle control s/c on consecutive days E14-E16. On E16 this was followed by intraperitoneal injection of LPS (10µg 0111:B4). Further cohorts (both pregnant and nP controls) were used for tissue harvest at 6 and 12h following LPS for the analysis of NO, cytokines and inflammatory markers. RESULTS: Whilst latency to labour after LPS was significantly increased from 21.5±2.07 to 98±11.83 h (p<0.001) after pre-treatment with P4, none of the pups survived. Vehicle-treated animals had very similar haemodynamic profiles to untreated mice following LPS (hypotensive response); where those pre-treated with P4 did not undergo the same decrease in mean arterial pressure (MAP) and systolic arterial pressure (SAP). P4 attenuated these decreases in MAP and SAP to baseline levels and the SAP maximal decrease was significantly reduced (p<0.05). NO levels in serum were significantly increased after LPS treatment at 6 and 12h (p<0.05); however this effect was significantly attenuated in pregnant mice compared to nP controls (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Giving P4 to pregnant mice did not cause further hypotensive responses to LPS, thus suggesting P4 is not responsible for the increased susceptibility to infection in pregnancy. As NO levels were attenuated in pregnant animals in endotoxaemia, taken with a hypotensive response, these data may suggest an increase in sensitisation to the vasodilator action of NO. (Usp) in pregnancy is common (~50%), and Usp are the most commonly isolated bacteria from the amniotic cavity following PTB, most women with vaginal Usp colonisation will not develop intrauterine infection / inflammation or deliver preterm. Little is known of the maternal T cell response to Usp. Recent studies suggest the quality of a T cell response to infection is determined by the production of multiple cytokines: polyfunctionality. We hypothesised that the nature of the maternal immune response to vaginal Usp colonisation is predictive of risk of infection-related PTB; specifically, a positive T cell response is indicative of primed T cells. METHODS: Maternal whole bloods for this ongoing study were collected at ~126;20 weeks' gestation from 30 consenting participants. Current Usp vaginal colonisation status was determined by self-collected vaginal swabs. Following in vitro Usp stimulation, multi-parameter flow cytometry was used to characterise T cell cytokine secretion profiles (IL-2, IFN-g, TNF-a) of participants. We assessed polyfunctional T cell responses that result in optimal and sustained protection -a more effective immune response to a pathogen than cells that produce only a single cytokine. RESULTS: 12 Usp-positive and 18 Usp-negative women have been recruited to date; pregnancy outcomes are not yet available on all women. Usp stimulation of whole blood from Usp+ women resulted in significantly higher frequency of IFN-g producing CD4 + T cells. Both Usp+ and Usp-women exhibit CD4 + T cell polyfunctionality in response to Usp stimulation, with an increased percentage of CD4 + T cells producing multiple cytokines evident in Usp+ women. Some Usp+ women exhibit an exaggerated CD4 + T cell response; the clinical implications of this response are not yet known. CONCLUSIONS: Using multi-colour flow cytometry we have shown that cytokine profiles of CD4 + T cells in maternal blood correlate with vaginal colonisation with Usp. Studies aimed at correlating the polyfunctional CD4 + T cell response with pregnancy outcome (e.g. PTB) and the quality of CD8 + and memory T cells are ongoing. ) were added to the amniotic compartment. Accumulation of IL-10, IL-6, TNF-a, MCP-1 and PGE 2 were measured in fetal and maternal conditioned media after 12 h incubation. For the sheep study, amniotic fluid and fetal and maternal blood samples were collected over 2, 6, 12, 24, and 48 h from chronically catheterised animals (116 d gestation) post IA stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 10 mg) with/without 0.875 mg OxZ or 2.8 mg TPCA-1 delivered IA. RESULTS: 16 singleton and five twin pregnancies have been recruited to date with maternal age, gravidity/parity, gestational age, sex and birthweight consistent across groups. 12 pregnancies were +INF, with Ureaplasma spp. identified in 3/12, Staph. aureus in 1/12, E. coli in 1/12 and clinical chorioamnionitis in 2/12. Of the five drugs tested, OxZ (TAK1 inhibitor) and TPCA-1 (IKKb inhibitor) were most effective at inhibiting amniotic accumulation of cytokines and PGE 2 , with inhibitory effects of 50-70%. These two drugs had greatest effect on amniotic production of PGE 2 /IL-6 in +INF membranes, and TNF-a/MCP1 in -INF membranes. In the sheep model an inhibition of PGE 2 , IL-6 and IL-8 accumulation was seen in amniotic fluid of LPS stimulated animals following IA treatment with OxZ or TPCA-1, with reduced cytokine levels in fetal plasma. CONCLUSIONS: IA administration of selected CSAIDs could be an effective treatment, in combination with antibiotics, for intrauterine inflammation and prevention of PTB. INTRODUCTION: Inflammatory pathways are important pharmacological targets for prevention of preterm birth and its associated infant mortality and morbidity. We are investigating the use of cytokine suppressive anti-inflammatory drugs (CSAIDs) to prevent preterm birth. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy, toxicity and targets of a novel CSAID, 5Z-7-oxozeaenol (OxZNL), on human primary amnion, chorion and placental cells. OxZNL is a natural antibiotic product extracted from yeast, reported to be a specific, potent and irreversible inhibitor of TAK1 kinase activity. TAK1 activation is key step in the NF-kB and MAPK signalling pathways. were isolated from placentas delivered at term by elective section. Isolated cells were stimulated with a range of bacteria: E. coli, Peptostreptococcus anearobius, Peptoniphilus asaccharolyticus or Ureaplasma parvum. Stimulated cells were treated with the TAK1 inhibitor (OxZNL) at a range of doses (0.1-10 µM). Cell culture supernatants were collected for assay of cytokines (IL-6, TNF-a and MCP-1) and prostaglandins (PGE 2 ); cell viability was determined by MTT assay. Activation of NF-kB signalling was assessed by immunostaining for phosphorylated p65/RelA subunit and expression of a luciferase reporter construct. RESULTS: Treatment of primary decidual and trophoblast cells stimulated with either Gram-ve or Gram+ve bacterial extracts with OxZNL resulted in inhibition of IL-6, TNF-a, PGE2 and MCP-1 production in a dose-dependent manner (IC50 of approx. 0.5-1.5 µM). Primary decidual cells showed no toxicity of OxZNL up to 10 µM, whilst trophoblasts showed some evidence of toxicity at >3 µM. Treatment with OxZNL (10 µM) appears to block nuclear translocation of phosphorylated-p65 at 2 h in decidual cells in response to Gram-ve stimulation. LPS-induced NF-kB activity in NF-kB reporter cells was inhibited by OxZNL at concentrations ≥0.1 µM. CONCLUSIONS: OxZNL is a potent inhibitor of placental inflammatory activation, exerting effects at concentrations as low as 0.1 µM. TAK1 is an attractive pharmacological target as its inhibition blocks pathological inflammatory activation without inhibiting constitutive NF-kB activity involved in homeostasis and tissue development. Further exploration of the use of OxZNL in preterm birth prevention is warranted. Every term or preterm delivery is an inflammatory event as uterine tissues release pro-inflammatory cytokines. IL-1b, a key cytokine, stimulates the parturient process by increasing uterine activation protein levels. IL-1b binds to two receptors, IL1RI and IL1RII. An accessory protein, IL-1RAcP, then binds to the ligand-receptor complex leading to signal transduction. Rytvela, a specific allosteric antagonist of IL-1RAcP, delays IL-1b-induced preterm delivery in mice. The accepted view is that IL-1Rs and IL-1RAcP are ubiquitously expressed. In this study we hypothesized that mRNA abundance of IL-1Rs and IL-1RAcP is constant in late gestation Long-Evans rat uteri. METHODS: Upper and lower whole uterine tissues were isolated from rats (n=5) on gestational days (GD) 17, 20, 21 and in labor. The mRNA abundance of IL-1RI, IL-1RII, IL-1RAcP, and IL-1RAcPb (found only in brain) were analyzed using RT-PCR. One-way ANOVA with Dunnett's multiple comparisons test was used to evaluate results. RESULTS: IL-1RI mRNA abundance increased 3-fold in upper and lower uterine segments over the last 5 days of pregnancy (p<0.05, 0.001). There was no change in the mRNA abundance of IL-1RII. IL-1RAcP mRNA abundance increased 2-fold in both uterine segments (p<0.01, 0.05) during late gestation, but surprisingly, IL-1RAcPb increased 4-fold in lower uterine segment (p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: These are the first data to describe increases in uterine sensitivity to IL-1b in late gestation and suggest another level of regulation for control of delivery. Importantly, the unexpected finding of increased IL-1RAcPb suggests a possible physiological association between brain and uterine activities in late gestation. Funding:Supported by Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine, CIHR, GAPPS, WCHRI. The objective of the present study was to identify the role of Chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) during infection-induced preterm labor in mice by studying the chaperone proteins Hsp90, Hsc70, Hsp60 and Hsp25. CMA is an intracellular catabolic pathway that mediates the degradation of a select subset of cytosolic proteins in lysosomes. The CMA is normal machinery in all cell types, by which cells selectively remove altered or damaged proteins. The cytosolic chaperone proteins bind to substrate proteins and direct them to the surface of the lysosomal membrane, where they interact with lysosome-associated membrane protein type 2A (LAMP2A). This leads to internalization followed by unfolding and rapid degradation by lysosomal enzymes. LAMP2A multimer disassembly is required for the binding of chaperone-substrate proteins complexes, while assembly leads to translocation of unfolded protein into lysosome. These conformational changes of LAMP2a are regulated by Hsp (heat-shock protein) 90. The purpose of this study was to examine the commonalities and differences in patterns of risk for preterm birth (PTB) by gestational age groupings (< 32 and 32-36 weeks) and by whether the birth occurred spontaneously or was medically indicated. METHODS: Included were 140,216 euploid singleton pregnancies with first and second trimester serum screening in 2009 and 2010 in California and had linked birth certificate and hospital discharge records. Logistic regression was used to compare patterns of maternal characteristics and biomarkers in PTB groups compared to term groupings using odds ratios (ORs) and their 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs). RESULTS: While the magnitude of observed risks often differed, there were numerous maternal characteristics and serum markers for which associations were observed across groupings. The most commonly observed patterns were for hypertension, previous PTB, and second trimester alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) ≥ the 95th percentile (Table 1) . Between one in four preterm births in each category had at least one of these risks present (21.3% to 51.9%). Most notably, pregnancies resulting in either early or late preterm birth who had a spontaneous or a medically indicated delivery were more than six to more than sixty-three times as likely to have preexisting or gestational diabetes compared to term pregnancies (ORs 6.3 to 63.7, 95% CIs 5.8 to 99.8). CONCLUSIONS: When maternal clinical characteristics and serum markers are considered across PTB groups similar patterns of risk emerge. Patterns suggest epidemiologic and clinical features that appear to be contributing similarly. can delay preterm labor and reduce fetal lung injury. Neonatal outcomes following this treatment have not yet been assessed. The objective of this study is to examine the neurobehavioral and cognitive outcomes of prematurely born non-human primate (NHP) infants following IAI and antenatal AZI therapy. METHODS: Catheterized pregnant rhesus macaques were assigned to control (n=2), IAI (n=2) and AZI (infection plus treatment, n=2) groups. Intra-amniotic inoculation was perfomed at ~120 days gestation with U. parvum (serovar 1; 10 5 cfu). AZI animals received treatment (25mg/kg/d; IV) for 10 days. C-section deliveries were performed at 141-152d gestation (term=168d). Infants were transferred to our Special Care Nursery where they received 24hr clinical and veterinary care, including respiratory support, IV fluids/nutrition and gavage feeding. Modified APGAR scores were recorded at 5 and 30min after delivery. Motor, sensorimotor and survival reflexes were measured 3 times/wk from birth. Morphometric data were collected regularly throughout the neonatal period and Primate Neonatal Neurobehavioral Assessments (eg. object permanence tests) were performed over a 6mth follow up period. RESULTS: Clinical care needs were higher and APGAR scores lower (2 vs 7±1) in IAI infants compared AZI animals. All infants exhibited a range of species-specific social and individual behaviors. Individual variation between animals was observed for age at criterion reached for developmental sensorimotor, motor and survival reflexes and performance in cognitive tests. AZI animals reached criterion at an earlier postnatal age for plain reach and object permanence tests, potentially due to later gestational age at birth. We have successfully expanded the maternal/fetal Ureaplasma IAI model to examine postnatal outcomes in premature NHP infants. Early observations show clear differences in levels of clinical care required and suggest cognitive and learning deficits in IAI infants compared to AZI treated animals. This novel maternal-fetal-neonatal NHP model of premature birth is unique in its ability to test therapies during pregnancy that may improve neonatal outcome. Considerably less well understood is the involvement of non-prostanoid eicosanoids in normal pregnancy and parturition. Derived from the lipoxygenase-mediated catalysis of arachidonic acid, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) have been detected in fetal membranes, decidua and myometrium obtained following the onset of labour. Levels of 12-HETE, a product of 12-lipoxygenase, are also significantly raised in the amniotic fluid and placentae of women in labour. The pro-inflammatory effects of 12-HETE suggests a role for this lipid in inflammation accompanying pregnancy. We sought to test the hypothesis that 12-HETE promotes release of proinflammatory cytokines from maternal and fetal leukocytes. METHODS: Leukocytes were isolated from cord and placental blood from healthy, pregnant women at term (38-42 weeks) following informed written consent. Cells (1 million /well) were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide in combination with either BzATP (stimulates IL-1b release), or 12-HETE. Supernatants were harvested and cytokines detected by ELISA. Immunofluorescence and western blotting were carried out to determine expression of immunoreactive 12-lipoxygenase in cord blood and placental leukocytes. A minimum of 6-12 samples were used in all experiments. RESULTS: Cord blood and placental leukocytes express the enzyme 12-LOX. Pretreatment of both cord blood (n = 6) and placental leukocytes (n = 6) with LPS and 12-HETE resulted in increased production of IL-6 compared with untreated cells (n = 12; P < 0.001) but not with 12-HETE alone (n = 12; P > 0.05). The increase in IL-6 levels was significantly greater from placental leukocytes than from cord blood leukocytes (P < 0.01). 12-HETE either with or without LPS had no effect on IL-1b release (n = 12; P > 0.05). The synergistic effects of LPS and 12-HETE on release of IL-6 provide evidence for novel inflammatory pathways operating in pregnancy. The increased release of IL-6 from placental compared with cord blood suggests further investigation of 12-HETE in the maternal circulation. been strongly associated with inflammatory diseases where they play a role in immobilising pathogens. ET formation has been described in pre-eclamptic patients. Our hypothesis was that cord and maternal blood leukocytes can be stimulated to produce ETs and may predict pregnancy complications including preterm birth. The aim of our study was to demonstrate ET formation (ETosis) by cord blood and maternal leukocytes. METHODS: Maternal and cord blood leukocytes were purified from normal pregnant women and placentae following informed consent. Cells were stimulated with range of agonists that cause ETosis. These included phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA), LPS and the calcium ionophore A23187. DNA release from leukocytes was measured using the cell-impermeable DNA-binding dye Sytox green using a fluorescence plate-based assay. Expression of the enzymes myeloperoxidase and elastase as well as ETs themeselves was tested using immunofluorescence. RESULTS: PMA, LPS and A23187 treatment led to the externalisation of DNA from cord blood leukocytes cells compared with control, untreated cells (n = 8 per treatment). This process was concentration-dependent (P< 0.01; Dunnet's test). Peripheral blood leukocytes isolated from maternal blood exhibited a similar response to agonists. There was no significant difference in sytox green fluorescence between maternal and cord blood leukoscytes. Furtehr confirmation of ETosis was provided by positive immunofluorescence for the enzymes myeloperoxidase and elastase. Extracellular DNA was observed as long-stranded meshwork emerging from single cells. Our data has shown that ETs can be reproducibly generated from activated maternal and cord blood leukocytes. Further work is needed to determine whether ETosis occurs in certain forms of preterm birth. Yoon Ha Kim, Jong Woon Kim, Hyo Jin Lee, Tae-Bok Song. Ob/Gyn, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Republic of Korea. The aim of this study was to determine the value of a gray-level histogram of the cervix as a predictor of preterm birth in women who admitted for preterm labor. METHODS: Ninety-seven women who admitted Chonnam national university for preterm labor were enrolled in this prospective study. A transvaginal ultrasonography for measurement of cervical length (CL), gray-scale histogram and cervical volume was performed when patients were admitted. Anterior and posterior cervical walls and AP (anterior and posterior) difference in MGL (mean gray level between anterior and posterior) were checked. And we analyzed the relationship between the value and preterm birth. The overall rate of preterm birth before 37 weeks was 53.6% and after 37 weeks was 46.4%, respectively. Logistic regression analysis demonstrated that not only cervix length (P=0.003; odds ratio[OR], 0.189; 95% confidence interval[CI], 0.064-0.560) but also anterior histogram (P=0.028; OR, 0.319; 95% CI, 0.115-0.884) was independent predictor of preterm birth before 37 weeks. The receiver operator characteristics (ROC) curves were analyzed for the anterior histogram, a value of 85.9 was the best cut-off value to determine the preterm birth. The areas under the ROC curve indicate that the variable provides a prognostic value for the prediction for preterm birth. To predict a preterm birth, anterior histogram had 78.8% sensitivity and 46.7% specificity. CONCLUSIONS: Gray-level histogram of the uterine cervix may predict the preterm birth in pregnant women with preterm labor. Oxytocin Activates NF-kB in Human Myometrium. Maria A Firmino Da Silva, Sung Hye Kim, Phillip R Bennett, Vasso Terzidou. Parturition research group, Imperial College London, United Kingdom. INTRODUCTION: Preterm birth accounts for the majority of neonatal morbidity and mortality and is often associated with infection and/ or inflammation. Labour is clinically characterized by myometrial contractions, but fetal membrane remodelling and cervical ripening precede it, in association with NF-kB activation and cytokine and prostaglandin synthesis in amnion. It is well established that OT stimulates uterine contractions in myometrium but it has been shown that in human amnion, OT binds to OTR, which couples with G ai , to activate MAPKs and NF-kB leading to increased PG and inflammatory chemokine/cytokine synthesis. Therefore, suggesting that OT plays a role in parturition beyond the final contractions by activating inflammation. We investigated the effect of OT on NF-kB and the expression of its downstream regulatory genes including prostaglandin synthetic enzymes and cytokines. METHODS: Term, pre-labour myometrial cells were stimulated with OT (100nM), with or without pre-treatment with OTR antagonists, atosiban (10µM) or ornitine vasotosin (OVT; 1µM). Total RNA was extracted for qPCR analysis and whole cell lysates were used for Western blots. All data sets were presented with S.E.M and p<0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. RESULTS: OT increased degradation of IkBa and phosphorylation of NF-kB p65, thereby inducing nuclear translocation of p65 and p50 (p<0.05, ANOVA). OT stimulation resulted in activation of MAPKs, ERK1/2, p38 kinase and JNK, as well as increase in mRNA expression of downstream NF-kB regulated genes such as COX-2, cPLA 2 , IL-8, and IL-6 (p<0.05, ANOVA). Pre-treatment with OTR antagonist, atosiban, attenuated the effects of OT on MAPKs and COX-2 expression, but not NF-kB. However, we found the OTR-specific antagonist, OVT, is more potent in inhibiting OT-mediated activation of NF-kB and MAPKs, and the upregulation of COX-2 and p-cPLA 2 . CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that OT not only has contractile effects in the myometrium but also has proinflammatory effects. This can play a role in the current use of tocolytics and provide new insights for the future development of tocolytics. The expressions of ECE-1 and NEP in amnion epithelial cell (HAEC) or mesenchymal cell (HAMC) with treatment of LPS and the inhibitor of TLR-4 were examined by Western blotting (WB). After intraperitoneal administration of 5 mg/ml of LPS or PBS into pregnant mice on E15, the expressions of ECE-1 and NEP in placenta were examined by WB. The expression of NEP was decreased, but that of TLR-4 was increased in CAM (P<0.05). The expression of ECE-1 in HAEC was increased, but that of NEP was decreased in HAMC by LPS (*P<0.05). The induction of ECE-1 and redutcion of NEP by LPS was completely blocked by TLR-4 inhibitor. ECE-1 was increased (*P<0.05), but NEP was decreased by LPS in murine placenta (**P<0.01). Those results suggest that LPS might have some effect on the expressions of ECE-1 and NEP in preterm birth via TLR-4 signalling. The  A failure in the postpartum involution process increases the risk of maternal morbidity. We have recently defined that a dramatic decline in the anti-apoptotic protein MCL1, plays a critical role in regulating the apoptotic and autophagic mechanisms that govern the uterine post-partum remodeling process (1). In this current study we examine the mechanisms that regulate the decline in myometrial MCL1 levels in post-partum uterus. We hypothesize that increasing oxytocin (OT) levels in the post partum period result in the decline of MCL1 levels in the post-partum uterus in an oxytocin receptor (OTR) dependent manner, allowing for the initiation of post-partum remodeling through myometrial autophagic and endometrial apoptotic events. In vitro human uterine myocytes (hTERT-HM) were treated with OT (0-100 nM) for 0-24h. To elucidate the mechanism associated with OT-action, Atosiban (ATS) an OTR antagonist was also utilized. hTERT-HM cells were pretreated with ATS (1h, 100 nM), and subsequently exposed to OT (100 nM) for additional 24h. Cells were lysed and MCL1 expression was quantitated by Western blotting. RESULTS: Increasing OT levels decrease uterine myocyte MCL1levels. Furthermore the pharmacological inhibition of OTR action by ATS (100 nM) markedly reversed the decline in MCL1 expression caused by OT. These findings demonstrate that withdrawal of uterine anti-apoptotic signaling in the postpartum period is likely mediated by increased OT-OTR action. CONCLUSIONS: We speculate that MCL1 is a critical mediator of the uterine post-partum remodeling process and in this study we have confirmed OT and it receptor act as novel regulators of MCL1. Identifying the mechanisms that govern the uterine postpartum remodeling process may provide novel targets for therapeutic intervention in women who fail to successfully complete the postpartum involution process. (1) Kyathanahalli et al, In press Endocrinology October 2013. INTRODUCTION: Acute exposure of spontaneously contracting human myometrium in vitro to cAMP agonists induces relaxation and they are being considered as potential tocolytic agents. However, we previously reported that 24 h pre-treatment of human myometrium with 8-bromo-cAMP, dibutyryl cAMP or rolipram can enhance contractility rather than suppress it. The aim is to determine how this increased contractility is related to expression of contraction-associated proteins. Myometrial tissue obtained from women undergoing caesarean section at term (TNL, n=22) were incubated in serum-free DMEM under tension for 24 h with 8-bromo-cAMP, dibutyryl cAMP, rolipram, 6-Bnz-cAMP, forskolin, or vehicle controls (con) (1 µM to 1 mM). Contractile activity (spontaneous or oxytocin-induced, 1 nM), expressed as mean integral tension (MIT), was measured in an isometric organ bath. PKA activity was determined using a Peptag PKA activity assay kit. Western blot/qPCR determined differences in expression of contraction-associated proteins. Mean ± SEM data were analysed using Wilcoxon test or ratio t-test (significance at P<0.05). RESULTS: In myometrium exposed to 8-bromo-cAMP (1 mM, 24 h), an increase in spontaneous contractility (P<0.05) was associated with increased EP2 receptor mRNA expression (55 ± 18 % vs con, n=6, P<0.05). EP2 receptor antagonist, PF04418948 (10 µM, 1 h) enhanced contractility in these tissues, but had a similar effect in vehicle controls. Rolipram (10 µM, 24 h) decreased PKARIIa (23 ± 5 % vs con, n=4, P<0.05) protein expression in tandem with increased spontaneous MIT (P<0.05). In oxytocin-stimulated tissues, dibutyryl cAMP (1 mM, 24 h) increased COX-2 (52 ± 5 % vs con, n=4, P<0.05) and decreased oxytocin receptor (11 ± 2 % vs con, n=4, P<0.05) protein expression, as well as decreased PGF synthase by 50 ± 5 % and increased 11bHSD1 by 127 ± 33 % at mRNA vs controls (P<0.05, n=6  Myometrial cell culture is an in vitro tool commonly employed for the study of myometrial activation and contractility in response to inflammation and/or infection. In order to obtain sufficient numbers of myocytes per experiment, it is often necessary to passage cells but there exists concerns that passaged myocytes are not phenotypically representative of myometrium in vivo. Therefore this study aimed to determine the effect of passage on the expression levels of key labour associated proteins and their ability to functionally respond to contractile and inflammatory stimuli. METHODS: Using Western blotting, levels of OTR, PR, GR and a-SMA were examined from proteins extracted from lower segment of myometrial tissue collected during elective caesarean section and corresponding cell cultures from passage 0 (P0) to P10. The effect of cell passage on myocyte calcium release was examined using confocal microscopy and time lapse images taken during treatment with butaprost, a PGE 2 agonist and oxytocin. Activation of NFkB and AP1 was also examined by Western blot analysis in passaged myocytes via inflammatory stimulation using LPS (serotypes 055, 0111, 0127 and 0128), TNFa and IL-1b. RESULTS: While levels of the labour-associated proteins remained consistent from P0-P10, a marked change was observed between tissue and passaged cells. PR, a-SMA and OTR were significantly decreased in passaged cells compared to original tissue levels where as GR was significantly increased in passaged cells. Butaprost and oxytocin treatment successfully induced calcium influx in passaged myocytes up to P10. Activation of NFkB and AP1 was achieved in passaged myocytes via inflammatory stimulation in a patient specific manner. TLR4 protein levels remained consistent across treatment and passage. CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that although the culture process leads to changes in the basal levels of key labour associated proteins, the biochemical phenotype of cultured myocytes and their ability to respond to inflammatory stimuli is largely retained throughout long-term passage. Our study provides important biological context for interpreting results obtained from in vitro myocyte culture systems. there are no biomarkers. One major cause of dystocia is abnormal contractility, though the cellular mechanisms are unclear. Previously, we reported in abstract form that the CFP mRNA transcriptome is altered in women with dystocia. Gene pathways analysis showed the strongest differences identified were in CFP mRNAs encoding for the small ubiquitin-related protein (SUMO-1), a DNA repair protein, and for proteins involved in its regulation (SAE1, SAE2, AKT3). We now hypothesize that CFP non-coding small RNAs (miRs) are also altered in women with dystocia. We further hypothesize these CFP miRs are part of the underlying pathology, and as such, may act as biomarkers in women destined for dystocia. A nested cohort of 6 women: 3 nulliparas in spont. labor with dystocia and C/S, 3 nulliparas in spont. labor with VagDel. Blood was obtained either at dystocia diagnosis or at 10cm cervical dilation. CFP miRNAs were isolated using a proprietary method. Those associated with dystocia were identified using the Affymetrix miRNA microarray and the data analyzed using MetaCore Bioinformatics Suite. miR targeting of mRNAs was predicted based on the RNA22 miRs Target Prediction Database. Array selected miRNAs and their target mRNAs were confirmed by rtPCR. Next, immortalized pregnant human myometrium cells (PHMI) were cultured. miRNA mimics were synthesized and used for miRNA overexpression. Cell contractility was quantitated using 3D Collagen Matrix Assay. RESULTS: 17 miRNAs were altered with dystocia-8 down regulated and 9 up regulated. One of these, miR-646, targeted an upstream regulator in the SUMO-1 pathway, AKT3. In women with dystocia (vs. control), CFP miR-646 was decreased and CFP mRNA of AKT3 increased. Overexpression of miR-646 in PHMI cells decreased expression of AKT3 and increased cell contraction. CONCLUSIONS: Differences in CFP miRNAs in women with dystocia rather than normal labor may reflect differences in myometrial cell function causing abnormal contractility. A potential mechanism is miRNA interference of target mRNA. We suggest as CFP miR-646 is taken up by its cell target as we show occurs in vitro, it up regulates AKT3 which then decreases myometrial contractility. We are now investigating longitudinal plasma samples obtained prior to the onset of labor from this same cohort. Supported by WRHR/NIH K12 HDO65260. Progesterone Antagonizes IL-1b-Induced COX-2 Expression by Inhibiting AP-1 in Human Myometrial Cells. In human parturition pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1b, activate transcription factors, including NF-kB, AP-1 and C/EBP, which lead to increased COX-2 expression. During pregnancy, progesterone (P4) is believed to exert an anti-inflammatory effect in order to maintain uterine quiescence and withdrawal of P4 leads to the onset of labour. Previously, we have reported that P4 acts via P4-induced and GRmediated MKP-1 activation to repress IL-1b-driven COX-2 expression. In this study, we have investigated which of these transcription factors are downstream of MKP-1 and account for the repression observed in human myometrial. METHODS: Primary cultures of human myometrial cells were exposed to IL-1b (5ng/mL) and P4 (10 uM), either alone or in combination for 6 h. Cells were transiently transfect cells with siRNA and RNA or protein extracted after incubations. Total RNA was converted to cDNA. Copy numbers of COX-2 and GAPDH were measured by qPCR using a Rotor-Gene. Protein extracts were analyzed by western blotting (n=4-6). Co-IP assays were performed using antibodies against the protein of interest and or pre-immune IgG and the protein-antibody complexes were subjected to western blot analysis. RESULTS: Firstly, we confirmed that GR mediated P4 repression of IL-1b-induced COX-2 mRNA resulted in similar changes at the protein level. P4 significantly reduced IL-1b-induced c-Jun phosphorylation (p<0.05), although this was not seen in MKP-1 depleted cells. We found no evidence of binding of GR and c-Jun in the nuclei of cells in co-IP experiments . In addition, P4 did not delay the IL-1b-induced nuclear transfer of c-Jun. MKP-1 knockdown did not completely reverse the effect of P4 suggesting that additional mechanisms may be involved. Although P4 did not alter c-Jun expression at transcription level, it significantly reduced this transcription factor at protein level (p<0.05). This effect was apparent after 6 and up to 24 h of P4 treatment. Conversely, overexpression of c-Jun attenuated the negative effect of P4 on IL-1b-induced COX-2 expression. CONCLUSIONS: These data show dual inhibitory effects of P4 on AP-1 activity, on the one hand attenuating the IL-1b-induced c-Jun phosphorylation via a GR-mediated increase in MKP-1 activity and on the other through a reduction in c-Jun protein levels. Previously we demonstrated that PGF2a stimulates COX-2 and IL-6 mRNA and protein abundance in HMSMC via its receptor, PTGFR, and that IL-1B stimulates PTGFR, COX-2 and IL-6 mRNA and protein abundance in HMSMC. We hypothesized that IL-1B elevation of PTGFR would correspondingly increase the ability of PGF2a to stimulate UAPs. METHODS: HMSMC were treated for 24h with DMEM only, followed by 6h PGF2a (10 -7 to 10 -5 M) and extracted for mRNA abundance determination by real-time RT-PCR. A second set of cells was treated for 24h with IL-1B (5 ng/mL) then washed and treated for another 6h with IL-1B alone or with PGF2a (10 -7 to 10 -5 M). N=3 patients, ANOVA followed by LSD post hoc testing (p≤0.05). RESULTS: 6h of PGF2a treatment (alone) increased relative mRNA abundance for COX-2 by 8.1-fold (p<0.05) and IL-6 by 12.4-fold (p<0.01). Cells treated with 24h IL-1b followed by 6h DMEM increased relative mRNA abundance for PTGFR by 6.2-fold, COX-2 by 273-fold (p<0.01), and IL-6 by 1368-fold (p<0.05). IL-1b treatment for 24h followed by 6h of PGF2a treatment increased COX-2 mRNA abundance synergistically 414-fold and increased IL-6 mRNA abundance by 1988fold. Washing cells pretreated with 1L-1b for 24h then treating again with IL-1b for 6h had no further effect upon COX-2 mRNA abundance but when co-incubated for 6h with PGF2a and IL-1b, drove COX-2 mRNA to 887-fold (p<0.01). An additional 6h of IL-1b treatment increased IL-6 mRNA further, from 1368 to 1908-fold, while an additional 6h of IL-1b plus PGF2a increased IL-6 mRNA by 5957-fold (p<0.02). CONCLUSIONS: Pretreatment of HMSMC with IL-1B increases PTGFR, and likely intracellular signaling intermediates, such that subsequent PGF2a stimulates extremely large synergistic increases in COX-2 and IL-6 mRNA abundance. These data suggest that in vivo preconditioning with IL-1B increases myometrial responsiveness to PGF2a tremendously thereby promoting a feed-forward amplification that activates the uterus for labour. Acknowledgements: March of Dimes, CIHR, Global Alliance for the Prevention of Prematurity and Stillbirth, an initiative of Seattle Children's.  Lappas. Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, Australia. risk factor for brain injury in neonates. Silibinin is a polyphenolic extract obtained from milk thistle and in non-gestational tissues, exerts potent antiinflammatory activities. The aims of this study were to determine the effect of silibinin on pro-inflammatory mediators in (i) human fetal membranes and myometrium treated with bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-1b, and (ii) in preterm fetal membranes with active infection. Further, the effect of silibinin in a mouse model of infection-induced preterm birth was assessed for markers of inflammation and brain injury. METHODS: Human fetal membranes and myometrium (tissue explants and primary cells) were treated with 200 µM silibinin in the presence or absence of 10 µg/ml LPS or 1 ng/ml IL-1b. Endpoint analysis was assessed by qRT-PCR and ELISAs. C57BL/6 mice were injected with 70 mg/kg silibinin with or without 50 µg LPS on day 15.5. Fetal brains were collected after 6 h. In fetal membranes and myometrium, silibinin significantly decreased LPS-stimulated expression of IL-6 and IL-8, COX-2, and prostaglandins PGE 2 and PGF 2a . In primary amnion and myometrial cells, silibinin also decreased IL-1b-induced MMP-9 expression. Preterm fetal membranes with active infection treated with silibinin showed a decrease in IL-6, IL-8 and MMP-9 expression. Fetal brains from mice treated with silibinin showed a significant decrease in LPS-induced expression of IL-8 and a marker of brain injury, ninjurin. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that silibinin can reduce infection and inflammation-induced pro-labour mediators in human fetal membranes and myometrium. Further, silibinin decreases cytokine expression in preterm fetal membranes with active infection. Excitingly, the in vivo results indicate a protective effect of silibinin on infectioninduced brain injury in a mouse model of preterm birth. Collectively, silibinin may present a novel therapeutic to reduce the unacceptably high rates of neonatal mortality and morbidity associated with infectioninduced preterm birth. Human fetal membranes express 11b-HSD1 which regenerates cortisol from biologically inactive cortisone, and in turn cortisol induces 11b-HSD1 expression thus forming a feed-forward loop of cortisol regeneration towards the end of gestation. The physiological impact of this feed-forward loop remains largely unknown. Rupture of the fetal membranes is an indispensable process of labor onset. The strength of fetal membranes are maintained by collagens (COL) upon cross-linking by lysyl oxidase (LOX). We hypothesize that this feed-forward loop may be involved in collagen production in the fetal membranes thereby participating in the rupture of membranes. METHODS: Cultured primary human amnion fibroblasts were used. LOX and COL I, III mRNA and protein levels were examined after treatment with cortisol +/-RU486, an antagonist of glucocorticoid receptor (GR), or cortisone +/-carbenoxolone (CBX), an inhibitor of 11b-HSD1. Since cortisol is known to increase prostaglandin E2 production in the amnion fibroblasts, the role of PGE2 in the effect of cortisol was also examined. RESULTS: Both cortisol (0.01-1mM) and cortisone (5-50 mM) increased11b-HSD1 mRNA and protein levels, and decreased LOX and COL I,III mRNA and protein levels in a dose-dependent manner, which could be attenuated by RU486 (1 mM) and CBX (1 mM) respectively, suggesting the participation of GR and 11b-HSD1. PGE2 (0.001-10 mM) decreased LOX but not COL I,III levels in a concentration-dependent manner. PGE2 receptor antagonists (EP1 SC-19220; EP2 and EP3 AH6809, 10 mM) but not EP4 antagonist (L-161982, 10 mM) could block the effect of PGE2 on LOX, but none of them could block the effect of cortisol on LOX and COL. As PGE2 receptors are coupled with either PKA or PKC activation, the effects of inhibition of these pathways were also examined. Both adenylate cyclase inhibitor SQ 22536 (5 mM) and PKC inhibitor RO-31-8220 (1 mM) could partially attenuate the effect of PGE2 on LOX, but not the effect of cortisol on LOX and COL I, III. CONCLUSIONS: Cortisol regenerated by 11b-HSD1 in the fetal membranes may participate in the rupture of membranes via downregulation of LOX and COL expression, an effect appears to be mediated by GR but independent of PGE2. Progesterone INTRODUCTION: FKBP51, a progesterone (P4) and glucocorticoid induced immunophilin co-chaperone, inhibits progesterone and glucocorticoid receptor (PR and GR) transcription. In humans, unchanging P4 expression suggests that labor is initiated by "functional progesterone withdrawal (FPW)" reflecting reduced PR expression and/or activity. Reports that chronic glucocorticoid treatment triggers preterm birth suggests possible GR mediation of FPW. Prior immunostaining of gestational age-matched pre-vs. post-labor decidua found: 1) decidual cells (DCs) from the latter contain significantly lower nuclear PR levels but no change in GR levels; 2) adjacent pre-and post-labor interstitial trophoblasts (IT) were devoid of PR, but contain similarly elevated GR levels. We posited that labor is associated with elevated term DC FKBP51 and that it is regulated by P4 and glucocorticoids. METHODS: Decidua basalis and parietalis were immunostained for FKBP51 and the cytoplasmic DC and IT markers, vimentin and cytokeratin. FKBP51 HSCORES were then compared in DCs and IT of gestational age-matched pre-vs. post-labor decidual sections. Cultured term DCs (n=3) were incubated with control, 10 -8 M estradiol (E2) or E2 + 10 -7 M Org2058, a pure progestin, or dexamethasone (DEX), a pure glucocorticoid. Immunoblotting assessed FKBP51 protein levels in nuclear extracts. RESULTS: FKBP51 HSCORES are significantly higher in DC nuclei of post-vs. pre-labor decidua basalis and parietalis (p<0.05), but immunoreactive FKBP51 is absent in ITs. In cultured DCs, immunoblotting of nuclear extracts indicates that FKBP51 is not induced by E2. Compared with E2, FKBP51 is primarily induced by Dex (p<0.008) with minimal induction by Org2058 (p<0.04). Since labor is also associated with decreased progesterone receptor expression, our findings may provide an explanation for stress-induced preterm birth and the correlation of fetal hypothalamic-pituitary axis maturation and term labor. Supported by the MOD Prematurity Research Center Ohio Collaborative grant. Human Myometrial N-Terminal Isoforms of the Large-Conductance Ca 2+ -Activated K + Channel Are Differentially Modulated by the Auxiliary b1-Subunit. Ramon A Lorca, 1,2 Meghan K Pillai, 1 Susan J Stamnes, 2 Sarah K England.  In the absence of b1, all isoforms had similar single-channel conductances and voltage-dependent activation. Interestingly, whereas the MSSN voltage-activation curve was not modulated by b1, the b1-subunit induced a significant leftward shift of the voltage-activation curve in both the MDAL and MANG isoform, at 10 mM and 100 mM Ca 2+ , with MDAL being of larger magnitude. Despite the difference in voltage-activation, the b1-subunit increased the open dwell-times and decreased closed dwelltimes of MANG and MDAL in a similar manner, however, the b1-induced increase in burst duration in MDAL was reduced in MANG, which may explain the differences in voltage-activation. Furthermore, we observed that the related b2-subunit induced a comparable leftward shift in the voltage-activation curves of both MANG and MDAL isoforms, indicating that the differential modulation of these isoforms is specific for b1. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the relative expression of the N-terminal isoforms fine-tunes BK Ca channel activity by modifying b1subunit modulation and highlight a novel mechanism of BK Ca regulation in myometrial smooth muscle. ),but also cell structure/signalling (OBSL1, SHC1;P=4x10 -4 ) and survival (IER3;P=0.04) pathways. Myometrial analysis showed highly connected pathways in cell adhesion/structure (e.g. DST, OBSL1;P=6.1x10 -3 ), inflammation (IL6, IRAK3;P=1.2x10 -2 ),and survival (BCL3;P=1.4x10 -2 ). Despite strong similarities in pathways activated, distinct highly interactive gene clusters were identified in the tissues. Key gene clusters specific to the decidua included: IL2RB (interleukin2 receptor), BMP2 (TGFb superfamily), SOCS3 (cytokine suppressor) and TLR4 (inflammation). Specific to the myometrium were: SOCS2, SMAD2 (TGFb signalling), RICTOR (mTOR signalling), FLT1 (VEGF receptor) and TLR2. IL6 signalling had a high number of regulatory interactions in both tissues. We have shown that inflammatory gene expression is highly upregulated with labor in decidua and myometrium and identified key genes with highly regulatory interactions. Common pathways suggest intercommunication between the tissues;however distinct clusters of network interactions demonstrate unique regulatory drivers in each tissue. We have developed a systems model of labor with an immune prominence,supporting that inflammatory processes play a substantial role in activating term labor. This supports the future therapeutic potential of a multi-targeted approach to suppress uterine inflammation 1. Weiner C.P. et al., Am J Obs Gyn, 2010.202:p474 e1-20. -19 ) is a small protein that regulates calcium signal transduction by binding calmodulin. We examined how changes in PCP4 expression affected contractility of human myometrial smooth muscle cells to test aspects of the hypothesis that a loss of PCP4 could potentiate enzymatic phosphorylation of myosin light chains and promote cell contractility. METHODS: PCP4 mRNA and protein expression were analyzed by Q-rtPCR and Western blot. Indirect immunofluorescence was performed to determine the localization of PCP4 in human myometrium. Collagen gel contraction was assessed in immortalized human myometrial smooth muscle cells that were modified so as to express PCP4 at levels consistent with primary cultures. The activities of myosin light chain kinase and rho kinase were determined by measuring phosphorylation of myosin light chains after stimulation with oxytocin and lysophosphatidic acid, respectively. Statistical differences between groups were compared by Student's t-Test. The percent change in gel contraction was compared by One-way ANOVA followed by the appropriate posttest. A p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: PCP4 expression was decreased in myometrium of spontaneous preterm labor women (positive histological chorioamnionitis, negative cultures). PCP4 localized primarily to the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and had little affect on cytosolic calcium flux in cells stimulated with oxytocin. Basal, oxytocin-, and lysophosphatidic acid-induced collagen contraction was significantly inhibited in cells expressing PCP4, which coincided with the attenuation of myosin light chain phosphorylation. CONCLUSIONS: PCP4 can modulate in vitro contraction of myometrial smooth muscle cells. This effect could be due to its ability to block the phosphorylation of myosin light chains by myosin light chain kinase and/ or rho kinase. These data suggest that repression of PCP4 could enhance contractility of stimulated myometrial smooth muscle cells. Moreover, decreased expression in preterm labor myometrium, but not term labYor, implies that PCP4 could play a role in pathologic labor. Cervical Ultrasonic Attenuation and Cervical Length in Pregnancy. Barbara Our objective was to determine whether ultrasonic attenuation and cervical length (CL) were associated with preterm birth risk. A sample of 67 pregnant African American women was recruited for the study. Women agreed to undergo 5 transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS) examinations for cervical ultrasonic attenuation and CL at 20, 24, 28, 32, 36 weeks gestation (GA). Raw ultrasonic data from the cervix and a reference phantom were obtained from a z.one ultrasound system. Ultrasonic data were processed offline using a spectral log difference Matlab® program. Descriptive statistics, means plots over time, and t tests were conducted among groups and time points. RESULTS: Women were African American, multi-gravid and 32% had a history of at least one prior preterm birth. Mean GA at delivery was 39 (± 1) weeks for the term group, 35 (± 1) weeks for the medical indicated preterm group, and 29 (± 6) weeks for the spontaneous preterm group. 239 TVUS were conducted for attenuation and cervical length. Attenuation was significantly lower in the SPTB group at 20 weeks than the full term group. Compared to the SPTB group, the fullterm group displayed consistent a attenuation value with small error. Attenuation risk of SPTB: Specificity = 71.4%, Sensitivity = 62.9% PPV = 91.7% & NPV = 27.8%. None of the women in the study had a short cervix at 20-26 weeks. Attenuation changed 6-8 weeks before CL. Cervical attenuation is an early indicator of SPTB and detected tissue changes in the cervix 6-8 weeks before cervical shortening. . The objective of this study is to evaluate the role of nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (nrf2), in the cell, and its downstream products hemeoxygenase (HO-1) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARg) in fetal membranes. METHODS: Normal fetal membranes (n= 10) collected at term were placed in an organ explant system and primary amnion epithelial cells were treated with water soluble cigarette smoke extract (wsCSE), an OS inducer (1:10). Reactive oxygen species (ROS) production was monitored using 2'7'-dichlorodihydro-fluorescein. Expression of nrf2 was enhanced with 10 mM/ml sulforaphane (SFN, 10 mM/ml), a natural component of cruciferous vegetables. Western blot was used to study expression changes of nrf2 and PPARg. HO-1 and TNF-a, a marker of inflammation, was quantified by ELISA. RESULTS: ROS in wsCSE-exposed amnion cells increased rapidly and significantly (p<0.01) at all-time points. wsCSE treatment of fetal membranes increased nrf2 expression (P < 0.01), HO-1 production (p = 0.007), decreased PPARg (p < 0.05) and increased TNF-a (p < 0.05) compared to untreated controls. SFN treatment alone had minimal effect on fetal membrane nrf2, HO-1, PPARg and TNF-a. However, co-stimulation of wsCSE and SFN further enhanced nrf2 and PPARg expression and reduced TNF-a compared to wsCSE alone (all p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: ROS enhances nrf2 and HO-1 expression; however, its quantities are not sufficient to contain OS and inflammation. We demonstrate that SFN treatment augments nrf2 and subsequent increases in HO-1 and PPARg that can exert antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Future OS and inflammation associated PTB prevention strategies should consider the enhancement of nrf2 and its effects on pregnancy outcome. Plasma Oxygenase-1 (HO-1) may have an important role in controlling inflammation at the maternal-fetal interface through its anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. The role of this enzyme in PTB, however, is unclear. We hypothesized that PTB (with and without pPROM) would be associated with increased HO-1 concentrations in maternal plasma and amniotic fluid. METHODS: Maternal plasma and amniotic fluid samples from Caucasian and African-American women were collected at the diagnosis of spontaneous preterm labor (with or without pPROM), or term labor. Samples were assayed for HO-1 by ELISA. RESULTS: Plasma concentrations of HO-1 were significantly higher in women with PTB when compared to term controls (P < 0.001). Cases with pPROM had slightly higher plasma concentrations of HO-1 than cases without pPROM (P = 0.035). A similar trend was found for amniotic fluid where cases with and without pPROM had higher concentrations of HO-1 (P < 0.001). However, levels did not differ between PTB cases with and without pPROM (P=0.631). HO-1 levels were also significantly impacted by maternal race. Term African-Americans had significantly higher plasma (P < 0.001; figure) , but tended to have lower amniotic fluid (P = 0.085), HO-1 concentrations than Caucasian controls. CONCLUSIONS: Plasma and amniotic fluid concentrations of HO-1 are increased in PTB with and without intact membranes. This suggests that HO-1 may be a sensitive biomarker for sub-clinical inflammation or oxidative stress that underlies this common pregnancy complication. Observed racial differences in amniotic fluid and plasma HO-1 concentrations suggests that HO-1 or oxidative stress may play a role in increased risk for PTB in African-American women. To modulate growth factor exposure, cells were cultured in media supplemented with low (0.5%) or high (5%) charcoal-stripped FCS. Cells were then exposed to P4 (100 nM or vehicle) in the presence and absence of interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß; 25 pg/mL). After various times, total RNA and protein lysates were prepared and subjected to qRT-PCR and immunoblot analysis respectively to measure IL-8 expression, which increases in myometrial cells in response to IL-1ß. RESULTS: IL-1ß increased IL-8 expression in a dose dependent manner. The amount of FCS in the media had no effect on the capacity for P4 via PR-B to inhibit IL-1ß-induced IL-8 expression. PR-A inhibited PR-B-mediated repression of IL-1ß-induced IL-8 expression only in cells cultured in 5% FCS; it had no effect in cells cultured in media containing 0.5% FCS. Similar effects of FCS on the repressive activity of PR-A were detected using a P4-responsive luciferase reporter assay. CONCLUSIONS: PR-A inhibition of PR-B is thought to be a key trigger for human parturition by inducing functional P4 withdrawal. Our data show that the repressive activity of PR-A can be inhibited in myometrial cells. Further studies to elucidate the mechanism of FCS effects on PR-A activity may reveal novel strategies to prevent preterm birth by suppressing PR-A-mediated functional P4 withdrawal.  is triggered culminating in premature activation of labour. We have shown that intrauterine injection of a TLR4-specific LPS (E. coli: serotype O111) induces AP-1 activation via JNK, causing PTL 7h post-injection (p.i.). In these animals, NF-kB is not activated. In contrast, TLR4KO mice show hypo-responsiveness to LPS treatment delivering around 42h p.i. The aim of this study was to identify AP-1 target genes in a murine model of inflammation-induced PTL. METHODS: Myometrial samples (n≥4) were collected at 1, 2, 4 and 6h p.i. or during labour from wild type (wt) mice following intrauterine injection of 20µg LPS or PBS on gestation day 16. Samples were collected from TLR4KO mice treated with LPS or PBS at 1, 2, 4, 6, 12 and 18h p.i. qPCR was used to examine expression levels of labour-associated genes containing AP-1 binding sites within the promoter. Protein levels were analysed by Western Blotting. RESULTS: COX-2 mRNA levels were increased in wt mice myometrium following LPS injection at 1 (p<0.05), 4 and 6h (p<0.001) compared to control animals. mRNA levels of inflammatory interleukins IL-1b, IL-6 and IL-8, as well as IL-10 were significantly increased in LPS treated mice. Similar responses were not exhibited by LPS treated TLR4KO mice where long-term AP-1 activation was not detected. IL-1b and Cx43 protein levels were significantly increased in response to LPS treatment. LPS treated wt mice showed increased levels of both the inactive precursor pro-IL-1b (31 kDa, p<0.001) and a 28 kDa product (p<0.05), resulting from post-translation processing of pro-IL-1b by caspase-1. Processing of IL-1b was abrogated in TLR4KO mice, indicating a key role for TLR4 in inflammasome-mediated IL-1b activation. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show TLR4-mediated AP-1 activation leads to subsequent expression of key inflammatory and contractionassociated genes thus highlighting AP-1 as a rational target for treatment strategies designed to prevent infection/inflammation-induced PTL. or ii) maternal IV AZ or SOLI and a single IA AZ or SOLI injection (1.4 mg/kg AZ; 0.14 mg/kg SOLI); or iii) single IV and IA vehicle injections. Animals were euthanized at 125 d GA. Treatment efficacy was assessed by AF UP culture and qPCR. Fetal lung, skin and membrane cytokine mRNA (IL-1b, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-a and MCP-2) expression was measured with qPCR. RESULTS: AF from all control animals contained 10 5 -10 6 CCU UP. AF from all AZ or SOLI-treated animals (IV or IV + IA) were negative for viable UP, but positive for UP DNA. There was no significant difference in fetal lung or membrane cytokine/chemokine expression between treatment and control group. Small, but significant (p<0.05) reductions in fetal skin IL-6 (mean ± SD, relative units; 0.38 ± 0.23 vs 1.02 ± 0.22) and MCP-2 (0.30 ± 0.31 vs 1.80 ± 2.37) mRNA expression were detected in the IV SOLI only group compared to control. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with either IV or IV + IA AZ or SOLI successfully cleared intrauterine UP infection without affecting fetal inflammation. After 5 d of treatment, there was no benefit to combined IV and IA administration of either agent, relative to IV alone. Further studies to explore the clinical efficacy of AZ or SOLI to treat intrauterine UP infection are warranted. Analysis of the amnion chamber indicated that thrombin addition to the decidual side of FM resulted in a 54% increase in IL6 levels and a 63% decrease in SerpinE1. Analysis of cytokine production by the decidual and amnion chambers during thrombin induced FM weakening indicate marked increases in GM-CSF in the decidual compartment and significant decreases in SerpinE1 in both compartments implicating these agents in pathways of thrombin-induced fetal membrane rupture. The Stillbirths with fetal growth restriction (FGR) exhibit a specific placental morphological phenotype. The significance of this phenotype is uncertain; it is not known whether the magnitude of changes in FGR is causally related to stillbirth or whether they develop as a postmortem artefact. We aimed to determine whether placental morphology is altered in FGR stillbirths compared to FGR live births and whether the phenotype in stillbirth results from cessation of uterine blood flow. METHODS: Human placental morphology was quantitatively assessed in wax-embedded placental samples from FGR stillbirth (n=13) and FGR live births (n=13), by screening for specific antigenic markers and features: ki67 (proliferation), CD31 (vessels), CD45 (leukocytes), -cytokeratin-7 (trophoblast) and syncytial nuclear aggregates. Image analysis was carried out on 10 images per tissue section. In addition, the effects of ex vivo maternal-side perfusion in the presence of static fetal blood in ligated placental cotyledons was assessed in FGR (n=5) and normal human placentas (n=7). Morphometry in pre-and post-perfusion samples was using the same panel of markers was assessed to investigate the effects of absent fetal blood flow. CONCLUSIONS: Race appears to be independently associated with the severity of GDM and glycemic control in pregnancy. Fasting Blood Glucose on the Glucose We sought to determine if this remains true regardless of the method used to diagnose gestational diabetes (GDM). Retrospective cohort study of women with GDM who were diagnosed by a 1-step method (75g 2 hr GTT) or a 2-step method (1 hr 50g glucose challenge test and a 3 hr 100g GTT) from 1/2008-10/2012. Exclusions: multiple gestation, diagnosed <20 weeks, described as biracial/other, and/or a FBG ≥126mg/dl. After adjusting for age, body mass index, and race, regression analyses were performed. RESULTS: Of 1,384 patients with GDM, 246 were excluded, leaving 1,138 patients for analysis. Figure 1 illustrates a significant linear association between average BG during pregnancy and FBG on GTT; for every 1 unit increase in FBG, average BG of pregnancy increased by 0.27 mg/dl (p<0.0001). Figure 2 shows a significant linear association between GA at delivery and FBG on GTT; for every 1 unit increase in FBG, the GA at delivery decreased by 0.01 weeks (p=0.0025). There was a significant linear association between birth weight (BW) % and FBG on GTT; for every 1 unit increase in FBG, BW % increased by 0.26 units (p=0.0014). There were no significant associations between BW or rate of large for gestational age and FBG. For every 1 unit increase in FBG, the risk of medical therapy increased by 4% (p<0.001). Increasing FBG on a GTT has a significant association with the degree of glycemic control, timing of delivery, and requirement for hypoglycemic agents in pregnancies complicated by GDM, regardless of the diagnostic method used.  We did an equivalence study of 24 patients at term monitored simultaneously with a diffuse electrode array and a patch (Monica AN25). Both electrode systems were attached to identical electronic processors. Only the data from the diffuse array were available to clinicians. For analysis the two FHR tracings were synchronized to within 0.25 seconds and then evaluated in serial 0.25-second intervals. We analyzed the first 30 min of simultaneous monitoring from labor Stage 1 and the 30 min of Stage 2 ending 15 min prior to delivery. Reliability was assessed by measuring the success rate (the proportion of intervals in which a FHR signal was present), and the positive percent agreement (PPA-the percent of intervals in which the patch-derived FHR was within 10% of the AN24). Accuracy (the degree of agreement between the two methods) was assessed by determining the root mean square error (RMSE) of the Bland-Altman regression line. Data were analyzed before and after stratification by labor stage and maternal BMI group (<29, 29-34.9, ≥35 kg/m2). The success rates of both the multiple electrode array and the patch were nearly identical (98.5±1.9 vs 98.4±1.9%, respectively; P=0.879). The overall PPA of the patch electrode with the standard array was 94.7±3.8%. The patch electrode was as accurate as the standard array. The overall RMSE was 5.5±2.4 bpm. Mean overall bias was near zero (-0.004±0.416 bpm). No measurements were affected by labor stage or BMI. CONCLUSIONS: Use of a simple electrode patch for intrapartum FHR monitoring is feasible, and causes no loss of signal quality. The high PPA, small RMSE and bias indicate the patch is equivalent in performance to the standard array of single electrodes, and is unaffected by labor stage or maternal BMI. Hill, Kathryn Reed. OB/GYN, Univ. Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. INTRODUCTION: Thresholds for cesarean section in pregnancies affected by intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) vary between physicians and practice settings. We examined the success rate for vaginal delivery in patients with IUGR undergoing a trial of labor. We carried out a retrospective cohort study at a University Hospital with a low (20%) cesarean section rate. We specifically assessed pregnancies that had been identified by ultrasound to be affected by IUGR (intrauterine growth restriction), with or without fetal umbilical artery absent end diastolic flow (AEDF) or reversed end diastolic flow (REDF). METHODS: Ultrasound reports in which a patient received a diagnosis of IUGR, AEDF or REDF between the years 2007 and 2013 were identified. Patient data was analyzed in relation to patient characteristics, spontaneous or induced labor, type of delivery and indication for delivery. RESULTS: There were 77 patients with singleton pregnancies. 2 patients presented with stillbirth and were delivered via induction of labor, leaving 75 patients for analysis. Of the 75 patients, 20 (26.7%) presented with spontaneous labor or rupture of membranes. 14 (70%) of these patients went on to deliver vaginally and 6 (30%) had cesarean deliveries. The indication for cesarean delivery in this group was for non-reassuring fetal status in 2 of the 6 cases. 26 (34.7%) patients underwent an induction of labor. 20 (76.9%) of these went on to deliver vaginally. There were 6 (23.1%) cesarean deliveries in this group. All patients requiring cesarean delivery had non-reassuring fetal status listed as a diagnosis on the operative report. . We sought to determine the risk of preterm birth in women with uterine anomalies, and the clinical utility of serial transvaginal ultrasonography of the cervix for prediction of risk. We performed a retrospective cohort study of women with uterine anomaly referred to two UK tertiary referral centres over a ten-year period (2001 and 2011). Women underwent serial transvaginal cervical length assessment between 14 and 26 weeks' of gestation. Elective and ultrasound-indicated cervical cerclages were inserted based on history and/or a short cervix (defined as ≤25 mm before 24 weeks). The risk of SPTB (≤34 and ≤37 weeks) was calculated. RESULTS: Ninety-one women with uterine anomalies were identified. The SPTB rate ≤34 and ≤ 37 weeks for the cohort (n=91) was 15% and 17%, respectively. Primigravid women (n=59) had a SPTB rate ≤34 and ≤37 weeks of 6% and 22%, respectively and those with a prior SPTB/ second trimester loss (n=26) had a SPTB rate ≤34 and ≤37 weeks of 27% and 15%, respectively. There was no association between type of anomaly and risk of SPTB. Nine women received a cervical cerclage. Six were placed electively; only three of these had had a previous preterm delivery. 3 women had ultrasound-indicated cerclage, at 19, 23 and 23 weeks, and they all delivered before 34 weeks. Despite intervention in this cohort, the risk of SPTB (≤37 weeks) doubled in the presence of a history of a previous SPTB/second trimester loss; RR 2.37 (95% CI 1.09-5.14, p=0.03). The risk of SPTB birth associated with uterine anomaly is high, especially in those with a history of preterm delivery or second trimester loss. The risk remains high even in women with a previous term delivery. However, serial measurement of cervical length fails to predict SPTB in the majority of cases, and ultrasound-indicated cerclage appears not to reduce the risk. The mechanism of SPTB in women with uterine anomaly is unlikely to be primarily a cervical problem. INTRODUCTION: Pregnancy after bariatric surgery is associated with perinatal risks. A healthy lifestyle together with intensive followup is recommended, but has not been evaluated in prospective studies. We therefore investigated the effect of close monitoring of lifestyle and vitamin levels on pregnancy outcomes in women with bariatric surgery. METHODS: A multicenter prospective controlled study was conducted. Pregnant women with a history of bariatric surgery presenting with a singleton pregnancy were included. A 7-day dietary record and a Kaiser questionnaire on PA were collected during the 1st and 2nd pregnancy trimester. After evaluation, written lifestyle advice was offered. Vitamin levels were monitored in each pregnany trimester and substituted if necessary. Women not wanting to participate as well as contemporary controls identified from the electronic database served as controls. RESULTS: Comparison between the study (N=49) and control (N=23) group showed a baseline difference for age. Women in the study group were slightly older (29.9±4.7 vs 27.2 ± 4.5, p=0.023). We found significantly less preterm deliveries (10.2% vs 39.1%, p=0.04) and admissions to the maternal intensive care unit (6.5% vs 43.5%, p<0.001) in the study group compared to the control group. Depleted levels of most water and fat-soluble vitamins were found in the study group. Especially levels of vitamin K-1 (T1: 88%, T2: 59%, T3: 50%), A (T1: 19%, T2: 40%, T3: 58%) and B-12 (T1: 35%, T2: 45%, T3:41%) were low. Almost 90% took supplements in the 1 st and 2 nd trimester and 81.6% in the 3 rd trimester. Vitamin levels were not screened routinely in the control group. However, most of the women took a vitamin supplement during pregnancy, indicating low vitamin levels. Babies in the study group had significantly higher birth weights (3214.1±553.9 kg vs 2778.7±604.6 kg, p=0.004) and low birth weight <2500g was less frequent (4.1% vs 26.1%, p=0.006). Other pregnancy outcomes were comparable between groups. Close monitoring and lifestyle coaching in pregnancies after bariatric surgery improves perinatal outcomes and should be advised routinely. CONCLUSIONS: Teratogen information services are providing important educational resources for both patients and providers. As the majority of calls concern nonprescription drugs and vaccines, these data provide insight into a lack of education on these subjects that should be addressed during prenatal care. INTRODUCTION: Current knowledge and guidelines concerning screening and treating of asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) in pregnancy are based on trials performed in the 60s, 70s and 80s. The outdated evidence on the effects of ASB during pregnancy and possible negative effects of antibiotics (ORACLE II followup) warrants new studies of ASB screening and treatment strategies in pregnancy. We documented maternal and neonatal outcomes of ASB in pregnancy, with and without treatment, in a multicenter trial. We screened women with a singleton pregnancy for the presence of ASB between 16-22 weeks of gestation using a urine dipslide. Consenting screen positive women were randomly assigned to either 200mg nitrofurantoin or placebo for 5 days (ASB trial, NTR 3068). Primary outcome was a composite of pyelonephritis and/or preterm birth (PTB) <34 weeks of gestation. The anticipated sample size was 220 women, but after 85 randomizations an independent data and safety monitoring committee advised to halt enrollment for futility. Outcomes of randomized and non-randomized patients were collected. Screen positive women who declined randomization did not routinely receive antibiotics; their outcomes were grouped with those of women receiving placebo. RESULTS: Between October 2011 and August 2013, 5,500 women were screened. ASB was present in 5%; 14% of the dipslides were contaminated and not used in this analysis. We randomly allocated 41 women to nitrofurantoin and 44 to placebo, 160 screen positive women declined randomization. So far, outcomes in 70% of the women have been collected. Pyelonephritis and/or PTB <34 weeks occurred in 2.7% of the nitrofurantoin group, in 2.4% of the untreated ASB positives and 2.1% in the ASB negative group. Preterm birth before 37 weeks occurred in 5.4% of the nitrofurantoin group, 5.4% of the untreated ASB positives and 4.8% of the ASB negative women. Short cervical length detected on ultrasound in the second trimester of pregnancy is predictive of spontaneous preterm birth in singletons and an optimal cut-off of 25 mm is widely used to accurately predict this outcome. Multiple pregnancy is associated with increased risk of prematurity, with up to 60% delivering before 37 weeks/ gestation. The aim of this study was to assess the strength of association between cervical length and preterm birth in twin pregnancies and to assess its predictive value. This was a cohort study in a single tertiary referral center, where cervical length was measured routinely in all twin pregnancies. All the operators were certified by the Fetal Medicine Foundation. Cervical length measured between 18 and 24 weeks of gestation was related to the occurrence of spontaneous preterm birth before 34 weeks of gestation and relative risk (RR) was calculated for different cut-offs of cervical length in twins. Finally, logistic regression analysis was performed to assess the association between pregnancy characteristics and preterm birth. We also studied whether this association differ according to the chorionicity. ROC curve analysis was used to assess the ability to predict preterm birth in this cohort. RESULTS: 915 twin pregnancies with cervical length measured between 18 and 24 weeks of gestation were analysed. Cervical length had an AUC of 0.69 (95% C.I. 0.56-0.71) for the prediction of preterm in twin pregnancies with an optimal cut off of 32 mm (sensitivity: 60%, specificity: 68%, PPV: 31.1, NPV: 86.3). Twins with cervical length <32 mm has a significantly increased risk (RR: 2.73, 95% C.I. 1.92-3.90, p<0.001) of preterm delivery compared to those with cervical length >32 mm. The risk of preterm delivery increased progressively with shorter cervical lengths (20 mm, RR: 3.80; 15 mm, RR: 5.1; 10 mm: RR: 5.9). At logistic regression analysis, cervical length (OR: 0.35, 95% C.I. 0.2-0.5) and monochorionicity (OR: 2.53, 95% C.I. 1.7-3.7) were independently associated with preterm birth in multiple gestations. CONCLUSIONS: Cervical length is independently associated with preterm birth in twin pregnancies. The data from this study suggests that a higher cut-off compared to singletons should be adopted in order to more accurately predict this outcome. , and childhood (29 days to 5 years) mortality following maternal bereavement in the preconception (6-0 months before conception) and prenatal (between conception and birth) periods. Bereavement was defined as death of a parent or sibling of the mother. Logistic and Poisson models were used for data analysis adjusting for infant sex, year of birth, birth order, maternal morbidity, parental age and country of origin. : 12,201 offspring died before age 5 years. The association between preconception bereavement and neonatal mortality (OR=1.14, 95% CI:0.9-1.5) was greatly attenuated when adjusted for gestational age (GA) and small for gestational age (SGA) (OR=1.05:0.7-1.5). Infant mortality was increased following preconception bereavement (OR=1.31:0.9-1.9). This association was primarily found in males (OR=1.60:1.0-2.5). Similarly, there was a significant association, independent of GA and SGA, between preconception bereavement and child mortality in males (RR=1.58:1.1-2.2). Associations were timespecific (6 months prior to conception only) and consistent throughout sensitivity analyses. Prenatal stress did not increase the risk of offsprting mortality. The preconception period may be a sensitive developmental period incurring risk for infant and childhood mortality. The association is particular to 6 month prior to conception and not due to increased risk for adverse birth outcomes or familial risk for death. These findings are consistent with and extend previous findings in the Summary ROC curves demonstrated a CL <15mm, < 20mm and < 25mm measured at 20-22 weeks' gestation had respective sensitivity and specificity of 10 % and 99%, 17% and 98%, and 29% and 96% for sPTB before 32 weeks. When measured at 22-24weeks'gestation, sensitivity and specificity for corresponding CL were 22% and 98%, 32% and 96%, and 43% and 92%. For delivery before 28 weeks, CL < 20mm and <25mm measured at 20-22 weeks' gestation improved sensitivity and specificity to 23%, 98%, 45% and 95% respectively. Sensitivity further improved with minimal reduction in specificity, when measured at 22-24weeks' to 61%, 95%, 81% and 92% respectively for corresponding CL < 20mm and <25mm. Further analysis at individual patient level data will provide improved diagnostic accuracy. CONCLUSIONS: Cervical length screening in twin pregnancy is highly specific for sPTB. Sensitivities improve as gestational age at measurement and CL cut offs increase. For effective screening for birth <28weeks the most predictive CL cut-off in twin pregnancies is < 25mm identified at 22-24 weeks gestation. Nevertheless, the optimal follow-up strategy for patients with placenta left behind has not yet been fully defined. A retrospective investigation of five cases of abnormally adherent placenta was conducted to evaluate a risk factor of delayed postpartum hemorrhage in conservative management. Regression of retained placenta was monitored using serial ultrasonography (GE Voluson 730 Pro) and dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI utilizing a 1.5T MRI unit (Avanto, Siemens, Erlagen, Germany). The blood flow in the placenta was evaluated by transvaginal color Doppler ultrasonography (pulse repetition frequencies, 1.8 kHz), and was also quantified by dynamic MRI-based placental vascular volume. Enhanced areas in the retained placenta on the arterial phase images (at 40 seconds after intravenous injection of 0.2 mmol/kg gadodiamide) were measured by manually setting regions of interest using a Centricity PACS 3.2 RA 1000 workstation (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI). Subsequently, total enhanced volumes were computed by multiplying enhanced areas by the slice thickness, and were regarded as the placental vascular volume. The monitoring of serum hCG levels was conducted every 1-2 weeks in all patients. Disappearance of placental blood flow was observed by follow-up ultrasonographyat postpartum 62.0 ± 12.0 days, almost coincident with a fall in human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) to undetectable levels (64.6 ± 13.2 days). The timing of this phenomenon did not differ much between the five cases despite differences in the initial placental volume left behind or approach used to control hemorrhage. Serum hCG levels were significantly correlated with dynamic MRI-based placental vascular volume (R=0.97, p<0.0001). Placental tissue remained for 14 to 70 days following the disappearance of placental blood flow, and was eventually resorbed spontaneously without surgical intervention. CONCLUSIONS: A declining level of hCG was a reliable marker of regression of placental vascular volume, rather than placental resorption. In the follow-up period of conservative management for placenta accreta,undetectable hCG levels may be a reliable negative marker of delayed postpartum hemorrhage. We didn't observe statistically significant differences in other measured chemokines. CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of our findings, it seems that the chemokines MIP-3a, TARC, I-TAC, HCC-4 may play role in the pathogenesis of preterm labor. Defining their potential as biochemical marker of preterm birth requires further investigation on larger group of patients. in the long-term. Short-term outcomes such as pain have not been studied. Our objective was to investigate whether closure of the rectus muscles at cesarean delivery (CD) increases post-operative pain. METHODS: A prospective, randomized, double-blind study was conducted. Healthy women > 35 weeks undergoing primary CD prior to labor were randomized to closure of the rectus muscles with three interrupted sutures, or non-closure. Intra-operative (spinal anesthesia with intrathecal bupivacaine, fentanyl and morphine) and post-operative pain management (multimodal analgesia with acetaminophen, NSAIDs and opioids) was standardized. The primary outcome was the combined opioid use and movement pain score using the Silverman Integrated Assessment (SIA) score (reference). Total opioid use was determined using standardized relative-potency conversion scales. Pain (0-10) was assessed at rest and after movement at 24, 48, 72 hours and 6 weeks postoperatively. Satisfaction with pain management was assessed. RESULTS: 63 women were enrolled and randomized. 35 underwent closure of the rectus muscles, and 28 underwent non-closure. The study was stopped prematurely due to slow enrollment. Demographic variables were similar between groups. The SIA opioid use and movement pain scores were higher in the rectus closure group (-31±78% vs. +15±100%; p = 0.043). Opioid use was similar between the closure and non-closure groups, 30 mg (18-45) and 20 mg (  A non validated, anonymous questionnaire was given to practicing and in-training obstetricians at two community hospitals. Five demographic and 10 knowledge based questions were included based on the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) committee opinion on NIPS. Questionnaire results from practicing obstetricians with ≥10 years experience (group 1) were compared to obstetricians with <10 years experience (group 2) and in training residents (group 3). Knowledge based questions were graded and percent correct compared using one way ANOVA. Five questions considered critical (Sensitivity of NIPS, appropriate for patients with major anomalies, equivalent to amniocentesis, exclude all aneuploidies, and recommendations for patients with positive NIPS) were graded separately and also analyzed using one way ANOVA. RESULTS: Ninety eight completed questionnaires were received, 51 from group 1, 16 from group 2 and 31 from group 3. The mean percent correct was 81, 85 and 79 percent (p=0.36) for the entire questionnaire and 84, 84 and 77 percent (p=0.25) for the critical questions for groups 1, 2 and 3 respectively. The critical questions were answered incorrectly by the entire cohort as follows: Sensitivity of NIPS:45%, appropriate for patients with major anomalies:25%, equivalent to amniocentesis:15%, exclude all aneuploidies:2% and recommendations for patients with positive NIPS:6%. CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that overall our obstetricians are knowledgeable regarding NIPS and knowledge is equivalent across all experience levels. However a significant amount of our cohort did not know the sensitivity of NIPS or appropriateness for patients with major anomalies. As the use of NIPS increases and the technology advances, it is imperative that obstetricians from all experience levels stay abreast of the indications, benefits and limitations of the test to provide accurate counseling and improve patient care. Continued education is needed across all experience levels regarding this evolving technology. (n=33; control group) who delivered in the Department of OBGYN at the University Hospital Graz from 2007 -2012. Groups were matched through maternal age (median = 35y; 21y -44yvs.21y -42y). Diagnostic criteria recommended by the IADPSG were used. Compiled risk factors, complications and outcomes were subsequently evaluated via various statistical methods. In the study group a significantly higher rate of primary c-sections (13vs.3;p=0.002), shoulder dystocia (3vs.0;p=0.033), and pregnancy induced hypertension (7vs.1;p=0.005) was found. Preeclampsia was observed 2 times in the study group. Study group also demonstrated a far higher mean BMI (31,2vs.22,1;p<0.001). The median of parity in the study group was higher than in the control group (3vs.1;p<0.001). In the study group we found 1 intrauterine fetal death as well as 1 lethal multiple fetal malformation. Gestational age at delivery was also significantly lower in the study group (p<0.01).Significantly more complications in the childbed were observed in the study group (4vs.0;p=0.039) Birth weight, apgar score, a.+v.pH of umbilical cord showed no significant differences in both groups. Also cord-blood insulin and cord-blood c-Peptide showed no significant difference, this was attributed to therapy measures. CONCLUSIONS: Women with unknown overt T2DM demonstrate significantly increased risks for adverse pregnancy outcomes. A possible explanation for the poorer outcome could be the period of uncontrolled hyperglycemia, but also the higher BMI, which could be partly explained by the higher rate of parity and also the gradual accumulation of weight after previous pregnancies. In women with placenta previa, severe bleeding usually occurs after removal of the placenta. Moreover, it is sometimes associated with placenta accreta, which further aggravates this bleeding. Herein, we describe another simple variety of uterine compression suture for hemostasis for atonic bleeding following placenta previa or accreta. We treated 3 women who had postpartum hemorrhage secondary to placenta previa. Hemostasis was achieved with double vertical compression sutures placed in the lower uterine segment and uterine corpus. RESULTS: In Case 1, compression suture of the lower segment was placed immediately, but uterine compression suturing was performed after uncontrollable atonic bleeding and DIC occurred. The hemorrhage decreased significantly after uterine compression suturing was performed. In Cases 2 and 3, we began using this technique when atonic bleeding occurred following hemorrhage from the placental separation site. In all cases, the sutures were immediately affective at controlling the hemorrhage without hysterectomy. The compression has been regarded as the main bleeding mechanism of these compression sutures; however, we suggest that reduced uterine blood flow may be another important action. Thus, we suggest that "double vertical compression sutures" may have dual actions: hemostatic compression of the bleeding surface and reduced uterine blood flow. Sensitivity analyses revealed that the parameter with the greatest influence was the probability of a short CL on TVUS. In a one-way sensitivity analysis, TV screening was less expensive than TA screening if the probability of a short CL on TVUS was <0.127. CONCLUSIONS: Even when accounting for indirect costs, TVUS CL screening of low-risk women has the potential to decrease PTB rates and improve neonatal outcomes at a lower total cost vs. traditional TAUS CL screening. Year Experience. Mariana Marquez, Alon Shrim, Sarit Sarit, Mordechay Hallak, Ron Beloosesky. Obstetrics and Gynrcology, Hillel Yaffe Medical Center, Hadera, Israel. INTRODUCTION: To assess pathogens involved and antibiotic sensitivities in symptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy. We conducted a retrospective cohort study. All positive urine cultures between January 2011 and December 2012 were retrieved using the hospital's computerized database. Only cultures taken from symptomatic pregnant women by midstream urine sample with growth of >20,000 of single bacteria were included. Analysis of the pathogens and sensitivities to antibiotics by trimester were evaluated. RESULTS: during 2011-2012, 287 pregnant women with clinical urinary tract infection had positive urine cultures. Almost 50% of Bacteriuria cases were diagnosed in the third trimester. 25% of cases were diagnosed in each of the first and second trimesters. The most common pathogen was Escherichia coli (48.4% of cases) followed by Klebsiella (13.9%), Enterococcus (11.6%), and Group B streptococcus (7.5 %). Cefuroxime Sodium, ofloxacin and gentamicin were the most effective antibiotics against the pathogens in our study. Ninety percent (90%) of Escherichia coli and 81% of Klebsiella were sensitive to Cefuroxime Sodium. Ofloxacin and gentamicin were as effective. Nitrofurantoin was effective against 86% of E.colii, but had only 18% sensitivity against Klebsiella. CONCLUSIONS: 50% of symptomatic bacteuria cases occur in the third trimester. E.coli is the most common pathogen in symptomatic bacteuria in pregnancy. Cefuroxime Sodium, ofloxacin and gentamicin are the most affective antibiotics against the most common pathogens with comparable sensitivity profiles. However, since only Cefuroxime Sodium is assigned to pregnancy category B by FDA, it should be the first line treatment option for symptomatic bacteuria during pregnancy. The Folic acid supplementation remains a highly effective nutritional intervention in reducing the risk of congenital anomalies; however, little is understood regarding the effect of supplementation on fetal utilization of maternal folate stores. This study aims to characterize the correlation of 5-methyl tetrahydrofolate, the most prevalent physiologic folate, in maternal and umbilical cord serum samples and its relationship with maternal supplementation. METHODS: This is a single-center, prospective cohort of cord blood samples obtained from 40 uncomplicated term deliveries. HPLC mass spectrometry quantitated the 5 methyltetrahydrofolate (5MTHF) concentrations in extracted serum maternal and umbilical cord blood samples. The mean concentrations of 5MTHF in maternal and umbilical cord plasma samples were 39 +/-18 nmol/L and 59 +/-21 nmol/L, respectively. Maternal and umbilical cord serum 5MTHF concentrations shared a positive correlation, which was statistically significant (r=0.76, p<0.001). Furthermore, when examining only samples associated with prenatal vitamin use (Figure 1) , maternal supplementation demonstrated a more positive correlation (r=0.84 vs. r=0.44). Not surprisingly, this study demonstrates that increased maternal folate concentrations positively impacts fetal folate status; however, prenatal vitamin use may result in a more predictive correlation. This finding suggests that maternal supplementation mitigates the effect of extrinsic factors, such as phenotypic variability in folate absorption and metabolism, on fetal folate concentrations; however, a larger sample size and a more detailed analysis of the maternal oral nutritional intake may help better characterize this relationship. Opioid abuse in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of preterm labor, preterm delivery, intrauterine growth restriction, placental abruption, as well as higher perinatal mortality and morbidity. About 40-95% of infants born to mother's with daily opioid use undergo neonatal abstinence syndrome including poor feeding, dehydration, seizures. METHODS: This is retrospective chart review from July 2011 through July 2012 on all patients who admitted to Labor and Delivery for delivery. The study group was identified by ICD-9 codes for drug use in pregnancy. The data included patient demographics, medical conditions, mode of delivery, delivery summary, urine drug screen results, payer source, length of hospital course for mother and their babies, and neonatal hospital course.Data were analyzed by SPSS version. Continuous variables were analyzed by student t test and categorical variables analyzed using chi square or fisher's extract test. A statistical significance was determined by a p value of 0.05. IRB approval was obtained by Bayfront Medical Center. RESULTS: 156 patients (3.5%) had a positive urinary drug screen at the time of delivery. Of these 45 (29%) were cared for by private physicians and 111 (71%) were cared for by the residency service. There was no significant difference between these two groups regarding demographics, gestational age, type of drug use, patient admitting to drug use, maternal or neonatal outcomes. There was a statistically significant higher incidence of NAS seen in our obstetrical population versus those delivered by private physicians (p value 0.006). The overall prevalence rate of a positive urine drug screen at the time of delivery is low. The primary substance used was methadone. Emphasis should be placed on outpatient resources for patients with positive drug screens at the time of delivery. Clinical outcomes are uniform across the range of clinical variables studied. Stromal Derived Factor-1α Is Key to Treating Neonatal Brain Injuries with Bone Marrow Cells. Miki Mori, Keiichi Matsubara, Yuko Matsubara, Yuka Uchikura, Akihiro Nawa. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ehime University School of Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan. INTRODUCTION: Neonatal hypoxia-ischemic (HI) brain injury is still a major cause of neonatal brain damage. Neonatal HI leads to high disability and mortality rates in neonates because the neonatal immature brain is especially sensitive to hypoxia, which leads to neuronal death. Recently, bone marrow cells have been proposed to treat the brain injury; however, the effect has not been sufficient. Stromal derived factor-1a(SDF-1a)is known to control the migration of cells derived from bone marrow into the ischemic lesion for regeneration. In this study, we evaluated the effect of SDF-1a on brain damage in neonatal rats. The left common carotid artery of seven-day-old Wistar rat pups was ligated with 6-0 silk threads. The pups were subsequently exposed to hypoxic gas mixture (8% oxygen, 92% nitrogen) for 120 min. The pups were divided into 4 groups, 1) control, 2) HI and bone marrow cells (BMNCs, 1×10 6 cells/300ml) intraperitoneal administration, 3) HI and SDF-1a (6mg/kg) intracranial injection, 4) HI, BMNCs intraperitoneal administration, and SDF-1a intracranial injection. Seven days later, brain damage in pups was evaluated with magnetic resonance imaging. Eleven and 15 days later, neurocognitive outcomes were evaluated using the Morris water maze (WM). After the WM, the pups were sacrificed and the brains were dissected. Brain injury was assessed using TTC staining. RESULTS: WM showed that there was no difference between group 1 and 2. TTC staining also showed that there was no difference between group 1 and 2. WM and TTC staining showed that group 4 suffered the least brain damage. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that although BMNC alone does not sufficiently affect neonatal brain injuries. SDF-1a could increase the effect of BMNCs and be used in the treatment of neonatal brain injury. Inositol However, it may also arise from an impaired alternative I-signaling pathway involving inositol phosphoglycan (IPG) second messengers. This study was designed to test the hypotheses 1) that perturbations in IPG signaling, as reflected in urinary excretion of myo-inositol (MI) and D-chiro-inositol (DCI), would evolve in the latter half of gestation in normal gravidas (NG) and 2) that these would be greater and occur earlier in GDM. A nested case-control study was carried out in 375 pregnant (P) women, involving random urine samples collected at 1) 8-14 weeks (P1), 2) 22-32 weeks (P2), and 3) ~6 weeks postpartum (PP). GDM developed in 35 patients (P1, n=17; P2, n=24; PP, n=17). These were matched with 59 NG by age, ethnicity, and pre-pregnancy BMI. Urinary levels of MI, DCI and L-chiro-inositol (LCI) were measured by gas chromatography / mass spectrometry. Values were normalized to urine creatinine (Cr) concentrations. The log transformed data was analyzed by ANOVA. RESULTS: Fig 1 shows that NG had greater mean MI/Cr ratios than nonpregnant (PP) values at P1 (>3 fold) and P2 (>5.75 fold) p<0.0001*. NG also had greater DCI/Cr ratios for P1 (>2-fold) and P2 (>4 fold)p<0.005*. There was also a significant increase in MI/Cr and DCI/Cr from P1 to P2 in NG *** Compared to NG, GDM had higher MI/Cr and DCI/Cr ratios for P1, p<0.05 † but not P2. LCI/Cr ratio was unaltered in either group. Pregnancy results in a progressive increase in the urinary excretion of MI and DCI that begins in early gestation. Thus, significant perturbations of the IPG pathway occur before I resistance develops in NG. These changes are significantly enhanced in gravidas who develop GDM. Effectiveness of a Risk Factor Based GBS Screening Program. There are significant differences in Clinical Practice Guidelines between countries with practice in the United States largely following CDC (Atlanta) recommendations for universal bacteriological screening at around 37 weeks gestation. In Australia either routine bacteriological screening or a risk factor-based approach is recommended and accepted, whereas in the UK no routine screening at all is recommended. We reviewed the outcomes over a 10 year period in our hospital where a risk factor-based program is in place to assess whether a risk factor-based approach is effective. In the 2011 period, the rate was 30% (161/531). CONCLUSIONS: A risk factor-based approach to the prevention of EOGBSD is highly effective when clinician compliance is high and as effective as routine bacteriological screening. The reported benefits of routine bacteriological screening over risk factor-base screening may relate to better clinician compliance with the former approach rather than any inherent advantage. Recommendations regarding "best" practice may merit review. (3): F-090). However, the underlying mechanism is unknown preventing targets for intervention. Here, we tested the hypothesis that hypoxia-induced oxidative stress is involved and compared two maternal antioxidant therapies. METHODS: Pregnant Wistar rats were divided into normoxic (N: 21% O 2 ) or hypoxic (H: 14% O 2 ) pregnancy +/-antioxidant treatment with either vitamin C (0.9 mg/g/day in maternal water) or allopurinol (30 mg/ kg/day in jelly) from days 6-20 of gestation. This experimental model of maternal hypoxia does not affect maternal food intake. After birth, offspring were maintained until adulthood. At 4 months, the aorta from 1 male per litter was investigated. At the Department of Engineering, uniaxial tensile tests were performed using a materials testing machine (Instron, Canton, MA) to determine aortic stiffness. Materials testing software (Bluehill 2, Instron) programmed the stretching rates, extensions and sequences. Strain is the extension of the aorta as a fraction of the initial sample length. Stress is the load on the aorta as a fraction of its cross sectional area. Stiffness is represented by the gradient of the stressstrain curve. RESULTS: Fetal chronic hypoxia reproducibly programmes an increase in aortic stiffness at adulthood. Maternal treatment with allopurinol but not with vitamin C is an effective intervention (Fig. 1) . CONCLUSIONS: Xanthine oxidase-induced oxidative stress is an involved mechanism programming aortic stiffness in adulthood following pregnancy complicated by chronic fetal hypoxia. Maternal treatment with allopurinol may protect against the programming of cardiovascular disease in high risk pregnancy. Early  Early term infants are more likely to acquire behavioral & emotional problems at 9 months than full term infants.Male early term babies had a higher risk of adverse outcome compared to females.Further research is needed to ascertain if the effects persist for medically-induced & spontaneous early term birth. If confirmed, these findings are of significant public health importance considering the increasing numbers of early term babies. The The clinical value of the K-B in the diagnosis of placenta abruption has been investigated in a few small retrospective studies selected for several reasons. We sought to determine the sensitivity of the Kleihauer-Betke (K-B) test for making the diagnosis of placental abruption and for prediction of perinatal loss. We carried out a retrospective cohort study of all cases of placental abruption managed over the past 5 years at our Center. Cases were identified using the ICD-9 code for abruption (642.13) and those with singleton pregnancies and with K-B tests performed prior to delivery were selected. To be included in the study, at least two of the following findings: bleeding, trauma, sonographic evidence of abruption, fetal death or distress, and evidence of placental separation or a clot at delivery were required. RESULTS: Fifty-eight patients met the inclusion criteria. Of these, 16 ended in perinatal death (27.5%). Only 3 had a positive K-B test, giving a sensitivity of 4.3% for diagnosis of placenta abruption. These three cases had a major trauma together with vaginal bleeding and abdominal pain. In one a fetal demise was noted. In 30/32 (93.7%) cases with a suspected abruption after a sonographic evaluation, the K-B test was negative. CONCLUSIONS: These observations from patients admitted to the hospital with the diagnosis of placental abruption suggest that the K-B test has very limited value in the diagnosis of placenta abruption or in the prediction of perinatal mortality.  We carried out a retrospective cohort study of all cases of placental abruption managed over the past 5 years at our Center. Cases were identified using the ICD-9 code for abruption (642.13) and those with singleton pregnancies were selected. To be included in the study, at least two of the following findings: bleeding, trauma, sonographic evidence of abruption, fetal death or distress, and evidence of placental separation or a clot at delivery were required. Statistical analysis was performed using parametric test, difference in proportion test and regression analysis. A probability <0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS: 58 patients were included and 16 ended in perinatal death (27.5%). No differences were noted for maternal age, gravidity, parity or GA at diagnosis. The proportion of patients that smoked, had hypertension, abnormalities of amniotic fluid volume, asthma, diabetes, hepatitis C, or inherited hemoglobin disorders were similar. Significant differences were noted for GA at delivery (29.3w, SD 4.5 in death vs. 31.9w. SD 4.7 in survivors) for trauma (25% in death vs. 7% in survivors) and for substance abuse (43.7 % in death vs. 24% in survivors). Figure 1 shows graphically the gestational age effect on perinatal death. These observations from patients admitted to the hospital with the diagnosis of abruption placenta suggest that GA at birth, trauma and substance abuse can discriminate patients at greater risk for perinatal death at our center. Over use of CS occurs in the absence of scientific evidence for improvements in maternal and neonatal outcomes, as respiratory complications of the newborn. Labor has been suggested to play a key role in enhancement of lung maturation. The aim of our study was to establish the correlation between labor and respiratory complications in newborns, comparing the outcome of those ones delivered either in absence or in presence of labor This study also focused on the gestational age at CS in pathologic newborns and timing for elective CS. We analyzed data from 16,433 living newborns from singleton pregnancies and we divided newborns in two groups by the presence or absence of respiratory complications, excluding meconium aspiration syndrome and neonatal pneumonia. For each newborn we recorded maternal age and gestational age at delivery, nationality, parity, mode of delivery, presence or absence of labor, indications for CS, birth weight, and newborn gender. Analysis of data was performed using t-test and chi-square when needed; a p < 0.001 was considered significant. We also calculated the Odds Ratio. RESULTS: No differences were recorded between the two groups regarding to parity, nationality and maternal age; there were difference in neonatal birth, gender and weight (p < 0.001). Total incidence of respiratory complications was 3%; this percentage rose up to 5.2% in case of CS and to 5.9% in case of CS without labor; conversely, incidence was 1.8% in the group of delivery in presence of labor (urgent CS or vaginal delivery). Considering only CS without labor, the stratification has showed that risk decreases as the weeks increase (OR = 36.5, 26.9, 10.3 and 4,1 at 34, 35, 36 and 37 weeks respectively); the risk is still present at 37 and 38 weeks of gestation; conversely, at 39 weeks it is the same than after 40 weeks (OR = 0.94). CONCLUSIONS: Incidence of respiratory complications in newborns delivered by CS was significantly influenced by presence or absence of labor. Elective CS is not a safer way to deliver for the baby. Although in daily practice it was performed in almost half of the cases at 38 weeks, a reduction in neonatal respiratory morbidity was observed when it was postponed at 39 weeks of gestation. Mechanisms of obesity damage to pregnancy are poorly known. We decided to study the metabolic profiles of acyl-carnitines in obese women whit normal pregnancies in order to obtain preliminary information on the limits of "metabolic plasticity" in women with abnormal adiposity during pregnancy. METHODS: Women included in the Mexico City's Perinatal Cohort were selected according to pregestational BMI and two groups were analyzed: 1. Twenty women with normal BMI (≤ 24.9) (NWP) and 2. Twenty obese women (BMI ³30)(OP). Concentration of the acyl-carnitines and free carnitine was determined by gas chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry in monthly samples of serum obtained from week 14 of gestation. The OP group showed lower concentrations of free carnitine (p <0.0001) that decreased as gestation progressed. OP women also showed higher concentrations of acyl-carnitine, acetyl-carnitine (p = 0.03), glucose (p=0.005) and triglycerides. OP group had higher concentration (p <0.0001) of C3 and C5-carnitines during pregnancy. Concentration of C10AC and C8AC were significant increased (p = 0.001, p <0.0001 respectively) compared the first to third trimester in OP group. CONCLUSIONS: The obese women analyzed in this study had normal pregnancy and normal perinatal evolution, despite severe disturbances in lipid metabolism. These adaptations reveal a broad metabolic plasticity dealing with the lipid overload and resulting in non-complicated pregnancies. During normal pregnancy, metabolic changes occur leading to weight gain and insulin resistance, these changes cover progressive demands of the fetus. Obesity has been considered a metabolic disruptor that harms evolution of pregnancy, however few information is available to understand the mechanisms of damage of obesity in pregnancy. We decided to study amino acid profiles of obese women in order to obtain preliminary information comparing normal weight women along pregnancy.OBJECTIVE: To quantify amino acid concentrations in serum during pregnancy in normal or obese women. METHODS: Women included in the Mexico City's Perinatal Cohort were selected according to pregestational BMI and two groups were analyzed: 1. Twenty women with normal BMI (≤ 24.9) (NWP) and 2. Twenty obese women (BMI ³30)(OP). Concentration of aminoacids was determined by gas chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry in monthly samples of serum obtained from week 14 of gestation. All women had no complications during pregnancy or perinatal periods. RESULTS: Alanine concentrations were significantly (p=0.0006) higher in the second trimester and there was a significant increase (p=0.05) in the gluconeogenic and ketogenic amino acid concentrations in OP. Glucose concentration was significantly higher (p=0.005) and there was an inverse correlation between leucine and valine with glucose concentrations (r=-0.25 and -0.37 respectively) in the OP group. A progressive decrease in the seric urea concentrations in the OP group was found. CONCLUSIONS: High levels of serum glucose in the OP group may be associated to increased channeling of aminoacids to gluconeogenesis derived from the reduction of oxidative degradation of these compounds. However, these striking changes related to the presence of increased adiposity coexisted wit a normal pregnancy. A better knowledge of the limits of this metabolic plasticity may aid to identify specific changes associated to abnormal evolution of pregnancy. to adverse long and short-term outcome. Our aim was to determine the distribution frequency of preoperative CL and to identify the threshold at which the risk of spontaneous PTB <34 weeks is increased. METHODS: Prospectively collected data from 384 patients from 3 fetal centers was analyzed. CL measurements were acquired from preoperative transvaginal ultrasound, between the gestational ages of 16-26 weeks. The CL threshold for the primary outcome was determined using receiver operator characteristics (ROC) curve. The preoperative CL was normally distributed with a mean of 37 ± 11.5 mm (5 th , 10 th , 20 th , 30 th percentiles were 17, 22, 27 and 31 mm). PTB <34 weeks occurred in 36% of the cohort. The area under the ROC curve for predicting PTB with CL measurement was 0.623 (p<0.01) and the optimal threshold was 27 mm (<20th percentile). The hazard ratio (HR; Cox proportional) for PTB for CL ≤ 27 mm was 2.7 (95% CI 1.7-4.2) after controlling for other significant factors such as history of prior PTB (HR: 2.9), 12Fr cannula (HR: 6.3), preterm premature rupture of membranes (HR: 5.7);p<0.001. The risk of spontaneous preterm birth at < 34 weeks is significantly increased in women undergoing FLS for TTTS who have a preoperative CL ≤ 27 mm. Further research is needed to reduce the risk of preterm delivery in this high risk group. from gestational day 1 until birth. The pregnancy length was measured by recording the mating and delivery, that allowed us to claculate the exact time of mating/delivery. Dams where weight every other day. In pups, length and weight, abdomen and cranial diameter, were also measured. Statistical differences between control and treated rats were assessed by non parametric t-test. Our results showed no significant differences in pregnancy length and dams gained weight. Although, significant differences were observed in pups body weight (p= 0.0058), total length (p= 0.0212) and abdomen (p<0.0001) and cranial diameter (p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that FLX treatment has an effect on pregnancy outcome, probably associated with a fetal distress, evidenced by the IUGR-like phenotype observed. These observations suggest physical complication for the fetuses of mother under treatment with FLX, the major antidepressant used in pregnant women. Further studies will be performed in order to evaluate the local effect of FLX in the placental tissue and the mechanisms associated to FLX effects in this model. Notably angiotensinogen (AGT), a precursor of the vasoactive peptide angiotensin II (AngII) is increased in obese individuals. Furthermore, AngII is known to activate NF-kB inflammatory pathway resulting in increased pro-inflammatory cytokine production and macrophage infiltration. We hypothesized that maternal BPA induces offspring adipose tissue inflammation via upregulation of AGT and increased macrophage infiltration. We determined the protein expression of AGT, marker of macrophage and inflammatory cytokine. METHODS: From gestational day 10 to term and throughout lactation, dams were administered oral BPA (500µg/kg body weight/day) or corn oil (Control). After birth litter size was standardized and pups nursed by the same dam. At 3 weeks of age, offspring were weaned with no further BPA treatment. At 1 day and 6 weeks of age, adipose tissue was collected from male offspring and protein expression (Western Blot) was analyzed for RAS precursor (AGT), and markers of inflammation (TNFa), macrophage (CD68) and inflammatory pathway (pNF-kB). RESULTS: At 1 day, BPA newborns were heavier than Controls (7.3 vs. 6,7g) and continued to show increased body weight at 3 weeks of age (56 vs. 49g). Further, BPA offspring exhibited significantly increased protein expression of adipose AGT (1.4-fold), TNFa (1.5-fold), CD68 (1.3-fold) and pNF-kB (1.7-fold) as compared to Control males. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal BPA promotes pro-inflammatory cytokine production in the offspring via upregulation of the adipose AGT. The underlying mechanism of offspring adipose tissue inflammation may be directly through activation of NF-κB inflammatory signaling pathway and/or increased macrophage migration. Furthermore, whether adipose tissue inflammation in BPA offspring is primarily a programmed effect or secondary to increased adiposity remains to be established. . We hypothesized that hearts of IUGR fetuses would show increased nitrotyrosine, a marker of reactive oxygen stress and a reduction in antioxidant capacity. We further hypothesized that there would be a difference between the sexes as shown in many other fetal responses to maternal nutritional challenges. Adult female baboons were randomly selected to receive feed ad lib (CTR; n=15) or 70% CTR global diet (IUGR, n=11) from 0.16 -0.9 G with fetuses obtained at cesarean section under general anesthesia. Cardiac nitrotyrosine and the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase 2 were determined by immunohistochemistry and quantifi ed by image analysis (ImageJ, NIH) for fraction (area immunostained ÷ area of fi eld x 100%). Analysis was by Student's t-test; data are Mean ± SEM, *p< 0.05. RESULTS: Figure 1 : Superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and nitrotyrosine protein in CTR (n=15) and IUGR (n=11) fetal left ventricle. * p < 0.05 Nitrotyrosine was increased and superoxide dismutase was decreased in the left ventricle of IUGR fetuses (p< 0.05). There were no differences between male and female hearts so data were pooled. CONCLUSIONS: A moderate degree of global nutrient reduction leads to increased nitrotyrosine, a marker of reactive oxygen stress and decrease in the antioxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase 2 in the fetal non human primate heart. There was no difference between male and female fetuses. If these changes persist into adult life they may constitute a mechanism whereby poor fetal growth and intrauterine nutrition predisposes to adult heart disease. (Endo. 2013 (Endo. ,154:2365 . Term IUGR fetuses show sex dependent increase in the 11-bHSD1 system in fat and liver (Diabetes 2013.62 1175) and increased 11-bHSD1 mRNA and protein in IUGR fetal kidney cortex and medulla. (Repro Sci 20.Sup.S-155). We hypothesized GR and H6PD would be increased in IUGR fetal kidneys. METHODS: From 0.16 to 0.9 G pregnant baboons were fed ad lib controls (CTR; n = 7) or 70% of CTR diet (IUGR, n = 6) and tissues collected at CS at 0.9 G). mRNA was measured with RT-PCR and protein by immunohistochemistry (fraction stained) in fetal kidney cortex and medulla . Analysis Student's t-test; data M ± SEM, *p< 0.05.# 0.05 <p<1.0. RESULTS: pGR protein increased and H6PD protein decreased in the IUGR cortex. All three proteins increased in IUGR medulla. In both sexes GR mRNA increased in the IUGR medulla but not cortex (Fig 1) H6PD mRNA was unchanged in males and up in the feale medulla but down in the cortex. GR protein increased in male and female medulla but was unchanged in the cortex. pGR protein increased in both sexes at both locations. Cortical H6PD protein decreased in females and incresed in female medulla (Fig. 1) . CONCLUSIONS: pGR is increased in both sexes in medulla and cortex while H6PD changes differed in region and sex increasing in females in the medulla and decreasing in the cortex. Combined with higher circulating fetal cortisol that we have previously shown, these fi ndings indicate that IUGR will expose the renal medulla and possibly the cortex to levels of cortisol activity in excess of those appropriate for the current stage of gestation potentially programming offspring to renal disease and hypertension. Maternal and Foetal Angiogenic Imbalance in Congenital Heart Defects. Our objectives were to evaluate the expression of angiogenic factors and their relation to hypoxia markers in the fetal heart congenital heart defects (CHD) in euploid and Down syndrome fetuses. METHODS: Angiogenic factors expression (VEGF, PlGF and sFlt1) and markers of hypoxia (HIF-1a, HIF-2a, HO-1 and SOD1) were measured in heart tissue from 23 euploid CHD, 26 Down syndrome foetuses and 8 controls TOP cases. mRNA of foetal heart tissue samples was extracted using RNeasy Fibrous Tissue (Qiagen). RESULTS: Expression of VEGF, sFlt-1, markers of chronic hypoxia and antioxidant activity were signifi cantly higher in heart tissue from CHD compared to normal hearts. sFlt-1 and VEGF-A mRNA were signifi cantly increased in the CHD group compared to controls (92%, p=0.005 and 59%, p=0.016, respectively). Signifi cant increases in the transcript level of HIF-2a, HO-1 and SOD1 were also observed in the CHD group compared to controls (non-CHD) (45%, p=0.019; 62%, p=0.015 and 31%, p=0.049, respectively). There were no differences in HIF-1a and PlGF mRNA expression among groups. Same expression pattern was observed in CDH heart tissue from euploid and Down syndrome cases. CONCLUSIONS: An intrinsically angiogenic impairment with evidence of tissue hypoxia exists in foetal heart with CHD. Our data suggest that an imbalance of angiogenic-antiangiogenic factors might be involved in developmental defects of the human heart. Effect  Homozygous NOS3 knockout and wild type mice were cross-bred to obtained heterozygous offspring developing in a WT mother, with normal uterine environment (KOP) and genomically similar heterozygous offspring developing in a KO mother lacking NOS3 (KOM). Minipumps were placed in offpsring at 4 weeks of age to deliver captopril for 4 weeks. At 14 weeks, male offspring were sacrifi ced and renal arteries isolated for in vitro vascular reactivity studies. Contractile responses to phenylephrine (PE), in the presence and absence of the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor L-NAME, as well as vasorelaxation to acetylcholine (Ach) and isoproterenol (ISO) were determined. ANOVA used for statistical analysis (signifi cance: P<0.05). RESULTS: Contractile responses to PE were signifi cantly increased in KOM offspring compared with KOP, and treatment with captopril signifi cantly corrected this response ( Figure A) . The beneficial effect of captopril in KOM was decreased by L-NAME, although the response in KOM remained higher. Vasorelaxant responses to Ach and ISO were significantly improved in KOM treated compared to untreated KOM offspring. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with an ACE inhibitor in the early postnatal period prevents the vascular dysfunction seen with fetal programming of adult hypertension. Targeting the renin-angiotensin pathway, specifically ACE inhibition may represent a potential strategy for postnatal prevention of adult hypertension. The  Given that IL-1a is known to promotes human vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and IL-13 stimulates the secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1, we speculate that they likely play a role in the altered vascular development leading to the hypertension later in life. These changes were noted very early postnatally, indicating that the perinatal period can be a potential target for prevention of adult cardiovascular diseases. The In the present study, using our mouse model, we examined the effect of the peri-implantation hormonal environment on long-term cognitive development including spatial learning, memory, anxiety and depressivelike behavior. METHODS: Blastocysts from naturally mated mice were flushed and transferred into the uteri of pseudopregnant recipients either during natural cycles or following treatment with gonadotropins. Pregnant dams were allowed to deliver and followed for 20 weeks. At least 20 offspring from 5 litters were analyzed in each group. The mice were subjected to the following behavioral tests: elevated zero maze, open field, novel object recognition, forced swim and cued and contextual fear conditioning and graded by two observers blinded to treatment group. RESULTS: Mice born from superovulated recipients showed increased anxiety-like behavior during the elevated zero maze test compared to offspring from naturally ovulated recipients. These mice spent significantly less time exploring the open arms (p<0.01) and made fewer open arm entries than control mice (p<0.01). Both male and female mice from the superovulated recipients demonstrated an increase in these anxiety-related behaviors. No differences were observed in general locomotor activity, associated learning, or depressive behavior between the two groups. In this study we have isolated the single exposure of superovulation to determine its effects on cognitive development. We found that the non-physiologic peri-implantation maternal environment resulting from gonadotropin stimulation not only leads to growth restriction in utero, but appears to have a long-term effect on anxietyrelated behaviors in the offspring. These findings, in the mouse model, further re-enforce the suggestion that long-term follow-up studies of children conceived following ovarian stimulation are needed in order to determine the effects of our clinical interventions on their health and psychological welfare. are non-coding RNAs regulating target gene expression through mRNA cleavage or translational repression. Profiling of miRNA in animal models of CVD and in human biopsies has revealed signature patterns of miRNAs diagnostic for heart failure, cardiomyopathy, myocardial infarction, and atherosclerosis. We have previously shown that maternal obesity alters fetal cardiac miRNA expression (Maloyan et al, Physiol Genomics 2013, 45:889) . We hypothesized that fetal cardiac miRNA expression is also altered by IUGR. METHODS: Six pregnant baboons were fed ad lib (Control, CTR), while an additional six pregnant animals received 70% of the control diet, which produced IUGR in both male and female fetuses (Li et al, J Endocrinol 2013, 217: 275) . Fetuses were removed at C-section at 0.9 gestation, and fetal cardiac RNA isolated for miRNA profiling. RESULTS: miRNA expression differed between male and female fetuses within both CTR and IUGR groups. In CTR, 10 cardiac miRNAs homologous to human miRNAs (let-7a, mir-1, mir-30c, mir-145, mir-181b, mir-323b, mir-324, mir-455, mir-574, and mir-664) were more than 2-fold higher in males vs. females (p<0.05). Most of these miRNAs are targeted by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a). HNF4a protein levels (Western Blot) were 4-fold higher in male CTR vs. female (p < 0.01). Fetal sex-dependent differences in cardiac miRNA expression were observed in IUGR fetuses vs. CTR (p<0.05). In IUGR males, 7 of 15 differentially expressed miRNAs (mir-19a, mir-23b, mir-27b, mir-99b, mir-143, mir-181a, and mir-378-3p) have been linked to CVD. Of 19 miRNAs that were up-or downregulated (p<0.05) in female IUGR, 11 were previously linked to CVD: let-7a, miR-1, mir-30c, mir-127, mir-143, mir-145, mir-181b, mir-378-3p, mir-378, mir-454, and mir-455 . Only two differentially expressed miRNAs, mir-143 and mir-378-3p, were shared by male and female IUGR fetuses. HNF4a was similar in male and female IUGR. Signaling pathways predicted to be targeted by the most highly changed miRNAs in male and female IUGR fetuses included PI3K-Akt pathway, Ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, and calcium signaling. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our findings show sexual dimorphism in cardiac miRNA responses in IUGR, which may play a role in sexdependent programming of adult CVD.  Blastocysts from naturally mated mice were flushed and transferred into the uteri of pseudopregnant recipients following either natural mating (NM) or superovulation (SO). At E18.5, recipient dams were sacrificed and fetal brain cortices were isolated and processed. miRNA array analysis was performed on 38 fetal brain (FB) samples (representing n=3 NM and n=8 SO litters). Confirmatory qPCR was done on miRNAs that exhibited >6SD difference between the groups. Sex specific differences were investigated. IPA ontology analysis of miRNA array against mRNA array results was performed. RESULTS: Based on IPA analysis, FB from the SO recipients demonstrated altered expression of multiple miRNAs involved in neuronal differentiation and migration. In comparing the male offspring of SO recipients versus the female offspring and the male offspring of NM recipients versus the female offspring, 18 miRNAs demonstrated at least 6SD change in expression. qPCR confirmation was performed on these miRNA against U6. Only 3 were statistically validated by qPCR ( Figure; p<0.05). Sex-specific differences were not validated. Our study finds that miRNAs regulating neuronal differentiation and migration genes are altered with superovulation. Downregulation of miRNAs that target these genes suggests that upregulation of mRNA of these neurodevelopmental genes is through a relieved repression by miRNA. Further investigation is needed to establish a behavioral phenotype and to elucidate the specific mechanisms of this miRNA-mediated down regulation of gene expression so true causality can be established. INTRODUCTION: Altered maternal perinatal food intake increases the risk of obesity and metabolic disorders in offspring due to developmental programming, however the mechanism is not clearly understood. We investigated the effect of maternal high fat diet (HFD) on sensory taste functions of adult offspring in rats. METHODS: Four groups of offspring were generated based on maternal perinatal exposure to HFD: 1) HFD: HFD during pregnancy and lactation; 2) HFD-pregnancy: HFD only during pregnancy; 3) HFD-lactation: HFD only during lactation; and 4) ND: normal diet (ND) during pregnancy and lactation. Following weaning groups were maintained exclusively on ND. Adult offspring underwent comprehensive sensory and motivational taste preference testing with various concentrations of palatable sucrose and intralipid solutions utilizing automated gustometer for short access and two-bottle preference for extended access testing. Offspring's weights, daily caloric intakes and glucose tolerances were not different. Offspring exposed to HFD during pregnancy showed increased lick responses for sucrose at 0.3, 0.6, 1.2M concentrations in HFD and at 0.6M in HFD-pregnancy groups, compared to ND group. Similar effect was noted for intralipid solutions in HFD (0.05, 0.10%) and HFD-pregnancy (0.05, 0.10, 0.5%) groups. HFDlactation group showed diminished lick responses for sucrose (0.9, 1.2, 1.5M), but not for intralipid, compared to ND animals. Extended access test did not reveal any differences. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that maternal exposure to HFD during pregnancy or lactation differentially alters sensory taste preferences in adult offspring, which may contribute to overeating and obesity. The idea that ancestral environment can affect the phenotype of future generations has been appreciated since Lamarck and Darwin. However, the mechanisms by which parents transfer adaptive information about the environment they experienced to offspring remain under discussion. We report in a rat model of intergenerational programming that adult males, which experienced chronic hypoxia in utero, transmit a cardiac deficit on to offspring. In contrast, adult females which experienced hypoxia in utero transmit on to offspring protection against this deficit. We show that the mechanism by which mothers can pass on this cardioprotective trait on to their offspring is via their mitochondria. METHODS: Pregnant rats (n=24, F0) underwent normoxic (N) or hypoxic (H: 14% O 2 ) pregnancy from days 6-20 of gestation. At 12 weeks, F1 offspring were mated with partners from outside the colony to produce an F2 generation which did not experience hypoxia from both parental lineages. In F1 and F2, cardiac recovery from ischaemia/reperfusion (I/R, Langendorff) and cardiac mitochondrial O 2 consumption (permeabilised cardiac muscle fibre respirometry) were determined at 4 months of age in male offspring. RESULTS: F1 and F2 paternal lineage offspring of hypoxic pregnancy showed impaired cardiac recovery from I/R (Fig. 1) . In contrast, F2 maternal lineage offspring of hypoxic pregnancy showed normal recovery to I/R. Cardiac protection to I/R in F2 maternal lineage offspring was associated with a decrease in mitochondrial complex I O 2 consumption. CONCLUSIONS: A decrease in complex I O 2 consumption is an established antioxidant strategy to limit free radical generation in hypoxic tissue (Levett et al. FASEB J. 26:1431 , 2012 . This adaptive response in F1 was transmitted to F2 offspring via the maternal and not paternal line. We show the heritability of an advantageous Lamarckian trait transmitted from mother to offspring via the maternal mitochondria. This may be a mechanism driving the evolution of environmental adaptation from generation to generation. Supported by the British Heart Foundation. Nurmamat, 1 Peter W Nathanielsz, 1 Stephen P Ford. NRC diet) and control (MO, n=6; fed 100% NRC) ewes were maintained together and fed to 100% NRC from weaning through adulthood with a 12-wk ad lib feeding challenge at 19 months prior to necropsy. Blood samples were frozen at -80ºC for hormonal analysis. Pituitary and AT were collected, and snap frozen at -80ºC for Western blot analyses. Baseline plasma cortisol was similar prior and increased (P<0.05) in MO vs. CON OFF at the end of the feeding challenge. Protein expression of phospho-JAK2 and phopho-STAT3 decreased (P<0.05) in MO vs. CON OFF in agreement with reduced OB-Rb expression. FAT including FATP1, FATP4 and CD36 protein expression were evaluated in visceral and subcutaneous fat; of which at least two of the FAT were upregulated in MO vs. CON offspring while the rest remained similar. The data indicate that the increased adiposity in adult offspring of obese mothers is the result of the upregulation of fatty acid transporters that is correlated with their increased insulin resistance, increased cortisol and reduced IGF1 which was associated with reduced pituitary leptin signaling. and their subsequent offsprings. Analysis of these parameters may prove applicable in normal as well as pathological childhood behavioral patterns, with specific relevance for pregnancies at high-risk for bearing a laterdiagnosed ASD child. METHODS: Thirty-one expectant mothers were enlisted for this study. All women were recruited prior to an elective cesarean section . Levels of Oxt, CD38 and VitA were investigated in maternal peripheral blood and in newborn cord blood. We checked for possible correlation between Oxt-CD38-VitA within each blood type (peripheral maternal or cord blood) and/or correlation within each dyad (maternal versus cord blood levels). RESULTS: Positive correlation was found between maternal and cord blood, both for Oxt and CD38. Maternal VitA and Oxt levels were approximately 4-and 8-fold higher, respectively, than neonate levels, while newborn cord blood levels of CD38 were found to be 9-fold higher than maternal values . CONCLUSIONS: Wide variability in Oxt, CD38 and VitA levels exist among healthy pregnant women and subsequent offspring. Deviations from these normative levels may identify pregnancies at risk for subsequent diagnosis of ASD. Further, research is needed into the regulation of this axis. There are no data on reproductive or reproductive and gynecological outcomes in women who have undergone fetoscopic surgery. We aimed to report outcomes of women who have undergone fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion (FETO) for isolated CDH. METHODS: This is a single center study in 140 consecutive patients who underwent FETO for severe CDH (study group). Controls were 84 patients evaluated because of fetal CDH and who were expectantly managed during pregnancy. All were asked to fill out a web-based, custom designed survey with 23 questions (2 open and 21 multiple choice), on further reproductive and obstetric pregnancy outcomes, gynecologic, emotional and psychological problems. The overall response rate was 52%, i.e. 51% (n=71) in the study group and 54% (n=45) in controls (p=0.363). Demographic, gestation and pregnancy outcome variables were comparable between responders and non-responders. 74% of cases attempted one or more subsequent pregnancies following FETO with a mean interval of 15 months (2-72). In total there were 70 pregnancies in 44 women (71%) during a mean follow-up period of 68 months. There were no <em style="mso-bidi-font-style: normal;">de novo fertility problems. One patient in each group reported a congenital anomaly in a subsequent pregnancy. Thirteen patients (21%) reported one or more pregnancy related complications and 9 patients (15%) reported complications during delivery or their postpartum in the next pregnancy. <em style="mso-bidi-fontstyle: normal;">De novo gynecological problems occurred in 6 patients, the majority being abnormal uterine bleeding (n=4). Outcomes were not different from what was observed in the control group. Psychological and emotional impact were frequent both in the study group (40%) as well as in the controls (46%) (p=0.606). CONCLUSIONS: Overall, subsequent obstetric or gynecological problems are not more common after FETO. We did not observe de novo infertility, and no patients reported subsequent uterine dehiscence or rupture. Nearly half of the patients who had a fetus with CDH, report a strong psychological impact, irrespective whether this was managed expectantly or with FETO. Histological analysis revealed that the radial saccular count and medial wall thickness of the pulmonary arteries was significantly improved in Saireito group comparing with nitrofen group (p<0.05 and p<0.01, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Antenatal treatment with Saireito not only decreases the incidence of CDH but also increases the lung volume in a rat model of nitrofen-induced CDH, then contributes to the improvement of the prognosis of CDH. Our data suggest the therapeutic potential of Saireito as a less-invasive antenatal therapy for CDH.  Cortisol levels were measured in the hair of pregnant women with singleton gestations, no major comorbidities, and no corticosteroid use at 3 time points in pregnancy: 15-18 weeks, 27-30 weeks, and immediately postpartum. Neonatal hair cortisol levels, representing fetal cortisol deposited in utero, were assessed post-delivery. Only pregnancies delivered at term (>37 weeks) were included. RESULTS: Seventy-five maternal-fetal dyads were available for assessment. Maternal hair cortisol levels increased over the course of gestation as expected and term delivered fetal hair cortisol levels were markedly higher than maternal levels at any time point (185.9±71.2pg/ mg fetal cortisol vs. 13.1±13.3pg/mg second trimester maternal cortisol, p <0.001). Spearman correlations were used to compare hair cortisol levels between mother at the 3 times points with her fetus. No correlations between maternal and fetal hair cortisol levels were found at any time point. CONCLUSIONS: While hair cortisol is useful in assessing long-term cortisol status, it does not appear that maternal cortisol levels correlate with fetal cortisol levels at any time point over the course of gestation. This suggests that the placenta plays a pivotal role in mediating the relationship between maternal and fetal cortisol production. These data will guide future studies focusing on the role of the placenta in regulating maternal and fetal HPA function. Our aim is to evaluate the effectiveness of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of b-thalassemia through simultaneously detecting the paternal inherited mutations and normal gene linked SNPs with the TT-COLD-PCR. We randomly chose ten expecting couples in the prenatal diagnosis clinic with discordant mutation in the CD41-42 and IVS-II-654, the most popular HBB genetic mutations in China. SNPs linked with the mutation sites as well as those linked with the normal HBB gene were analyzed respectively with allelic specific PCR. cffDNA was extracted from 10 ml maternal peripheral blood followed with TT-COLD-PCR amplification of the paternal mutations and the paternal particular linked SNPs. Fetal samples obtained by amniocentesis were sequenced of the HBB gene as the golden standard in comparison. RESULTS: Two mutation sites and polymorphic sites SNP-5248786, rs10768683 and rs1609812 in the HBB gene were detected in the couples. All the male carriers showed at least one unique SNP linked with the normal HBB gene that did not exist in the genome of his spouse. TT-COLD-PCR method detected either paternal mutations or paternal particular SNPs linked with normal HBB gene in all maternal blood samples. This result agreed with the finding from PCR amplification and sequencing of the amniotic fluid samples. Melatonin (1 mg.kg -1 ) or saline vehicle was injected daily into the air cell. At day 19, the embryo was removed. Blood was obtained for haematocrit and the embryo subjected to biometry. Third order femoral arteries were mounted on a wire myograph. Reactivity to acetylcholine (10 -9.5 -10 -5 mol.L -1 ) was investigated ± L-NAME (10 -5 mol.L -1 ) ± indomethacin (10 -6 mol.L -1 ) to determine the partial contributions of NO, prostanoids and EDHF to the relaxation. RESULTS: Hypoxic development increased haematocrit (N: 22±2; H: 27±1; HM: 32±1; NM: 26±4%, P<0.05). Hypoxic development promoted asymmetric fetal growth restriction and endothelial dysfunction (Fig.1) . Melatonin treatment during hypoxic incubation rescued the vascular defect via a prostanoid-dependent mechanism, but it did not affect the changes in fetal growth (Fig 1) . CONCLUSIONS: Melatonin rescues peripheral vascular endothelial dysfunction while maintaining brain sparing in the fetus during hypoxic development. Melatonin may be a translatable antioxidant strategy to protect against fetal origins of cardiovascular disease in high risk human pregnancy. The British Heart Foundation. In the liver, these transporters are important in transfer of factors into the bile for excretion. We have shown that oxygen tension regulates P-gp and BCRP expression in the human placenta, in vitro. However, the effects of hypoxic pregnancy on multidrug resistance in the placenta and fetal liver, in vivo, are not known. We hypothesized that hypoxia would increase P-gp and BCRP expression in the placenta and fetal liver, and that the antioxidant, vitamin C, would counteract these effects. Pregnant rats were subjected to normoxia or chronic hypoxia (13% O 2 starting on day 6 of pregnancy) with or without vitamin C (VC) supplementation (5 mg·ml -1 in drinking water; n= 6-8 per group). Pregnant rats were euthanized on embryonic day 20. Abcb1a, Abcb1b, Abcg2 and Vegfa mRNA expression were assessed in placenta and fetal liver using qRT-PCR. RESULTS: Hypoxia increased Vegfa mRNA expression in the placenta and fetal liver, confirming activation of hypoxic pathways. Hypoxia alone had no significant effect on placental Abcb1a, Abcb1b (the predominant placental isoform encoding P-gp) or Abcg2 expression. However, in fetal liver, hypoxia alone decreased Abcb1a (predominant liver isoform), an effect prevented by VC (P<0.05). In normoxic pregnancy, VC caused a significant increase in placental Abcb1a mRNA. In hypoxic pregnancy, VC decreased (P<0.05) Abcg2 mRNA in the placenta and Abcb1 and Abcg2 mRNA in the fetal liver. CONCLUSIONS: Hypoxic pregnancy has little effect on drug transporter expression in the placenta, but causes a profound effect on Abcb1a (the predominant liver isoform encoding P-gp) in the fetal liver, in vivo. The latter effect is ameliorated by VC. Hypoxia-induced reduction in fetal hepatic Abcb1a expression will likely lead to an impaired ability of the fetal liver to excrete xenobiotics, drugs and certain hormones. Conversion of w-3 and w-6 EFA are performed by the enzymes D5desaturase, D6-desaturase, elongase 2 and elongase 5. Maternally derived EFAs undergo conversion in the fetal liver before transport to tissues for local conversion. The effect of IUGR on EFA conversion and converting enzyme mRNA in rat serum and lung is unknown. We hypothesize that IUGR alters EFA conversion in the serum and lung of fetal rats at term gestation. We further hypothesize that changes EFA conversion in the serum and lung will occur in conjunction with changes in mRNA levels of converting enzymes in the liver and lung. METHODS: IUGR was induced by bilateral uterine artery ligation in rats at e19. Rat pups were delivered by C-section at term gestation (e21). Serum and lung was collected and EFA levels measured using gas chromatography. mRNA levels of FADS1 (D5-desaturase), FADS2 (D6-desaturase), ELOVL2 (elongase 2) and ELOVL5 (elongase5) were measured using real-time RT PCR. RESULTS: Results are IUGR as % sex-matched control ± SD, *p<0.05. In male serum, IUGR decreases conversion of ALA to EPA (21±11%*) and increases conversion of EPA to DHA (260±74%*). In male lung, IUGR decreases conversion of LA to AA (76±15%*). In female serum, IUGR increases in conversion of LA to AA (115±9%*). In male liver, IUGR decreases mRNA levels of FADS1 (65±31%*), ELOVL2 (73±35%*), and ELOVL5 (65±10%*). In male lung, IUGR increases mRNA levels of FADS2 (142±26%*). IUGR did not affect mRNA levels of conversion enzymes in female liver or lung. CONCLUSIONS: IUGR alters serum and lung EFA as well as mRNA of EFA conversion enzymes in a sex-dependent manner. Changes in expression of EFA conversion enzymes in rat serum and lung may contribute to altered EFA levels. Given that EFA act as ligands for several transcriptional regulators, we speculate that dysregulated EFA will affect gene expression profiles in the liver and lung. Altered gene expression profiles during fetal development may contribute to the programming of postnatal disease, including chronic lung disease. Rapid Perinatal hypoxia-induced free radical formation is an important cause of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy and subsequent neurodevelopmental disabilities. The xanthine oxidase inhibitor allopurinol reduces the formation of free radicals, which potentially limits hypoxia-induced brain damage. We have investigated placental transfer and safety of allopurinol after maternal allopurinol treatment during labor to evaluate its potential role as a neuroprotective agent in suspected fetal hypoxia. Allopurinol is known to inhibit xanthine oxidase at plasma levels ≥2 mg/L. We used data from a randomized double blind multicenter trial (RCT) comparing maternal allopurinol versus placebo in case of imminent fetal hypoxia (NCT00189007). Patients: We studied 58 women in labor at term with suspected fetal hypoxia, prompting immediate delivery, in the intervention arm of the RCT. Setting: 11 Dutch hospitals. Intervention: 500 mg allopurinol, intravenously to the mother, immediately prior to delivery. Main outcome measures: Drug disposition (maternal plasma concentrations, cord blood concentrations) and drug safety (maternal and fetal adverse events). RESULTS: Within 5 minutes after the end of maternal allopurinol infusion target plasma concentrations of allopurinol were present in cord blood. Of all analysed cord blood samples, 95% (52/55) had a target allopurinol plasma concentration of ≥2 mg/L at the moment of delivery. No adverse events were observed in the neonates. Two mothers had a red and/or painful arm during infusion. CONCLUSIONS: A dose of 500 mg intravenous allopurinol rapidly crosses the placenta, provides target concentrations in 95% of the fetuses at the moment of delivery, and has little side effects, which makes it potentially useful as an antenatal neuroprotective agent in perinatology. Light emitting transgenic mice, where luciferase expression is controlled by a surrogate promoter, are used to provide an in vivo readout of disease processes. In this study, we aimed to deliver a GFAP promoter controlling luciferase to brains of neonatal mice as a form of assessing the amount of astrogliosis in a mouse model of HIE.  A rodent GFAP promoter (GfaABC1D) was cloned into a lentivirus vector upstream of the genes encoding a codon-optimised firefly luciferase and green fluorescent protein. This vector was injected intra-cranially into wild-type neonatal (P0) mice, and luciferase expression continuously monitored by whole body bioluminescence imaging. We observed long-term expression of firefly luciferase under the control of the GFAP promoter; expression was restricted to the CNS. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, this GFAP biosensor appears suitable for achieving prolonged somatic transgenesis and astrocyte-selective. We now plan to use this construct in a neonatal neurodegenerative Type II Gaucher disease model and the HIE model, which would locate areas of perinatal brain injury and provide regions for delivering therapeutic transgenes. INTRODUCTION: Fetal growth depends on optimal maternal health and normal placental development. Maternal exposure to different factors such as ischemia, nicotine, inflammation and diabetes lead to persistent hypoxic conditions and result with critical injury to vital organs. Neonatal hypoxia remains a major cause of intrauterine growth restriction in neonates. Offspring exposed to prenatal hypoxia due to nicotine has been evidenced to experience behavioral abnormalities. Similarly, hypoxia due to exposure to nicotine during pregnancy is associated with cognitive deficits and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Gestational diabetes and inflammation processes also seem to increase the rate of brain damage due to oxidative stress. A variety of cytokines produced during the intrauterine inflammation are known to be toxic to developing brain cells. The study was conducted on pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats, (120 days old, 250-300 g). Experiments were carried out in order to determine the effect of nicotine (N) in doses of 2, 4 and 6 mg with or without long-term (24 hours from E-15 to E20) (LTH) and short-term hypoxia (6 hours a day from E1-15 to E-20) (STH), treated (T-GD) and untreated (UT-GD) streptozocin-induced gestational diabetes with or without LTH and STH conditions and bacterial endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation (I) with or without the treatment with interleukin-10 (Il-10) and ceftriaxon (CTX) on fetal brain weight. In each experiment pregnant female rats were assigned to two research groups: control group (N=6) and the experimental group subject (N=6). At E-21 rats were sacrificed, their fetuses were removed and their brains were weighted. RESULTS: Statistically significant (p < 0.05) brain weight decrease has been observed only in I and UT-GD-LTH groups. In other groups brain weight decrease has also been observed with non relevant values. In Ngroup 6 mg with LTH pregnancies were aborted before E-21. The obtained results of brain weights in rat offspring may be attributable to behavioral changes of experimental animals due to hypoxic exposure during gestation. Sphingosine-1-Phosphate (S1P) and Regulation of Drug Transporter (P-Glycoprotein) Activity in the Developing Blood-Brain Barrier. ) is an efflux transporter located on the luminal membrane of brain endothelial cells (BECs) of the brain microvasculature. P-gp is present in fetal BECs and is important in protecting the developing brain. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a lipid signaling molecule, has been shown to modify P-gp function in the adult rat blood-brain barrier (BBB) though the effects have been inconsistent. S1P is formed by sphingosine kinases (SKs), and acts through 5 membrane receptors (S1P 1-5 ). FTY720 acts as an agonist of S1P receptors at low concentrations, while at high concentrations inhibits production of endogenous S1P (K i = 2mM). We hypothesized that S1P receptors are expressed in the developing BBB and that FTY720 would have a dosedependent effect on P-gp function. METHODS: BECs were isolated from male postnatal day 14 guinea pigs and cultured. At confluence, BECs were treated with FTY720 (0.1, 1, or 5mM) or vehicle for 15, 30, 60 or 120 minutes. P-gp function was assessed using the calcein-AM fluorescence accumulation assay. S1P 1-4 receptors were measured in cultured BECs by RT-PCR. RESULTS: S1P 1-4 receptors were expressed in BECs. Treatment of BECs with high dose FTY720 (5mM) for 15, 30, and 60 minutes resulted in a reduction in P-gp function (increased P-gp substrate accumulation; P<0.05). There were no effects at 120 minutes. Low dose FTY720 (0.1mM) at 30 minutes caused a strong tendency (P<0.055) towards an increase in P-gp function. CONCLUSIONS: FTY720 treatment rapidly affected P-gp function in BECs derived from the developing brain, in a highly dose-dependent manner. At low concentrations, known to activate S1P receptors, FTY720 tended to increase P-gp function. However, at high concentrations, known to inhibit S1P production, FTY720 decreased P-gp activity. These data are consistent with S1P having an important role in the regulation of P-gp in the developing BBB. S1P levels are altered in many pathologies, including hypoxia, ischemia, inflammation, and infection. Modification of S1P levels resulting in changes in P-gp activity will likely profoundly alter exposure of the developing brain to xenobioitics, drugs and other factors.  the risk for metabolic diseases in adulthood, and the greater incidence for Type 2 Diabetes infers developmental adaptations in b-cells. In human and animal models of IUGR, reductions in b-cell mass and pancreatic islet metabolism were apparent. The objective of this study was to determine differentially expressed RNA transcripts in placental insufficiency induced IUGR fetal sheep islets that explain physiological and morphological adaptations in b-cells. METHODS: At 90% gestation placental insufficiency-induced IUGR (established by environmental hyperthermia) and control sheep islets were isolated (n=4/treatment). Isolated RNA was sequenced with Illumina hiseq2500 and analyzed using the Tuxedo Suite against the bovine genome (UMD 3.1) to identify differentially expressed transcripts. RNA transcripts were queried for enrichment and modeled to functional pathways previously defined. RESULTS: RNAseq identified 30,091 transcripts of which 7,192 were previously undefined. Fetal sheep islets expressed high levels of mature endocrine hormones and regulatory factors and 915 transcripts were differentially expressed (137 were novel). Pathways over-represented were proliferation and cellular stress response. Specifically, 36 genes identified significantly slowed mitosis, linking current results with previous findings that explain the reduction in IUGR b-cell mass. Also, negative regulation of programmed cell death was significantly enriched in IUGR islets, which supports unchanged rates in apoptosis of IUGR b-cells. Genes involved in metabolic processes were also significantly enriched, predominantly oxidative-reductive processes. In IUGR genes regulating glycolysis potential were increased and mitochondrial uncouplers were reduced. Also, five isoforms of peroxiredoxin and related enzymes were down regulated in IUGR islets, indicating reduced antioxidant capacity. CONCLUSIONS: High throughput RNA sequencing identified physiologically relevant pathways that describe mechanisms resulting in reduced b-cell mass and metabolic deficiencies in IUGR islets. These adaptations and other key differentially expressed candidate genes in IUGR may define the increased susceptibility of patients to early adulthood dysfunction in insulin secretion. (NIH R01 DK084842). Gain or loss of function of miR-29c was achieved by transfection with pre-miR-29c or anti-miR-29c oligonucleotides into sub-confluent cultured RAOSMC. Luciferase reporter activity assaysverified targets of miR-29c after 48hrs of transfection in RAOSMC. The results were analyzed in GraphPad Prism using unpaired two-tailed student's t-tests. RESULTS: Dexamethasone (0.1mM) and corticosterone (10mM) timedependently increased miR-29c expression 2.5 and 1.8 fold at 48hrs respectively (P<0.05), and reduced VEGF, Col3A1, Col4A5, MMP2 and ELN protein in RAOSMC. These effects were blocked by RU486 (1mM). The 3'UTRs of these genes were targeted by pre-miR-29c as confirmed by a significant decrease in luciferase activity of VEGF (19%), Col3A1 (34%), Col4A5 (45%), MMP2 (28%) and ELN (17%) constructs after 48hrs of culture. In addition, miR-29c overexpression in RAOSMC caused a significant reduction in mRNA expression for Col3A1 (26%), Col4A5 (28%) and MMP2 (24%), with no effects on mRNA degradation of VEGF and ELN. Gain-of function through miR-29c transfection in RAOSMC resulted in a significant reduction of protein levels of VEGF (43%), Col3A1 (51%), Col4A5 (56%), MMP2 (28%) and ELN (53%), respectively, whereas knockdown of miR-29c through anti-miR-29c transfection increased protein expression of VEGF (22%), Col3A1 (26%), Col4A5 (32%), MMP2 (68%) and ELN (52% The uterine artery (UA) undergoes marked vasodilation during pregnancy to provide an appropriate supply of maternal blood to the fetus. The large conductance Ca 2+ -activated K + (BK Ca ) channel is highly expressed in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) where it buffers depolarization and attenuates vasoconstriction. BK Ca activity is increased in the UA during pregnancy and its inhibition reduces basal uterine blood flow. However, the mechanism by which the BK Ca channel is regulated in the UA during pregnancy is still unknown. The leucine-rich repeat-containing (LRRC) protein 26 is a newly identified modulatory subunit that enhances BK Ca channel activity. We hypothesize that LRRC26 enhances BK Ca channel activity in VSMCs of UA from pregnant mice and may underlie the increased vasodilation seen during pregnancy. We evaluated the expression of LRRC26 in UA from nonpregnant and pregnant mice by qPCR. We recorded single-channel and whole-cell currents from both UA VSMCs and HEK293T cells transfected with BK Ca channel and LRRC26, using patch-clamp technique. Moreover, we evaluated the contribution of BK Ca channels to vasoconstriction of UA at different stages of pregnancy using a pressurized myograph. RESULTS: Iberiotoxin, a selective blocker of BK Ca channels, induced a greater reduction of UA diameter in pregnant compared to non-pregnant mice, confirming an increased activity of BK Ca in UA during pregnancy. We found that the LRRC26 mRNA is expressed in mouse UA. In freshly dissociated UA VSMCs from pregnant mice we observed a leftward shift of the BK Ca voltage-activation curve compared to cells isolated form nonpregnant UA. In HEK293T cells co-transfected with BK Ca and LRRC26, we observed enhanced BK Ca channel activation, with a leftward shift of the voltage-activation curve, similar to that observed in pregnant mouse UA. CONCLUSIONS: These results provide new insights into the mechanisms involved in the pregnancy-dependent vasodilation of UA and may provide information about novel modulators of the BK Ca channel that regulate UA vasodilation. INTRODUCTION: Exposure to intrauterine hypoxia occurs due to a variety of maternal, fetal and/or placental factors. Following birth, the implications on infant respiratory outcome depend on the duration and/ or severity of the hypoxic insult. In this study, we focus on the effect of maternal chronic hypoxia for a month during late gestation in sheep on the expression of genes regulating fetal lung liquid reabsorption and the maturation of the surfactant system. These are vital processes that aid the successful transition of the fetus to air-breathing at birth. METHODS: Chronically catheterised pregnant sheep carrying male singletons were exposed to normoxia (n=8) or hypoxia (n=7; 10% O 2 ) from 105-138d (term, ~145d). At 138d, fetuses were delivered, measured and their tissues collected. qRT-PCR was used to quantify lung mRNA expression of genes regulating sodium and water reabsorption, as well as the surfactant proteins (SP). These included amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel ( Progesterone has been linked to improved outcomes following traumatic brain injury in adults. Evidence shows that progesterone decreases edema, improves neuronal survival and modulates apoptosis. We sought to determine if women who received progesterone to prevent preterm birth had lower rates of severe intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) and/or periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) in their premature neonates. METHODS: Using a contemporaneously maintained database in a large community-based hospital, we identified all inborn singleton neonates with birthweight less than 1500gm whose preterm birth was the result of spontaneous preterm labor from 2003-2012. The primary exposure was a maternal history of progesterone use, intramuscular or vaginal, to prevent preterm birth. Our primary outcome was severe IVH defined as grade III and/or IV IVH or cystic PVL on routine head ultrasound. To control for covariates known to influence the rate of severe IVH and PVL multivariable analysis was performed. RESULTS: A total of 492 neonates were identified (Progesterone N=57; No progesterone N= 435). Increasing gestational age, absence of clinical chorioamnionitis, antenatal corticosteroids and higher Apgar score were all inversely associated with severe IVH and/or PVL ( P-value<0.01). No association was seen with maternal progesterone use and severe IVH and PVL in either unadjusted analysis (P-value=0.63) or in multivariable analysis aOR 1.1 (95% CI 0.4-3.2) after controlling for gestational age, race, antenatal steroids and clinical chorioamnionitis. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal progesterone usage is not associated with decreased rates of severe IVH and/or PVL. Although there is no association seen in this retrospective analysis further investigation with larger numbers, differentiating the methods and timing of maternal progesterone administration and examining fetal serum levels of progesterone are areas for future study to further examine the effects of progesterone on premature fetal neurologic outcomes. Excess neonatal body fat (%BF) is a risk factor for childhood obesity. Identification of excess fetal fat accretion midpregnancy may allow for interventions to optimize the fetal metabolic environment and improve long-term outcome. Previously, ultrasound (U/S) estimates of fetal thigh soft tissue at 28w were found to correlate with neonatal %BF. The objective of this analysis was to determine whether the association between early estimates of fetal adiposity and neonatal %BF differs by gender. METHODS: This is a secondary analysis of a prospective longitudinal fetal growth study (William Beaumont Hospital, MI, 2005 -2010 , including uncomplicated pregnancies (n=97) in which U/S measurements were obtained at 28 and 32w (2D fetal biometry and two fetal soft tissue measurements [fractional thigh volume (TVol) and mid-thigh circumference (TCirc)]). %BF was assessed within 2d of birth using air displacement plethysmography (PEA POD). Associations between U/S variables and %BF were determined using Pearson's correlation. Multiple regression modeling was performed to determine the best U/S variables for prediction of %BF. RESULTS: Mean birth weight was 3316.9±413.2g (1SD), gestational age 39w1d±1d, and %BF 9.6±3.8. The best predictor of neonatal %BF at 28 and 32w was TCirc (28w: r=0.25, p=0.01; 32w: r=0.37, p=0.0003). At 28w, this correlation was stronger in males (r=0.53, p=0.0003) than females (r=0.28, p=0.04), however the discrepancy resolved by 32w (male: r=0.41, p=0.006; female r=0.40, p=0.003). Multiple regression modeling did not significantly improve prediction of %BF. Abdominal circumference and estimated fetal weight were poorly predictive of %BF. CONCLUSIONS: Estimates of fetal mid-thigh adiposity (TCirc) early in the third trimester correlate with neonatal adiposity. Targeted intervention strategies aimed at moderating fetal fat accretion based onfetal soft tissue estimates should consider potential gender-based differences in fetal fat accretion patterns at 28-32w. Is the Heart of the IUGR Fetus Hypoxic in Early Gestation? M Tie, KJ Botting, S Zhang, C McMillen, S Gentili, SM MacLaughlin, JL Morrison. Sansom Institute for Health Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, Australia. INTRODUCTION: Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and chronic hypoxemia cause a decrease in cardiomyocyte endowment in late gestation with no change in hypoxia inducible factors (HIF1a, 1b and 2a) or genes with hypoxia response elements. We hypothesised that the decreased cardiomyocyte endowment in late gestation is due to either a decrease in proliferation or an increase in cardiomyocyte death in early gestation in the IUGR fetus. METHODS: IUGR was induced by removing endometrial caruncles in nonpregnant ewes. At 55d gestation, hearts from Control and IUGR fetuses were weighed and ventricular samples were frozen and fixed. Gene expression was determined relative to the geometric mean of 3 housekeepers using real-time PCR. The percent of proliferating cardiomyocytes was determined with Ki67 staining. Protein expression was determined relative to loading control using Western blotting. Data were analysed using a Students' t test. The IUGR fetuses were smaller (Control, 0.034±0.001kg, n=17; IUGR, 0.027±0.001kg, n=19) but there was no difference in relative heart weight. There was no difference in cardiac gene expression of HIF1a, 1b and 3a or genes with HRE including VEGF, IGF2, IGF2R and GLUT1 in IUGR group compared to Controls. There was no change in the expression of genes that promote cell cycle entry (Chek1, CDC2A, CyclinD1, CyclinD2 and Cdk9), in the percent of Ki67 positive cardiomyocytes or PCNA protein abundance between the IUGR and Control fetuses. There was, however, a decrease in the protein expression of Bcl-xl, an anti-apoptotic protein, and an increase in the protein expression of LC3B, a marker of autophagy, in IUGR fetuses. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the heart of the IUGR fetus may not be hypoxic and that there is no change in cardiomyocyte proliferation in early gestation, but that there may be an increase in apoptosis or autophagy of cardiomyocytes Here we sought to conduct human pilot studies to determine adenosine levels in the circulation of SCD non-pregnant and pregnant women. The study population is comprised of two matched cohorts-pregnant women who have SCD confi rmed by hemoglobin electrophoresis (n=8),and pregnant women who do not have SCD(n=8).The study population further comprised of non-pregnant women with (n=8)and without SCD(n=12). Blood was collected into tubes containing EDTA, deoxycoformycin (DCF) and dipyridimole in order to prevent degradation of adenosine.Adenosine levels were measured using high performance liquid chromatography(HPLC). Results were analyzed on Graph Prism Pro 5.0 software by student's T-test. We found that circulating adenosine is signifi cantly elevated in SCD patients compared to normal individuals under non-pregnant states by 2-fold. Moreover, we found that circulating adenosine levels in pregnant women with SCD is signifi cantly increased 8-fold compared to non-pregnant SCD women. Our pilot human studies showed that circulating adenosine is further elevated in SCD patients during pregnancy compared to non-pregnant SCD patients. This finding suggests that elevated adenosine is detrimental for SCD patients and may contribute to triggering sickling and other complications of pregnancy.Future studies will further determine whether adenosine is a pathogenic biomarker for abnormal pregnancy associated with SCD and assess the exact role of elevated adenosine. We believe these studies are likely to provide new insight for us and perhaps innovative therapeutic possibilities for SCD. While there are many studies on maternal protein restriction on offspring (OFF) outcomes, few address milk intake. We evaluated effects of maternal low protein diet in pregnancy and lactation on pup milk nutrient intake. METHODS: Pregnant rats received control (C -20% casein) or restricted (R -10% casein) isocaloric diet in pregnancy and lactation. One set of mothers were weighed and separated from their pups for four hours. After that period, both the mothers and their pups were weighed and were placed together again. One hour later, the pups were weighed to quantify relative milk and nutrient intake (water, protein, glucose, fat, DHA and AA; g/h). Another set of mothers were separated from their pups; four hours later moms received 0.8U oxytocin (ip) and after 15 minutes the rat was milked. Milk samples were assayed for water, protein, glucose, fat, DHA and AA. Data M ± SEM, analysis Student's t-test. Signifi cance set at p< 0.05. RESULTS: At all ages evaluated milk intake was lower in the R group ( Fig 1A) . Intake of all six nutrients measured at 21dL was lower in the R group than C (p < 0.05) (Fig 1, B -G) . At 14dL water, protein and fat intake was lower in R than C. At 7dL glucose and fat were lower than C. Pup nutrient intake at 7, 14 and 21dL in C (black dots) and R (white dots) group. M ± SEM, p < 0.05. * vs C, t-test. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal protein restriction negatively affects pup nutrient intake in all components but there were differences according to the post natal stage. These defi ciencies likely adversely affect neonatal development. Several epidemiological studies suggest associations between vascular-related pregnancy complications, such as pregnancyinduced hypertension (PIH) and preeclampsia, and maternal cardiovascular disease in later life. The underlying mechanisms of these associations are not yet clear. We examined the cardiovascular condition of mothers with vascular-related pregnancy complications 6 years after the index pregnancy. The study was embedded in a prospective populationbased cohort study in the Netherlands. Analyses were performed on data collected from 2,135 primigravid mothers without essential hypertension who visited the research center approximately 6 years (90% range: 5.7-7.1) after the index pregnancy. We studied the associations of PIH, preeclampsia, birth weight for gestational age and spontaneous preterm birth (sPTB) with the maternal cardiovascular outcomes. The cardiovascular outcomes included, blood pressure, carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity and results from maternal echocardiography. Information on pregnancy complications was retrieved from medical records. RESULTS: After adjustment for potential confounders mothers who had experienced PIH showed a higher systolic and diastolic blood pressure (8.42 mmHg; P<0.01 and 7.30 mmHg; P<0.01, respectively), a higher pulse wave velocity (0.29 m/s; P<0.05) and a larger aortic root diameter (0.66 mm; P<0.05). We observed a higher diastolic blood pressure in mothers with previous preeclampsia (3.92 mmHg; P<0.01) compared to mothers without hypertensive pregnancy complications. Small for gestational age was associated with a smaller maternal aortic root diameter (-0.48 mm; P<0.05), whilst large for gestational age was associated with a larger maternal aortic root diameter (0.52 mm; P<0.05). Mothers with a sPTB showed a lower systolic blood pressure (-4.08 mmHg; P<0.05) 6 years after their pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest that initially normotensive mothers with a history of vascular-related pregnancy complications, especially mothers with PIH, show several signs of increased cardiovascular risk approximately 6 years after the index pregnancy. Fetal Sex Specific Differences in Maternal Vascular Adaptation to Pregnancy. Zoe A Brown, 1,2 Sarah Schalekamp -Timmermans, 1,2 Albert Hofman, 3 Vincent WV Jaddoe, 1,3 Eric AP Steegers. Our objective was to assess fetal sex specific differences in maternal vascular adaptation to pregnancy measured by blood pressure and the pulsatility index of the uterine artery (PI-UtA). This study is embedded in the Generation R study, a prospective cohort study. Live singleton pregnancies were included (N=7810). In all trimesters systolic (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP) was measured. In the 2 nd and 3 rd trimesters PI-UtA was assessed. Pregnancies were stratified into complicated (hypertension, pre-eclampsia, small for gestational age or preterm birth, n=1133) or uncomplicated (n=6677). Linear regression analysis was performed to assess effects of sex on these outcomes. RESULTS: SBP and DBP are lower in mothers with a female fetus in uncomplicated pregnancies but higher in complicated pregnancies compared with male pregnancies. The differences are observed from the 1 st trimester onwards. In all groups PI-UtA was lower in the case of a female fetus. In complicated pregnancies the difference in male and female PI-UtA is greater than in the uncomplicated pregnancies. CONCLUSIONS: Fetal sex significantly affects maternal vascular adaptation with different effects for complicated versus uncomplicated pregnancies. Effect of Advanced Maternal Age on Pregnancy Outcomes in the Rat. Alison S Care, 1,3 Stephane L Bourque, 1,3 Sandra T Davidge. The age at which women deliver their first child has increased steadily in recent years, particularly in Western societies. Advanced maternal age (≥35 years) is associated with increased maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Little is known about the impact of aging on vascular adaptations to pregnancy that might compromise pregnancy outcome. We hypothesize that maternal cardiovascular adaptations to pregnancy will be impaired in rat dams of advanced maternal age. METHODS: Female Sprague Dawley rats aged 9 months (approximately equivalent to a 35 year old woman), and 4 months (young controls) were mated, and systolic blood pressure was measured using tail cuff plethysmography in mid-and late-gestation (gestational day (GD)14 and 19). On GD20, fetal biometrics were measured and uterine artery function was assessed ex vivo using wire myography. RESULTS: Systolic blood pressure was increased on GD19 in aged rats compared to young rats (young=108.8±5.1 mmHg vs. aged=131.4±5.8 mmHg, P<0.05). Aged dams had a reduced capacity to carry viable pregnancies (young=90% vs. aged=50%), and had reduced litter sizes (young=15.0±0.57 pups vs. aged=8.5±1.6 pups, P<0.01) on GD20. Fetuses from aged dams had a reduced body weight at GD20 (young=3.78±0.1g vs. aged=3.19±0.2g, P<0.05) as well as an increased crown-rump length:abdominal girth ratio -indicative of asymmetric fetal growth restriction (young=0.97±0.0 vs. aged=1.04±0.0). Moreover, fetal to placental weight ratios in aged dams were reduced (young=7.32±0.3 vs. aged=5.65±0.3, P<0.01), indicating a reduced placental efficiency. Uterine arteries showed a reduced maximal response to phenylephrine in aged dams (E MAX young=14.38±0.9 mN/mm vs. aged=11.44±0.5 mN/ mm, P<0.05), although there were no changes in endothelium-dependent relaxation. CONCLUSIONS: In a rat model of advanced maternal age, dams developed hypertension as well as altered uterine vascular contractility, and these changes were accompanied by adverse fetal outcomes. Hydrogen Sulfide Biosynthesis Is Highly Upregulated during the Follicular Phase and Late Pregnancy in Ovine Uterine Artery. Dongbao Chen, 1 Thomas J Lechuga, 1 Ronald R Magness. 2 1 Ob/Gyn, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA; 2 Ob/Gyn, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA. INTRODUCTION: Uterine blood flow increases during the follicular phase of estrous cycle and pregnancy in part via upregulation of vasodilator production locally in uterine artery (UA) in association with rises in circulating estrogens. The novel vasodilator hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) is primarily synthesized from L-cysteine by cystathionine b-synthase (CBS) and cystathionine g-lyase (CSE). It is unknown whether UA H 2 S biosynthesis is regulated by endogenous estrogens. Hypothesis: UA H 2 S biosynthesis is upregulated during the follicular phase of estrous cycle and pregnancy. METHODS: Nonpregnant ewes were synchronized to the luteal (Lut) and follicular (Fol) phase of the ovarian cycle. On day 9 postestrus, ewes (n=5/group) were given 2 IM injections 4 hours apart of either saline (1 ml) or lutalyse (1 mg/ml saline PGF 2a ) 48 hours after the last injection, Fol and Lut phase ewes were obtained from the PGF 2a and saline treated groups. Five late pregnant (LP, 120 to 130d) were studied. UAs were obtained at sacrifice, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and subsequently enriched UA endothelial (UAendo) or smooth muscle (UASM) proteins were extracted for determining CBS and CSE proteins by immunoblotting and H2S production by the Methylene Blue assay. Cellular specific CBS and CSE protein expression was assessed by immunofluorescence microscopy. RESULTS: CBS, but not CSE, protein was significantly (p<0.001) upregulated in UAendo and UASM in the Fol and LP <em style="mso-bidi-font-style: normal;">vs. Lut ewes. Levels of UAendo and UASM CBS protein were 2.6 and >9 -fold and 1.7 and >8 -fold greater in Fol and LP ewes than that of Lut ewes, respectively. Immunofluorescence microscopic analysis confirmed these findings. Compared to nonpregnant ewes, H 2 S production was also upregulated in LP UA ptotein lysates, which was blocked by incubation with a specific CBS inhibitor. CONCLUSIONS: UA H 2 S biosynthesis system is significantly upregulated in the follicular phase and late pregnant ewes, suggesting a role of physiologically elevated estrogens. ( In rats, the corpus luteal (CL) hormone, relaxin (RLN), mediates maternal circulatory changes in early pregnancy characterized by massive vasodilation. To assess whether RLN plays a similar role during human pregnancy, in a pilot study we investigated women conceiving with donor eggs (DE) who lack a CL, and hence, circulating RLN. METHODS: Women conceiving with DE or autologous eggs (AE) were studied before, 6 times during, and once after pregnancy. Cardiac function and structure were determined by echo, and arterial compliance (AC) and wave reflection by tonometry. Hemoglobin (Hb), plasma protein (PP) and hormones were assessed. Statistical graphs were drawn to contrast differences between DE and AE, and significance was set at 0.05 by testing fixed effects in the mixed models. RESULTS: 4 DE and 5 AE subjects completed the pilot study. DE subjects showed a markedly subdued decrease in systemic vascular resistance (SVR; p<0.002), increase in cardiac output (CO; p<0.005) and heart rate (HR; p<0.01 vs AE). Despite radically different SVR, mean arterial pressure (MAP) fell during pregnancy (p<0.002) comparably in the 2 cohorts (p>0.05). Hb (p<0.02) and PP (p=0.06) decreased, while left atrial (p<0.005) and ventricular end diastolic (p<0.02) dimensions increased to a similar extent in the 2 groups (p>0.05). In AE, global AC rose, and aortic augmentation index@HR75 and pressure declined; these responses were markedly attenuated in DE (p values from <0.06 to <0.03 vs AE). Serum RLN was high in AE and undetectable in DE throughout pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: Whereas AE showed the expected pattern of circulatory changes in pregnancy, there was a markedly blunted decrease of SVR and increase of CO in DE consistent with the lack of a circulating vasodilator such as RLN. Gestational increase in AC was attenuated in DE also consistent with impaired vasodilation. Despite impaired vasodilation, the fall in MAP was similar in DE and AE, which may explain the comparable expansion of plasma volume as reflected by the fall in Hb and PP, and rise in cardiac chamber sizes. Studies are ongoing to include age-matched spontaneous conceptions, as well as additional AE and DE pregnancies. We speculate that the maternal milieu, which is not physiological in DE, may contribute to the reports of increased preeclampsia and SGA in these pregnancies. In vivo, tumor cells employ them as a mechanism of immune escape and they can be measured in peripheral blood of patients with most forms of cancer. Their presence and activity have even been correlated with burden of disease and clinical stage. Our objective was to evaluate whether MDSC are induced and present during healthy pregnancies. We performed a prospective pilot study examining peripheral blood samples drawn from healthy pregnant patients for the presence of MDSC subsets, previously defined as CD11b+/HLA-DRlow/ HIF-1a+ and CD33+/HLA-DRlow/CEBP-b+. Differential density gradient was used to isolate peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and flow cytometry was performed to measure percentages of circulating CD11b+ and CD33+ MDSC subsets. We collected blood from six healthy pregnant volunteers in the third trimester and six weeks postpartum. Elevated levels of circulating CD11b+/HLA-DRlow/HIF-1a+ and CD33+/HLA-DRlow/CEBP-b+ MDSCs were found in all patients. Although changes in MDSC levels were not statistically significant (p>0.05), there is a trend suggesting that CD11b MDSC levels decrease after delivery (10.9% ± 2.2 versus 5.8% ± 1.5, mean ± SEM, n=6). While this trend also exists for CD33+ MDSC, there is a smaller difference in percentages before and after delivery (6.0% ± 1.2 versus 4.3% ± 1.7). Overall, Caucasian women with high education (degree) showed to be more precise about their self reported W and H. CONCLUSIONS: Self reported H and W measures set the population in the appropriate BMI category in 86.8% of cases. There are some demographic differences in the accuracy of sr measurements that should be taken into account. Lower Uterine Segment Thickness and Cervical Lenght. Yuval Ginsberg, Nizar Khatib, Zeev Weiner, Israel Goldstein. OB/GYN, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel. INTRODUCTION: Previous morphological studies have shown correlation between the cervical length (CL) and the lower uterine segment (LUS) along gestation. We examined sonographically the CL and the LUS throughout gestation and the correlation between them. METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study in our department between January 2008 and July 2013. During the study period we measured the LUS thickness and CL in women carrying singleton and twin pregnancies between 11-41 weeks gestation.Both CL and LUS thickness were measured by using a transvaginal approach with an empty urinary bladder to ensure adequate visualization of the LUS. Correlation between CL and LUS was calculated throughout gestation. RESULTS: Overall, 836 women with a median age of 31 (19-53) years were included in our study. 429 (51%) were singleton and 407 (49%) were twin pregnancies. An inverse correlation was demonstrated between gestational age and both LUS thickness (r=-0.558, p<0.0001, eta=0.534) and CL (r= -0.228, p<0.0001, eta=0.221). There were no statistical differences in the LUS thickness and the CL comparing between singleton and twin pregnancies throughout gestation. Although both demonstrated an inverse correlation with gestational age, no correlation was found comparing between the LUS thickness and CL. Since CL has already been approved as a predictor of preterm delivery, our results may suggest the benefit of adding LUS thickness for predicting preterm delivery. : 1285 in each group completed questionnaires; a 92% response rate. Women were similar at baseline. 90.5% in the CS group and 42.7% in the VB group gave birth by CS for one or both infants. We found no significant differences between groups in any outcome measure. Nearly one quarter of study participants had scores on the Edinburgh Postpartum Depression Scale >10 indicating possible depression and ≥14.0% in both groups scored >12 (likely depression). 4.4% (CS) and 3.9%(VB) reported thoughts of harming oneself sometimes or quite often. CONCLUSIONS: For women with twin pregnancies >32 weeks, outcomes at 3 months postpartum do not differ between planned CS and VB. Since depression scores were observed to be higher than for singleton births further study is warranted. Abbie C Johnson, 1 Marilyn J Cipolla. INTRODUCTION: Vasogenic brain edema is present in ~90% of women with eclampsia, although it is difficult to determine if edema is present prior to seizure because seizure itself causes blood-brain barrier (BBB) disruption. This study investigated the effect of pregnancy on seizureinduced vasogenic brain edema in the posterior brain region, a primary location of edema in women with eclampsia. We hypothesized that the pregnant state is more sensitive to seizure-induced brain edema than the nonpregnant state. Further, the role of oxidative disruption of the BBB was investigated as a potential underlying mechanism of seizure-induced edema since pregnancy is a state of mild peripheral inflammation that may sensitize the brain to edema during seizure. METHODS: Seizure was induced by i.v. infusion of the chemoconvulsant pentylenetetrazol (PTZ, 10mg/mL, 1mL/min) in nonpregnant (NP; n=7) and late-pregnant (LP; n=6) Sprague Dawley rats. PTZ infusion was stopped at onset of electrical seizure as monitored via EEG. Thirty minutes post-seizure, rats were euthanized, the brains removed and the posterior cerebral cortex isolated. Percent water content was measured by wet:dry weights, a sensitive measure of brain edema. To determine if edema formation was due to seizure-induced oxidative disruption of the BBB, in a separate group of LP rats (n=6) the peroxynitrite decomposition catalyst FeTMPyP was infused i.v. 10 minutes prior to PTZ, and seizureinduced edema measured. RESULTS: LP rats had significantly greater water content in the posterior brain region after seizure compared to NP rats (78.55 ± 0.11 vs. 78.04 ± 0.19 %, p<0.05). Infusion of FeTMPyP did not impact seizure-induced edema formation during pregnancy, as the percent water content was unaffected by FeTMPyP treatment and similar to LP (78.48 ± 0.13 %; p>0.05). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the maternal brain is more susceptible to seizure-induced vasogenic edema than the nonpregnant state. The combination of mild inflammation present in pregnancy and oxidative stress due to seizure may lead to BBB breakdown, however, our results suggest edema does not appear to be due to peroxynitrite generation. These findings reiterate the importance of prevention and management of eclampsia and suggest that the maternal brain is at a greater risk of edema after seizure. Estrogens potently dilate blood vessels throughout the body with the greatest response in the uterus that is largely mediated by enhanced production of uterine artery (UA) nitric oxide (NO); however, additional mechanisms are involved since NO inhibition only blocks ~65% of the estrogen-induced response. Hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) has been described as a novel vasodilator, which is primarily synthesized from L-cysteine by cystathionine b-synthase (CBS) and cystathionine g-lyase (CSE). Hypothesis: Estrogens stimulate UA H 2 S biosynthesis. METHODS: Ovariectomized nonpregnant ewes (n=5/group) were treated with vehicle (OVX/Veh) or estrogen replacement therapy (OVX/ERT, 1 µg estrodiol-17b/kg body weight, 5-6 days). Intact UA and denuded UA (UASM) samples were obtained and analyzed for: 1) CBS/CSE mRNA by qRT-PCR; 2) CBS/CSE protein by immunoblotting and their cellular specific (endothelium vs. smooth muscle) localization/expression by immunofluorescence microscopy; and 3) H 2 S production by the Methylene Blue assay. RESULTS: ERT significantly (P<0.01) stimulated CBS mRNA and protein without altering CSE mRNA and protein expressions in UA and UASM of OVX ewes. Levels of UA and UASM CBS mRNA were 5.03 (± 1.00 SD) and 5.60 (± 0.93)-fold greater, and levels of CBS UA and UASM protein were 3.51 (±0.51) and 4.67 (±0.09)-fold greater in OVX/ ERT than that of OVX/Veh ewes, respectively. Immunofluorescence microscopic analyses confirmed the CBS and CSE protein expression patterns. ERT also stimulated H 2 S production in UA protein lysates compared to controls, which was blocked by incubation with specific inhibitors of CBS and CSE. CONCLUSIONS: Exogenous estrogens upregulate UA H 2 S biosynthesis in OVX sheep, suggesting that H 2 S contributes to estrogen-induced uterine vasodilatation (Supported by NIH HL 70562, HL 98746 and HD08783). INTRODUCTION: A history of completed pregnancy is associated with reduced risk of breast cancer in later years and those pregnancies associated with preeclampsia (PE) demonstrate a further reduction in risk. It has recently emerged that pregnancies and multiparity are both positively associated with an aggressive tumor subtype termed triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) defined by the absence of expression of estrogen, progesterone, and Her2-neu receptors. Our objective was to evaluate the relationship between a history of PE and breast cancer subtypes (TNBC vs. other subtypes). METHODS: From a population-based cohort study of all women aged 20-44 diagnosed with invasive breast cancer in the Seattle-Puget Sound area, we conducted a secondary recontact interview, including detailed obstetric history. For this analysis, we considered all pregnancies before a breast cancer diagnosis. Pathology reports confirmed tumor type. Each woman was considered according to whether she had experienced PE with one or more pregnancies at any gestational age (GA), and according to whether she had experienced preterm PE with one or more pregnancies (delivery <37 weeks GA). Chi-square and logistic regression were used for analysis. An additional analysis considering all pregnancies was performed, using generalized estimating equations (GEE) to account for possible correlation between repeated measures from the same subject. RESULTS: There were 318 parous women available for analysis with 27 (8.5%) with any history of PE, 12 (3.8%) of which had preterm PE. Though PE at any GA was not associated with tumor type, prior preterm PE was more common in women with TNBC, a trend which reached significance after adjustment for age at time of cancer diagnosis and race. Analysis of all pregnancies using GEE yielded similar results.  In our study, prior preterm PE was associated with an increased risk of TNBC compared with other tumor types. Our evolving understanding of the relationship between pregnancy outcomes and subsequent breast cancer risk underscores the importance of consideration of differences in the biology of both tumor subtypes and pregnancy complications. The INTRODUCTION: The significant increases in uteroplacental blood flow during gestation, essential for normal fetal growth, are achieved in part by vasodilation of the uterine vasculature. Estrogen may contribute to this effect although the mechanisms involved remain to be fully understood. The aim of this study was to investigate whether the novel G-protein coupled estrogen receptor (GPER) is implicated in the uterine circulation of pregnant vs. non-pregnant rats. METHODS: Experiments were carried out on uterine radial arteries isolated from non-pregnant (n= 18) and age-matched late pregnant (day 20/22; n= 20) Sprague Dawley rats. Arterial segments were pressurized to 50 mmHg in an arteriograph, preconstricted 40-50% with phenylephrine, and tested with a specific agonist and antagonist of GPER (G1 and G15, respectively). To compare reproductive and systemic vessels, an identical protocol was applied to isolated resistance mesenteric arteries. RESULTS: A dose-response curve was obtained for G1 in the 1 pM -1 µM range, with a maximum vasodilation of uterine arteries of 81 ± 6.8% in non-pregnant vs. 35 ± 7% (p<0.001) in pregnant rats; mesenteric arteries also dilated 56 ± 3.4% and 45 ± 9.4% (p=0.02), respectively, in vessels from non-pregnant vs. pregnant rats. G1 vasodilation was significantly inhibited in presence of G15. Interestingly, the vasodilatory effects of 17b-Estradiol were not affected by the inhibition of GPER in uterine arteries. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that GPER produces functional effects in resistance uterine arteries and are in agreement with a previous study on different type of arteries. Vasodilation in response to G1 was reduced by pregnancy in both uterine and mesenteric arteries, although this effect was only statistically significant in the former. The preservation of vasodilation to estradiol in the presence of G15, a specific GPER inhibitor, suggests the non-involvement of GPER in the estrogen vasodilatory effects on uterine vasculature, although some indirect (co-modulatory) effects cannot be excluded. Thus, while GPER maybe not be directly activated by estrogen, its vasodilatory effect may contribute to the increase of uteroplacental blood flow during pregnancy. The blood of asthmatic pregnant women contains increased numbers of neutrophils and monocytes. We hypothesise that asthma during pregnancy will be associated with enhanced chemotaxis of maternal monocytes particularly in women who experience an exacerbation during pregnancy compared to non-asthmatic pregnant women. The aim of this study was to assess the chemotactic capabilities of monocytes from asthmatic and nonasthmatic pregnant women in relation to fetal sex, asthma exacerbations and severity. METHODS: Venous blood was collected from pregnant asthmatic subjects and controls at 12, 18, 30 and 36 weeks gestation and 6 month post-partum (n = 10 per group). Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated, and chemotaxis was assessed using a transwell assay with Monocyte Chemoattract Protein-1 as the chemoattactant. Cells were loaded into the upper chamber, and after incubation, the number of cells that migrated were counted using a Scepter cell counter. Chemotactic response was expressed as migration index relative to cells with media alone and compared between the different groups. RESULTS: Current data has identified that at 30 weeks gestation there is no variation in the chemotactic ability of monocytes from pregnant women with asthma, with and without an exacerbation during pregnancy and compared to non-asthmatic pregnant women. When data were split according to fetal sex, there was a trend of reduced monocyte chemotactic ability in women pregnant with a male fetus who experienced an exacerbation. CONCLUSIONS: Suppression of monocyte chemotaxis appears to be sex specific. In pregnancies with a female fetus mechanisms other than monocyte chemotaxis may contribute to worsening asthma such as differences in neutrophil function. Further research focused on understanding the mechanisms that cause the disease to worsen with pregnancy will help improve management and reduce poor pregnancy outcomes associated with an asthma exacerbation. Maternal and Fetal Angiotensinogen Genotype Affect Uterine Spiral Artery Remodeling. Monique Rennie, Jessica Hebert, Antonio Frias, Kent Thornburg, Terry Morgan. Center for Developmental Health, Knight Cardiovascular Institute, OHSU, USA. In humans, angiotensinogen (AGT) genetic variants causing slightly elevated angiotensin II production are associated with preeclampsia, fetal growth restriction, and abnormal spiral artery remodeling. To isolate the effects of a 20% increase in AGT expression, we study a murine AGT gene titration (3-copy) model (TG). We have recently shown using microbubble-enhanced ultrasound imaging that this mouse model has faster uteroplacental blood flow velocity and reduced spiral artery transit time compared with wild-type controls (WT). Our objective now was to test for differences in uterine spiral artery remodeling in TG and WT dams; and, to determine whether fetal genotype may influence this important mechanism underlying placental insufficiency. METHODS: Uteroplacental vasculature from four WT and four TG dams were perfused with x-ray contrast at embryonic day 17 and 3D microcomputed tomography images were obtained for WT and for 2and 3-copy TG pups (n=7-9 placentas/group). Arterial vessel numbers, diameters, and degree of spiral artery coiling were measured using Amira visualization software. Maternal and fetal AGT expression levels were measured using fresh liver samples and Taqman qRT-PCR. Placental sflt-1 levels were measured by ELISA. RESULTS: TG dams and 3-copy fetuses expressed elevated AGT levels (125%) compared with WT controls and their 2-copy siblings from TG dams. WT dams exhibited a complex network of spiral arteries (4 to 6 per tree) that merged into large canals feeding the intervillous space. In contrast, the number of spiral arteries in TG dams was reduced by 28% (4.6 +/-0.3 (SEM) vs. 3.3+/-0.4, p<0.001), and 3D surface renderings revealed further reductions in spiral artery coiling, length and branching. Interestingly, 3-copy pups exhibited a more pronounced deficit in spiral artery number and coiling than their 2-copy siblings from TG dams. Placentas from TG dams made more sflt-1, which was surprisingly most pronounced with the fetus was male compared with female siblings. Rapid uteroplacental blood flow in our TG model appears to be related to reduced spiral artery numbers, length, and coiling. Vascular effects were most pronounced when the pups also expressed elevated AGT levels. We hypothesize elevated angiotensin II production at these sites may increase placental sflt-1 secretion, which in turn may inhibit maternal VEGF signaling and spiral artery growth. Uterine Scars Cause Premature Fetal Lymphocyte Activation through a Disrupted Immunologic Barrier. Tina A Nguyen, Andrea L Snead, Maria Yesayan, Daniel A Kahn. OB/GYN, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA. In healthy pregnancy, maternal and fetal compartments are physically separated by multiple cell layers and the fetal immune system displays an 'in-experienced' phenotype in utero. The contribution of the uterus as an immunologic barrier contributing to the naïve state of the fetal immune system has not been explored thus far. Given the high worldwide rate of cesarean section, the role that a disrupted (scared) uterus would play in fetal immune responses was explored. A prospective cohort study of fetuses born to mothers with prior uterine scar was undertaken (UCLA IRB # 11-002962). Cord blood lymphocytes were analyzed for memory status of the T regulatory cells (CD4+FoxP3+RO/RA). Placental location was documented immediately prior to delivery by ultrasound, but laboratory staff was blinded. Memory phenotype was defined as CD45RO+ and Naïve phenotype as CD45RA+. In this prospective cohort study, we identified placental implantation in apposition to a uterine scar as a sufficient factor for fetal in utero immune activation, especially in the regulatory T cell compartment. Our results (N=20) identify a risk difference of 90% with a relative risk of 10 (p<0.05) of activation (RO+) of the regulatory T cells when the placenta was implanted over the prior uterine scar. CONCLUSIONS: It is known that tolerogenic fetal immune responses to non-inherited maternal antigens exist (via regulatory T cells) but the degree to which this includes other antigens, for example derived from maternal infections or vaccinations during pregnancy, has not been studied. Our initial results demonstrate a link between placental location over a prior uterine scar and increased maturity of tolerogenic fetal lymphocytes. Our study indicates that intrauterine formation of tolerogenic fetal responses increases with fetal exposure to a scarred uterus potentially increasing the formation of inappropriate tolerogenic responses. While the fetus can cope with antigens in utero by favoring immune tolerance, inadvertent exposure to some antigens in utero (such as vaccine antigens) may lead to long lasting immune tolerance when effector phenotype may be desired. Thus, factors that limit fetal antigenic exposure may be critical in allowing the development of fetal/child effector responses to provide protection against infections. Our results highlight the role that uterine integrity plays as an immunologic barrier. although the human placenta highly expresses receptors that scavenge heme-haptoglobin and heme-hemopexin complexes (LRP1 and CD163, respectively). The aim of this study was to intrinsically label maternal RBC's early in gestation using a stable Fe isotope ( 57 Fe) and compare neonatal cord blood enrichment of RBC-derived Fe with that of inorganic Fe ( 58 FeS0 4 ) given in late gestation. Neonatal and maternal RBC Fe enrichment will be compared to maternal hemopexin and haptoglobin concentrations, maternal and neonatal Fe status and to expression of key placental heme and non-heme Fe transporters at delivery. METHODS: Pregnant women (n=20, ages ≥ 15 y) will receive 15-20 mg of 57Fe orally as FeS04 between 13-15 wks of gestation to label the Friday maternal RBC pool at a time when little fetal Fe accrual occurs. RBC Fe enrichment disappearance curves will be monitored at 16-18, 24-26, and 35-37 wks of gestation and at delivery. A second stable isotope (1 mg of 58Fe as FeS04) will be given in late gestation (wk 33-35). Absorption of each form of Fe will be measured 2 weeks post-dosing; at delivery enrichment of both isotopes in cord blood will be measured to assess net fetal transfer of dietary and maternal endogenous Fe. A full complement of Fe status indicators will be measured. RESULTS: To date, 10 women (28.0 ± 1.7 y) have received 15.2 ± 1.5 mg of 57 Fe as FeS0 4 at 15.1 ± 0.8 weeks of gestation. At entry, 20% of the women (n=10) were anemic. Ferritin decreased across gestation and 50% of women were anemic at term. Iron absorption in early pregnancy was inversely associated with ferritin and averaged 13.7 ± 10.4% (n=7). Six women received 58 Fe at 33.8 ± 0.9 wks gestation. RBC enrichment declined over the last 23 wks of gestation and 57 Fe-RBC disappearance curves were variable. Studies are underway to relate RBC disappearance curves with maternal / neonatal Fe status and enrichment in the neonate at birth. CONCLUSIONS: Using this novel biomedical mass spectrometric approach, unique in vivo data on placental transport of Fe from variable maternal Fe sources will be obtained. Comprehensive knowledge of the placental vasculature is vital to understanding normal and complicated fetal growth and development. Chorionic plate vascular morphological differences in placentas of normal and abnormally grown fetuses have undergone limited evaluation using gross observation and corrosion casting.These methods do not allow complete visualization and analyses of the chorionic vessel branching and morphology, particularly at the level of the delicate networks that constitute the terminal branches. Our aims were (i) to devise an effective, detailed and sophisticated technique to define and analyse human chorionic vessels and (ii) to compare chorionic vascularity in placentas obtained from normal pregnancies and those complicated by fetal growth restriction (FGR). We constructed three dimensional models of chorionic plate vessels using a corrosion casting technique. Subsequently, whole placental vascular models were scanned by high resolution micro-CT and analysed using computer-aided scientific visualisation software. RESULTS: High resolution micro-CT imaging of corrosion casted vascular models permitted analyses of the entire chorionic vasculature and terminal branches to 60µm resolution. Compared to normal (n = 12), FGR placental arterial casts (n = 6) demonstrated fewer branches of large calibre chorionic arteries (p = 0.0071, Mann-Whitney test) which terminate as a fine network of arterioles. Similarly, preliminary findings indicate poor vascularity at the arteriolar level in the FGR casts. CONCLUSIONS: This study was the first to demonstrate the validity of micro-CT as an effective technique for the examination of the morphology of chorionic vessels. Our preliminary findings show impoverished chorionic arterial vascularity in FGR placentas. The consequence of this may be insufficient blood and nutrient supply to the fetus. This provides insight into the likely events preceding or associated with failed intrauterine growth. Only a minority report experiments using purified term primary trophoblasts. Therefore, we set up a protocol where primary trophoblast isolations would be the main in vitro tissue used in our laboratory. From previous reports we were uncertain: 1) whether negative selection was essential 2) whether forskolin syncytialisation was required 3) of seeding density 4) whether primary trophoblasts had the machinery to produce sFlt-1. Thus, we performed a systematic examination of these questions in order to propose an 'optimal protocol' for primary trophoblast isolation. METHODS: Trophoblasts were isolated by trypsin digestion and separation on a percoll gradient, before negative selection using CD9. Purity was assessed by immunocytochemical analysis of CK7. Trophoblasts were plated at 175,000, 0.5 or 1 million cells/cm 2 . At 16h monolayers were washed and treated with vehicle (DMSO) or Forskolin (20uM). Media was collected at 24 and 48h for analysis of hCG (marker of syncytialisation) and sFlt1. To assess the functional utility of these cells, we administered siJMJD6, a key molecule involved in the splicing of sFlt1 and assessed sFlt secretion. Experiments were repeated with at least 3-4 different placentas. RESULTS: 1)Negative selection using CD9 produced a highly pure population (>98% cytokeratin staining of cells). 2)Initial plating of 175,000, 0.5 or 1 million cells/cm 2 produced monolayers with 40-50%, 60-70% and 80-90% confluency at 16h respectively. 3)Surprisingly, primary trophoblasts did not spontaneously syncytialise, with little to no hCG secreted 16 and 40h post plating. In contrast hCG secretion was significantly increased in forskolin treated cells, indicating enhanced syncytialisation. 4)Primary trophoblasts produced high levels of sFlt1 from the initiation of culture, and levels were increased with forskolin. siJMJD6 induced >70% reduction of Jmjd6 mRNA expression, and translated to a significant decrease in sFlt1 protein secretion. CONCLUSIONS: Primary trophoblasts represent an easily accessible in vitro model of the syncytiotrophoblast. Negative selection is essential to produce a pure population, and syncytialisation can be enhanced by administration of forskolin. The primary trophoblast readily produce sFlt1 and are amenable to siRNA experiments. Determination of Reference Genes for the Use with Rat Placenta. Quantitative real time PCR (RT-qPCR) is commonly used in gene expression studies in rat implantation. The most commonly used reference genes are Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) or ß-actin. So far there are no studies detailing a systemic analysis of reference genes in the rat placenta. Therefore the aim of this work was to identify the most suitable reference genes out of a shortlist of 12 reference genes in rat placenta. METHODS: RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis was performed from placental tissue (n=10). The rat geNorm TM reference gene selection kit with 12 reference genes was used (Primer Design, Southampton, UK). The Pfaffl quantification method was used for analysis of gene expression. The software programmes geNorm and Normfinder were employed for the analysis of reference gene stability in rat placenta. GraphPad Prism was used for statistical analysis and statistical significance was considered with a p-value <0.05. No data were obtained for the MDH reference gene suggesting this mRNA is not expressed in rat placenta.The Ct values for the remaining genes varied as shown in Figure 1 . The most stably expressed reference genes identified by both geNorm and Normfinder in rat placenta were Phospholipase A2 (YWHAZ), ribosomal protein L13a (RPL13A) and GAPDH. Figure 1 : CT values of 11 reference genes in rat placenta (n=10). CONCLUSIONS: The most stably expressed reference genes in rat placenta were YWHAZ, RPL13A and GAPDH.  Overall, there is consistency in the top five regulators, with alpha catenin and U0126 unique to the 10 vs. 16 wk comparison. The predicted activation state is inhibited for all 5 regulators until the 10 wk vs. 16 wk comparison. This is consistent with adaptive modifications of gene expression facilitating the transition from hypoxic conditions in the early first trimester to normoxic conditions by the second trimester. Several of these transcription regulators are known to play a role in placental angiogenesis and signaling of trophoblast differentiation. Further examination will provide new insight into normal pregnancy and pregnancies complicated by placental disease. Is Normal placentation occurs at low oxygen tension,which rises towards the end of the first trimester with the successful remodelling of spiral arteries 1 . Oxygen-sensing is mediated by hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) whilst the renin angiotensin system (RAS) may play a role in placental development via receptors such as angiotensin type 1 (AT1R) and type 2 (AT2R) 2 . Hypoxia stimulates HIF1a which must bind to HIF1b to regulate target genes. Using an in vitro model of hypoxia-reoxygenation, we tested the hypothesis that HIFs would be associated with placental angiotensin receptors. METHODS: Following informed written consent, term placental samples were obtained from women undergoing elective Caesarean birth. Placental explants were incubated under1) normoxic conditions (N) (10%O 2 /85%N 2 /5%CO 2 ) for 20 hrs; 2) 1mM H 2 O 2 ; 3) 6 hr cycles of repetitive hypoxia (0.5% O 2 /94.5%N 2 /5%CO 2 )-reperfusion (10% O 2 ) (HR) for 20 hrs; 4) normoxic conditions with added vitamin C (1mM) and E (1mM). At the end of the culture period, explants were flash frozen and stored at -80 o C for mRNA analysis.Expression of AT1R and AT2R as well HIF 1a, 1b and 2a genes were determined by qRT-PCR and normalised to 3 stably-expressed housekeeping genes. Overall, placental mRNA expression of HIF1b was found to strongly correlate with both AT1R (r=0.77, P<0.001) and AT2R (r=0.81, P<0.001). AT2R also correlated with HIF1a mRNA expression (r=0.512, P=0.013). Under these experimental conditions, there was no association between the angiotensin receptors and HIF2a. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a strong interaction between AngII receptors and HIF1b at the gene level. We are exploring whether this is mirrored in protein expression. In this study mRNA stability was not assessed, however HIF1b is the most stable and constitutively-expressed subunit. Translocation of HIF complexes to the nucleus can only occur after binding to HIF1b; regulation of this subunit therefore could have a significant effect on responsiveness to oxygen changes. AT2R are most highly expressed early in pregnancy and this association with the oxygen-sensing units, reemphasises a possible role for RAS in normal placental development. INTRODUCTION: Differential diagnosis between late fetal growth restriction (late-IUGR) and constitution small fetus (SGA), their monitoring criteria and decision on timing of delivery remain highly controversial. The aim of this study was to assess the possible contribute of uterine blood flow volume measurements in improving our understanding of this condition. METHODS: 27 singleton pregnancies with late-IUGR fetuses >34+6 weeks were enrolled in this study. IUGR was diagnosed by abdominal circumference < 5 th percentile, and/or by growth restriction <40 th percentiles in longitudinal exams. Doppler velocimetry of Uterine (UtPI) and Umbilical (UmbPI) arteries was recorded. Uterine and Umbilical blood flow volumes were measured (Barbera 1999; Rigano 2010). Gestational age at delivery and newborn weight was recorded. P values <0.05 were considered significant. RESULTS: Gestational age and newborn weight at delivery were 39±1 and 2610 (i.q. 2345-2790). Labor was induced in all cases, but one breech presentation and one multiple cesarean section. Mean pH at birth was 7.26 (i.q. 7.19 -7.30). All UtPI and UmbPI were normal. A non significant In this cohort, umbilical vein fl ow volume normalized per fetal weight was signifi cantly lower than AGA fetuses (median IUGR 66.4 ml/min/ kg, i.q. 52.5 -80.7 vs. median AGA 108.0 ml/min/kg i.q. 71.2 -144.5). CONCLUSIONS: Our fi ndings, albeit observed in a small cohort, pose intriguing questions as regards traditional views on the integration of fetal biometry and Doppler velocimetry of uterine and umbilical arteries. Absolute uterine blood fl ow volume might help to differentiate true growth restricted fetuses with reduced uterine and umbilical blood fl ow versus constitutionally small fetuses. Placental histology and larger clinical cohorts are needed to confi rm this emerging hypothesis. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-dependent transcription factor, is a classic receptor of 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzop-dioxin (TCDD). AhR mediates TCDD-induced increases in fetal and neonatal mortality and decreases in litter sizes. However, AhR knockout in mice also leads to similar adverse phenotypes in the fetus and newborn, partially due to abnormal vascular development. We have reported the expression of AhR in human umbilical cord vein (HUVE) & artery (HUAE) endothelial cells as well as in human term placentas. To examine physiological roles of AhR in fetoplacental vasculature, we test the hypothesis that 2-(1'H-indole-3'-carbonyl)-thiazole-4-carboxylic acid methyl ester (ITE, an endogenous AhR ligand) and TCDD (an exogenous AhR ligand) suppress endothelial cell proliferation and migration in HUVE and HUAE cells via AhR. METHODS: Cell proliferation and migration were assayed. Cell cycle progression was analyzed by fl ow cytometry. Western blotting was used to quantify changes in target protein levels. Special AhR siRNA was used to knockdown AhR expression. RESULTS: ITE at 1 mM and TCDD at 10 nM were used in this study. We observed that ITE and TCDD inhibited (p < 0.05) HUAE and HUVE cell proliferation by ~ 30% on Day 6 of treatment, but ITE and TCDD at the indicated dose did not affect the cell cycle progression. ITE and TCDD inhibited (p < 0.05) HUAE (by ~ 40% and 30% for ITE and TCDD, respectively), whereas did not affect HUVE cell migration. ITE and TCDD rapidly decreased (p < 0.05) AhR protein levels in HUVE (~ 80% by ITE at 2 hr and 80% by TCDD at 8 hr) and HUAE (~90% by ITE and ~ 85% by TCDD at 8 hr) cells, indicating activation of AhR. AhR siRNA specifi cally suppressed (p < 0.05)AhR protein levels in HUVE (~ 90% We have reported the expression of SDF2 in human placenta in different compartments throughout pregnancy. We showed this expression is higher during second trimester of pregnancy, which is maintained until term. The function of SDF2 is not known in mammals, but the high expression -especially in syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblast from villi -intrigued us to investigate the role of the placental SDF2 during gestation. METHODS: Primary cytotrophoblast cells (CTBs) were obtained from second trimester placentas by enzyme digestion and Percoll gradients. Cells were plated in matrigel and maintained in culture for 30 min, 24 h and 48 h for differentiation assays. An additional group was maintained for 24 h and then submitted to 1 h or overnight in hypoxia (2 % O 2 ). BeWo cells were also cultured for 24 and 48 h and an additional group were submitted to hypoxia using DMOG (1mM). The expression of SDF2, HIF-1a (Hypoxia inducible factor 1 a) and hCG were evaluated and b-actin and cytokeratin were used as loading control for Western Blot assays and trophoblast marker in immunofl uorescence assays respectively. RESULTS: In differentiation assays SDF2 was upregulated in CTBs after 24 h and after 48 h in BeWo cells. In hypoxia SDF2 was downregulated after 1 h in CTBs and after 48 h in BeWo. Immunofl uorescence and Western Blot of HIF-1a confi rmed hypoxia condition for CTBs and BeWo cells respectively. Elisa for hCG confi rmed CTBs differentiation. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest SDF2 is playing a role in the trophoblast differentiation. A role for this molecule activity during placental development has not been previously suspected. Further studies addressing function assays to understand the exact play role by this protein at maternal-fetal interface are in progress. Supported by FAPESP and CNPq. Epidemiological studies have shown that dietary intake of foods and beverages rich in polyphenols is associated with improved health outcomes. As the use of natural health products (NHPs) increases in popularity, more research studying the biological effects of polyphenol consumption is required, especially during pregnancy. Leaf extracts from many plants, including Vaccinium angustifolium Ait. (Lowbush blueberry), have been used as traditional medicines and are currently recommended as NHPs. The benefi cial effects of V. angustifolium may be explained by its antioxidant and anti-infl ammatory activities. Furthermore, other Vaccinium species have been shown to promote cell migration for wound healing. Since many pregnancy complications are associated with increased oxidative stress and inflammation, and altered trophoblast invasion, we wanted to: (1) determine the effects of V. angustifolium leaf extract on trophoblast biology; and (2) characterize the active components in the extract. METHODS: Dose-response studies were performed by treating HTR-8/SVneo cells with the extract for 24 or 48 hours. Trophoblast invasion was determined using Matrigel-coated Boyden chamber inserts. Cell proliferation and viability were assessed using BrdU incorporation and trypan blue exclusion assays, respectively. Crude extract was characterized using UPLC-MS-QTOF and fractioned in a four-part series extraction. RESULTS: At 20 ng/mL, the extract significantly increased cell invasion and had no effect on cell proliferation or viability. Phenolic acids, flavonoids, and terpenes were identified in the crude extract. Extracts isolated using hexane and acetonitrile increased cell migration to a degree comparable to the effect seen with the crude extract. CONCLUSIONS: V. angustifolium leaf extract increases trophoblast invasion and has no effect on cell proliferation or viability. Preliminary results suggest that polyphenols are major components of the crude extract. Fractionation studies suggest that compounds present in the hexane and acetonitrile fractions are the active principles. Mechanistic studies are currently underway to determine the effects of the extract on cell signaling. The multidrug transporters, P-glycoprotein (Pgp, encoded by the ABCB1 gene) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP, encoded by ABCG2) are expressed in the first trimester human placenta and protect the embryo / fetus from exposure to toxins, drugs and other xenobiotics that may be present in the maternal circulation. Viral or bacterial challenge has been shown to down-regulate expression of multidrug transporters in rodents. In the current study, we hypothesized that bacterial and viral challenge (as modeled by exposure to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and poly I:C, respectively) will down regulate expression of P-gp and BCRP in the human first trimester placenta. This would result in increased exposure of the embryo/fetus to potentially harmful drugs and toxins in the maternal circulation. METHODS: First trimester placental villous explants (n=6) were collected and cultured with LPS (0.1-10ug/mL) or Poly I:C (1-50ug/mL) for either 4h or 24h. ABCB1, ABCG2, TLR-3, TLR-4, IL-6, IL-8 and CCl2 mRNA expression levels were assessed by RT-PCR and protein (P-gp and BCRP) by western blotting. RESULTS: LPS treatment (24h) decreased (p<0.0001) placental ABCB1 and ABCG2 mRNA levels, but had no effect on TLR-3 and TLR-4 mRNA. This treatment also decreased (p<0.05) BCRP protein expression, but had no effect on P-gp protein. Poly I:C treatment did not affect mRNA or protein expression of the transporter proteins or the Toll Like Receptors. IL-6, IL-8 and CCl2 were significantly increased (p<0.01) after LPS and Poly I:C treatment (4h and 24h) compared to control, demonstrating that these treatments effectively activate downstream markers of TLR3/4 activation and are not cytotoxic to the explants. CONCLUSIONS: Placental TLR3/TLR4 are expressed in the 1 st trimester. Activation of TLR4 by LPS (modeling bacterial challenge) leads to decreased expression of the multidrug transporters ABCG2 and ABCB1, as well as BCRP protein. In contrast, activation of TLR3 by Poly I:C (modeling viral infection) has no effect on the expression of these transporters. Thus bacterial (but not viral) infection may reduce the protection of the embryo / fetus against drugs and toxins present in the maternal circulation during early pregnancy. Supported by CIHR. Growth Restricted Pregnancies. C Mando, GM Anelli, C Novielli, MI Mazzocco, F Parisi, I Cetin. Biomed Clin Sciences L.Sacco, Univ Milan, Italy. INTRODUCTION: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number is positively correlated with the number of mitochondria and its control is essential for normal cell function. We previously reported altered mitochondrial content and function in intrauterine growth restricted (IUGR) placentas, as well as higher mtDNA levels in IUGR maternal blood.Here, we measured for the first time mtDNA levels in fetal cord blood of preeclamptic (PE) and IUGR single pregnancies, in order to assess potential alterations in fetal energetic metabolism. We studied at elective cesarean section 30 term AGA (appropriate for gestational age), 33 PE (16 PE alone, 17 PE/IUGR), 32 IUGR and 10 preterm AGA (<37 weeks of gestation) fetuses. The latter presented appropriate for gestational age (GA) fetal weights.We analyzed mtDNA levels by Real Time PCR (2^-DCt; target gene:CytocromeB; endogenous gene:RNAseP) in the fetal blood obtained by double clamping of umbilical cord. As expected, GA, fetal and placental weights were significantly decreased in IUGR and PE pregnancies vs controls. Maternal BMI was higher in PE vs AGA. RESULTS: IUGR fetuses presented significantly lower oxygenation values than controls. All cases presented a strong significant increase (p<0.001) in cord blood mtDNA levels compared to controls. Moreover, cord blood mtDNA was increased in all cases also compared to preterm AGA, which presented similar GA (2^-DCt: term AGA=234±76; preterm AGA=268±98; PE=644±380; PE/IUGR=567±420; IUGR=486±290). Cord blood mtDNA levels are a depiction of the fetal bioenergetics status. While in pregnancies presenting IUGR the increase in mt biogenesis may be related to lower fetal oxygen levels, in PE cases without IUGR the mtDNA increase may be due to other mechanisms such as inflammation. However, since mtDNA was isolated from whole cord blood, we cannot exclude placental tissue fragments as a source of its increase. Future studies analyzing PE fetal blood inflammation and oxidative stress status are needed in order to assess increased mtDNA levels possible origins. INTRODUCTION: 3D placental reconstruction/analysis could improve our understanding of healthy/complicated pregnancies but a universally accepted model of the term human placental villous tree is lacking. We therefore applied a novel 3D digital method for the virtual reconstruction of the human placenta (villous tree, fetal membranes, parenchyma) in order to better appreciate its normal/pathological morphology. Friday METHODS: Placentas were obtained from normal/complicated (preeclampsia (PET), gestational diabetes, growth restricted; each n=1) pregnancies following term elective caesarean sections. Full depth placental segments were formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded and serially sectioned. Slides were stained with H&E, digitized on an automated slide scanner and reconstructed using sequential image-based registration. Interactive segmentation highlighted various placental structures which were iso-surfaced to yield volumes of areas of interest (stem villi and their branches in normal/PET cases). Volume rendered models allowed detailed visualization/ qualitative assessment of the complex spatial arrangement of stem villi, their lower order branches, the parenchyma and fetal/maternal membranes. Segmentation of the villi in different cases revealed remarkable differences in villous distribution and branching patterns across these pathological pregnancies. CONCLUSIONS: Successful development of the villous architecture and its circulatory network is essential to support a healthy, term pregnancy. Virtual pathology is superseding conventional microscopy in creating high-resolution 3D models. The approach combines simple histology with an automated registration algorithm to generate a high dataset throughput with minimal user interaction. This method enables users to examine tissue microstructural and likely functional differences between tissues, especially if combined with immunohistochemistry. Its application in this study highlights its merit as a vital research tool enabling users to examine placental histoarchitecture at a cellular resolution, thereby gaining clinically relevant insight into the placental pathology of pregnancy complications. Coffee is the most commonly consumed pharmacologically active beverage in the UK, above alcohol (1). Coffee contains biologically active chemicals including caffeine, caffeic acid (CA) and chlorogenic acid (CHLA); the latter are natural phenols with antioxidant properties and potential health benefits. Pregnant women are encouraged to limit their caffeine consumption during pregnancy. However potential effects of CA/CHLA on placental function are unknown. We aimed to investigate the effects of caffeic acid and chlorogenic acid on placental arterial function. METHODS: Human chorionic plate arteries, isolated from placental biopsies (elective Caesarean section from women with uncomplicated pregnancies; maternal age 24-39), were mounted on a wire myograph (2). Vessel viability was determined with 120mM potassium solution (KPSS), U46619 (Thromboxane A 2 mimetic) and bradykinin. Doseresponse curves to CA and CHLA (both 10 -8 -10 -3 M) were constructed to determine direct contractile or relaxatory (in presence of U46619-induced contraction) effects. Contractile effects of the reactive oxygen species (ROS) hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ; 10 -3 M) were determined post-incubation with CA/CHLA (10 -3 ; 15 minutes). Data was expressed as mean+/-SEM. RESULTS: CPA (n=64) diameters were 324+/-15µm. CA and CHLA did not significantly increase basal tone (n=42; CA 1.2+/-0.6kPa vs. Control 0.9+/-0.5kPa and CHLA 0.2+/-0.1vs. Control 0.2+/-0.1). Neither CA nor CHLA induced relaxation of U46619-contracted CPA's (n=30. Peak H 2 O 2 induced contraction in CPA's was unchanged (4.9+/-0.9 vs. 4.4+/-1.0kPa) but the longevity of response was reduced by pre-incubation with CA but not CHLA (22+/-3 vs. 53+/-12%) of maximal H 2 O 2 -induced contraction at 15mins (P<0.05; M-W U test). CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that CA may protect placental CPA's from ROS-induced stimuli. Further studies will focus on the effects of coffee oils (e.g. cafestol) and chronic incubation of CA/CHLA on placental arteries. Progesterone supplementation shows promise in reducing preterm birth in those women at risk. The role of progesterone in mitigating the early pathologic activation of labor through diverse, yet interrelated pathways is an area of active research. Aberrant uteroplacental flow is implicated as an independent risk factor for preterm birth. In an ex vivo placental perfusion model 17-hydroxyprogesterone has demonstrated the ability to attenuate vasoconstriction in the fetal blood vessels of human placentas. The objective of this study was to investigate if micronized progesterone (P4) has the ability to attenuate thromboxane mimetic U46619-mediated fetoplacental artery vasoconstriction. METHODS: Paired cotyledons obtained from the same placenta of five term, healthy, non-labored subjects were used in a modified dual cotyledon perfusion model. The fetal artery and maternal intervillous space of one cotyledon was infused with P4 while another cotyledon was infused with control perfusate. After 30 minutes, a bolus dose of U44619 was administered to both cotyledons. The change in the measured fetoplacental vascular pressure caused by bolus administration of U46619 was less in the cotyledons infused with P4 compared to control (8.8 mmHg + 5.2 mmHg versus 50.3 + 12.7 mmHg, p = 0.009). CONCLUSIONS: Continuous treatment with P4 significantly attenuates the U46619-mediated fetoplacental vasoconstriction. This ex vivo observation supports the biologic plausibility of a clinical protective effect exerted by progesterone against aberrant uteroplacental blood flow, a known risk factor for preterm birth. Labour Is Associated with Altered Class I Histone Deacetylase Expression in Human Gestational Tissues. Sheryl K Munro, 1 Murray D Mitchell, 2 Anna P Ponnampalam. We have previously shown that modulation of HDAC activity has tissue specific effects on the inflammatory network in gestational tissues. Aim of this study was to determine whether there are any labour associated changes in the expression and localisation of class I HDACs (HDAC1, 2, 3 and 8). METHODS: Human gestational tissues were obtained, following caesarean section without labour and vaginal delivery. HDAC mRNA expressions were examined by Real-time PCR and proteins were localised by immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: Expressions of HDAC1, 2 and 8 were significantly higher in villous compared to amnion or choriodecidua. HDAC2 and HDAC3 mRNA expression were significantly reduced in choriodecidua following labour. In amnion, HDAC protein was most prominent in the epithelium. Decidual tissue strongly stained for all 4 HDACs, with most variation apparent in the extravillous trophoblast of the chorion. In villous tissue, HDACs were most strongly associated with the syncytiotrophoblasts, with consistent staining also in endothelial cells. Nuclear HDAC2 and Cytoplasmic HDAC8 were both enhanced in amnion post-labour. Majority of HDAC3 and HDAC8 staining in extravillous trophoblast was cytoplasmic, however additional nuclear staining was more apparent post-labour, and cytoplasmic HDAC3 became more strongly associated with the cell margins rather than diffuse. In villous tissue HDAC2 staining frequency dramatically increased post-labour. Several of the Class I HDACs are up-regulated in the placenta and membranes post labour despite little evidence for changes in mRNA expression. Studies to date have examined the inhibition of these proteins, however our data suggest it would be of interest to examine the implications of increased HDAC protein and how this relates to labour processes both at term and in a pathological setting. INTRODUCTION: Pregnancy in obese women is associated with increased infl ammation in the placenta and programs the offspring for adult cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are non-coding RNAs, which regulate target gene expression through mRNA cleavage or translational repression. We have previously shown: 1) a role for miR-210 in mitochondrial dysfunction in preeclamptic placentas, and 2) fetal sex-dependent differences in expression of miR-210 in the placenta with maternal obesity. We hypothesized that activation of NFkB by infl ammation will affect the expression of miR-210 and, as a consequence, placental mitochondrial function. METHODS: Placentas of male or female fetuses from women of healthy BMI with uncomplicated pregnancies were collected after c-section at term (no labor). Cytotrophoblast cells were isolated and syncytialized for 72 hrs. To mimic the infl ammatory state of obesity, syncytiotrophoblasts (ST) were treated with TNFa (10ng/ml, 2 hrs), an activator of NFkB1. The effect of TNFa on mitochondrial respiration in the ST was measured using Seahorse XF24 Analyzer. TNFa-treated male and female ST showed a 2-fold increase in protein expression of NFkB1 (p<0.05). However, only female ST had 4-fold increase in expression of miR-210 (p<0.01) vs. untreated controls. This was accompanied by a 50% reduction (p<0.05) in the expression of miR-210 target genes -Iron Sulfur Cluster assembly proteins and NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha subcomplex 4. No signifi cant changes in miR-210 expression (1.2±0.2 fold) were observed in male ST. In parallel, binding of NFkB1 to the miR-210 promoter measured by ChIP assay was detected in TNFa-treated ST of females but not males. Co-transfection with siRNA to NFkB1 (100nM, 48hrs) was suffi cient to prevent the TNFa-mediated upregulation of miR-210 expression in the ST. Basal, ATP-coupled and maximal respiration were decreased in TNFa-treated ST by 67±2%, 60±5%, and 66±4% respectively vs. controls (n=3, p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Thus, we show a sexual dimorphism in placental miR-210 expression in response to TNFa regulated by NFkB1. Our data suggest that the infl ammatory in utero environment associated with obesity induces an NFkB-mediated increase in placental miR-210 in a fetal sex-dependent manner and inhibits mitochondrial respiration causing placental dysfunction. Role In cancer cells, high rates of glycolysis are regulated by changes in expression of miR-143 (a small non-coding RNA) which inhibits its target gene hexokinase 2 (HK-2). HK-2, which converts glucose to glucose-6-P, has been reported to be over-expressed in diabetic rat placenta. We hypothesized that miR-143 expression is down-regulated in GDM placenta mediating a switch in mitochondrial respiration to glycolysis. METHODS: Placental villous tissue was collected at term after C-section (no labor) from women with gestational diabetes, treated with diet alone (A1GDM), or with glyburide/insulin (A2GDM) (n=6/each group). The control group (CTR) included placentae collected from healthy women with uncomplicated pregnancies, matched for pre-pregnancy BMI and gestational age (n=6). Placental expression of miR-143 and its target genes were analyzed by RT-PCR and Western blot. Mitochondrial respiration and glycolysis were measured in syncytiotrophoblasts (ST) cultured for 72hrs from control and A2GDM placenta by Seahorse XF24. RESULTS: There was no signifi cant difference in fetal weight, however, placental weight was higher (p<0.05) in A2GDM (733±58g, mean+SE) but not in A1GDM (706±76g, p=0.06) vs.CTR (587±48g). The fetalplacental weight ratio was lower (p<0.03) in A2GDM (3.45±0.02) but not in A1GDM (4.54±0.03) vs. CTR (5.26±0.02). Placental expression of miR-143 was reduced by 50% (p<0.05) in A2GDM compared to A1GDM or CTR. Expression of HK-2 mRNA and corresponding protein were increased 4-fold and 1.5-fold respectively (p<0.05) in A2GDM vs. CTR with no difference in A1GDM. Furthermore, mRNA and protein levels of the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase, and of lactate dehydrogenase were also signifi cantly increased (p<0.05) in A2GDM vs. CTR. Our preliminary fi ndings show a decrease in mitochondrial oxidative respiration in ST from A2GDM vs.CTR. This was accompanied by an increase in the rate of glycolysis as indicated by a 2-fold increase in extracellular acidifi cation rate (ECAR) in A2GDM vs. CTR. In conclusion, we suggest that miR-143 may mediate the increased expression of genes regulating glycolysis in the A2GDM placenta perhaps in response to decreased mitochondrial respiration and/ or placentomegaly. The inflammatory or metabolic milieu of the obese pregnant woman may cause epigenetic changes in DNA methylation in placenta that modulate function. With genome scale analysis we found increased DNA methylation (5mC) and decreased DNA hydroxymethylation (5hmC) in placentas of obese vs healthy weight women. TET enzymes convert 5mC to 5hmC to alter gene expression from inactive to active. The mitochondrial enzyme IDH2 catalyses formation of a-ketoglutarate (aKG) a co-factor for TET activity providing a pathway for metabolic regulation of DNA methylation. We determined the effect of obesity on the association between differential methylation of IDH and TET, their mRNA expression and the functional consequence. METHODS: RNA was isolated and cDNA prepared from villous tissue (5 random samples/placenta) collected at term by c. section in the absence of labor from healthy (term BMI 27.4±2.2, mean±SD, n=21) and obese (38.1±2.3, n=21) women with normal pregnancy outcomes. mRNA expression of TET and IDH genes was measured by qRT-PCR. Expression of CSH-GH and PSG gene cluster members, which we previously found to be differentially methylated with obesity, was measured as a functional readout. RESULTS: Expression of TET1, TET2 and IDH2 (mitochondrial) genes was significantly decreased (p<0.05) in placenta of obese vs healthy women. In parallel, expression of CSHL1, GH2 and PSG2 was significantly decreased (p<0.05). Expanding studies to 63 women (BMI 23-42) showed an inverse correlation of placental IDH2 expression with increasing maternal BMI (p<0.02). The association of TET2 with BMI just failed to reach significance. There was a significant correlation between IDH2 and TET2 expression (p<0.0001), between IDH2 and CSHL1 (p<0.005) and between TET2 and CSHL1 (p<0.02). CONCLUSIONS: TET2 may sense metabolic or oxidative stress states in placenta via IDH2 and aKG. IDH2 mutations have been shown to impair TET2 catalytic activity. We previously found evidence of decreased DNA hydroxymethylation of IDH2 in placenta with obesity which thus may mediate the decreased IDH2 expression shown here. The relationship between IDH2, TET2 and CSHL1 expression suggests a functional role for differential methylation of this pathway in metabolic sensing with obesity and regulation of placental gene expression. Higher rates of adverse pregnancy outcomes have been observed in pregnancies where the fetus is male. We investigated whether there was an association between fetal sex and levels of several candidate biomarkers (placental growth factor (PlGF), soluble endoglin (sEng), metallopeptidase domain 12 (ADAM-12) and insulin-like growth factor acid labile subunit (IGFALS)) previously identified as predictive of preeclampsia (PE). Plasma samples taken at 20 weeks' gestation from women who developed PE (n=150) and women who did not develop PE (n=450) were randomly selected from the SCOPE study biobank. Proteins were quantified using targeted mass spectrometry assays and ELISA (PlGF) and converted to MoMs. RESULTS: In contrast to PlGF, sEng and IGFALs, levels of ADAM12 at 20±2 weeks were dependent on fetal sex in women with PE, with significantly higher ADAM12 levels observed in women carrying a male fetus (n=73) compared to women carrying a female fetus (n=75) . CONCLUSIONS: These data fit a contemporary hypothesis that female and male offspring respond differently to insults during gestation. Males maintain their growth trajectory in an adverse maternal environment while females reduce growth and are thereby more likely to survive further maternal insults. The data presented here suggest that an alteration in ADAM12 may reflect an altered placental response in pregnancies subsequently complicated by PE. The Altered levels of a number of plasma proteins have previously been identified in pre-diagnosis samples from women with pre-eclampsia using mass spectrometry (MS) methods. We aimed to determine whether changes in any of these proteins were demonstrable in serum-free media samples generated from placental explants cultured under different oxygen conditions. METHODS: 1 st trimester placental villous explants were established from tissue obtained from termination of pregnancy procedures (n=9, all 7-9 weeks gestation). Explants were pre-conditioned at 1% O 2 before being cultured at 1%, 6% or 20% O 2 in serum-free media for 48h with a replacement of media at 24h. A panel of 69 proteins was measured using selective reaction monitoring. RESULTS: A number of low abundance proteins which were differentially expressed in plasma from women with pre-eclampsia were down regulated in placental explants (1% vs 6% O 2 fold change): Ectonucleotide phosphodiesterase-2 (ENPP-2, 0.67; p=0.02), Prenylcysteine oxidase 1 (PCYOX, 0.76; p=0.02), Kunitz-type protease inhibitor 1 (SPIT-1, 0.65; p=0.03), cystatin-c (CYTC, 0.73; p=<0.01), ADAM-12 (0.78; p=0.02) and Sulfhydryl oxidase 1 (QSOX-1, 0.72; p=0.02). Both Peroxiredoxin-1 and 2 were upregulated in hypoxic explants (PRDX1, 1.19; PRDX2, 1.28; p=0.01) and in 20 week plasma samples from women with PE. Serum amyloid A-4 protein (SAA4, 2.23; p=0.01), phosphatidylinositolglycan-specific phospholipase D (PHLD, 1.52, p=0.01) and placental anticoagulant 3 (ANXA3, 1.23, p=0.01) were upregulated in hypoxic explants but unchanged in PE plasma. ENPP-2 and CYTC were also significantly increased in explants at 20% O 2 . CONCLUSIONS: A number of proteins, which have been identified as candidate biomarkers for pre-eclampsia in pre-diagnosis plasma samples are significantly changed in placental explants exposed to hypoxia. This confirms that changes in circulating levels of these proteins are likely to originate from placental dysfunction. Further work is necessary to explore the role of these proteins in the placenta. Late-onset small for gestational age (SGA) babies are at a higher risk of adverse perinatal outcome regardless of the finding of the presence or absence of doppler signs of placental insufficiency. Histopathologic placental analysis could provide additional information reflecting latent insufficiency in uteroplacental blood supply. A series of placentas were evaluated from singleton pregnancies of SGA births (birth weight below the 10 th percentile) delivered after 34 weeks with normal umbilical artery Doppler (pulsatility index below the 95 th percentile), that were matched by gestational age with adequate-for-gestational age (AGA) controls. Using a hierarchical and standardized system, placental lesions were classified histologically as consequence of maternal underperfusion, fetal underperfusion or inflammation. A total of 284 placentas were evaluated (142 SGA and 142 AGA). In the SGA group, 54.2% (77/142) of the placentas had weights below the 3 rd percentile for GA while it was a 9.9% (14/142) in the AGA group (p<0.001). Only 21.8% (31/142) of SGA placentas were free of histological abnormalities, while it was 74.6% (106/142) in the AGA group (p<0.001). In the abnormal SGA placentas (111/142) there were a total of 161 lesions, attributable to maternal underperfusion in 64% (103/161), fetal underperfusion in 15.5% (25/161), and inflammation in 20.5% (33/161). CONCLUSIONS: A significant proportion of late-onset SGA births with normal umbilical artery Doppler may still be explained by placental insufficiency. A Nawathe, 1,2 K Sung Hye, 2 M Savvidou, 1 M Christian, 2 M Johnson, 1,2 V Terzidou. Placental samples from fetal side collected within 30 minutes of delivery. RNA was extracted, cDNA prepared and qPCR was performed as per manufacturer's instructions. RESULTS: IGF1 was significantly underexpressed in fgr and overexpressed in macrosomia. IGF1 was significantly underexpressed in GDM on diet and metformin. There was no difference in IGF2 expression. IGFBP1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 were overexpressed in FGR & raised BMI groups while underexpressed in macrosomia. We show for the first time IGFBP7 expression in term placenta. The IGF binding proteins may play a crucial role in altering local availability of IGF which might be crucial in regulating fetal growth. Friday suggests that Wnt signalling pathways play an important role in implantation and placentation. To date, there have been no studies looking specifically at Wnt signalling cross-talk between trophoblast (fetal) and decidua (maternal) cells in vitro. METHODS: Human placental trophoblast and decidual cells were grown in co-culture and their gene expression profiles compared with/ without co-culture. Intracellular and secreted levels of Wnt inhibitors were determined by ELISA and immunoblotting to determine the effects of co-culture on Wnt signalling and its regulation. RESULTS: Expression analysis of Wnt components using a Wnt PCR array (Qiagen) showed that the majority of the 84 Wnt-related genes on the array were detectable in both cell types and the majority of genes were not differentially expressed in co-culture; however, expression of the secreted Wnt inhibitors secreted frizzled related protein (sFRP4), Dickkopf 1 and Wnt inhibitory factor 1 (Wif1) were up regulated in trophoblast co-culture, findings confirmed by real time qPCR. The protein levels of all three antagonists in cell extracts of trophoblast co-culture were found to be up-regulated by ELISA. A number of other proteins with important roles in implantation/placentation were shown interact with the Wnt signalling components. Among these, Msh homeobox 1 and cyclooxygenase-1 (PTGS-1) expression were up-regulated in trophoblasts with decidual co-culture, consistent with an increased inhibition of Wnt signalling in response to increased antagonists levels. Our studies suggest that the differences in Wnt signalling factor expression between trophoblast and decidua mostly reside in secreted Wnt antagonists, possibly reflecting paracrine downregulation of Wnt signalling possibly to tightly regulate trophoblast proliferation and invasion. The We previously demonstrated that inhibition of autophagy suppressed TNF-a-induced apoptosis in JEG3 cells(Reproductive Science, accepted) and also found the inhibition of autophagy was associated with increased trophoblast invasion in JEG-3 cells(SGI 2010 abstract #195). In this context, to elucidate the possible molecular mechanism of autophagy on trophoblast invasion, we here investigated the effect of autophagy inhibition on intracellular calcium store and the expression of calcium-dependent adhesion molecules in JEG-3 cells. We suppressed the autophagic activity using plasmid encoding mStrawberry-Atg4B C74A , which is known to inhibit autophagy and prepared stable JEG-3 cells expressing either mStrawberry-Atg4B C74A or the control vector. Intracellular calcium levels were measured using Indo-1 by flow cytometric analysis. Ionomycin(a calcium ionophore) and thapsigargin(an endoplasmic reticulum calcium ATPas pump inhibitor) were used for tracking the cytoplasmic and ER calcium flux. Among the calcium dependent adhesion molecules, we assessed the desmosome formation by immunofluorescence staining against desmoplakin and performed Western blot for E-cadherin in JEG-3 cells stably expressing either mStrawberry-Atg4B C74A or the control vector. RESULTS: Invasion of JEG-3 cells expressing mStrawberry-Atg4B C74A was increased by 7-9 folds compared with the control. This result was consistent with our previous observation. We found that the suppression of autophagy was associated with the depletion of intracellular and ER calcium store in JEG-3 cells, which was restored with the supplementation of calcium. We also found that the suppression of autophagy also induced the derangement of desmosome formation detected by immunofluorescence staining. Notably, suppression of autophagy induced a significant decrease in the expression of E-cadherin in JEG-3 cells. CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed that the inhibition of autophagy affected the depletion of intracellular calcium store, thereby affecting the calcium-dependent adhesion molecules in JEG-3 cells. Taken together, inhibition of autophagy seems to increase invasion of JEG-3 cells by lowering intracellular calcium concentration which disrupted desmosome formation. The Dynamic and complex network of molecules participates to maternal fetal cross-talk ensuring success of the placenta and pregnancy. The Macrophage Migration Inhibitory Factor (MIF) is one of the molecules produced during gestationmainly by trophoblast in a time-and spatial-dependent manner. Since several reports in non reproductive tissues have pointed out a protective role of MIF against cell injury, we investigated the MIF potential activity and its contribution as pro-survival factor in placenta. First trimester human placental tissues were used to evaluate the expression and localization of MIF receptor/coreceptor complex CD74 and CD44. In subsequent experiments, we challenged placenta villous explants with carbonyl cyanide p-(trifluoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP), a known inducer of cell death by apoptosis in the presence of recombinant MIF, anti -MIF antibody or anti -CD74 antibody. The placental cultures were then examined for the expression of caspase 3, Bax and Bcl 2 by western blot. RESULTS: CD74 and CD44 mRNA and protein were both detected in all placental tissues examined. Immunohistochemistry showed that CD74 was mainly localized in the cytotrophoblast cells while, the CD44 was expressed by the villous stromal cells. Treatment of placental explants with FCCP, as expected, resulted in increased levels of cell death; pre-treatment with rMIF significantly prevented this effect as showed by the decreased cleavage of caspase 3 and Bax/Bcl2 ratio. This protective role of MIF against apoptosis was confirmed by the treatment of placental explants with anti -MIF and anti -CD74 resulting in an increased cleavage of caspase 3 and Bax/Bcl2 ratio. The pro-survival function of MIF herein showed may influence placenta physiology and help in protecting the organ from any potential injury.  Proper placental development is crucial for a healthy and successful pregnancy. Myostatin a highly conserved secretory protein negatively regulates muscle development affecting both proliferation and differentiation. In human placentae myostatin expression is negatively correlated with gestational age and in placental explants acts to facilitate glucose uptake. OBJECTIVE:To determine the localization of myostatin in human placental tissue and investigate the effect of myostatin treatment on placental cell function. METHODS: Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for detection of myostatin, cytokeratin 7, vimentin and HLA-G was performed on paraffin imbedded third trimester placentae. Chromogenic reaction was completed with DAB and counterstained with Mayer's hematoxylin.Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed on a TripleTOF® 5600 system (ABSCIEX) using a Scheduled High Resolution Multiple Reaction Monitoring (sMRM HR ) method developed for the detection of myostatin. Myostatin treatments in the absence of FBS (0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.5 and1mg/ml) were applied to to HTR-8/SVneo cells* (model of extravillous trophoblast; EVT) seeded on Collagen I-coated 96 well plates at densities of 10x 10 4 for proliferation and 5 x 10 5 for migration assays. Incucyte TM live-cell imaging system was utilised for quantitation of cell proliferation and the migration of cells into wounds made with the 96-pin WoundMaker TM . *HTR-8/SVneo were generously provided Dr Charles H. Graham. RESULTS: Myostatin localization was observed in EVT cells and confirmed by HLA-G IHC. MS detection of myostatin protein was confirmed by MASCOT software and the limit of detection with the sMRM HR method developed was identified as 20ng/ml. HTR-8/SVneo was significantly (p<0.05) increased in proliferation in a concentration dependent manner with myostatin treatment and migration of HTR-8/ SVneo was significantly (p<0.05) increased with all myostatin treatment. CONCLUSIONS: Myostatin is localized to EVT cells and up-regulates proliferation and migration of EVT (HTR-8/SVneo) cells. We postulate myostatin to be a key regulator of placental formation, development and function. Increments observed in the proliferative and migrative capacities of extravillous trophoblast cells treated with myostatin presents for the first time a role for myostatin in the development of the human placenta. The PE is thought to have a multi-stage pathology including 1) poor early placentation of largely unknown aetiology and 2) endothelial dysfunction and inflammation that drive the progression into the maternal syndrome (stage 2) characterised by hypertension and proteinuria. A common link between the maternal syndrome and early placentation is the highly oxidative environment. Isoprostanes are a lipid peroxidation product that can increase vasoconstriction and limit placental perfusion through binding to the thromboxane receptor (TP); however, the complement of TP expressed during pregnancy and PE is undocumented. The objective of the study was to document the expression of and regulation of trophoblast function by TP isoforms during pregnancy. METHODS: IHC was performed on sections from "normal" and PE pregnancies. Stable ectopic expression of TPa, TPb or TPD328 (the region common to both receptors) in trophoblast cell lines (BeWo, JEG-3) was achieved using transfection. The effect of these receptors on proliferation, syncytialization in response to 100 mM forskolin, and motility was subsequently assessed. RESULTS: Elevated levels of the human-specific TP isoform, TPb, were identified in syncytiotrophoblast and extravillous cytotrophoblast populations in placentae affected by PE but not normal tissue. TPa expression enhanced proliferation (increased expression of cyclin A/ D1/E), syncytialization of BeWo cells (3-fold reduction in E-cadherin) and migration of JEG-3 cells. By comparison, TPb activation attenuated proliferation (increased expression of p27 and p53), syncytialization and migration of trophoblasts (p<0.0001 compared to TPa). These effects (not shared by the TPD328 mutant) were localised to the divergent C-terminus of TPb and were mediated through direct protein-protein interactions within distinct domains. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the TPa isoform, expressed normally on trophoblasts, enhances the processes required for normal placentation. However, activation of the TPb isoform produces a cellular phenotype consistent with the abnormal placentation observed in PE and indicates that the pathologic upregulation of TPb in the placenta may play a role in regulating the onset and severity of PE. The Influence of the SK3 Channel on Placental Vascularization in Mice. Cara C Rada, Sarah England. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. INTRODUCTION: Improper placental perfusion can lead to pregnancy complications and loss of the fetus. K + channels are known to contribute to vascular remodeling during pregnancy and their dysfunction may underlie pregnancy-related vascular diseases. Overexpression of one K + channel in particular, the small conductance Ca 2+ -activated K + channel (SK3), leads to a high rate of fetal demise and intrauterine growth restriction in mice, indicating an important role for this channel in pregnancy. Here, we describe how maladaptation of the placental vasculature in SK3 T/T pups may contribute to their lethal phenotype. METHODS: Paraformaldehyde fixed, paraffin embedded placentas from SK3 T/T and WT mice were sectioned and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin to look for structural abnormalities. Immunoblots probing for the endothelial marker CD31 were performed on placental lysates. Placental vascular structure of SK3 T/T and WT mice was examined using MicroCT. RESULTS: Histological analysis of placental sections showed altered morphology at early gestational stages (gd10 and 14). Most notably, the placental labyrinth was decreased in thickness at gd10 in SK3 T/T mice compared to controls. By gd14, the labyrinth showed reduced number of labyrinthine trophoblasts leading to abnormal placental vasculogenesis in the SK3 T/T mice. This was apparent by the presence of abnormally dilated blood vessels. SK3 T/T placentas at gd18 showed no difference in labyrinth size or morphology from WT indicating an altered growth trajectory from controls and placental plasticity. To look for specific markers of the maladaptation, CD31 was used to quantify and compare endothelial cell density as a marker for blood vessels in SK3 T/T and control mice. CD31 expression was increased in SK3 T/T gd10 placentas compared to controls. To determine the physiological impact of the altered placental morphology, vessel density was quantified using MicroCT and other imaging techniques. The SK3 T/T placentas displayed 3.5 fold higher vessel density than control mice. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest the SK3 channel plays a vital role in the modulating the morphology and vascularization pattern of the placenta. It also suggests that mistimed vascularization of the placenta may lead to increased fetal demise and intrauterine growth restriction. Placenta. Cara C Rada, Grace Murray, Sarah England. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO, USA. A balance of angiogenic factors is essential for the maternal circulation to adapt in order to support the developing fetus. An imbalance can lead to impaired development of the utero-placental vasculature, ineffective delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the fetus, and pregnancy complications, including preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). A mouse model that overexpresses the small conductance Ca 2+ -activated K + channel (SK3 T/T ), a prevalent channel in the endothelium, has increased fetal demise and IUGR. We examined whether an improper angiogenic signaling results in poor fetal outcomes observed in SK3 T/T mice. METHODS: Serum and placental VEGF, PlGF, and sFlt-1, levels were measured by ELISAs in SK3 T/T and control mice. VEGF, PlGF, and sFlt-1 placental transcript levels were measured by qPCR. All experiments were performed at pregnancy days 10, 14, and 18. RESULTS: VEGF, PlGF (pro-angiogenic) and sFlt-1 (anti-angiogenic) showed no differences in the VEGF blood serum levels at any gestational stage in SK3 T/T compared to wild type (WT) mice. There was a significant decrease in PlGF levels at pregnancy day 18 (P18) in SK3 T/T mice compared to WT. sFlt-1 levels in the SK3 T/T mice were also decreased at P10 and P18 compared to WT. Despite similar VEGF levels in WT vs. SK3 T/T in the serum, placental explants showed increased levels of secreted VEGF at each gestational age in SK3 T/T compared to WT. Placental sFlt-1 secretion was decreased at P10 in SK3 T/T compared to WT, but remediated by P18. Conversely, SK3 T/T mice have increased secretion of PlGF at P10 before decreasing by P18. Finally, qPCR results of these factors in placenta corresponded with changes in gene with increased transcript levels of PlGF and VEGF at P10 and decreased sFlt-1 levels in P18 in SK3 T/T compared to WT placentas. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the SK3 channel influences the serum and placental secretion rates of the angiogenic factors: PlGF, VEGF and sFlt-1. Furthermore, an imbalance of these factors could lead to a maladaption of the maternal and fetal vasculature parameters during pregnancy. The role of the peptide hormone kisspeptin (Kp) in pregnancy and placentation is poorly understood. In vitro studies on human trophoblast explant cultures have shown that increased concentrations of Kp have an inhibitory effect on trophoblast migration, suggesting its potential role in placentation. Our recent study has shown that chronic administration of exogenous Kp during pregnancy in Sprague-Dawley rats, reduced the depth of spiral artery remodeling and fetal growth. This study provided the first in-vivo evidence of a role for Kp in pregnancy. The objective of this study is to develop a Kp overexpressing mouse model using lentiviral transgenics, to study the effects of Kp placental overexpression on the implantation and placentation. METHODS: Kp receptor (Kiss1R) cDNA with an epitope tag known as "FLAG" attached to it was commercially obtained. The tag makes the receptor identifiable by using an antibody specific to the tag. We then created an alternative, constitutively active, version of the cDNA by introducing a previously described mutation (Arg386Pro). The presence of this mutation is anticipated to enhance the effects of receptor overexpression, thereby altering trophoblast function and/or pregnancy outcome. Receptor constructs were then transferred into the lentiviral vector, and stocks were produced using standard methods. DBA/J mice were superovulated using a standard protocol and then mated. Females with copulatory plugs were euthanized on E3.5 and embryos collected by flushing the uterine horns. After removing the zona pellucida, blastocysts were transduced (infected) with lentivirus by culturing them for 24 hours. At E4.5, blastocysts were transferred to pseudopregnant foster dams. On E10.5 the fetus and placenta were collected and snap-frozen for sectioning and staining. RESULTS: Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining with an antibody to the FLAG tag showed trophoblast-specific expression of Kiss1R in the placenta (but not fetus), demonstrating successful transfection. More embryos are being collected and transferred after transfection in order to study the effects of placental overexpression of Kp on pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: This study utilizes lentivirus for trophoblast-specific transgenic overexpression of the Kiss1R gene. This model will allow us to directly assess the effects of enhanced local Kp signaling on trophoblast endovascular invasion, spiral artery remodeling and fetoplacental development. An In separate experiments, MgSO4 (270 mg/kg IP) was injected in advance of PTZ into PE rats to observe its effect on PTZ-induced seizures. RESULTS: PE conditions are verified in rats after LPS administration by significantly higher blood pressure and urinary albumin excretion, elevated sFlt-1 and decreased PlGF serum levels, and evidence of hepatic dysfunction compared to control groups. PTZ successfully induces seizure activity in all groups studied. Seizure latency is significantly (P<0.01) less in the PE+PTZ group (73.2 ± 6.6 sec.) than in PTZ-treated controls (107.0 ± 7.4 sec.). Pretreatment with MgSO4 prolongs (P<0.05) seizure latency, shortens seizure duration and decreases seizure rates. Significant increases (P<0.05) in the serum levels of the inflammatory cytokines TNF-a and IL-1b, decreases (P<0.05) of serum IL-10 in PE and PE+PTZ groups, and decreases in their levels following MgSO4 administration. However, IL-6 levels do not show changes before or after MgSO4 treatment. CONCLUSIONS: PTZ induces an eclampsia-like condition in rat with clinical, biochemical and pharmacological features, and this is comparable to human eclampsia. The change of serum pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines is coincidence with the decrease in seizure threshold, suggesting the presumption of inflammatory roles in the mechanism of preeclampsia and eclampsia. This model may serve as a useful research tool for future studies. Though an association between maternal characteristics, abnormal levels of first and second trimester serum biomarkers and preeclampsia has been extensively studied, little is known about eclampsia-specific associations. Our aim was to identify maternal factors and serum biomarker abnormalities associated with eclampsia. A potential association between eclampsia, maternal characteristics, and abnormal levels of first and second trimester serum biomarkers was analyzed among 129,722 screened euploid singleton pregnancies in California with data available via linked hospital discharge records. Serum markers included first trimester pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A) and human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), and second trimester alpha fetoprotein (AFP), hCG, unconjugated estriol (uE3) and inhibin (INH). Logistic regression models were used to estimate the risks of eclampsia based on maternal characteristics and abnormal biomarker levels. Analyses were stratified by parity. RESULTS: Among nulliparous pregnancies, only second trimester INH multiple of the median (MoM) ≥ 95th percentile was found to be associated with increased risk of eclampsia (odds ratio (OR) 5.0, 95% confidence interval (CI) 2.3 -10.8). Among multiparous pregnancies, black race/ ethnicity (OR 3.8, 1.4 -12.9), obesity (OR 3.1, 1.4 -6.8), pre-existing diabetes (OR 5.6, 2.3 -24.3), and second trimester INH MoM ≥ 95th percentile (OR 3.6, 1.1 -12.1) were found to associated with increased risk of eclampsia (Table 1) . Nearly one in five nulliparous pregnancies with eclampsia had a second trimester INH MoM ≥ 95th percentile. More than half of multiparous pregnancies with eclampsia had one or more of the risks identified in final logistic models. Patterns point to specific subgroups at substantially increased risk for eclampsia. Further study of these risk groups may reveal etiologic clues for eclampsia. Eunice Kennedy Shriver, NICHD MFMU Network, USA. INTRODUCTION: Reduced nitric oxide (NO) has been posited as a mechanism for the systemic vascular dysfunction associated with preeclampsia. Increased arginase activity and elevated asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) reduce production and bioavailability of NO and have been implicated in cardiovascular disease and preeclampsia. The aim of this study was to investigate whether differences in circulating arginase, ADMA, and NO metabolite (nitrite and nitrate) concentrations precede the development of preeclampsia in low risk women. This study is a secondary analysis using plasma samples from women in an antioxidant trial to prevent preeclampsia. We used a case-control study design of 174 women with preeclampsia and 348 normotensive pregnant women matched for gestational age at sample collection and center. Early onset preeclampsia was defined as diagnosis prior to 34 weeks'. Arginase, ADMA, nitrite and nitrate were measured at three gestational time-points (9-11, 15-17, and 23-25 weeks  Atypical Autophagy Induction by Sera from Pregnant Women with Preeclampsia. Tomi T Kanninen, 1 Aswathi Jayaram, 1 Shirlee Jaffe-Lifshitz, 1 Giovanni Sisti, 1 Iara M Linhares, 1,2 Steven S Witkin. 1 1 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York City, NY, USA; 2 Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil. INTRODUCTION: Mechanisms leading to preeclampsia remain incompletely defined. Autophagy is a conserved process necessary for cell survival under adverse conditions. We evaluated whether sera from women with healthy pregnancies and women with preeclampsia differed in autophagy induction. METHODS: Sera from 20 normotensive pregnant women and 20 women with preeclampsia were incubated with peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from female donors. After 48 hours the PBMCs were lysed and the intracellular concentration of p62 was determined by ELISA. The p62 concentration is inversely proportional to the extent of autophagy induction. Serum endoglin, interleukin (IL)-13, insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-1 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-b levels were quantitated by ELISA. RESULTS: Autophagy induction increased with gestational age in sera from normotensive women (p=0.0159) but not in women with preeclampsia. In the presence of an autophagy inducer, the capacity for autophagy induction decreased with gestational age in sera from preeclamptic women (p = 0.0266) but not from controls. Endoglin concentrations increased with gestational age in normotensive women (p = 0.0048) but not in the preeclamptic women and endoglin levels were associated with the extent of autophagy induction only in controls (p = 0.0015). There was no association between autophagy and serum IL-13, IGF-1 or TGF-b levels. CONCLUSIONS: Sera from women with preeclampsia differ from normotensive women by their inability to induce autophagy as a function of gestational age. Integrative Genomic Analysis of Preeclamptic Placentas Identifies Glutathione and GABA Receptor Pathways as Novel Therapeutic Targets of Preeclampsia. Kaoru Kawasaki, 1 Eiji Kondoh, 1 Yoshitsugu Chigusa, 1 Ryuusuke Murakami, 1 Mari Ujita, 1 Haruta Mogami, 1 Satoru Takeda, 2 Ikuo Konishi. 1 1 Gynecology and Obstetrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan; 2 Gynecology and Obstetrics, Juntendo University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. The aim of the present study was to identify precise PE pathways by integrated analysis of multiple microarray data. METHODS: Gene expression data of control and preeclamptic placentas were obtained from Gene Expression Omnibus. Single sample gene set enrichment analysis was performed to generate gene set activation scores. Candidate PE pathways were identified using t-test based screening of 8513 pathways in Molecular Signatures Database v3.1 on three microarray datasets (GSE25906: p<0.01, GSE10588: p<0.001, GSE14722: p<0.005). Concordant pathways in at least two data sets were determined to be more accurate candidates. The pathways were validated using hierarchical clustering (gene cluster 3.0), and were also validated across another data set in silico (GSE30186). The expressions of PE pathway-related genes were investigated in control and preeclamptic placentas using real time PCR (n=10, respectively). The influence of oxidative stress, inflammation, and hypoxia on PE pathway-related genes was examined using immortalized human trophoblast cells (TCL1) treated with or without H 2 O 2 , TNFa, and hypoxia. RESULTS: Integrated analysis of microarray data identified 24 PE pathways. They contained not only well-known pathways in preeclampsia such as NFkB, CDKN1C, and IGFBP1 pathways but also novel pathways including glutathione and GABA (g-aminobutyric acid) receptor pathways, which were suppressed in preeclampsia. The expressions of glutathione synthesis gene, GCLC and GCLM, and GABRA3 (GABA receptor a3 subunit) were decreased in the preeclamptic placentas (Mann-Whitney test, GCLC; p=0.0029, GCLM; p=0.0005, GABRA3; p=0.0021, respectively). The expression levels of GCLC and GCLM in TCL1 were significantly augmented by H 2 O 2 or TNFa (p=0.0162 and p=0.0066, respectively). In contrast, hypoxia decreased GCLM expression (p=0.0088), suggesting that defense mechanism against oxidative stress and inflammation may be compromised by hypoxia in preeclamptic placentas. CONCLUSIONS: Integrative genomic analysis of preeclampsia identified glutathione and GABA receptor pathways as possible novel therapeutic targets of preeclampsia. Decidual Cell-Derived Interleukin-6 Inhibits IL11-Mediated Gene Expression in Macrophages: Implications for Preeclampsia. UA Kayisli, 1 N Ocak, 1 A Uyar, 2 O Guzeloglu-Kayisli, 1 M Basar, 1 J Huang, 1 F Schatz, 1 CJ Lockwood. 1 1 Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ohio State University, College of Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA; 2 Computer Engineering, Okan Univ., Istanbul, Turkey. INTRODUCTION: Receptor bound interleukin-11 (IL11/IL-11R) and IL6/IL6R competes for binding to gp130 to mediate signaling in target cells. While IL11 is crucial to maintain pregnancy, plasma and decidual cell (DC) IL6 level is elevated in preeclampsia (PE) and chorioamnionitis (CAM). Macrophages (MF) expressing gp130, IL6R and IL11R, exist as distinct subsets, pro-inflammatory (M1) and anti-inflammatory (M2) forms. We hypothesize that perturbed IL6 and/or IL11 secretion from DCs induces PE and CAM-associated inflammation by promoting M1 polarization. METHODS: Human MFs were isolated from human peripheral blood of healthy donors (n=3) by density gradient centrifugation and purified by anti-CD14 magnetic beads. Microarray analysis was performed on RNA extracts from MFs treated with control, or 1ng/ml of IL11 or IL6 or IL11+IL6 for 4h using an Illumina Human microarray kit. Statistical analysis was limited to genes expressed at 1.5-fold above threshold. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) assessed signaling cascades. RT-PCR was performed to confirm microarray results. RESULTS: In IL11-treated MF vs. controls, 71 genes are differentially expressed (38 up-and 33 down-regulated); the resulting profile represented the M2 phenotype. In contrast, 63 genes are differentially expressed in IL6-treated MFs vs controls (27 up-and 36 down-regulated) producing a gene spectrum consistent with the M1 phenotype. After incubation of MFs with IL11+IL6, 106 genes are differentially expressed vs IL11 alone (48 up-and 58 down-regulated) representing a shift from an M2 to an M1 phenotype. No differences in expressed genes were found in MFs treated with IL11+IL6 vs IL-6 alone. Analysis of upstream regulatory signaling by IPA reveals that STAT4 and ERK1/2 MAPK signaling activation and STAT5 signaling inhibition are associated with IL6-mediated MF differentiation. CONCLUSIONS: IL6 redirects gene expression of IL11 stimulated MFs away from M2 towards M1. Such IL-6 dominance would promote decidual inflammation associated with PE and CAM. Molecules inhibiting ERK1/2 and STAT4 and/or activating STAT5 could block M2/M1 MF transition representing potential targets to prevent pregnancy related inflammation. Ohio Collaborative grant. Thromboxane A 2 Activates Sphingosine 1-Phosphate Pathway to Increase Vascular Tone. D Kerage, 1,2 DG Hemmings. 1,2 1 Med, Micro Immun, Canada; 2 OB, Gyn, Canada. INTRODUCTION: Preeclampsia (PE) and IUGR are associated with endothelial (EC) dysfunction. We recently discovered a direct link between increased EC permeability and generation of vascular tone mediated by sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a bioactive lipid, produced by sphingosine kinase (SK). S1P exported out of cells by ABC-type transporters binds to S1P 1 enhancing EC barrier, but also disrupts it at high ligand levels via S1P 3 receptors. Thromboxane A2 (TXA2), a vasoconstrictor is increased in PE. TXA2 increases S1P, but whether TXA2 utilizes S1P to increase EC permeability and vascular tone is unknown. HYPOTHESIS: Infusion of TXA2 into arteries will activate SK increasing S1P. By engaging S1P 3 , S1P will overcome signals generated via S1P 1 to increase permeability, allowing TXA2 leakage to the underlying vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) increasing vascular tone. METHODS: A novel method, using pressure myography, was used to simultaneously assess EC permeability (Relative fluorescence units) and vascular tone in uterine arteries from young female mice. TXA2 mimetic, U46619 (1-20nM), was infused inside arteries with or without inhibitors to SK (1µM SK-II) or ABC transporters (10µM MK571, 1µM F9054), S1P 1/3 antagonist (1µM VPC23019) or S1P 1 agonist (0.1µM SEW2871). Vascular tone was compared to that induced by adding drugs to the vessel bath to directly affect VSMC. RESULTS: Infused U46619 (20nM) increased EC permeability (1.0±0.2) compared to control (0.6±0.7) or lower U46619 doses. U46619-induced permeability was unchanged by co-infused inhibitors but was fully prevented by SEW2871 (0.65±0.08). Notably, permeability to singly infused SK-II (1.58±0.37), MK571 (1.05±0.28) or F9054 (1.59±0.67) was increased, suggesting endogenous S1P promotes EC barrier. Infused U46619 (20nM) also increased vascular tone (50.2±11.6%) that was inhibited by SK-II (6.2±5.5%), MK571 (10.4±2.1%), F9054 (11.4±5.4%) and SEW2871 (8.8±4.8%). Overall, the results suggest that U46619induced permeability could permit its own leakage to VSMC increasing vascular tone; and that vascular tone, but not permeability, is mediated via the S1P pathway. CONCLUSIONS: We show for the first time, a previously undescribed mechanism whereby a TXA2 mimetic increases vascular tone by modulating the S1P pathway. Access of U46619 to the VSMC to increase vascular tone likely involves EC leakage of U46619. Targeting the S1P pathway could be invaluable in finding therapeutic solutions against pregnancy-related disorders such as PE or IUGR. Supported by CIHR, NSERC and WCHRI. Most Studies have focused on cross-sectional gestational age windows for screening for preeclampsia (PE), e.g. 11-13 weeks, 22-14 weeks, and more recently 32-34 weeks. The aim of this study was to investigate the longitudinal cardiovascular changes in women who subsequently develop PE and gestational hypertension (GH). This was a prospective longitudinal study in singleton pregnancies identified by screening at 11 +0 -13 +6 weeks' gestation as being at high-risk for PE. Measurements of uterine artery mean pulsatility index (PI), mean arterial pressure (MAP), pulse wave velocity (PWV), central systolic blood pressure (SBPao) and angiogenic markers (placental growth factor and soluble form of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor) were taken every four weeks until delivery, and compared between pregnancies that developed preterm-PE, term-PE and GH and those that remained normotensive. X 2 -test, Kruskal-Wallis test, Mann-Whitney test with post-hoc Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons and regression analysis were used for comparison between the groups and identification of potential confounders. Analysis of repeated measures with multilevel mixed-effects linear model (fixed effects and random effects) was performed. RESULTS: A total of 1198 observations were recorded in 245 women (181 women had a normal outcome, 20 developed GH, 22 term-PE, and 22 preterm-PE). In the normotensive group PI decreased with gestational age (GA) and MAP decreased between 12 and 24 weeks, then increased again. In preterm-PE, compared to the normal group, PI and MAP were higher from early pregnancy and the difference for both increased with GA. In term-PE, PI was significantly increased only from 33 weeks onwards and MAP was increased from 12 weeks but the difference from normal did not increase with gestation. In GH, PI was not significantly different from normal but MAP was higher from 12 weeks. In the GH and preterm-PE groups, SBPao was significantly higher than in the normotensive group, and this difference remained constant throughout pregnancy. In the preterm-PE group, PWV was significantly higher than in the normotensive group from 16 weeks. CONCLUSIONS: This study describes the temporal changes in cardiovascular parameters in normotensive pregnancies and in those that develop PE and GH. Ha Kim, Tae-Bok Song. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea. INTRODUCTION: Hyperuricemia has been described commonly in preeclamptic pregnancies, often preceding the diagnosis of preeclampsia and historically was used as a diagnostic marker of preeclampsia. The aim of this study was to determine the usefulness of gestation corrected hyperuricemia to predict the recurrence of preeclampsia on subsequent pregnancy. The retrospective study of 62 women who had previous preeclampsia and checked serum uric acid was analyzed. Gestation corrected hyperuricemia (GCH) was defined as being one standard deviation above the gestation-specific mean . And we used uric acid z-scores ([serum uric acid value -gestation specific mean] / standard deviation of the population) to account for gestation-specific alterations in uric acid and tested this as a continuous variable. Linear regression RESULTS: A2aR and HIF1a were localised to syncytiotrophobasts and cytotrophoblasts and positively correlated through pregnancy (r=0.85; P<0.0001). Expression of both proteins was highest in Early TOP, decreasing to term but higher in PE (A2aR [median 13.4, HIF1a [11.15, ]) than NC (A2aR [median 3.32, IQR 2. HIF1a [4.5, ]) (P<0.0001 for all). A positive correlation between A2aR and AT4R was observed in all TOP placentae (r=0.58; P=0.016) but not in term NC or PE. A2aR was not associated with AT1R or AT2R (P>0.05 for both). CONCLUSIONS: Placentation occurs in a hypoxic environment. Hypoxia is known to stimulate adenosine, which functions to promote angiogenesis, proliferation, inflammation and protection against oxidative stress. As AngIV acting through AT4R has similar effects and there appears to be an association between A2aR and AT4R in early pregnancy, it is possible that these receptors may have a role in placentation and their dysregulation may contribute to PE. The possible effect of corticosteroids on pregnancy outcome in HELLP syndrome has been grounds for discussion for the last 30 years. The therapeutic concept of high-dose prednisolone has been introduced to our department in 2005. Until 2013 patients with HELLP syndrome received one to three doses before delivery. The effect of high dose prednisolone (0.5-1 g one to three times) on maternal and neonatal outcome in HELLP syndrome was analyzed in a retrospective study. Data were presented in absolute numbers and percentages; statistic was performed using Chi square, Fisher's exact test, independent T test and ANOVA calculation. A two-sided p-value of less than 0.05 was considered as significant. RESULTS: Pregnancies complicated by HELLP syndrome (n=77) were divided in 3 groups: 1) PRED treated by high prednisolone administered one to three times (n=48, 62.3 %), 2) NO, receiving no corticosteroids (n=17, 22.1 %) and 3) MIX, received more than three doses and different types of corticosteroids (n= 12, 15.6 %). The data are presented in Table 1 There is a tendency (n. s.) to shorter intensive care and hospitalization times, decreased incidence of cesarean section and increased ratio of completion of lung maturation in the PRED group. CONCLUSIONS: The management of HELLP syndrome with a high dose prednisolone should be evaluated in a further prospective study. However, it seems that the use of high dose corticosteroids could improve the outcome of pregnancies complicated by HELLP syndrome. Effect FLT1, ENG and LEP) and the prediction of PE development, the false negative detection rates are too high for clinical use. We hypothesize that there are multiple distinct molecular pathologies of PE that present with the common clinical symptoms of proteinuria and hypertension which has inhibited the discovery of effective biomarkers and therapeutics. METHODS: Placenta samples (n=157) representing a broad range of well-defined preeclamptic and non-preeclamptic states, including maternal chronic hypertension, were collected from the RCWIH BioBank in Toronto, along with clinical information. The samples were subjected to microarray analysis using Affymetrics Human Gene 1.0 ST arrays. Array data was analyzed by blinded hierarchical multivariate clustering and the resulting groups were assessed for correlations to clinical outcomes. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed to detect specific genes and biological pathways with significant differential expression between the clusters. qPCR was used to validate candidate markers. Clustering identified five distinct molecular subclasses of placental gene expression. Two of the clusters were composed primarily of PE samples while a third contained mostly normotensive controls. Surprisingly, the remaining two subclasses consisted of a mixture of preeclamptics and non-preeclamptics, including the chronic hypertensive controls. Samples with "pure" PE often displayed high levels of FLT1, ENG and LEP, while those with PE superimposed on maternal chronic hypertension showed lower or more variable expression of these markers. We have identified multiple unique molecular subclasses of preeclampsia with differential expression of several known PE markers. Future work will involve testing for correlations between placental pathology and membership in the clusters. We are also preparing a large (n=150) independent patient cohort to validate the described subclasses. Hopefully, this research will lead to the identification of biomarkers to improve the diagnosis of PE and eventually to the development of etiology-based treatments for preeclampsia. Placental Uric Acid Transport System: Glucose Transporter 9 (SLC2A9). Benjamin P Luscher, Pre-eclampsia, a pregnancy-specific disease, contributes substantially to perinatal morbidity and mortality of both the mother and her child. Pre-eclampsia is often associated with high maternal urate serum levels, which in turn has been shown to play a role in the pathogenesis of this disease. The aim of this study was to investigate the glucose transporter GLUT9-mediated placental uric acid transport system. In this study western blot, immunofluorescence techniques as well as a transepithelial transport (Transwell) model were used to assess GLUT9 protein expression and, respectively, uric acid transport activity. Electrophysiological techniques and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were used to characterize the properties and the structure of GLUT9. RESULTS: Uric acid is transported across a BeWo choriocarcinoma cell monolayer with 530 pmol/min. We could successfully overexpress and for the first time purify the GLUT9b isoform using the Xenopus laevis oocytes expression system. Chloride seems to modulate the urate transport system. TEM revealed that GLUT9b isoform is present as monomer and dimmer in the Xenopus laevis overexpression model. A class average of all the particles allowed us to develop a first model of human GLUT9b structure, which was derived from the published crystal structure of the bacterial homologue of GLUT1-4. CONCLUSIONS: In vitro the "materno-fetal" transport of uric acid is slow indicating that in vivo the fetus might be protected from short-term fluctuations of maternal urate serum levels. The low-resolution structure obtained from TEM validates the proposed homology model regarding the structure of human GLUT9b. In ongoing studies this model is used to perform virtual screening to identify novel modulators of the urate transport system enabling the development of novel therapies in pregnancy complications. Maternal/Child HLA Class II Compatibility in Pregnancies Affected by Preeclampsia. Kimberly K Ma, 1 J Lee Nelson, 2 Christine T Luu, 2 Coline A Gentil, 2 Hilary S Gammill. Lack of immunogenetic diversity appears to be a risk factor for adverse pregnancy outcomes, including preeclampsia (PE), and both epidemiologic and laboratory data suggest that immune dysfunction contributes to PE pathophysiology. We sought to examine maternal and child human leukocyte antigen (HLA) Class II relationships in PE compared with normal pregnancy, hypothesizing increased HLA compatibility in PE pregnancies. METHODS: DNA was isolated from blood or buccal swab samples from mother/child pairs. HLA typing for the Class II loci DRB1, DQA1, and DQB1 was performed using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-sequence specific oligonucleotide probe technique. Maternal and child HLA relationships were examined to determine low-resolution compatibility, considering both bidirectional compatibility and unidirectional compatibility which can occur in the setting of maternal or child homozygosity. Chi square was used for analysis. RESULTS: Results are summarized below. HLA Class II compatibility did not differ between mother/child pairs with (n=110) and without (n=108) PE. Recently we showed in P-UAECs, that both cAMP and cGMP augment GJ function/assembly associated with the phosphorylation of PKA-dependent Cx43 Ser365 as well as endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) Ser635. Therefore we hypothesized that in response to ATP stimulation, which increases PGI 2 and NO production, phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors specific to cAMP and cGMP will differentially modulate the stimulatory phosphorylation state of Cx43 and eNOS. METHODS: P-UAECs from pregnant sheep were pretreated with either vehicle, Isogladine maleate (PDE4 inhibitor; 1umol/L) or Sildenafil (PDE5 inhibitor; 100nmol/L) followed by treatment with vehicle, ATP (100 umol/L) or Forskolin (100umol/L; the positive control for cAMP production). The production of cAMP and cGMP were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and the stimulatory phosphorylation state Cx43 and eNOS phosphorylation were evaluated by Western Immunoblotting. In the absence or presence of PDE4 or PDE5 inhibitor, ATP increased P-UAEC cAMP and cGMP levels (P<0.01). Specificity was shown since Forskolin substantially elevated cAMP (P<0.01), but not cGMP. ATP and Forskolin both elevated the PKA dependent stimulatory phosphorylation site of Cx43, but this was only augmented in the presence of the PDE4 (P<0.05) not PDE5 inhibitor. By contrast weak stimulatory site phosphorylation of eNOS was seen in response to both ATP and Forskolin alone, but the ATP response was greatly augmented in the presence of PDE5 inhibitor (P<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: Stimulatory responses to the physiologic agonist ATP are differentially altered by endogenous PDEs specific to cAMP and cGMP via modulation of the stimulatory phosphorylation state of Cx43 and eNOS. Thus increased pregnancy-enhanced GJ communication between cells is mediated by cAMP more so than cGMP in response to ATP to enhance uterine vasodilation. NIH GM083252, HL49210, HD38843, HL87144, R25GM0832. Values below 85 were considered as normal. Single measurements were performed for sFlt-1 and PlGF on the fully automated Roche Elecsys system. RESULTS: All women were treated according to international guidelines. We observed adverse obstetric outcome despite therapy in eight women with APS and in two women with SLE. Pregnancy complications consisted of early-onset preeclampsia, HELLP-Syndrome, Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and lupus flare in early pregnancy. Four women developed Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome (CAPS), which was treated successfully in three cases with Plasmapheresis. Serum samples from 18 pregnancies in 18 women with APS and SLE were analyzed.Sflt-1/ PlGF ratio remained < 85 in pregnancies without complications. In those pregnancies complicated by CAPS, HELLP-Syndrome and preeclampsia, sFlt-1/PlGF ratio was > 85. Additionally sFlt-1 and PlGF values were measured before and after plasmapheresis in 3 cases with CAPS with a significant decrease of sFlt-1 and plgf. CONCLUSIONS: Our data show a 31% rate of adverse obstetric outcome despite intensive management, which is consistent with literature.The sFlt-1/plGF ratio was increased in women with APS who developed CAPS and/or IUGR, but not in women with APS without adverse pregnancy outcome.Our findings suggest a possibility to use the sFlt-1/PlGF ratio as an additional predictive parameter for CAPS. But further prospective studies with larger numbers are in progress to clarify the potential role of the ratio in the diagnostic algorithm of Preeclampsia, HELLP-Syndrome and CAPS. There is a growing body of evidence indicating that mitochondrial dysfunction is a pathogenic mediator of oxidative stress in pre-eclampsia. The health of mitochondria is in part mediated by their biogenesis; the inducible transcriptional co-activator peroxisome proliferator activated receptor g co-activator 1-a (PGC-1a) is a well characterised pleiotropic orchestrator of a broad range of genetic programs, including mitochondrial biogenesis, angiogenesis and a multifaceted antioxidant defense system. Aim: To determine the link between PGC-1a, mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in pre-eclampsia. METHODS: RUPP (N=10) and control sham rats (N=10) was used in our study. Localisation of PGC-1a expression and mitochondrial specific ROS production was determined by fluorescent microscopy in placental samples in both study groups. The antioxidant profile was measured by real-time PCR, while markers of cellular senescence and telomere shortening were assessed by real-time PCR and immunoblotting. RESULTS: PGC-1a expression was localised to both endothelial cells, cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts in placental samples with evidence of reduced expression in the RUPP animals. We showed elevated production of mitochondrial specific reactive oxygen species in RUPP animals. Mitochondrial specific ROS co-localised to PGC-1a in both endothelial and trophoblast cells in both study groups with evidence of reduced PGC-1a activity leading to increased production of mitochondrial specific ROS. The expression of antioxidants including SOD2 and mitochondrial uncoupling proteins UCP-1 and UCP-2 were reduced in the RUPP study group. Mitochondrial oxidative stress and dysfunction are intrinsically linked with cellular senescence. Additional analysis revealed increased expression of cellular senescence markers including checkpoint kinase 2 and p16 INK4 in the RUPP study group. Furthermore, telomere shortening is a feature of cellular senescence, we confirmed an increase in expression of telomerase reverse transcriptase and teleomere repeat-binding factors 2 in the RUPP study group. CONCLUSIONS: A reduction in PGC-1a activity is intrinsically linked to dysregulaton of mitochondrial function with subsequent induction of oxidative stress in pre-clampsia. Early diagnosis of pre-eclampsia allows appropriate monitoring and targeting of therapeutic strategies, but is challenging in women with pre-existing hypertension and/or proteinuria. The aim of this study was to establish a distinctive urinary proteome profile which is diagnostic of pre-eclampsia in both low and high risk women. METHODS: A proteome profile for urine samples from women with pre-eclampsia (PE) and gestation-matched healthy pregnant controls was created, using a validated workflow, involving selective immunodepletion, 1D SDS-PAGE gel fractionation, in-gel digestion of gel sections, LC-MS/ MS analysis, spectral analysis. Candidate peptides were selected and quantified by Selective Reaction Monitoring (SRM) in a larger challenge cohort including women with PE/superimposed PE (PE/SPE), gestational hypertension (GH), healthy controls (C) and women with chronic hypertension (CHT) or kidney disease (CKD). Each sample was prepared to a standardised total protein concentration. Step-wise regression was used to create the optimum diagnostic panel with Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. RESULTS: Ten proteins were differentially expressed between 12 women with PE and 12 healthy controls. After regression analysis of SRM areaunder-curve quantification of 33 peptides in the challenge cohort (133 women), two peptides were identified which were differentially expressed between women with PE/SPE (N=53) compared with GH/C/CHT/CKD (N=80). Area-under-ROC for combination of the two best-predictive peptides was 0.78. CONCLUSIONS: A diagnostic panel of urinary peptides can be identified in the urine of women with PE/SPE demonstrating qualitative differences in protein excretion, which is likely to have even greater diagnostic potential when absolute amounts of candidate peptides are compared. The The vascular effects of TS in the pregnant state, however, are unknown. We hypothesized that TS would increase vasodilation, thereby reducing the signs of preeclampsia in a RUPP model. METHODS: On d14 of pregnancy in Sprague Dawley rats, uteroplacental blood flow was reduced via clips inserted on the abdominal aorta and uterine arteries. Sham surgeries were performed as controls. Both groups were treated with a water soluble TS compound (STS) in their drinking water (approx. 27mg/kg/day) from surgery onwards. On d20 (term d22), blood pressure was measured, animals were euthanized, litter biometrics measured and ex vivo vascular function was assessed. RESULTS: RUPP surgery caused a significant increase in diastolic (79±4 mmHg Sham vs. 92±2 mmHg RUPP, p<0.001) and systolic (109±3 mmHg Sham vs. 124±4 mmHg RUPP, p<0.001) blood pressure, a reduction in pup weight (4.03±0.07g Sham vs. 3.47±0.15g RUPP, p<0.01) and placental weight (0.49±0.01g Sham vs. 0.44±0.04g RUPP, p<0.05); measures that were not affected by STS treatment. STS reduced vascular oxidative stress (decreased superoxide and peroxynitrite, p<0.05) in RUPP. However, oxidized LDL caused a reduction in vasodilation in RUPP that appeared to be worsened by STS; potentially due to an upregulation of the lectin-like, oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) (p<0.05). Conversely, STS decreased the involvement of the platelet-activating factor receptor (PAF-R; another receptor that is activated by oxidized LDL). CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to our hypothesis, STS treatment of the RUPP model of preeclampsia did not improve the mechanisms of vasodilation and may increase the detrimental effects of the LOX-1 receptor pathway. These effects may be offset by a decreased involvement of the PAF-R. In this model, STS did not prove to be beneficial for pregnancy outcomes. response, endothelial dysfunction and a hypercoagulable state. When stimulated or stressed, cells may shed small fragments of plasma membrane called microvesicles. Previous studies have described increased levels of circulating placental microvesicles in women who have been diagnosed with preeclampsia. Furthermore, tissue factor, an initiator of the coagulation cascade, is found to be upregulated in trophoblast cells during preeclampsia. This study aimed to determine whether there is a mechanistic link between oxidative stress and the shedding of tissue factor expressing trophoblast microvesicles. METHODS: Term human chorionic villi explants were cultured under normoxia (8% O 2 for 24 and 48 hours), hypoxia (0.2% O 2 for 24 hours) or hypoxia-reoxygenation (0.2% O 2 for 24 hours followed by 8% O 2 for 24 hours). Culture supernatant was collected and flow cytometry was performed to quantify tissue factor expressing microvesicles. RESULTS: There was no difference in the number of shed microvesicles between chorionic villi explants cultured under both normoxia and hypoxia. Chorionic villi explants cultured under hypoxia-reoxygenation shed more tissue factor expressing microvesicles than those cultured under normoxic conditions. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that placental oxidative stress, a condition characteristic of preeclampsia, may induce shedding of tissue factor expressing microvesicles from trophoblast cells, likely contributing to a maternal hypercoagulable state. Placental Histology of Low Risk Nulliparous Women: Does Preeclampsia Make a Difference? Leslie Myatt. for the Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD MFMU Network, Bethesda, MD, USA. INTRODUCTION: Alterations in placental structure/function reported as a cause or consequence of preeclampsia (PE) include defective trophoblast invasion, increased villous trophoblast apoptosis and syncytial knots. The majority of data have been generated in small studies with poor definition of cases and controls. We have compared placental histology between PE and control in a secondary analysis of a multi-center randomized trial of antioxidants in low risk nulliparas with singleton pregnancies enrolled at 9-12 weeks' gestation. At delivery (24 wks-term) 5 full depth placental sections were collected from random sites from 110 women with PE (mild or severe) and 217 women who did not develop PE matched for gestational age at delivery, center and ethnicity. Tissue was fixed, sectioned, and scored for lesions in chorionic and basal plates, villous parenchyma and intervillous space by two histopathologists, masked to PE status, using a standardized protocol. Lesions were scored present if they were observed in at least one section. Fisher's exact test was used to determine if significant differences existed between groups. RESULTS: No significant differences in the incidence of lesions were seen in any area of the placenta comparing tissue from PE vs control. No difference in occurrence of increased syncytial knots was found between PE and controls even when corrected for gestational age, severity of preeclampsia or smoking.  In low risk women with careful diagnosis of PE we find no evidence of differences in placental histology between women who developed PE vs those who did not. Strengths of the study were number of cases, use of a random tissue sampling and masking of study personnel to outcomes. The majority of women however delivered at term which may account for increased syncytial knotting in control patients in the absence of other comorbidities. The low incidence of most lesions suggests that in low risk women PE does not cause profound structural differences in placental villous tissue. Pregnancy INTRODUCTION: Elevated placental production of soluble fmslike tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt1) at later stages of pregnancy is thought to contribute to the maternal manifestations of preeclampsia (PE) through antagonism of its ligand, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). However, although VEGF is also upregulated in PE and although it serves critical functions at different stages of pregnancy, its specific role in the placenta is poorly understood, primarily due to lack experimental models for pregnancy stage-specific manipulation of genes in the placenta. Here we examine the effects of VEGF overexpression in the mouse placenta at different stages of pregnancy using a doxycycline (Dox)-inducible (Tet-On 3G; Endocrinology, 153: 5637) placenta-specific gene expression system. VEGF and/or mCherry expression were induced on days 6-9, 9-12, 12-18, and 17-18 of pregnancy, and samples were collected on day 18. RESULTS: VEGF overexpression on days 6-9 and 9-12 led to significant decrease in fetal size, increase in placental size, and severe disorganization of labyrinth vessels with focal hemorrhages, dilation of vessels and fibrin deposition on the walls. There was also a dramatic expansion and invagination of the spongiotrophoblast layer into the labyrinth. VEGF overexpression on days 12-18 resulted in significant increase in the rate of fetal absorption and extensive placental hemorrhages, but overexpression on days 17-18 had no marked effect. Surprisingly, several dams in all treatment groups, except those from days 17-18, showed significant increases in blood pressure and placental and serum levels of sFlt1, and proteinuria and focal glomerular endotheliosis in the kidney, all typical signs of PE in women. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that placental development at early stages of pregnancy is more susceptible to excess local VEGF and that fully mature placentas, after day 17, are relatively resistant. Most importantly, our results for the first time suggest that transient increase in placental VEGF at early stages of pregnancy may induce placental sFlt1 production and maternal symptoms of PE at later stages, implicating excess local VEGF production in the pathogenesis of PE. These findings have significant implications for current efforts to develop VEGF-based therapies for neutralization of excess circulating sFlt1 in PE. Thus an individualized medicine approach to PE may lead to better treatment outcomes and new developments. We hypothesize that PE is a multi-factorial syndrome and that this will be represented as differences in cell signalling. Furthermore, heparin can act as a signalling cofactor, and therefore treatment of PE with heparin may modulate the signalling environment of the placenta and be beneficial to some patients. To test this hypothesis, we have used a combined approach of assessing phospho-signalling and gene expression in patient samples, and an in vitro model using explants and PE serum treatment. To assess signalling, phospho-peptide antibody arrays were conducted on samples from 32 preterm deliveries, from patients with or without PE and/or chronic hypertension, to identify signifi cant changes in downstream signalling events. As an in vitro model, fi rst trimester placentas were cultured in serum from PE women and assessed for differences in phospho-tyrosine signalling compared to healthy pregnancy serum and no serum controls. RESULTS: Model based clustering analysis of PE placental pathologies revealed three molecular subclasses with distinct signalling events driving their classifi cation, including phosphorylation of FGFR and Stat in one group and MAPK (ERK1/2) and Akt/PKB in another group. One cluster was enriched in pathology samples while other clusters were mixtures of pathologies and controls. Treatment of placental explants with PE serum resulted in intracellular signalling excitation relative to controls. CONCLUSIONS: These results confi rm that subclasses of PE patients demonstrate differences in downstream cell signalling. Future experiments include microarray/proteomic analysis of in vivo/in vitro PE placenta samples with or without heparin to determine changes in gene expression concurrent with altered cell signalling. Cell free RNAs of placental origin can be identifi ed in the circulation of pregnant women, enabling the placental transcriptome to be "sampled" through analysis of maternal blood. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small regulatory RNAs that are relatively stable in serum, and are likely protected from degradation through their incorporation within exosomes or other particles. They have been identified as biomarkers for multiple diseases, particularly cancer. In this project, we propose to identify miRNA biomarkers for the prediction of pregnancy disorders associated with placental dysfunction, specifi cally preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. The serum from fi ve fi rst trimester, fi ve third trimester, and fi ve non-pregnant female subjects was collected. Total RNA was isolated from these serum samples as well as 12 placental tissue samples. qRT-PCR was used to verify the presence of miR-372, a known placental miRNA, specifi cally in the extracellular RNA samples of the pregnant subjects. Small RNA sequencing libraries were constructed and deep sequencing was performed on a HiSeq 2000 (Illumina). Our results indicate that extracellular miRNA could be isolated and sequenced from all serum samples. The majority of placentaspecifi c miRNAs were encoded in two large genomic clusters: one at chr19q13 and the other at chr14q32. The chr19 miRNAs were identifi ed in samples from both the fi rst and third trimester subjects, while the chr14 miRNAs were identifi ed primarily in the third trimester samples. Neither the chr19 nor the chr14 miRNAs were detected in the samples from non-pregnant subjects. Interestingly, many miRNAs that were present at higher levels in the pregnant samples compared to the non-pregnant samples were not placenta-specifi c miRNAs. CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that pregnancy-associated extracellular miRNAs can be detected in maternal serum throughout pregnancy, but that the miRNA profi les change with gestational age. Moreover, some, but not all pregnancy-associated miRNAs originate from the placenta. Our fi ndings suggest that both placental and non-placental miRNAs may serve as biomarkers for prediction of placental dysfunction. However, in order to identify accurate biomarkers, it will be necessary to account for changes in serum miRNA profi les that occur over the course of normal gestation. Severe preeclampsia prior to 34 weeks gestation is associated with maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality. Immediate delivery improves the maternal condition, but may increase neonatal morbidity and mortality. There is little controversy for expectant management of mild preeclampsia or for immediate delivery for eclampsia or HELLP syndrome. We compared maternal and neonatal outcomes of pregnancies at <32 weeks complicated by severe preeclampsia in a cohort of women delivered urgently to those who were managed expectantly. We reviewed 736 charts of mothers diagnosed with preeclampsia. Of these, 295 were born at 32 or less GA, and of those, 247 had severe preeclampsia. The clinical course of the 247 pregnancies complicated by severe preeclampsia at <32 weeks gestation were reviewed. Maternal demographics and neonatal outcomes were compared for those delivered within 72 hours (Group 1: n=184) versus pregnancies managed expectantly (Group 2: n=63). A subgroup analysis of neonates delivered within 24 hours of diagnosis for maternal and/or fetal indications was also performed (Group 3: n= 60). Comparisons were made between groups 1 and 2 by Chi-square, Fischer s exact test, and ANOVA. RESULTS: Groups 1 and 2 were similar for maternal: age (29.5 ± 6.5 years vs 28.5 ± 6.6 years), race; SBP (182.3 ± 19.5 mmHg vs 181.9 ± 15.1 mmHg); DBP (107.1 ± 13.8 mmHg vs 109.7 ± 13.8 mmHg); GA at diagnosis (28.8 ± 2.6 wks vs 28.6 ± 2.4 wks) and delivery, proteinuria, LFTs and platelet count. The average latency for the expectant management group was 1 week. Neonates in groups 1 and 2 had similar BW, GA, race, sex distribution, length of NICU stay and mortality. Neonatal outcomes were similar across both groups. See Table 1 below. University Hosp., HK, Czech Republic; University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary; Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary; "Dr. I. Cantacuzino" Hospital, "Carol Davila" Univ., Bucharest, Romania; Slovak Med Univ, Bratislava, Slovakia (Slovak Republic); Lviv National Medical University, Lviv, Ukraine; 9 Slovakia and Ukraine. The study utilized ten most significant risk factors at these sites: BMI, history of smoking, current smoking, history of diabetes, current diabetes, history of hypertension, preeclampsia, progesterone use, anemia and iron supplementation. Romania is a high-risk center. The data was analyzed using logistic regression to investigate the odds ratio of conclusive risk factors of PTB for each core. Czech data indicated that for PTB the odds are two times more with history of smoking of hypertension, current diabetes or use of progesterone. Data from Hungary concluded (both sites) that odds for PTB were three times with preeclampsia or smoking than without. Romania had no significant predictors of preterm birth. For Slovakia, preterm birth had at least four times the odds for subjects with preeclampsia, anemia or history of hypertension. The odds were less likely with lower BMI. Ukraine data suggested that PTB was at least four times likely with preeclampsia, use of progesterone, current smoking or history of hypertension. CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of this important epidemiology data from electronic data collection system (www.flexiform.hu) sheds light on the relativity of risk factors in each region. The data would be vital for PTB prevention initiatives. Passive There is a paucity of data on smoking in pregnancy and cessation counseling in Latin America. Our objective was to investigate if prenatal care providers' perceptions and training in smoking cessation counseling and personal tobacco use are predictive of their counseling efforts with pregnant smokers in Medellín, Colombia. METHODS: Cross-sectional study. Anonymous surveys emailed to 136 physicians who provide prenatal care at 3 academic centers and 1 public health center in Medellín. Physician smoking, training in cessation, and perceptions about pregnant smokers was compared with provision of smoking cessation counseling. A convenience sample of 59 pregnant patients were surveyed in person to assess rates of smoking, counseling received, and perceptions about smoking in pregnancy. RESULTS: 48 physicians completed the survey. 51.1% had smoked and 18.8% smoked in the last month. Most physicians (91%) always counsel pregnant patients who smoke to quit. Most (89%) had never been trained in a specific intervention for tobacco cessation counseling in pregnancy and 40.4% reported rarely or never using an established method. The best predictor for always counseling patients to quit smoking was the frequency of asking patients if they smoke (Fisher's exact test p=0.01). All providers who did not always counsel smoked but statistical power was limited by sample size. Of patients surveyed 13.8% smoked during pregnancy while 53.9% believed that half or more of pregnant women smoke and 47.5% felt few or no women quit during pregnancy. CONCLUSIONS: Most physicians report counseling pregnant smokers to quit but few have training in or use an evidence based method. Smoking prevalence by self-reporting in these pregnant patients was higher than previous estimates. Routine screening with biological markers for tobacco exposure in pregnancy could be considered to identify all smokers in pregnancy. Smoking prevalence in physicians remains high and efforts to help providers quit should be a focus. Preterm birth is a leading cause of infant mortality and morbidity worldwide. Puerto Rico has the highest rate of preterm births of all US jurisdictions and has undergone one of the largest global shifts in preterm birth rate in recent history, increasing from 11% in 1994 to 18% of all singleton births in 2009.The aim of this study was to describe trends in the overall distribution of gestational age between 1994-2009 in Puerto Rico, compare these trends to the U.S. mainland, and assess the contribution of known clinical risk factors. METHODS: We used US and territorial data from the National Center for Health Statistics for the years 1994-2009 to examine overall distributions of gestational length, rates of selected maternal risk factors and delivery characteristics. Analysis was limited to those singletons born at 20 to 42 completed weeks of gestational age to either US or Puerto Rican resident mothers. Exclusion of data which had birth weights inconsistent with gestational age was performed according to criteria published by Alexander et al. Puerto Rico of singletons born at 20 to 42 completed weeks shifted toward a shorter gestational duration, with a mean decrease of 5.4 days. This shift occurred most dramatically between 1997 and 2002 with a mean decrease of 4.1 days. While preterm births (<37 weeks) increased overall from 1994 to 2009 these rates did not appreciably change for infants born <34 weeks (2.8% in 1994 and 3.4% in 2009). Maternal risk factors, including but not limited to, hypertension and use of assisted reproductive technology and delivery characteristics, such as c-section and induction rate, did not dramatically alter gestational age distributions for Puerto Rico. CONCLUSIONS: Observations suggest a changing pattern towards births at late preterm/early term gestation and most notably for infants born between 34-38 weeks. A similar shift did not occur on the US mainland. Maternal and delivery characteristics routinely recorded on the birth certificate did not appear to be responsible for observed decreases in gestational age for Puerto Rico. The Association between Contraceptives and Infertility in Uganda: Patient Beliefs and Access to Infertility Evaluation.  Between April and July 2013, women were recruited and surveyed from both an infertility and antenatal clinic at Mulago National Referral Hospital in Kampala, Uganda. Demographics and reproductive knowledge were compared using Student's t-test, Spearman's rho, and Pearson's chi-squared test. RESULTS: 108 infertile and 103 pregnant women of similar age and income participated, with mean age 28.6±5.5y. 48% of subjects listed a modern contraceptive, most commonly Depo-Provera, among the three most common causes of infertility. Women accessing infertility evaluations held fewer misconceptions about contraceptives causing infertility (40% vs. 55%, p=0.02), were better able to list biologic causes of infertility (29% vs. 4%, p<0.001), had a higher likelihood of listing male factors among the three most common causes of infertility (19% vs. 1%, p<0.001) , and a lower likelihood of reporting a non-biologic or divine cause of infertility (23% vs. 51%, p<0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Many women listed a modern contraceptive among the three most common causes of infertility, a community perception that may contribute to low contraceptive utilization. Women obtaining basic infertility evaluations were less likely to associate contraceptives with infertility, possibly due to the consultation improving understanding of reproductive physiology. Access to comprehensive reproductive healthcare, including infertility evaluation and counseling, may increase contraceptive uptake by decreasing misperceptions about contraceptives and fertility. A Rapid Colorimetric Assay for On-Site Detection of Cervical Dysplasia in Developing Countries. Jacob Rotmensch, 1 Liaohai Chen. 2 1 Gynecologic Oncology, Rush University Medical Center, USA; 2 Department of Chemistry, Utah State University, USA. INTRODUCTION: There are several barriers in setting up cytology based screening programs for cervical cancer in developing countries. Methods for interpretation of cervical cytology is based on automated staining and computer assisted scanning system not present in many developing countries. Problems often encountered are limited resources, lack of a cytology laboratory, and limited patient finances preventing follow-up visits. The absence of the ability to immediately interpret cervical intraepithelial neoplasia or cancer by a rapid assay is a major hurdle for an effective cervical screening program in these low-resource environments. Hypothesis: Development of a rapid bioassay based on colorimetric analysis to detect cervical dysplasia or neoplasia not dependent upon sophisticated instrumentation or lengthy steps. METHODS: An acid autocatalytic reaction is used to achieve a litmuslike color change within a few minutes when cervical dysplasia or cancer is present. Hemalum is added to a solution containing cervical cells. An autocatalytic reaction is produced causing a color change if dysplastic cells are present. In this study, cervical cytology cells are stained with Lillie Mayer hemalum. Approximately 20 cells per sample are needed to trigger the autocatalytic reaction after washing the cells with water and incubating them with autocatalytic acid precursors. The presence of cervical dysplasia or cancer cells changes the solution from yellow to red. RESULTS: After one minute of incubation the solution containing dysplastic cells changes color from yellow to red. In control samples containing no dysplastic cells the solution remained yellow indicating no autocatalytic reaction occurred. CONCLUSIONS: The hemalum assay developed is a simple colorimetric test that directly detects the presence of cervical dysplastic cells without the presence of sophisticated instrumentation or microscopy. This assay enables various levels of health care providers to immediately determine if therapy is required. States Air Force (USAF) obstetrician and gynecologist (OB/GYN) noted that something as simple as a pelvic examination was nearly impossible without having to compromise patient comfort, safety or both. Field stretchers are a wonderful tool for transporting patients, but they are not ideal for examinations, surgery or as a hospital bed. Unfortunately, this is exactly what they are used for during disaster relief, humanitarian missions or during military deployments but they do not have the ability to achieve low or high lithotomy positioning for pelvic examinations, surgery or childbirth. Additional personnel, straps, or other improvised methods are typically used to hold up the patient's legs. Recent military conflicts have also revealed that military trauma surgeons did not have adequate access or exposure to the pelvis/perineum while treating patients with improvised explosive device blast injuries. METHODS: Greene Stirrups (USAF Patent Pending-2013) were developed as a portable attachment to field stretchers for low and high lithotomy positioning under austere conditions. A prospective randomized control trial was used to test the prototype for Greene Stirrups during a humanitarian mission to Trinidad, 7-12 April 2011. This new team was recently developed to provide rapid deployment of medical assets anywhere in the world within 24 hours with a functional field hospital ready to receive patients 6 hours after arrival. Every fourth female patient was assigned a traditional examination under field conditions with the others examined using Greene Stirrups. Validated patient satisfaction questionnaires (Short-Form 12) were used to assess patient satisfaction with frequencies of high and low responses and the medians compared using the Cox-Mantel Log-Rank Test, Chi 2 and Fisher's Exact Tests. RESULTS: 82 patients were examined and treated using Greene Stirrups and 27 patients were randomized to have their pelvic examinations performed using traditional field medicine methods by the same OB/GYN provider. The SF-12s indicated very high or high patient satisfaction for 98.8% of patients that used Greene Stirrups vs. 63.0% that used traditional field methods (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Greene Stirrups allow for safe and comfortable examinations of patients who require low or high lithotomy positioning in austere conditions. Endometriosis is a chronic inflammatory disease and pain and infertility are the major symptoms, with a negative impact on women's quality of life especially on psychosocial functioning. The present study investigated the perceived stress in a group of women with endometriosis, before and after the diagnosis of the disease. METHODS: A 40 item questionnaire was administered to a group of women with endometriosis (n=251) before and after the diagnosis. In 90% (226/251) patients had at least one surgical treatment. The median age at endometriosis diagnosis was 28.8 years and the median age at the first surgery was 29.4 years. The questionnaire was divided in two different parts: the former was about clinical history, characteristics of menstrual cycles and painful symptoms; the latter focused on global measure on perceived stress both before and after the diagnosis of endometriosis. The "Perceived Stress Scale" (PSS10) was used and four different levels of stress were categorized. RESULTS: Based on four different PSS10 score intervals, all patients showed a perceived stress which in 39% (98/251) resulted at the highest levels (p<0.001); no statistically significant difference was found between before and after diagnosis in any of the four groups. Mood disorders affected 18.72% (47/251) of patients and the median level of PSS10 this group was found significantly higher than in the other patients (p=0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Endometriosis is a stressful disease, and this is well clear since before obtaining a surgical diagnosis. Medical or surgical treatment do not affect stress levels, while mood disorders are associated with an increased perceived stress. AhR and ARNT Are Overexpressed in the Endometrium of Women with Endometriosis, but Regulated Differentially. John F Langenheim, 1 Karenne N Fru, 2 Eli V Hestermann, 3 Jung Yoon Yoo, 4 Jae Wook Jeong, 4 Lingwen Yuan, 5 Steven L Young, 5 Bruce A Lessey. An increased prevalence of endometriosis over the past 20 years has been proposed to be the result of environmental factors. Dioxin or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) has been implicated in endometrial dysfunction and endometriosis pathogenesis. The primary TCDD receptor, aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and its dimerization partner, aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT) mediate many of its biological effects. In this study we compare the spatial and temporal expression pattern of AhR, ARNT, and downstream targets in the endometrium of normal women versus those with endometriosis. METHODS: AHR was detected in endometrium in women with and without endometriosis, using immunohistochemistry (IHC), real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), and western blot. Expression of AhR/ARNT-regulated genes, CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and AhRR, were also measured by qRT-PCR. Effects of estrogen, progesterone, cytokines and TCDD were studied in vitro using Ishikawa cells. The effect of decidualization was studied in cultures of isolated human endometrial stromal cells (ESCs)from normal women and women with endometriosis. We used 1 nM TCDD treatment to study AhR and ARNT expression and an AhR antagonist. RESULTS: AhR, but not ARNT was cycle-regulated, with maximal expression during the mid-secretory phase. Increased expression of AhR, ARNT, CYP1A1, CYP1B1 and AhRR was seen in the midsecretory endometrium of women with endometriosis versus controls. AhR protein was elevated in extracts of whole endometrium and ESCs of women with endometriosis compared to controls. Although down-regulated with All diaphragmatic lesions are superficial. All cases of diaphragmatic localizations are associated with concomitant pelvic endometriosis. Only 2 patients report recurring pain in the right arm and shoulder. The 2 cases of atypical symptoms were resolved within 6 months after surgery. 100% Associated pelvic disease 100% Diaphragmatic symptoms 25% Symptoms regression after treatment 100% The asymptomaticity of most of the lesions is mainly related to their superficiality. For superficial diaphragmatic endometriosis in asymptomatic cases, treatment, limited to accessible areas, seems appropriate, in symptomatic cases, treatment, preferably laparoscopic, conducive to regression of symptom, is always advisable. The higher incidence of right side endometriotic lesions on the diaphragm, and the almost constant association with pelvic endometriosis are additional elements in favor of the retrograde menstruation theory. Genome-wide association studies report strong evidence for markers associated with endometriosis risk located in at least six genomic regions. An important step towards understanding the role of these regions affecting risk is to conduct fine mapping and functional studies in each region to determine the genes and pathways affected by these genetic differences. We imputed genotypes for each region from the 1000 Genomes datasets. Non-synonymous variants within exons for genes in each region were genotyped in 930 endometriosis cases and 959 controls using the Sequenom MassARRAY platform. We also genotyped single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the strongest evidence of association from imputation and the top SNP from the GWAS studies to determine the relative evidence for association among the different SNP classes. Potential functional roles of SNPs were annotated using ENCODE data. The genetic architecture in each region varies. Coding variants in genes from chromosome 1 (WNT4 and CDC42) and chromosome 12 (VEZT and FGD6) do not account for the genome-wide significant association signals reported in these regions. On chromosome 1 and 12, genotype data for imputed SNPs had high concordance with estimated genotypes from imputation and association signals for SNPs on chromosome 1 were stronger than the genotyped SNP rs7521902 reported in published genome scans. Some key SNPs are located in DNA sequences with potential functional roles and should be prioritized for studies on expression of genes in these regions. Imputation results for common SNPs shows high concordance with genotype data in most regions. SNPs most strongly associated with disease risk are generally located in non-coding regions and likely to affect gene regulation. Key SNPs in regulatory regions of the genome were identified on some regions for further analysis to look for effects gene expression of target genes in these regions. Changes and HMB in 90% of women. Its mechanism of action is unknown; we hypothesise that altered steroid receptor expression is involved. METHODS: Endometrial biopsies were collected with ethical approval/ consent from 6 UPA-treated women with fibroids (10mg OD, up to 12 weeks) and non-treated controls (n=6). Progesterone (PR), androgen (AR) and estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) mRNA/protein were examined using qRTPCR and immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: AR mRNA was increased with UPA-treatment compared to proliferative (p<0.05) and mid-secretory phase controls (p<0.001). PR mRNAs were lower in mid-secretory and UPA-treated samples than in proliferative samples (p<0.001). There was no difference in PR mRNA and hospital stay in the TVT-O group were significantly less than in the Burch group. The rate of complete cure, improvement and failure at the end of 2 years in the sling group was 83.3%, 10% and 6,6%, respectively, as well as 80%, 13,3% and 6.6% in the Burch group. The fact is confirmed by the degree of patients' satisfaction in the two arms and the reduction (from 18/30 to 2/30 and from 19/30 to 2/30 in arm A and B respectively) of the number of patients using pad. The data of the current study agree with the recomendation panel of the American Society of Urology Female Stress Urinary Incontinence, and it is also shown that none of the two surgical techniques analysed has achieved a fully satisfactory cure rate for the treatment of stress urinary incontinence in women. Altered ). An equal number of control mice received identical incisions at peritoneum or distal sites. Twelve weeks following establishment of endometrial lesions, mice were sacrificed and whole uteri were obtained from recipients. Gene expression of transcription factors involved in endometrial receptivity was measured using qRT-PCR. RESULTS: When exposed to endometriosis at proximal site, uterine expression of several mediators of endometrial receptivity was decreased. Expression of Hoxa10 (3.78-fold), insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1(Igfbp1; 3.63-fold) and Kruppel-like factor 9 (Klf9; 3.06-fold) in the endometrium were decreased (p<0.05) in comparison to controls. No significant differences were observed in expression of Hoxa11, total progesterone receptor (total Pgr) in endometrium of proximal group. In the distal group expression of Igfbp1 (1.93-fold) and total Pgr ( The evidence for a relation between endometrioma and painful symptoms is still debated, since they are frequently related to the presence of pelvic adhesions or deep infiltrating lesions. Recent reports showed an association between endometrioma and adenomyosis which ranges between 15% and 40% increasing in infertility. The correlation between endometrioma and adenomyosis is still under discussion, both in terms of pathogenesis and clinic. The purpose of this study is to evaluate: 1) the occurrence of adenomyosis by transvaginal ultrasound in a group of women with endometrioma; 2) the impact of adenomyosis on painful symptoms before and 3 months after surgery. METHODS: A group of women (n=44) who underwent laparoscopic treatment for endometrioma were enrolled in this study. Clinical history, painful symptoms (dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, dyschezia, dysuria, chronic pelvic pain that were evaluated by the VAS-Visual Analogic Scale) and ultrasound evaluations were always performed for the preoperative assessment of the patients; the presence of the ultrasonographic appearences of endometrioma and adenomyosis were recorded by 2D and 3D ultrasonographic criteria (myometrial cysts and heterogeneous areas, myometrial hypoechoic linear striations, diffuse vascularity and asymmetry of the myometrial wall, junctional zone thickness and alterations). All women completed the postoperative clinical and ultrasonographic follow-up 3 months after surgery. RESULTS: Adenomyosis was found in 45.4% (n=20) of women with endometrioma. Before surgery dysmenorrhea was significantly higher in patient with endometrioma and adenomyosis (p=0.02), while the other painful symptoms were not significantly different between the two group. Postoperative dysmenorrhea was decreased in the whole group but it remained significantly higher (p=0.004) in the group with adenomyosis. The presence of adenomyosis has to be evaluated in patients with endometrioma by transvaginal ultrasound and it significantly influences clinical symptoms and their persistence after surgery. with chronic exposure to buprenorphine (daily dose 8-24 mg). A nonopioid dependent control group (n=65) was matched for parity, ethnicity, tobacco use, and medical comorbidities. The FHR tracings in the last 5 hours of the first stage and during the entire second stage of labor were analyzed by a single experienced provider who was blinded to the exposure status. The baseline and overall FHR tracing categories were assessed using the three-tiered interpretation system defined by the NICHD. We also evaluated whether FHR variability (absent, minimal, moderate, or marked) differed between the groups. We defined the presence of variable and late decelerations as occurring with greater than 50% of contractions. Paired t-test and exact Wilcoxon signed rank tests were used for statistical comparisons. The mean FHR baseline was not altered with buprenorphine exposure (p=0.053). During the first stage of labor, there were no cases of absent variability, pseudosinusoidal patterns, or late decelerations. FHR variability did not differ overall, and minimal variability was not more common with buprenorphine exposure. Category II tracings were equally common in both groups during the first (p=0.26) and second stages of labor (0.70). None of the patients had a Category III FHR tracing. The need for a primary cesarean delivery for a non-reassuring FHR pattern was infrequent and did not differ between the buprenorphine and control groups (6.7% vs 1.7% p= 0.36). CONCLUSIONS: Chronic in utero exposure to buprenorphine did not affect the FHR baseline, variability and category of the FHR pattern. Maternal buprenorphine therapy should not influence interpretation of intrapartumFHR tracings. Variants of the Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC1) gene have been associated with risk for extreme obesity and diabetes. The objectives of this investigation were to determine NPCI gene allele frequencies in our obstetric population and to evaluate whether those allele variants were associated with maternal obesity or diabetes. METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional study involving 567 gravid patients admitted for delivery. Blood specimens were obtained at admission and umbilical cord at delivery for NPC1 genotype analyses and HbA1c determination. Regression analyses evaluated any associations between the NPC1 ancestral and derived gene alleles and race/ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), pre-existing diabetes, serum HbA1c level before labor, and large-for-gestational age infants. RESULTS: Frequencies of NPC1 gene ancestral alleles were significantly different and in complete linkage disequilibrium among race/ethnic groups. [ The ancestral allele for the I858V variant was associated with diabetes among 1.30-1.87, P = 0.018), while the derived allele for the same variant was whites (OR 4.94; 95% CI associated (OR 2.03; 95% CI 1.04-3.96, <em style="mso-bidi-font-style: normal;">P = .04) with diabetes among Hispanics. The ancestral allele for the I642M variant was ssociated with being overweight (BMI 25.1-29.9) (OR 2.10; 95% CI 1.12-4.00, <em style="mso-bidi-font-style: normal;">P = .02) but not being obese (BMI>30) among whites. We found no relation between each NPC1 allele and maternal serum HbA1c level at delivery, infant birth weight, and large-for-gestational age infant in any race/ethnic group. CONCLUSIONS: Frequencies for NPC1 gene alleles differed significantly among race/ethnic groups in our obstetric patients. These alleles were differentially associated with susceptibility of mothers being overweight or having diabetes. Many pathways identified in the Irregular group were involved in the immune response (particularly response to interferon) compared to Regular (7 of the top 10 pathways) and Control (10 of the top 10 pathways). The Fibroid group was the most divergent with the most DEG compared to all other groups. The present study reports the first microarray data analysis on the endometrium of women demonstrating a difference in gene expression in different aetiologies of HMB. Paricalcitol, an Analogue of Vitamin Potentially Inhibits Fibroid Growth in In Vivo Nude Mice. Chakradhari Sharan, Sunil K Halder, Ayman Al-Hendy, Sangeeta Nair. CWHR, Ob and Gyn, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN, USA. INTRODUCTION: Uterine leiomyoma (fibroid) are the most common benign tumors in the uterus, occurring in 20-25% of premenopausal women. Studies have been shown that vitamin D deficiency is a risk factor for the occurrence of uterine leiomyoma. We have also shown the shrinkage of uterine fibroids in in Eker rat model. Our purpose of this study to find out the effectiveness of paricalcitol in reducing the rat uterine leiomyoma tumor in comparison with vitamin D by using rat leiomyoma (ELT3) cells in the nude mice model. For the creation of uterine leiomyoma tumor ELT3 cells were inoculated subcutaneously in female nude mice (5-6 weeks). Immediately after the formation of the tumors (3-4 weeks), these mice were treated with the final dose of 300ng/kg/day of paricalcitol by intraperitoneal injection 3 times/week or 0.5 µgm/kg/day of vitamin and compared to vehicle treated control. At the end of the experiment (4 weeks) tumors were collected and evaluated for histological analyses. RESULTS: We found that paricalcitol dramatically reduce the volume and weight of the tumors in comparison with vitamin D at 4 weeks. The expression of proliferative marker Ki67 and apoptotic marker caspase 3 protein were greatly increased and reduced respectively. No toxicity was observed due to treatment by histological analyses on the tasted organs. CONCLUSIONS: Paricalcitol in comparison with vitamin D effectively inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis in fibroid tumor lesions in vivo. Paricalcitol can be used as a novel therapeutic alternative for the treatment of Uterine fibroid. Friday and ORT (p<0.0005). No significant differences were noted between the RALS and CLS groups in age, race, hysterectomy rate, EBL, LOS, or in rates of intra-operative or postoperative complications. CONCLUSIONS: Despite a higher mean ORT in the RALS group, by using the robotic platform in these cases, surgeon fatigue will be decreased, and outcomes will be comparable to those of non-obese patients undergoing conventional laparoscopy for severe endometriosis. To determine long term outcome differences in patients undergoing robotic-assisted versus conventional laparoscopy for advanced-stage endometriosis. METHODS: Cases were collected from our prospectively-maintained computerized database of robotic-assisted (RALS) and conventional laparoscopic surgical (CLS) treatments for endometriosis. Included were all patients treated between July 2009 and October 2012 for endometriosis stage III or IV (ASRM). A questionnaire composed of questions ranging from assessing post operative pain to subsequent medical or surgical treatment, followed by future pregnancies was distributed to all patients at least six months after their surgery and was compared between the groups. Patients were also divided into sub-groups of those who had hysterectomy and those who did not. A Chi-square test was used to compare presence of long term outcomes between CLS and RALS groups. The level of significance was set as 5%. The study included 54 CLS and 23 RALS subjects. CLS patients who did not underwent hysterectomy needed additional medical treatment for endometriosis after the surgery mainly for unresolved pain compared to CLS patients (p=0.01 and p<0.5 respectively). No significant differences were noted between RALS and CLS groups when comparing post operative pain, subsequent medical or surgical treatment, and future pregnancies. CONCLUSIONS: Even though the robot has known advantages over conventional laparoscopy, no statistical differences in long term outcomes were found between CLS and RALS groups for treatment of advancedstage endometriosis. However, in contrast to the RALS group, patients in the CLS group who had hysterectomy did not need any additional medical therapy compared to CLS patients who did not have a hysterectomy and needed additional medical treatment for endometriosis after the surgery, mainly for unresolved pain. CONCLUSIONS: Imiq and OVA in a microparticle platform directs TH1-type cytokine and antibody production. This vaccine strategy has potential for vaccines for intracellular pathogens and cancers such as ovarian, cervical and uterine cancers, and viral and intracellular STIs.  Of the 127 women, a total of 51% (n=65) indicated that a health care provider discussed birth control during or after treatment of breast cancer. Of these women, 75% (n=49) reported discussions regarding birth control options with an oncologist and 52% (n=32) with a gynecologist. Of all women sampled, 52% (n=66) reported completion of childbearing at the time of cancer diagnosis. Of these women, 39% (n=26) engaged in a conversation regarding birth control with a healthcare provider. Among the 78 women indicating interest in future child bearing 64% (n=39) reported discussing contraception with a healthcare provider during or after treatment. The odds of a patient indicating that their healthcare provider discussed contraception with them was 60% lower for women who did not desire future childbearing than women who did when correcting for age and year of diagnosis (p=0.0194). The ramifi cations of an unintended pregnancy may be more complicated for women with cancer than those without. There is a tremendous gap in the provision of oncocontraception leaving nearly half of surveyed women at risk of unintended pregnancy. Recommendations of less effective and even contraindicated methods of contraception indicates a need for targeted contraceptive training among oncologist and cancer care providers to enhance provision of appropriate counseling. INTRODUCTION: Given the lack of an instrument to assess quality of prenatal care, our Canadian research team developed and tested the 46item Quality of Prenatal Care Questionnaire (QPCQ). This questionnaire, which consists of six subscales, is designed to be completed by women to evaluate the quality of care they received. The purpose of this subsequent study was to test the psychometric properties of a French language version of the QPCQ and the English language version of the QPCQ modified for an Australian population. METHODS: The French language QPCQ was administered to 302 women in Ottawa, Canada and the Australian QCPQ was administered to 300 women in Sydney and Melbourne, Australia. Data analysis was undertaken to establish construct validity, convergent validity, and internal consistency reliability. Construct validity of the original QPCQ was demonstrated by a positive association (r=0.81) with a satisfaction of prenatal care questionnaire. Convergent validity was demonstrated by a positive correlation (r=0.61) between the "support/respect" subscale of the QPCQ and "respectfulness/emotional support" subscale of an instrument measuring prenatal interpersonal processes of care. The overall QPCQ had excellent internal consistency reliability (Cronbach's alpha=0.97) as did each of the six subscales (Cronbach's alpha=0.69-0.95). Preliminary analyses suggest that these psychometric properties remain stable for the French language and Australian versions of the QPCQ. CONCLUSIONS: The QPCQ and the newly developed French language and Australian versions are valid and reliable instruments that will be useful in research to assess quality of care and its association with a variety of maternal and infant outcomes. General Preconception Care in The Netherlands: Current Implementation and Attitudes in Primary and Youth Healthcare. SF van Voorst, 1 SCN Plasschaert, 2 LC de Jong -Potjer, 3 EAP Steegers, 4 S Denktas. 5 1 Obstetrics and Perinatal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2 Social Sciences, Erasmus University College, Rotterdam, Netherlands. INTRODUCTION: General Preconception care (PCC) is preconception care for all women or couples contemplating pregnancy, aiming to lower risks for adverse perinatal outcomes. PCC faces implementation challenges. The aim of this study is to perform an inventory on PCC activities in primary care and youth health care (YHC) and secondly to assess attitudes and prerequisites for the future. The current recommendation is to delay elective induction of labor(IOL) to 39wks to decrease prematurity risks. There is data on accelerated maturity in fetuses according to race(Blacks, Asians). However, optimal timing for delivery in Hispanics has not been evaluated. We analyzed the effect of the Hispanic ethnicity in the timing of delivery. The US Natality Database from 2007-2010 was reviewed. Inclusion Criteria were: singleton pregnancy, IOL, gestational age (GA) 36-42wks, Hispanics. Exclusion criteria were: congenital anomalies, diabetes/hypertension-related disorders, previous cesarean, breech presentation, rupture of membranes. Variables analyzed were: neonatal complications(apgar score, assisted ventilation, NICU admission, surfactant/antibiotic use); labor complications(fetal intolerance, meconium staining, chorioamnionitis), delivery mode, and macrosomia. Adjusted odds ratios were calculated for all variables using 40wks as reference. RESULTS: A total of 415,760 cases were included. The risk of cesarean delivery and neonatal complications is the lowest at 38 wks in compared to 40wks. The risk of labor complications is the lowest at 37 wks compared to 40 wks. TXB2, LTB4, while 12 were newly identified (13, . Lipid mediators/cytokines grouped into 4 clusters: Cluster 1 (LOX products) exhibited lowest concentrations at MI; Cluster 2 (CYP450/COX products) showed highest concentrations at GV; Cluster 3 (LOX/COX products) concentrations peaked at MII-NF; Cluster 4 (LOX products and cytokines) showed a steady increase in level peaking at MII-F. This variety of mediators demonstrated COX, 12-LOX, 5-LOX, 15-LOX and CYP450 activity. Furthermore, we report previously unidentified lipid mediators active in the ovarian follicle whose profiles vary with oocyte maturation status. This points to their likely functional involvement in oocyte maturation. ) are thought to induce maternal immunotolerance of paternal antigens. The molecular basis of this response is poorly understood but appears to be central to implantation/placentation. This study aimed to characterise the endometrial epithelium and stroma-specific global gene expression patterns in response to semen exposure in the days leading up to implantation. METHODS: Naturally mated female CD1 mice were culled at 24, 48, 72 and 96h post coitum (each n=3). Uterine horns were snap frozen in optimal cutting compound in liquid nitrogen and cryosectioned. Sections were stained with cresyl violet, and pure endometrial epithelium and stroma were obtained by laser capture microdissection. RNA was extracted, labelled and hybridised to Agilent one colour genome-wide gene expression microarrays. Data were analysed using Genespring. RESULTS: 46 pathways were significantly active in the murine post coital endometrium, 8 immune-related: prostaglandin synthesis/regulation, cytokines/inflammatory response, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), macrophage markers, oxidative stress (P<0.01) and TGF-b signalling (P<0.05). Several immune mediator genes were differentially expressed across epithelium, stroma and the post coital period. Csf2 was more highly expressed in stroma than epithelium at 24h, a relationship which was reversed 96h post coitum. Csf1 showed higher epithelial expression at 24 and 96h. With the exception of the 96h time point, Ccl2 was more highly expressed in stroma with marked peaks at 24 and 48h. Ccl5 peaked in stromal expression at 48h with a subsequent decrease at 72 and 96h. Tnf peaked in stroma at 24 and 48h, while epithelial expression peaked at 24h. Il15 epithelial expression rose at oestrus while stromal profiles were maximal at 24, 48 and 96h. Tgfb1 was consistently more highly expressed in stroma, with an increase in expression at all time points post coitum. Mmp1a, Mmp8 and Mmp13 were also more highly expressed in stroma, with peaks in expression at 24 and 48h. CONCLUSIONS: The multiple immune-related pathways active in the murine endometrium post coitum are epithelium/stroma-specific and change over time, suggesting that immune networks are intimately involved in regulating the maternal response to seminal plasma and priming the endometrium for blastocyst implantation. Cognitive biases to emotional information are common in psychiatric disorders in women; yet, the impact of sex hormones on cognition has not been studied. The menstrual cycle offers an opportunity to study whether and how subtle fluctuations of sex hormones influence neuronal circuits implicated in cognitive regulation of emotional processing. Attention performance is considered a model for cognitive functions. With the introduction of sensitive tests it is now possible to analyze attention performance in women by their menstrual cycle phase. METHODS: Attention performance was studied using a newly developed, internet based, 18 minute long, highly sensitive, validated version of a computerized performance test (CPT), evaluating four parameters: Attention, Timing, Impulsivity, and Hyperactivity. The patient was instructed to respond quickly to target stimuli and to avoid responding to all other stimuli. Attention is defined as the number of correct responses to a stimulus. Timing includes the number of correct responses only while the target stimulus was still on screen. Impulsivity is defined as the number of commission errors, responses to a non-target stimulus. Hyperactivity includes all types of commission responses that are not coded as impulsive responses, such as multiple responses to a single stimulus. The study group included 6 healthy regularly cycling women and 7 age-matched healthy men. Each participant performed CPT three times. The women performed the test twice on day 9-11 of the cycle and a 3 rd test on day 19-21. Full hormonal profile confirmed cycle phase. Men were tested likewise 10 days apart. RESULTS: Women had comparable attention yet significantly lower timing, impulsivity, and hyperactivity scores than men at both dates. Cycling women showed significantly higher attention (267.4 vs. 271.5, p=0 .04) and lower hyperactive (3.3 vs. 1.3, p=0.04 ) scores at the luteal phase, whereas men achieved comparable scores without statistical difference at both dates on the four cognitive parameters studied. CONCLUSIONS: Unlike men, cognitive performance in women varies throughout the menstrual cycle. In the luteal phase women experience significantly improved attention performance and decreased hyperactivity responses. When studying cognition in women, menstrual cycle phase and hormonal status should be taken into account. Uterine (Tregs), defined by CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ expression, important in early pregnancy, may also play a role in embryo implantation. We therefore hypothesized a conditional knockdown of Tregs in a murine model will lead to reduced litter size secondary to uterine implantation defect. METHODS: Conditional knockdown of Tregs was induced using a transgenic mouse (DEREG) that express a DTR-eGFP transgene under the control of an additional Foxp3 promoter. Specific depletion of Treg was performed by intra-peritoneal (IP) injections of diphtheria toxin (DT). Peripheral blood and uterine tissue levels were analyzed for Treg depletion via flow cytometer analysis of FoxP3 expression. Wild type (WT) and DEREG mice were given IP injections of saline or DT prior to mating. Early murine ultrasound (e+7-10 days) was performed to count implanted gestational sacs and compared to delivered pups to assess any effects on embryo reabsorption. RESULTS: DEREG mice (n=7) given DT (cohort 4) demonstrated decreased litter sizes (4.57 pups/litter) compared to DEREG mice (n=7) given saline (cohort 3) (7.5 pups); WT mice (n=8) given saline (cohort 1) (7.58 pups); or WT mice (n=12) given DT (cohort 2) (7.29 pups) (P=0.02) (Figure 1) of clinically recognized pregnancies. Immune imbalance of the maternal immune system in response to the fetal semi-allograft, resulting in an aberrant immune cell population and excess inflammation, is postulated to be a major cause of SA. To date, there is no effective prevention for SA. JLFC01 is the most common multi-herbal formula, and has been widely used in Asia for centuries to treat blood stagnation and miscarriage. However, its effects on the embryo are unclear. There has been no systemic or mechanistic evaluation of its protective effects. Thus, this study will test the hypothesis that JLFC01 treats SA by modulating the decidual microenvironment. METHODS: Frozen decidua from elective terminations and from women with missed or incomplete SA during 5 to 8 wk of gestation were immunostained with human anti-CD68 + anti-CD80 or -CD86 (M1 macrophage (MF) markers) or -CD163 (M2 MF marker) antibodies. First trimester decidual cells (FTDCs) were primed with estradiol (10 -8 M) + medroxyprogesterone acetate (10 -7 M) for 7d followed by pretreatment ± JLFC01 for 24h before adding 1 ng/ml of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1b) or tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a). Expression of IL-8, GM-CSF, IP-10, MCP-1, RANTES, and M-CSF was measured by the multiplex Luminex assay. MF subtypes were determined after developing peripheral monocytes in conditioned media (CM) from TNF-a-or IL-1b-treated FTDCs. Eight-week-old virgin female CBA/J mice were treated with JLFC01 (0.3 gm/kg in ddH 2 O/day) or ddH 2 O by oral gavage started 7d before mating with 10-week-old DBA/2 males throughout pregnancy. Litter size, fetal weight and resorption rate were recorded in pregnant CBA/J mice sacrificed at gestational day 15.  Under an approved protocol, endometrial samples were obtained from patients undergoing surgery for benign gynecological disorders, and prepared as single cell suspensions. Passage 2 cells were plated on 6-well Synthemax plates and 6-well gelatin coated plates in complete medium (10% FBS DMEM/F-12, 1% Pen Strep). Once the cells reached 90% confluence, 3 different differentiation agents were respectively added to 3 wells on each plate: 10 uM 5-azacytidine, 10 nM oxytocin (OT), and 100 nM OT. After 72 hours, all wells were replaced with complete medium. Control group wells received complete medium only. Complete medium was replaced every 3 days. 14 days after differentiation, mRNA was extracted and expression of cardiomyocyte markers (NKX2.5, cTnT, cTnI, and ISL1) was analyzed by qRT-PCR. The cells were visually recorded to observe any morphological changes. RESULTS: Treatment with 10 nM OT on Synthemax plates caused a 5-fold increase in expression of NKX2.5 and a 2-fold increase in cTnT expression while treatment with 10 uM 5-azacytidine caused a 2-fold increase in NKX2.5 and cTnT expression. Treatment with 5-azacytidine and OT on Synthemax plates did not lead to significant increases in cTnI, which is exclusively expressed in cardiomyocytes, or ISL1. Treatment with 5-azacytidine on gelatin coated plates resulted in a 6-fold increase in cTnI expression, while treatment with 100 nM OT yielded a 10-fold increase in ISL1 and a 17-fold increase in cTnI. 10 nM OT treatment resulted in a 3-fold increase in ISL1 and an 11-fold increase in cTnI. Treated cells showed morphological changes consistent with cardiomyocyte differentiation (e.g. striations similar to actin filaments), yet no spontaneous beating was observed. CONCLUSIONS: EDSC have shown the potential to be differentiated into cardiomyocyte-like cells, and further research will look towards increasing differentiation efficiency. This is especially promising for female CVD patients, where the autologous nature of their cells may increase clinical potential. . Serum 25OH-D and sRAGE concentrations were measured at baseline and after vitD3 supplementation in the treated group, and 8 weeks apart in the control group. In the second experiment, cumulus granulosa cells (GCs) collected from 7 women were cultured in media (control) with or without vitD3 (50nM) for 24h after which mRNA for RAGE was compared using RT-PCR. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. T-test and Pearson correlation were used as appropriate. There was a negative correlation between body mass index and serum sRAGE levels (r=-0.3, p=0.01). Oral vitD3 increased serum levels of sRAGE in women with PCOS (from 1635±158 to 1758±191 pg/ mL; p=0.03) but not in women without PCOS (from 1734±95 to 1761±88 pg/mL; p=0.5). The change in serum 25OH-D following supplementation correlated with the change in serum sRAGE in women with PCOS (r=0.6, p=0.01). When compared to controls, RT-PCR results showed a trend toward lower RAGE mRNA expression levels in GCs treated with vitD3 (p=0.09). CONCLUSIONS: VitD3 exerts a protective effect against the inflammatory action of AGEs in women with PCOS. VitD3 seems to attenuate the effect of the AGE-RAGE system by increasing the circulating sRAGE and down-regulating cellular RAGE expression in GCs. The pathological significance of these harmful inflammatory molecules (AGEs) in follicular health clearly requires further investigation. Granulosa  A widely accepted feature of ovarian follicle development is that growing "healthy" ovarian follicles have zero or very few dying granulosa cells. The presence of even a few pyknotic or apoptotic granulosa cells in a single histological section of a follicle meets the criteria for follicle death, or, atresia. It has been suggested that it takes between 70 and 210 days for a primordial follicle to grow to its largest pre-antral state. Given a doubling time between 20 and 26 hours, granulosa proliferation without cell death would result in large solid volumes where any growing follicle would exceed the size of the entire ovary. The goal of this project was to test whether assumptions about proliferation and death match observed characteristics of ovarian follicles. The statistical analysis and graphing package R was used for all mathematical modeling. Histomorphometric assessment of the ovaries of wild-type mice and mice deficient in the enzyme Cathepsin B (Ctsb) (n=5 ovaries per genotype) was performed after fixation, embedding, and preparation of sections upon glass slides. RESULTS: Follicle measurements from wild-type and Ctsb-/-mice (deficient in cell clearance) were compared with values calculated using R. Variation(s) in follicle volume due to the arrangement of granulosa cells were estimated using sphere packing calculations. We confirmed that without robust death and clearance, wild-type follicles from mice, and by extrapolation, humans cannot exhibit observed growth patterns. For example, given minimal cell death, a growth-activated primordial follicle consisting of a few pregranulosa cells and an oocyte would grow to 40 mm in diameter (a solid volume the size of a golf ball) in less than 50 days. In order to limit growth to the expected approximately 2 mm diameter, granulosa cells would either have to engage in a remarkably slow cell cycle (doubling on the order of every 130 hours), or approximately 30% of granulosa cells would have to die each day. That neither of these options is observed (or is realistic) again supports our interpretation that cell turnover consistent with nearly every other tissue of the body is critical for normal follicle growth. CONCLUSIONS: In sum, healthy wild-type follicles contain granulosa cells that proliferate at a rate greater than the number that die and are rapidly cleared. In atretic follicles, the rate of granulosa cell death exceeds the capacity for the phagocytic clearance of the dying cells. have been suggested to have pluripotent capacity. However, the isolation and culture of both cell types from the amnion shows that these cells have differential proliferation and growth characteristics often resulting in cells not viable for downstream experimentation, despite this pluripotent reputation. Both stem cells and cancer cells have high levels of telomerase, correlating with their rapid proliferation. Therefore, the level of telomerase expression was characterized from amnion cells at term and compared with that of cancer cell lines. METHODS: Fetal membranes were collected at repeat Caesarian section at Kapiolani Hospital for Women and Children with prior IRB approval. Amniotic epithelial (AEC) and mesenchymal (AMC) cells were isolated. Cell lines (HEK, WISH, A549) and primary cells (AEC, AMC) were cultured (750,000 cells per well, 6 well plate). Over 7 days, the cells were trypsinized and counted. Growth/proliferation was also monitored by MTT assay. Real-time PCR was performed to measure telomerase expression by two methods (QTD kit and Trapeze RT) and normalized to total protein. Both of telomerase real-time PCR assays showed that all cells expressed telomerase. The level of variation in telomerase expression between patients (n=8) cells was 5-6 fold. The proliferation data demonstrated that all cancer cell lines proliferated twice as much and their peak growth rates were on average five fold higher than the primary cells. Unsurprisingly, the cancer cell lines had significantly more telomerase than the amnion cells but the level of telomerase expression correlated with the proliferation rate (R 2 =0.912) for all of the cell types tested. CONCLUSIONS: While there has been controversy in the literature as to whether human fetal membrane cells express telomerase, we show clear expression by two methods and describe the level of patient variation at term. This data supports the idea that telomerase expression could be used to determine the proliferative capability of these cells and also supports mounting evidence by other researchers that these cells may be a source of therapeutic stem cells. Interestingly, H19 also acts as a molecular "sponge" for the let-7 family of miRNAs, which are known to play critical roles in development, cancer, and metabolism. We have previously shown that H19 expression is increased in cumulus cells of patients who sustain a high response to controlled ovarian hyperstimulation and in-vitro fertilization (COH-IVF). We thus sought to clarify the effect of estradiol on H19 expression. To determine the effect of estradiol on H19 expression, we performed in vitro experiments using the human granulosa-like tumor cell line (KGN). KGN cells were cultured in aMEM and treated with estradiol (E2 10 -8 ) for 96 hours. Following treatments, RNA extraction was performed using the PureLink RNA Mini-Kit, and RT-qPCR was performed using SYBR Green PCR kit. All reactions were run in triplicate. Expression of H19 was normalized to beta-tubulin levels. Results were reported as a fold change in H19 expression between groups. To explore potential mechanisms, KGN cells were then treated with JNK-inhibitor 30 minutes prior to estradiol incubation and RNA extraction/RT-qPCR was performed as above. RESULTS: Extended culture of granulosa-like KGN cells with estradiol led to a twofold downregulation of H19 compared to control cells (p<0.05). Treatment with JNK-inhibitor restored H19 levels to those in untreated cells. CONCLUSIONS: Interestingly, despite the fact that H19 is increased in women who are considered "high responders" to COH-IVF (with associated increased estradiol levels), H19 was significantly downregulated in cultured granulosa cells in the presence of estradiol. Treatment with JNK-inhibitor provided partial rescue from estradiol's downregulation of H19. Though the mechanism for regulation of H19 by estradiol remains unclear, perhaps H19 regulation by estradiol is dose-or context-dependent, and there may exist a feedback loop that underlies H19-mediated regulation in granulosa cells. Ultimately, this work provides impetus for further studies investigating the regulation of H19 by estradiol (with particular interest in the JNK pathway), as well as H19's role in granulosa cell growth and development. Changes to the Endocannabinoid System in Implantation and Inter-Implantation Sites after Exogenous Anandamide Administration. AEA is important for fertilisation, implantation and early pregnancy maintenance. Low levels of AEA are present at implantation sites. In this study we investigated the effects of exogenous AEA on implantation and inter-implantation sites in rat. A single injection of AEA (1mg/kg i.p.) or vehicle was given to pregnant Wistar rats on Day2, Day4 or Day6. The rats were sacrificed on Day14; decidua and placenta of implantation sites and inter-implantation sites were collected for the expression of the EC by immunohistochemistry, qRT-PCR and Western blotting. GraphPad Prism was used for statistical analysis and significance was considered with a p-value <0.05. RESULTS: Histomorphometric analysis showed increased FAAH expression in inter-implantation sites after AEA treatment when compared to the control, which was significant for Day2 AEA treated rats (p<0.001). NAPE-PLD expression in inter-implantation sites was significantly increased in Day2 and Day4 AEA treated rats (p<0.05, p<0.01). NAPE-PLD expression decreased in implantation and inter-implantation sites after AEA treatment on Day4 or Day6, but this was not significantly different. However, FAAH immunostaining increased in implantation as well as inter-implantation sites after AEA treatment on Day4 or Day6 (p<0.01). NAPE-PLD mRNA expression in Day4 or Day6 AEAtreated rats decreased in placenta and increased in decidua. NAPE-PLD expression in inter-implantation sites was higher in the AEA-treated than control rats. FAAH transcript levels were significantly higher in decidua and placenta than inter-implantation sites in the control rats (p<0.05). FAAH expression increased in inter-implantation sites of Day2 and Day4-AEA treated rats. NAPE-PLD and FAAH protein levels were not significantly different between implantation and inter-implantation sites. CONCLUSIONS: Exogenous AEA administration shows an effect on the ECS in implantation and inter-implantation sites in rat pregnancy. Friday moderate (25-60% occluded), or severe (>60% occluded) cavities. Outcomes assessed included SHG evaluation of the cavity post-op, the number of hysteroscopies performed, and any post hysteroscopy pregnancies, miscarriages, or ongoing pregnancies leading to live births. Chi Square and ANOVA were performed with Systat 13 software. RESULTS: 30.5% of subjects had recurrent pregnancy loss and 75.6% had infertility. More severe adhesions were associated with greater parity, postpartum D&C, and Asherman's syndrome. 75% had at least one prior D&C and 13.4% had a prior myomectomy. Positive Chlamydia serology was found in 25.5% of subjects versus 5.5% of controls (p<0.001). Total patency and number of hysteroscopies were highly associated with severity of adhesions, but there were no differences in reproductive outcome between mild, moderate, and severe adhesions after the final hysteroscopy. 47/85 subjects underwent IVF with a cumulative 74.5% pregnancy rate and 63.8% LBR. (1) used, while successful, are time consuming and therefore there is growing interest in the development of new protocols. One such paper(2) aimed to minimize the time taken and reduce cell type contamination. This protocol reduced the number of steps to obtain both cell types while achieving their aims. Therefore, a direct comparison of the traditional method(1) and the new method(2) was performed. METHODS: Fetal membranes were collected at repeat Caesarian section at Kapiolani Hospital for Women and Children with prior IRB approval. The fetal membranes were equally divided. hAEC and hAMC cells were isolated, one half using the traditional method(1) the other following the new protocol (2). At each step, small samples were removed and processed for histology to verify the protocol. The cells isolated were cultured (1 million cells per 6cm plate) and over 10 days the cells were counted. Viable cells not adhered to the plastic were also counted. The numbers of cells from the same tissue by the new method were significantly less (n=6) with 35-45% less viable hAEC for each preparation and often no mesenchymal cells (80% of the time) were retrieved. Histological analysis of the new technique showed that we produced the same preparations as the original authors. Upon 10 days monitoring, the hAEC(1) adhered to the plastic slower (3-4 versus 1-2 days) but significantly less cells died and only 15-20% remained in suspension compared to 45-60% of the new cells. Thus by the end significantly more (60-80%) viable hAEC were available for use in downstream assays despite being originally seeded at equivalent densities. CONCLUSIONS: Both the numbers of isolated cells and the culture characteristics of these cells from the same human amnion are different depending on the isolation technique used. The cell adhesion and cell proliferation characteristics of these cells are being investigated as the new method may only be isolating a subpopulation of the amnion cells. (1) Casey ML, MacDonald PC. Biol Reprod. 1996; 55:1253-60 (day 4, 8, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28) and isolated RNAs from each differentiation stage. miRNA specific RT-qPCR was performed and the expression profile of cardiac specific miRNAs (miR-1, -133a, -133b, -204, -499a) was evaluated. RESULTS: Expression level of miR-1 and miR-204 was almost consistent from day 4 to 28. On the contrary, expression of miR-133a, -133b and -499a was increased during differentiation and the level was highest at differentiation day 16. The expression level was significantly increased from day 12, differentiation stage in turning off of pluripotency genes and explosion of cardiac specific genes, to day 16 and the expression level was sustained. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we evaluated the expression profile of miRNAs during differentiation into cardiomyocytes from hPSCs. Our findings demonstrated the expression of miRNAs was stage-dependent during differentiation and the differentiation into CMs could be regulated by miRNAs through direct or indirect pathway (A111539). CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the presence of an inverse correlation between sperm characteristics and semen fructose. The estimation of per-spermatozoon fructose level provides information on the microenvironment of the spermatozoon and its metabolism. Given that seminal vesicle function and sperm production are gonadotropindependent, fructose assessment may provide insight into the integrity of the germinal epithelium. Expression protecting the follicles from growing and ultimately becoming atretic. We hypothesized that vitD would improve follicular development via AMH action on GCs. METHODS: 8 reproductive-aged women who underwent controlled ovarian hyperstimulation followed by oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilization (IVF) were enrolled. GCs were cultured in media (control) with or without 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (vitD3; 50-100 nM) for 24 h after which: 1) mRNA was compared using RT-PCR for AMH, AMHR-II and c-kit ligand, an important regulator of oogenesis and folliculogenesis, and 2) AMH protein concentration in culture media was compared using ELISA. The effect of vitD3 on AMH action was assessed in GCs from 4 additional participants by measuring nuclear localization of phospho-Smad1/5/8 using immunofluorescence. For this experiment, GCs were treated with media (control) or recombinant AMH (50 ng/mL) in the presence or absence of vitD3 (50 nM) and the % of cells with nuclear staining of phospho-Smad1/5/8 calculated. Data are expressed as mean±SD. RESULTS: VitD3 significantly decreased AMHR-II mRNA levels from 4.7±2.7 to 3.1±2.2 (AU; p<0.05) but did not affect AMH or c-kit ligand mRNA levels. VitD3 did not affect AMH protein concentration in culture media (2.4±0.9 vs. 2.3±0.9 ng/mL; p=0.9). Recombinant AMH markedly increased the phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8 and its localization to the nucleus when compared to control (20.7±7.5% vs. 0.0±0.0% respectively; p<0.01). When cells were treated with vitD3 in the presence of recombinant AMH, the accumulation of phospho-Smad1/5/8 in the nucleus was significantly reduced (3.0±1.8%; p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that vitD3 suppresses the activity of AMH in human GCs. Because AMH signals via Smad1/5/8 to suppress follicular growth, these findings indicate that vitD3 may counteract this repressive effect of AMH, potentially promoting follicular differentiation. Understanding the role of vitD in the ovary may provide clinical significance for fertility and reproductive disorders. Adiposity Alters Genes Important in Human Granulosa Cell Growth. of human endometrial receptivity with consensus about the up-regulation of hsa-miR-30d. The aim of this work was to analyze the proteomic regulation induced by the over-expression of hsa-miR-30d in primary cultures of human endometrial epithelial cells (hEEC) . METHODS: Primary cultures of hEEC (n=4) obtained from volunteer donors at the day of the LH peak were transiently transfected using HiPerfect with hsa-miR-30d Mimic or Scramble as a control. After 72 hours, both RNA and total protein was extracted and quantified using Trizol and Bradford method respectively. Transfection efficiency was determined by qPCR. Next, iTRAQ 8-plex was performed, data normalized, log-transformed and analyzed using paired rank product with FDR correction <5% for the differentially expressed proteins between conditions using MeV software. Differential proteins were confirmed by western-blot analysis. Target prediction software (Targetscan, microcosm, pictar and miranda) was used to find miRNA target genes. RESULTS: Hsa-miR-30d transfection induced ~65-fold increase expression of this miRNA in transfected EEC vs control. iTRAQ identified a total of 2,290 proteins and 108 were statistically significant (47 overexpressed and 61 under-expressed). Top 5 relevant up-regulated and downregulated proteins were DDX18, MIF, DNMT1, LGALS1, COX6C and WNT1, ALDH2, PGRMC1, NOTCH4, ALDH1B1, respectively. Several proteins were validated by western-blot analysis (DNMT1, ALDH2, WNT1 and PGRMC1). This putative epigenetic effect was also checked by methylation differential immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) for H19 gene. These results together with previous transcriptomic observations suggests a potential role of hsa-miR-30d in the control of the epigenetic status of the endometrial epithelial cells. Human follicular fluid contains a combination of proteins, metabolites, and other molecules that are indicative of the follicular metabolism and could be associated with oocyte maturation stage as well as their quality. Specifically, miRNAs are regulators of gene expression in different tissues and fluids, implicated in many physiological and pathological processes. Objective: We aim to characterize the miRNA expression profile in the human follicular fluid and their putative association with oocyte maturation stage. METHODS: Patients undergoing IVF (n=15) with the same stimulation protocol: rhFSH+LH+GnRH antagonist were recruited for this study. Individual puncture of follicular fluid from different follicles resulting in 12 germinal vesicles (GVs), 9 metaphase I (MI) and 18 metaphase II (MII) oocytes were obtained and pooled (n=3) in groups. RNA was extracted and miRNA assessed using microarray technology. Global miRNAs expression was performed using Agilent Human miRNA v3 8x15K arrays. Data was analyzed using Rank product with False Discovery Correction < 5% for the differentially expressed miRNAs between different groups. Principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering were done for the differentially expressed miRNAs. We found approximately 300 known miRNAs in the human follicular fluid. When comparing GVs vs. MII and MI vs. MII, 13 and 7 miRNAs were found to be statistically deregulated respectively. Furthermore, we observed 43 and 5 "on/off" miRNAs expressed in GVs and MII respectively. When we looked at the "on/off" genes in MI vs. MII oocytes, we obtained 211 uniquely expressed miRNAs in MI compared to 28 miRNAs in the MII oocytes. Using a non-supervised PCA and hierarchical clustering analysis we were able to separate the different populations using miRNA expression. Documentation of olfactory receptor expression at the RNA level was achieved by RT-PCR using primers for 9 different, randomly selected, human olfactory receptor loci. The authenticity of specific amplification products was confirmed by DNA sequencing. Whole cell protein extracts obtained from luteinized cells were analyzed by western blotting using anti-OR4E2 antibody to document protein expression. Paraffin sections of donated ovarian tissue were examined by immunohistochemistry using the same antibody. RESULTS: Three of 9 different olfactory receptor species examined, OR52N, OR8G2, and OR4E2, were expressed at the RNA level in hyperstimulated luteinized granulosa cells. Confirmation of expression at the protein level was obtained for OR4E2 in both hyperstimulated luteinized and unstimulated granulosa cells of antral, primary, and primordial follicles. CONCLUSIONS: Specific olfactory receptor proteins are present in human granulosa cells during multiple stages of follicular development. Signaling through these receptors may be responsible for triggering important follicular functions or regulation of hormone biosynthesis. Their function may also be involved in attracting the corona to the fimbriae. Targeting these receptors may lead to novel strategies for improved fertility or contraception. Survivors of premature birth often suffer from enormous neurological problems, including major motor deficits. Stem cell therapy was been shown to be effective in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases in animal models. The aim of the study was to assess therapeutic effects of the intracranial transplantation of human Wharton's jellyderived mesenchymal stem cells (WJ-MSC) in a perinatal rat model of encephalopathy of prematurity. In a rat model, neonatal brain damage was induced on postnatal day 2 (P2) by the intraperitoneal injection of the bacterial toxin LPS from E. coli followed by ligation of the left carotid artery and general hypoxia (8% O2, 65min) on P3 (n=19). Human WJ-MSC (250'000 cells per site) were transplanted into the lateral ventricles unior bilaterally stereotactic frame on P5 (n=9). Animals were euthanized on P12 and histology and immunohistochemistry were used to evaluate the neuroprotective effect of the transplant in a sham-controlled design. In non-treated animals the induced injury was associated with reduced cortical thickness and hippocampal area (left vs. right hemisphere). Comparison (semi-quantitative assessment) of non-treated animals to sham animals displayed several morphological changes in the ischemic hemisphere, namely extensive microglial activation, astrogliosis, neuro-axonal loss, and myelination deficiency. The injury was profound in the hippocampus and inner layers of the neocortex. Transplantation of WJ-MSC significantly reduced microglial activation and restored the numbers of neurons and oligodendrocytes, compared to non-treated animals. The infarct region was reduced and the cortical thickness restored significantly. CONCLUSIONS: Intracranial transplantation of human WJ-MSC in a model of encephalopathy of prematurity attenuates concomitant histological changes in affected brains, presumably by mechanisms including the secretion of neurotrophic factors and the consecutive suppression of the neuroinflammation in a hypoxic-ischemic environment. Characterization METHODS: Ten DsRed(+) (FRP:B-actin) mice were used as BM donors. 30 recipient animals were irradiated to induce bone marrow ablation, and transplanted with DsRed(+) BM. The recipient mice were randomly divided into 3 groups, and uteri were harvested at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and 16 weeks. The uteri were digested into a cell suspension, and sorted using FACS. Following exclusion of hematopoietic cells, 2 distinct populations were retrieved: CD45(-)/Ter119(-)/DsRed(+) and CD45(-)/ Ter119(-)/DsRed(-). Total RNA was collected and global gene expression for both groups was analyzed using microarray. DsRed(+) vs. DsRed(-) cell populations were compared for each time point. Statistical analysis was done by t test and false discovery rate (FDR). Cell surfacer markers were confirmed by IHC. RESULTS: BM derived stem cells showed increased expression of epithelial markers including cytokeratin 5, 13, 14, 15, 16; stromal markers Hoxa11 and Hoxb5; endothelial cell marker CD31, and smooth muscle marker a-SMA at 16 weeks compared to 2 weeks (p<0.05). Additionally, they showed intranuclear estrogen and progesterone receptor expression, which suggests functionality. The antibody panel showed that some BM derived cells expressed high levels of mesenchymal stem/progenitor cell markers CD44 and Sca-1 and lower levels of CD90 and CD146. Most of the CD44 + /DsRed + positive cells were in the endometrial stroma, however double positive cells were also observed in the uterine luminal epithelium. Sca-1 + /DsRed + and CD90 + /DsRed + cells were mainly distributed in the stroma. Similar to endogenous CD146 expressing mesenchymal cells, CD146 + /DsRed + cells were mainly adjacent to the vessels in the basal the endometrium. CONCLUSIONS: BM derived cells can contribute to uterine epithelial, stromal, endothelial and smooth muscle cells. These stem cells produce progeny that acquire a tissue distribution similar to that demonstrated by endogenous cells. Moreover, some of the BM derived cells express mesenchymal stem/progenitor markers, indicative of the BM contribution to the stem/progenitor cell pool. BM derived cell fate is carefully regulated to drive cells to diverse mature endometrial and stem/progenitor cell types. Investigating (40kD+80kD), mPRb (50kD), and PGRMC1 (28kD but no 55kD dimer) proteins in all samples examined. Similar findings were noted for mRNA expression using RT-qPCR. [ 3 H]-P 4 binding analysis confirmed that P 4 binding was specific since it could be displaced with nonradiolabeled P 4. Competition studies confirmed that [ 3 H]-P 4 binding was to mPRs because the mPR agonist Org OD 02, but not the nPR agonist R5020, bound to the receptor. Saturation and Scatchard analysis estimated a Bmax 0.075nM and Kd 7.15nM, which suggests binding is to mPRa or mPRb and not PGRMC1. CONCLUSIONS: These data confirm the presence of mPRs in fetal membranes that bind P 4 . We propose that an alternative pathway of P 4 signaling exists to maintain pregnancy and prevent PPROM-related PTB, and that this may involve binding to specific mPRs within the uteroplacental unit. In  technique that can longitudinally measure the biochemistry of a substance based on its inherent vibrational energy levels. In this study, the Raman spectral changes present in wild type (WT) mice and a delayed labor model, Cyclooxygenase-1 knock out (COX-1 KO), were compared throughout gestation and correlated with biomechanical properties. Our preliminary data showed normal uterine contractility in both WT and KO models. We hypothesize that biochemical and mechanical differences in the cervix may be responsible for the prolonged gestation in COX-1 KO mice. METHODS: Raman spectra were acquired using an in vivo Raman system with a fiber optic probe. Biomechanical tests were performed on excised mouse cervix tissue and their results were correlated with spectral changes from corresponding mouse groups. Five mice were used for all time points for each genotype. T-tests were performed on each pixel in Raman spectra and a p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: COX-1 KO mice had significantly stiffer cervices compared to WT at all stages of gestation. Raman spectra of WT vs. COX-1 KO from the same gestation days had statistically significant differences in peaks corresponding to lipid and Amide 1 bonds. However, spectra from WT day 19 vs. COX-1 KO day 20 did no show significant differences, suggesting that the COX-1 KO cervix may have delayed cervical remodeling which results in delayed delivery. CONCLUSIONS: Raman spectroscopy was sensitive to the subtle cervical biochemical differences between WT and COX-1 pregnant mice at different stages during gestation. Furthermore, Raman data demonstrated that COX-1 KO mice have differences that manifest in the cervix rather than in uterine contractility. These cervical variations are likely responsible for delayed delivery in COX-1 KO mouse. Telomere shortening in fetal membranes is associated with spontaneous preterm birth (PTB) following pPROM. This is theorized to be due to premature senescence of fetal membrane cells in response to reactive oxygen species (ROS). The mechanism by which damaged telomeres lead to PTB and pPROM is still unclear. Herein we tested the hypothesis that telomere fragments generated by ROS damage to DNA cause amnion cell senescence through activation of p38 mitogen activated kinase (p38MAPK). METHODS: Primary human amnion cells isolated from fetal membranes were exposed to water soluble cigarette smoke extract (wsCSE), an ROS inducer. Changes in ROS levels and DNA base and strand damage were determined using 2'7'-dichlorodihydro-fluorescein and Fragment Length Analysis using Repair Enzymes (FLARE), respectively. Telomere length was determined by real-time qPCR. Cells were also treated with telomere mimetic (T-oligos, TTAGGGTTAGGG) or control oligonucleotides (AATCCCAATCCC) for 48 hours and immunostained for phosphorylated g-histone2A (gH2AX) to identify DNA damage foci (DDF). Western blots for phosphorylated (p) p38MAPK and staining for senescence specific ß-galactosidase (SA-ßGal) also were performed. RESULTS: Exposure of amnion cells to wsCSE resulted in an increase in ROS that was prevented by the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine. DNA strand and base damage (generation of 8-oxoguanine) was evidenced by FLARE assays. Treatment of cells with wsCSE for 96 hours significantly decreased telomere length compared to untreated controls (p <0.05). wsCSE or T-oligo treatments resulted in more cells with DDF as indicated by increased g-H2AX staining than untreated or control oligo-treated cells. Similarly, pp38MAPK was increased after wsCSE or T-oligo treatment, with an increased expression of SA-ßGal, demonstrating more senescence in these cells than untreated or control oligo-treated cells. Our data indicate that in addition to telomere shortening caused by ROS, the intracellular release of telomere fragments can promote senescence via pp38MAPK. ROS can lead to telomere fragmentation and cellular senescence and also triggers a distinct inflammatory cytokine signature, recruitment of inflammatory cells promoting PTB. A better understanding of the pathway(s) activated by telomere fragments should contribute to the design of PTB/pPROM treatment via prevention of premature senescence. Uterine smooth muscle exhibits rhythmic contractions in the absence of hormonal or neural stimuli. The frequency of these contractions is driven by a pacemaker current that all myometrial cells are thought to be capable of expressing. These potentials are hypothesized to initiate by a depolarizing leak current in the myometrium that is gadolinium (Gd 3+ ) sensitive, but the cationic leak channel responsible for this current remains to be elucidated. Here, we report the presence of a Gd 3+ -sensitive, Na + -dependent leak current in primary human myometrial smooth muscle cells (hMSMCs), and the contributution of a Na +l leak channel (NALCN) to this current. METHODS: Primary hMSMCs were isolated from human uterine samples, maintained in culture, and used through passage 4. Leak currents were measured in hMSMCs using whole-cell patch clamp analysis. NALCN-targeting shRNAs expressed by a lentiviral vector were used to knockdown NALCN expression in hMSMCs. NALCN expression was quantified via immunoblot and quantitative RT-PCR. RESULTS: Whole-cell patch clamp analysis of hMSMCs revealed the presence of an ohmic leak current, which was significantly reduced by the presence of 10 mM Gd 3+ in the extracellular bath solution. Furthermore, by replacing bath Na + with a non-permeable cation, NMDG, we demonstrated that the leak current was Na + -dependent. The contribution of NALCN activity to the leak current was determined by knocking down NALCN expression. Treatment of hMSMCs with a NALCN-targeting shRNA resulted in a 50% reduction of NALCN mRNA, and an 80% decrease in NALCN protein levels in hMSMCs. The reduction in NALCN expression led to a significant decrease in the Gd 3+ -sensitive leak current elicited by a -60 mV membrane potential. Finally, to determine whether NALCN has a link to pregnancy-related changes in uterine contractility, we measured its expression in the mouse uterus using qRT-PCR and immunoblot and discovered a decline in expression near term. CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results indicate that NALCN contributes to the Na + -dependent, Gd 3+ -sensitive leak current in the uterus. Furthermore, this channel's expression changes throughout pregnancy, indicating a potential role for it in pregnancy related changes in uterine contractility. Preterm Uterine quiescence is vital to maintaining a pregnancy to term. Important regulators of this quiescence are K + channels, which serve to polarize the membrane of myometrial smooth muscle cells (MSMCs) and keep them in a relaxed state. One crucial K + channel in the uterus is the small conductance, calcium activated potassium channel 3 (SK3-1A). When overexpressed in mice, this channel attenuates uterine contractions and displays delayed or incomplete parturition. We previously reported six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the SK3 gene (KCNN3) associated with preterm birth. One of these SNPs, rs1218585, is located near the promoter for alternative exon 1C, which encodes SK3-1C, a dominant negative suppressor of SK3-1A. Due to the importance of SK3-1A in maintaining uterine quiescence, a shift in the SK3-1A:SK3-1C balance, may lead to premature contractility. We hypothesized that rs1218585 contributes to preterm birth by altering SK3-1C expression. METHODS: Promoter reporter assays were performed using Promega's pGL3 luciferase reporter plasmids. To test promoter activity, alternative exon 1C promoter and 523 base pairs of the upstream sequence, expressing either the wild type (WT) or the rs1218585 genotype, were cloned upstream of the luciferase coding sequence. To test enhancer activity, the 523 base pair segment was cloned upstream of an SV40 promoter, driving the luciferase coding sequence. These plasmids were transfected into HEK-293T cells and luciferase activity was measured 48 hours later. We identified a 7-fold decrease in enhancer activity of KCNN3 exon 1C upstream sequences containing rs1218585 as compared to WT. However, we found no significant difference between the promoter activity of plasmids containing the WT KCNN3 sequence and rs1218585 despite our predictions. CONCLUSIONS: The loss of enhancer activity upon inclusion of the SNP suggests that the SNP precludes endogenous enhancer activity. Enhancers can act in trans, and therefore, changes in enhancer activity could impact not only SK3-1C activity, but could also reduce SK3-1A activity. The results emphasize the need for a myometrium specific, full-gene model of KCNN3 regulation to definitively elucidate its role in preterm birth. On-time parturition requires coordinated progression from an anti-inflammatory to pro-inflammatory immune profile in gestational tissues. Macrophages are implicated as potent regulators of the maternal immune adaptations required for successful gestation, parturition and delivery. We hypothesized that CD11b+ monocyte/macrophages have a critical role in controlling the timing and success of birth. METHODS: CD11b-dtr mice mated with wild-type FVB males were given diphtheria toxin (DT; 25 ng/g, to deplete CD11b+ cells) or PBS on gestation day 16, with or without exogenous progesterone or wild-type bone-marrow derived macrophages (n=9-12 / group). Gestation length, labor duration, and perinatal parameters were recorded. In a second cohort, leukocytes in blood and gestational tissues were analyzed by flow cytometry 24h after DT or PBS injection, and decidual mRNA was analyzed by RT 2 Profiler PCR array. In DT-treated CD11b-dtr mice, CD11b+ macrophages were depleted from the myometrium, decidual tissues and placenta by 95%, 70% and 40% respectively, but were unaffected in fetal liver. Expression of several genes regulating inflammation was dysregulated in decidual tissue. CD11b+ cell depletion caused preterm delivery in CD11b-dtr mice, with birth 20h earlier than in control mice (P<0.05, Mann-Whitney U-test). The duration of labor was extended 1.4-fold, pups weighed 15% less and their viability was poor compared with controls (26% vs 100%)(all P<0.05). Administration of exogenous macrophages, but not progesterone, alleviated prematurity and normalized labour duration in DT-treated mice, with an increased fetal survival rate of 72% (all P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Acute depletion of maternal macrophages during late gestation induced preterm delivery and perinatal death, and replacement with exogenous wild-type macrophages protected mice from fetal loss. These data suggest that macrophages have a physiological role in exerting anti-inflammatory effects to maintain uterine quiescence and restrain premature progression to labor in mice. Thus, insufficient number or function of anti-inflammatory macrophages warrants investigation as a cause of preterm delivery in women. CONCLUSIONS: This in vivo study provides a novel approach to the physiologic capacities of the myometrium early in pregnancy. These preliminary fi ndings demonstrate the plasticity of the myometrium early in pregnancy resulting in almost 50% larger uterine size in Twins than Singleton pregnancies by 11 weeks gestation and 30% larger in Twins than Singletons at 14 weeks gestation. Further studies are needed to determine the clinical relevance of uterine size/CRL ratio together with other biomarkers for prediction of patients at increased risk for preterm delivery. 18.5-24.9 (normal); 25.0-29.9 (overweight); 30.0-34.9 (obese I); 35.0-39.9 (obese II); and >40.0 (obese III). We assessed associations between BMI and obesity in non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic Black women. RESULTS: Analyses adjusted for maternal age, height, and prenatal care month showed the three obesity categories (I-III) were associated with increased risk of preterm birth at 20-23 and 24-31 weeks among nulliparous non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, and non-Hispanic Black women. Odds ratios ranged from 1.3 to 7.0. These risks were further influenced by socioeconomic status (as measured by educational attainment). A similar, but lower risk, pattern was observed for multiparous women. Lower BMI was associated with modest increased risks (odds ratios 1.2 to 2.1) for preterm births at 24-31 and 32-36 weeks for nulliparous and multiparous women in each of the racial/ethnic groups. CONCLUSIONS: Our fi ndings clearly indicate that the association between women's prepregnancy BMI and risk of preterm birth is complex and is infl uenced by race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, gestational age, and parity. Phase Figure 1 ). We show that the excitability of the network is modulated by heterogeneity in gap-junctional conductance. Our model suggests a threshold distribution width for optimal network excitability, and demonstrates that the most dramatic infl uence of voltage-dependence occurs around the resting potential of uterine myocytes. The conductance of gap junctions within a network of excitable elements is an important modulator of excitability within the system. Spatial heterogeneity and voltage-dependence of gap junctions provide additional means for regulating the transition from gestational quiescence to activity at parturition. The It is well established that term labour is an infl ammatory process driven by a network of hormones, chemical messengers, prostaglandins, cytokines and chemokines. Differences of the genes in the phenotypes of preterm labour have yet to be elucidated. METHODS: Human myometrial biopsies were collected during caesarean section from women in preterm no labour (PNL; n=26) and preterm labour (chorioamnionitis, placental abruption, polyhydramnios and idiopathic; n=11, 6, 16 and 4 respectively). Samples from preterm twins were also collected (NL and L; n= 12 in each group). Term no labour comprised of 18 samples. Term labour was divided into early labour (EAL, < 3cm dilatation; n=10) and established labour (ESL, ≥3cm dilatation; n=12). Samples were rapidly frozen at -800C. Total RNA was extracted from these tissues using a RNeasy kit from Qiagen and the mRNA converted to cDNA. Copy numbers of PGHS-2, IL-8, OTR, IL-6 and connexin 43 and GAPDH were measured by qPCR. Previously we reported that in EAL PGHS-2 and OTR expression are significantly increased when compared with TNL but only CXCL-8 and IL-6 were significantly increased in ESL. In PTL compared to PNL, PGHS-2 was significantly increased in all the phenotype specific groups (idiopathic, chorioamnionitis, polyhydramnios, twins labour and twins no labour) except placental abruption (p<0.05). PGHS-2 levels were also significantly increased in twin no labour versus PNL (p<0.05), but there was no difference in PGHS-2 expression between twin no labour and twin labour. There was no statistical difference in the expression of PGHS-2 when the different phenotype of PTL was compared to both EAL and ESL. Compared to the term data, there were no significant changes in the expression of CXCL-8 or OTR among both the labouring and non-labouring preterm phenotypes. Similar to term labour, connexin-43 expression does not change among the preterm groups. CONCLUSIONS: These data show that PGHS-2 appears to play a significant role in driving the process of preterm labour in all distinct phenotypes (except for placental abruption). Twin labour appears to show very different gene expression profiles when compared to labour in a singleton pregnancy.  The LL-37 increased IL-8 production in END E6/E7 (figure 1A) and ECT E6/ E7 (figure 1B) cells (25ug over 24 hours; p<0.001). A similar response was seen for IL-6. Scrambled LL-37 and D enantiomer did not affect cytokine levels, suggesting a specific receptor mediated effect. Receptor antagonist experiments indicated this is through an as yet unidentified G-protein coupled receptor. The findings that LL-37 has a pro-inflammatory effect on cervical epithelial cells, and higher levels of cervicovaginal LL-37 are associated with Bacterial Vaginosis (itself is associated with preterm labour) support the hypothesis that this cationic host defence peptide may be involved in the pathophysiology of preterm parturition. and rat genome microarray analysis was performed by GenUs Biosystems (Agilent RNA6000) and data analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analyses. RESULTS: In cervix from both D21 and NP rats, expression of a subset of Mj-related genes were regulated in common, either increased (158) or decreased (57). The fold magnitude of each varied between D21 and NP groups. Pathway analyses indicated constitutive inflammatory functions in both D21 and NP cervices for leukocytes (cell movement, engulfment, response of myeloid cells, activation of phagocytes), cell growth/survival (differentiation, proliferation, fatty acid metabolism), and cell signaling (adhesion, binding). Some inflammation-related gene expression and pathways were diminished in the preterm cervix. Overall, common regulated genes reflected canonical pathways for cellular signaling by Cdc42, ILK, and NFAT, dendritic cell maturation, as well as agranulocyte adhesion and diapedesis. CONCLUSIONS: These data are the first to suggest that expression of Mj-related genes in both prepartum and nonpregnant cervix reflect selectivity in ongoing proinflammatory processes. With pathway analyses of exclusively regulated Mj-related genes, pathways that reflect actions by an alternative Mj phenotype (putative M2-like wound-healing) may become more prominent in the prepartum cervix. The findings support the possibility that a balance of Mj-related molecules may reflect selective inflammatory and restorative processes to enhance extracellular remodeling in the prepartum cervix. Whether molecules regulated by gene expression are sentinel to the progress of remodeling or provide useful therapeutic strategies for control of the timely ripening of the cervix remains to be determined. The commonly accepted hypothesis is that an action potential propagates throughout the uterus, recruiting and activating tissue as it passes. In 1970 Csapo proposed that mechanotransduction by pressure-tension sensing was the mechanism for organ-level coordination of contractions. But because strong evidence shows electrical activity is crucial for uterine contractions, mechanotransduction has been largely forgotten. SQUID array measurements recently indicated that organ-level recruitment of tissue is not contiguous, and suggested the uterus is composed of functional regions of myometrium. To incorporate these data, we propose a novel mechanism where action potential propagation recruits and activates tissue within regions, but mechanotransduction synchronizes the regional contractions into organ-level contractions of labor. The surface of the gravid uterus was simulated with equalsized functional regions arranged in a 13 x 11 array. Each region was a "cell" in cellular automaton lexicon. Cells were inactive, active, or inactivated (refractory). Cells only interacted via mechanotransduction, where wall tension is proportional to intrauterine pressure (LaPlace's Law). Each cell activated when tension exceeded threshold. The pressure at any time was proportional to the sum of all activities. The threshold and sensitivity were the primary input parameters with a mean and variance distributed across the cells. RESULTS: At some input settings, cells activated asynchronously or infrequently. At other settings, phasic rises of pressure occurred regularly over time, and were highly suggestive of the phasic pressure rises of labor contractions. Contraction frequency, regularity, and peak strength depended upon each input parameter. Only under extreme conditions did strong contractions occur without intervening periods of quiescence. CONCLUSIONS: Emergent behavior of phasic coordinated activity was demonstrated using mechanotransduction recruitment of regional contractions. This simulation supports the concept that mechanotransduction mechanisms can coordinate moderate numbers of regional contractions and mimic function of the human uterus. Myometrial contractions of labour signal the normal physiological end-point of pregnancy but the biochemical onset of labour may occur at or earlier via series of changes in expression of labour associated genes. There is increasing evidence that components of the cAMP-signalling pathway are up-regulated in the human myometrium during pregnancy to promote myometrial relaxation. Our aim was to determine how the cAMP-related genes are altered in pregnancy and parturition. METHODS: Myometrial biopsies from caesarean sections were taken preterm before the onset of labour (PNL), and at term, either before (TNL) or after the onset of labour. Term labour was divided into early labour (EAL, <3cm dilatation), and established labour (ESL, ≥3cm dilatation). Samples were rapidly frozen at -800C for RNA and protein extraction (n=12 for each group). Cells from TNL biopsies were cultured and incubated with and without 100µM forskolin for 48h, RNA extracted and subjected to Affimetrix Human Genome U133 plus 2.0 array gene analysis. A total of 28870 genes were interrogated (n=3). Two gene lists were generated by combining the top 50 up-regulated and down-regulated genes. Only those genes with p<0.05 and fold change >1.5 were analyzed. Of the genes altered by cAMP, 8 that were up-regulated (11bHSD1, MKP-1, PKAR2a, GPR125, GaS, PDE4B, CCL8, PTGES) and 5 that were down-regulated (OTR, CREB3L1, GUCY1A3, GPR124, PRKG1) were analyzed in the myometrium obtained from the different groups of women by qPCR and western blotting. RESULTS: Of the up-regulated cAMP genes, there is a significant decrease from PNL to term labour in PKAR2a at mRNA and protein levels (p<0.01). Similar trends were also observed in 11bHSD1 (mRNA and protein), MKP-1 (mRNA) and PDE4B, GaS (protein). Of the downregulated cAMP genes, there is a significant increase from PNL to EAL in OTR (p<0.05), CREB3L1 (p<0.01), GUCY1A3 (p<0.01), and GPR124 (p<0.01) at mRNA level but the significant increase at protein level is only observed with OTR (p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: These data show that in the cAMP regulated genes, the expression of PKAR2a at mRNA and protein levels is increased in pregnancy and decreased in labour, whereas the opposite is observed in the expression of OTR. This study highlights the differences in cAMPrelated gene expression at different stages of pregnancy and parturition. for UW, NW, OW, and obese groups, respectively. UW mothers were younger, more likely to smoke and use alcohol or illicit drugs, showed decreased hypertension but increased preterm delivery, and had a lower cesarean rate; while OW and obese mothers were older, showed increased hypertension and diabetes, and had a higher cesarean rate. UW mothers had a 2-fold increase in SGA infants, while OW and obese mothers had a 1.5 and 2.5-fold increase in LGA infants, respectively. Birth to placental weight ratios were decreased for all three pathologic BMI groups, indicating disproportionately high placental weights relative to fetal weights. Arterial PO 2 values were lower in all birth weight groups from OW and obese mothers and in all LGA groups, while venous and arterial PO 2 were both lower in all SGA groups. CONCLUSIONS: UW mothers with increased SGA infants and OW/obese mothers with increased LGA infants both have disproportionately large placentas, the former likely a reactive process to nutrient deficiency and the latter a differential effect of stimulatory factors on growth of the placenta relative to that of the fetus. While LGA infants and those from OW/obese mothers showed lower arterial oxygenation indicating increased extraction, SGA infants from all 4 BMI groups showed lower venous and arterial PO 2 values supporting hypoxemia as a common determinant of growth restriction whether with maternal under-nutrition or 'placental insufficiency'. Abstract Withdrawn -41.5, p=0.50) . Treated women were more likely to have a known thrombophilia (11 vs 1, p=0.02) and more likely to have had an ischemic stroke (28 vs 8, p=0.09) than untreated women. Hemorrhagic stroke was equally common in cases and controls. Outcomes were similar among treated and untreated women (Table) . None had a recurrent CVE or other thrombotic event. Table. Adverse pregnancy outcomes in women who were and were not treated with anticoagulant therapy. The purpose of this study is to evaluate salivary cortisol levels pre and post 50 gram glucose challenge and assess for association with gestational diabetes mellitus and fetal shoulder dystocia as a marker of fetal overgrowth. METHODS: This is a pilot study of ten obese women (pre-pregnancy body mass index ranging from 35.1 to 45.7 kg/m 2 ) who provided salivary samples immediately before and 1 hour after a 50 gram glucose load. The samples were collected between 24 and 28 weeks gestation. The salivary samples were evaluated at the Johns Hopkins Center for Interdisciplinary Salivary Bioscience Research. Clinicians and patients were unaware of the results. Pregnancy outcomes were collected prospectively. Of the ten participants, two were diagnosed with gestational diabetes mellitus and two had shoulder dystocias at the time of delivery. There is a trend toward gestational diabetes mellitus and fetal overgrowth being associated with lower salivary cortisol levels after the glucose challenge (post) although the trend is not statistically significant due to small sample size (see table) . There was also no significant trend with regard to pre or post cortisol levels and other pregnancy outcomes including excessive maternal gestational weight gain, preterm birth, preeclampsia or cesarean delivery.  We performed a retrospective cohort study of 2000 women who underwent cesarean delivery at a tertiary care women's hospital in 2011. Data on patient demographics, medical co-morbidities, indications for cesarean, operative details and postoperative complications were abstracted from the medical record. The data were validated by a double entry process. Patients with placenta previa and multifetal gestation were excluded. Significant hemorrhage was defined as an estimated blood loss (EBL) >1200cc, decrease in hemoglobin ≥3.9 g/dL, or receipt of a blood transfusion. Chi square, t test and multivariable logistic regression were used for analysis. Risk factors significantly associated with hemorrhage in bivariate analysis were evaluated by multivariate logistic regression. The majority of the 1862 women analyzed were <35 years old (78%), Caucasian (77%), privately insured (67%) and had a primary cesarean section (60%). The mean gestational age was 39.1 weeks (SD 2.1), EBL was 807cc (SD 234) and decrease in hemoglobin was 1.8 g/dL (SD 1.1). Thirty-eight women (2.0%) were transfused and 115 women (6.2%) met criteria for significant hemorrhage. The multivariable logistic regression revealed that several preoperative factors were associated with hemorrhage including thrombocytopenia, preeclampsia, laboring prior to cesarean and being a resident service patient. With the clinically relevant variables of repeat cesarean and gestational age included, the corresponding area under the receiver operating characteristics curve was 0.70. The assessment of cesarean section blood loss influences both intraoperative and postoperative patient management, although there is no clinically useful gold standard for quantifying operative bleeding. We sought to compare subjective and objective methods of assessing the degree of cesarean section blood loss. We performed a retrospective cohort study of 2000 women who underwent cesarean delivery at a tertiary care women's hospital in 2011. Data on patient demographics, operative details, laboratory assessments and postoperative complications were abstracted from the medical record and validated by a double entry process. Four indicators of operative blood loss were collected: 1) surgeon estimate of blood loss (EBL), 2) change between preoperative and postoperative hemoglobin, 3) receipt of a blood transfusion and 4) sponge count. EBL, hemoglobin change and sponge count were evaluated as both continuous and dichotomized variables (at the 95 th percentile for each distribution). Chi square, t test and Pearson's correlation were used to test for association between each of the assessments of blood loss. The mean EBL was 818 cc (SD 238) and mean decrease in hemoglobin was 1.8 g/dL (SD 1.1). Forty-seven women (2.4%) received a blood transfusion. The mean sponge count was 24.0 (SD 7.5). The bivariate tests of association and correlation comparing the methods of assessing the degree of blood loss were all significantly (p <0.01) and highly associated and correlated. CONCLUSIONS: Measures of blood loss are highly associated and correlated. While the validity of subjective EBL as a measure of blood loss can improve with training, consideration may be given to using objective measures such as hemoglobin change or sponge count as markers of excessive bleeding. Hemoglobin change, while very useful in postoperative care, would not trigger a change in intraoperative decision making or immediate postoperative care. In contrast, sponge count may prove to be effective as an objective, intraoperative indicator of cesarean section hemorrhage. In obstetrical practice, the best prevention strategy for pregnant women aged >35 years without known thrombosis risk factors who underwent elective caesarean delivery is controversial. The aim of the study is to evaluate the role of maternal age in the decision making process of whether or not to perform LMWH during the postpartum period after elective CD in healthy women with unknown inherited thrombophilia status. We performed an observational-longitudinal-cohort study on pregnant women aged >35, who delivered at term by elective caesarean section after a physiological single pregnancy to evaluate the role of maternal age in the decision making process of whether or not to perform low-molecular-weight-heparin prophylaxis during the postpartum period after elective caesarean delivery in healthy women with unknown inherited thrombophilia status. During six postpartum weeks we followed two groups: GROUP-A (349 women treated for 7 days with low-molecular-weight-heparin) and GROUP-B (180 women not treated with low-molecular-weight-heparin treatment). The outcomes were as follows: thromboembolic events onset during the post-partum period, non-obstetrical-linked maternal haemorrhage, blood transfusion, relaparotomy, detection of surgical site haematoma, length of hospitalisation, and treatment suspension because of decreased platelet count. RESULTS: Except for the parity number, the two groups were homogeneous for the general features. In both groups, we reported no cases of thromboembolic events during the follow up period. Maternal haemorrhage requiring transfusion occurred in 16 women in GROUP-A and none in GROUP-B<em style="mso-bidi-font-style: normal;">. Among the GROUP-A women, 11 demonstrated a surgical site haematoma, and 4 required re-laparotomy. No cases of treatment suspension were reported. CONCLUSIONS: Pneumatic compression stockings represent a better, low cost and safe way to prevent postpartum venous thromboembolic episodes after elective caesarean section in an unscreened population. Pharmacological prophylaxis after elective caesarean section should be performed only in case of clear and known adjunctive risk factors, independent of maternal age.  The study group consisted of 945 women with GDM and 791 women without GDM as controls. No significant differences were noted in respect to maternal age and parity between the groups. They did differ in BMI (p = 0.01). The most frequently identified preexisting medical conditions in GDM are polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS), hypertension (HTN), thyroid dysfunction, obesity and depression/anxiety disorders (DEPR). Percentage of occurrences are noted in the graph and differed significantly from the control group (p = <0.0001). Our data suggest there is a strong association between PCOS, thyroid dysfunction and depression/anxiety disorders in our GDM population. While the percent of PCOS and thyroid disorders support the hypothesis that other metabolic disturbances may be frequently present in GDM, the high rate of depression/anxiety disorders requires further investigation to clarify possible etiology. Additionally, the high occurrence rates of this triad should alert healthcare providers to carefully screen for these preexisting conditions in their GDM patients. Recent work with an urban cohort revealed that increasing the total T-ACE score cut-point from 2 to 3 doubled specificity of detecting risk drinking in pregnancy without reducing sensitivity substantially. The goal of this study was to further validate a cut-point of 3 (TACER-3) in a rural cohort. METHODS: Prospectively recruited pregnant patients (n=540) completed the T-ACE and a simple alcohol questionnaire that assessed the women's self-reported typical pre-pregnancy alcohol consumption. RESULTS: 22.2% of participants were positive on the T-ACE (cutpoint =2) compared to 5.4% positive on the TACER-3 (cut-point =3). An ANOVA followed by Tukey HSD contrasts revealed that "At-Risk" women (positive on T-ACE and TACER-3) reported consuming significantly more alcohol per day before pregnancy than both the "Notat-Risk" (negative on both on T-ACE and TACER-3) and "Change Risk" (positive on T-ACE but not TACER-3) women (omnibus F=22.3, p<.001). The rate of average daily alcohol use among women in the "Change Risk" group was not significantly different than women in the "No Risk" group. Relative Risk scores indicated that women in the TACER-3-positive "At-Risk" group were 6.6 times more likely to drink alcohol at risk levels (≥0.5 absolute oz./day) than women in the "No-Risk" group, and 2.6 times more likely than women in the "Change Risk" group. CONCLUSIONS: Compared to the original T-ACE, the TACER-3 was more effective at selectively identifying women who were drinking at risk level prior to pregnancy recognition in this rural cohort. These analyses further validate prior findings that using the TACER-3 reduces "false positives." The TACER-3 allows for more efficient use of health care provider time in directing targeted clinical interventions with those pregnant women most at risk for adverse fetal outcomes. The Preeclampsia is one of the major causes of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality worldwide. It complicates up to 8% of pregnancies and is a multisystem disease with an extremely variable appearance, from mild to catastrophic courses. The pathogenesis still is not fully understood, however, early placental development is supposed to have a major role in its etiology. Antiplatelet agents, such as acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), have a positive effect on the balance of vasoactive agents, resulting in an enhanced placental invasion. Because of conflicting, though promising, data from meta-analyses, recommendations for clinical management seem not to be convincing enough yet to be introduced into routine obstetric care. The aim of the study was to evaluate the effect of prophylactic use of acetylsalicylic acid on pregnancy outcomes in women with a history of preeclampsia in their previous pregnancy. The retrospective analysis of pregnancy outcomes included 108 women with a history of severe preeclampsia or HELLP-syndrome in the previous pregnancy. The administration of acetylsalicylic acid (75-100 mg daily) was started in 55 pregnancies in the 1 st trimester and continued until week 34 of gestation (prophylaxis -group, +p). The control group of 53 patients did not get oral prophylaxis (non -prophylaxis-group, -p). The current pregnancies were analyzed with regard to onset of preeclampsia, mode of delivery, preterm delivery, fetal growth restriction (FGR), asphyxia and intrauterine fetal death. Continuous variables between study groups were compared using the independent sample t-test and categorical variables by chi-square test. Two-tailed p-values set by 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Patients receiving aspirin showed significant less preeclampsia in their following pregnancy than those without oral prophylaxis (p=0.05). Comparison between groups regarding severity of disease showed less occurrence of the mild as well as less occurrence of the severe form (+p 3.6%, -p 15.1% and +p 27.3% and -p 34%, respectively). There was no difference in mode of delivery and fetal outcome between the groups. CONCLUSIONS: The data show a protective effect of low dose aspirin on the prevention of recurrent preeclampsia in women with a history of severe preeclampsia. (sPTB) is the leading cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality with serious consequences for mother and child. Sensitivity and specificity of predictive tests for sPTB has been found to be low when studied in large cohorts. Our hypothesis is that metabolomics, the study of low molecular weight molecules, provides a direct link to the disease phenotype and will offer a clinically useful method of predicting sPTB [Auray-Blais C et al., 2011] . Our aim was to develop a metabolomic screening method for sPTB using cervical swabs. METHODS: Cervical swabs were obtained from the SCOPE (Screening for Pregnancy Endpoints) bio-bank [http://www.scopestudy.net/]. Samples were collected at 20 weeks' of gestation and stored with and without bovine serum albumin (BSA) medium. Metabolites were extracted from specimens using 50% and 80% cold methanol solutions. After methyl chloroformate (MCF) derivatization [Smart, K et al., 2011] , extracts were analysed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). We used Metab software [Aggio, R et al., 2011] and an in-house MS library to identify the metabolites present in cervical swabs. We were able to obtain valuable and reproducible metabolic data from the cervical swabs. Approximately 26 compounds were identified from samples with volume ranging from 100µL to 150µL. The majority (15) of the metabolites were amino acids; the remaining compounds were intermediates of central carbon metabolism. Ratio between metabolites, particularly 3,5-diiodo-L-tyrosine, lactic acid and methionine was found to be higher in samples collected with BSA (32, 16, 13 respectively). CONCLUSIONS: GC-MS technique based on methyl chloroformate derivatization gave a good metabolite profile from cervical swabs. We will investigate whether liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) enhances the pool of detectable metabolites further and thus increases the potential for biomarker discovery. sought to evaluate whether there was a difference in maternal or neonatal outcomes and hospital charges in women whose cesarean delivery (CD) was scheduled at 38w versus 39w. METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed of all planned CD ≥36w in 2003 and 2005, when CD were scheduled at 39w and 38w, respectively. Main outcomes were the proportion of cases performed prior to the planned date (i.e. unscheduled) and a composite of major maternal morbidity and major neonatal morbidity. Data were compared according to scheduling strategy by t-test, Rank Sum test or chi-square. Multivariate logistic regression was then used to analyze for predictors of the primary outcomes. Maternal and neonatal hospital charges were adjusted to 2012 health care dollars. RESULTS: Scheduling CD at 38ws resulted in a lower proportion of cases performed unscheduled (33% vs. 47%, p<0.05). In those scheduled at 38w, composite maternal adverse morbidity was actually higher (16% vs. 10%, p=0.006). Infants of mothers scheduled at 38w had an earlier gestational age at delivery and lower mean birthweight (3473gm vs. 3592gm, p=0.003), but no difference in composite neonatal adverse outcomes. Scheduling CD at 38w resulted in slightly lower maternal charges and higher neonatal charges than scheduling at 39w, but total m a t e r n a l a n d n e o n a t a l c h a r g e s w e r e c o m p a r a b l e .  Scheduling CD at 38w resulted in fewer unscheduled CD but higher composite maternal morbidity and no difference in neonatal composite morbidity compared to scheduling CD at 39w. The difference in median combined hospital charges for both groups was not significant. The . For all individual outcomes except meconium aspiration, the risk of complications for DM1 was greatest, followed by DM2 and GDM, respectively. Regardless of BW, neonates delivered via cesarean of DM mothers were at increased risk of complications. Among neonates born vaginally, those whose mothers had GDM had a higher risk of adverse outcomes regardless of BW and those whose mothers had DM1 or DM2 had higher risk of adverse outcomes for BW<5000gm. Adverse outcomes in neonates of diabetic mothers increased with higher BW and among those born vaginally. Subtle differences in maternal or neonatal care may explain these findings.  The results of this study indicate that vaginal progesterone could be effective in the reduction of adverse neonatal outcome and births <32 and <34 weeks of gestation. These data should be used in meta-analysis with other randomised studies on the subject. ) . Risk of macrosomia increases after 37wks, but without further increase risk in birth injury. Babies from GDM mothers present and increase risk for NICU admission compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: 39wks seems to be the optimal timing for IOL in GDM. Gestational age for gestational age, induced GDM have more complications than non-GDM, they truly are at higher risk of adverse outcomes. There is no evidence from this analysis that modifying optimal weeks' gestation for induction would improve outcome for gestational diabetics & their infants, but clinical trials on this topic may modify this conclusion. Maternal Pre-Pregnancy BMI and Circumstances of Labor. The aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of self-reported information on pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) on delivery outcomes in a Canadian sample. METHODS: Data were drawn from the All Our Babies (AOB) study, a prospective, ongoing community-based pregnancy cohort in Calgary, Alberta (N=3388). Maternal self-reported data on height and prepregnancy weight were linked to clinical data on pregnancy and birth events retrieved from Alberta Perinatal Health Program (APHP) electronic health records. Exclusion criteria were defined as: preterm delivery, multiples, non-cephalic presentation, elective C-section, BMI <18.5, and missing data. Descriptive statistics and chi square analysis were used to assess associations between pre-pregnancy BMI categories (normal weight BMI =18.5-24.9; overweight BMI=25-29.9; and obese BMI>30) and delivery outcomes. Multinomial regression analyses were used to examine the association between pre-pregnancy BMI and type of delivery (operative vaginal or c-section, compared to spontaneous vaginal), controlling for confounding variables such as maternal age, preexisting maternal health conditions, fertility issues, pregnancy complications, and weight gain during the present pregnancy. Regression models were stratified by mode of labor onset (spontaneous vs. induced). Of the 1996 women included in the study, 1313 were of normal weight (65.8%), 472 (23.6%) were overweight, and 211 (10.6%) were obese. Spontaneous onset of labor was recorded in 71.2% of women with normal pre-pregnancy BMI (p<0.001), whereas labor induction was more frequent in overweight (39.3%) and obese (49%) women (p<0.001). In adjusted multinomial models, nulliparity was the only significant independent variable associated with operative delivery. This was seen for both women with spontaneous labor and women with induced labor. Obesity (OR=2.51, CI=1.32, 4.76) was a significant risk factor for delivery by C-section among women with induced labor; other significant factors included nulliparity and previous history of C-section. For women with spontaneous labor, significant factors associated with C-section included previous C-section and nulliparity but not increased BMI. CONCLUSIONS: There is an increased risk of obstetrical interventions at delivery in women with increased pre-pregnancy BMI and this depends on mode of labor. Women of reproductive age may benefit from lifestyle counseling to optimize pre-pregnancy weight. Postdate pregnancy is defined as pregnancy that extends beyond 41 to 42 completed weeks of gestation. Given the increased incidence of stillbirth and other complications as pregnancy advances towards 42 weeks, induction of labor between 41 and 42 weeks is the current best practice. However, the response to labor induction is variable and has been related to several maternal/fetal factors (parity, gestational age, high body mass index BMI, maternal age, Bishop score, neonatal birth weight, ultrasound cervical lenght, E3/E2 ratio). In this context the finding of novel parameters associated with the response to labor induction may help clinicians to predict outcome of labor induction in postdate pregnancy. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate whether the measurement of novel ultrasound parameters, such as membrane thickness and pulsatility index of the fetal middle cerebral artery (MCA PI), are associated with the response to labor induction in postdate pregnancies. A group of nulliparous women (n= 202) carrying singleton postdate pregnancies admitted for pharmacological labor induction were enrolled. Ultrasound parameters, clinical characteristics and obstetric history were collected. Vaginal delivery within 24 hours after indution was the primary outcome; women were divided into responders (n= 118) and non-responders (n= 84) to the induction of labor to perform the statistical analysis. RESULTS: Women who successfully delivered with 24 hours showed significantly lower MCA PI (P=0.0013) and shorter ultrasound cervical length (P<0.0001) from the remaining patients, while membrane thickness did not show any difference. In addition non-responders differed significantly from responders in terms of higher maternal weight gain (P=0.0147), BMI increase (P=0.0152) and more numerous male fetuses (P=0.004), confirming data in the literature. In the multivariate analysis, ultrasound cervical length, MCA PI and fetal sex influenced significantly the induction response. CONCLUSIONS: Ultrasound cervical length, middle cerebral artery, weight gain and male fetal gender may represent novel risk factors for the prediction of failure to induction of labor in postdate pregnancy. The awareness of these findings, together with known risk factors, may help clinicians to optimize the obstetric management of women with unfavorable conditions at time of pharmacological induction. In a perinatal health program, we observed striking heterogeneity in the explanation on the most prominent risks across municipalities. We therefore explored the separate contribution of several socio-demographic risks in neighbourhood perinatal health inequalities. The study aims to identify perinatal health inequalities on neighbourhood level across the selected municipalities, and to objectify the contribution of socio-demographic risk factors on pregnancy outcomes in each municipality by the application of the population attributable risk concept. METHODS: Population based cohort study (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) . Perinatal outcome of 352.407 single pregnancies from 15 municipalities were analysed. Odds ratio's and population attributable risks (PARs) were calculated. Main outcomes were Big 4 outcomes (small for gestational age, prematurity, congenital anomalies, low Apgar), and perinatal mortality. Perinatal health inequalities existed on both municipal and neighbourhood level. In municipalities, Big 4 outcomes ranged from 17.3% to 23.6%, and perinatal mortality rates from 10.1‰ to 15.4‰. Considerable differences in socio-economic status (14.4% -82.5%) exist. Significant differences between neighbourhoods existed in 9 municipalities for perinatal morbidity (OR 1.44 to 2.43)) and in 6 municipalities for perinatal mortality (OR 2.62 -8.84), and remained after adjustment for potential confounders. Socio-demographic risk factors were sometimes a strong predictor for the observed inequalities, but explained in others only a (very) small proportion. The risk factor 'late onset of care' showed an effect in almost all municipalities (PARs 4.4% -9%). CONCLUSIONS: Substantial differences in perinatal morbidity and mortality between municipalities, and neighbourhoods exist. Different patterns of inequality suggest differences in etiology. Policy makers and healthcare professionals need to be informed about their local perinatal health profiles in order to introduce customized antenatal healthcare to their target population. Current tools for medical risk screening were derived from protocols (>80%). In absence of national guidelines, predominantly local protocols were used for non-medical risk screening (>40%). In resp. 18% and 23% decisions were based on personal experiences. Only 22% used predefined criteria to discuss patients multidisciplinary. Caregivers stated multidisciplinary protocols to bemost desirable for assessment of psychosocial problems. Social services were consulted in resp. 13% and 35% (p<0,001). A higher case load of psychosocial problems (> weekly) induced more consultation of social services (primary caregivers: 15% vs 10%, hospital caregivers: 41% vs 26%), and such caregivers showed better professional satisfaction. CONCLUSIONS: Despite their relevance, non-medical risk factors still remain underexposed in both the primary care and hospital care setting. p<0.001). Cases had a lower gestational age at G1 delivery (34.8 vs. 35.2 wks, p=0.003) and were more likely to have an interpregnancy interval < 18mo (23.1 vs. 14.5%, p<0.001). Changes in marriage or insurance status and BMI obesity class between G1 and G2 did not differ between cases and controls. Overall rates of illicit drug use were low. There were no differences in the proportion of cases and controls that began tobacco use (1.9 vs. 1.4% p=0.31), quit tobacco use (0.9 vs. 0.7%, p=0.78), began alcohol use (7.8 vs. 7.9%, p=0.96), and quit alcohol use (7.4 vs. 6.4%, p=0.38) between G1 and G2. In multivariate models, an interpregnancy interval < 18 mo resulted in a 1.78 increased risk for recurrent PTB (95% CI 1.4-2.3). CONCLUSIONS: Of modifiable risk factors, interpregnancy interval is the most significant for recurrent PTB. Efforts directed towards contraception counseling may be more effective than substance abuse cessation counseling for our population with low rates of substance abuse, tobacco, alcohol, and drug use. Women with a prior intrapartum cervical laceration have been hypothesized to have cervical insufficiency, protracted labor, and cesarean delivery in subsequent pregnancies. We sought to characterize subsequent pregnancy outcomes among women with a prior cervical laceration. METHODS: Retrospective case series of women with their first 2 consecutive pregnancies carried to ≥ 20.0 wks gestation within a tertiary healthcare system, 2002-2012. Women with multiple gestation or fetal anomalies/aneuploidy were excluded. Data were extracted from computerized point-of-care programs. Cases of cervical laceration in the 1st delivery were identified by ICD9 code, confirmed on chart review, and included only if suture repair was required. Outcomes from the second pregnancy were examined. RESULTS: 55 women were confirmed to have a cervical laceration in the 1st delivery (0.14% of deliveries). 43 lacerations were identified after vaginal delivery (VD) and 12 after cesarean delivery (CD). The mean delivery gestational age was 39.1 wks and birthweight 3519g; these were similar between those with VD and CD. 5 women delivered < 37wks and 2 women had a cerclage. Among women with VD, 12 (28%) delivered by forceps/vacuum, 4 (9.5%) had a 2nd stage > 3 hrs, 21 (50%) had an episiotomy, and the mean EBL was 716 ± 705 cc. Women with CD had a mean EBL of 942 ± 223cc; 6/7 (85.7%) had CD due to a failed 2nd stage. In the 2nd pregnancy, 4 women (9.3%) delivered <37 weeks -all had a prior VD, only 1 of which was preterm at 34.5 wks. 2 women (4.6%) had a prophylactic cerclage placed (both also had a cerclage in their 1st pregnancy) and 1 had a CD for breech presentation. No one in this group had a prolonged active stage or a prolonged 2nd stage of labor. All women with a cervical laceration identified during CD opted for a repeat CD. 2 women (3.6%), 1 in each group, had recurrent cervical lacerations. CONCLUSIONS: Cervical lacerations are uncommon in our population. In this cohort, the rate of complications in the following pregnancy were low, despite lack of additional prophylactic cerclage use. There is concern that placenta is an organ reflecting the pathological condition of neonates, however there have been limited information concerning the association between pathology of placenta and neonatal treatment. This study aimed to the relationship between placental pathological findings and clinical course of the infants admitted to NICU. METHODS: Placentas were obtained between January 2010 to December 2011 from infants admitted to NICU of Hamamatsu university Hospital. The clinical backgrounds of these subjects were obtained from clinical records. Placentas were histologically analyzed using HE staining and a gross morphological survey. pathological abnormalities were examined, such as 1) alterations in blood vessels, 2) inflammatory reactions (i.e. chorioamnionitis, villitis, villitis of unknown etiology), 3) increased number of syncytial knots, changes in villous histology and classified into 3 categories. i.e.1 :circulatory disturbance, 2 inflammation, and 3 ischemic change. Respiratory support in resuscitation and period of hospitalization were compared to the placental pathology. RESULTS: Total 196 infants were admitted to NICU due to preterm delivery (51.0%), low birth weight(45.4%), respiratory distress 26.5%), neonatal asphyxia(9.2% ), and infection (7.1%). In cases of preterm delivery, inflammation, ischemic change, and circulatory disturbance were equally observed. In cases of neonatal asphyxia showed circulatory disturbance in 64%. In respiratory distress showed inflammation was observed in 62% of cases and significantly higher compared to the cases without respiratory distress(p<0.05). In infants with pathological placental findings, respiratory support was carried out in resuscitation significantly higher compared to those without findings(p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Placental pathology may be associated with respiratory status soon after delivery among infants admitted to NICU. Pathological findings of inflammation and circulatory disturbance may have multiple effects on the newborns. Placental pathology have a possibility of a prediction about neonatal outcome. Uterine Electromyography (EMG) before and after Continuous Epidural Anesthesia/Analgesia (PCEA) in Term Women with Spontaneous Onset of Labor. Yuanjuan Ye, 1,2 Liu Lei, 1 Xingrong Song, 1 Huishu Liu, 1,2 Shao-Qing Shi, 1,3 Garfield Robert. To examine the variation of uterine EMG activity before and after PCEA in term women with spontaneous onset of labor. METHODS: Pregnant women (nulliparous, n=12, ages= 28.9±3.6 years old, gestational ages= 39.7±1.5 weeks) in term labor were enrolled. For each PCEA patient (n=8) five periods of time were defined: Part I: Uterine EMG during 30 mins before treatment, cervix 2 cm dilated; Part II: 30 min after anesthesia/analgesia with a micro-pump (0.1% levobupivacaine + 5 ug sufentanil + NS, 10 ml in total until patient-controlled analgesia (PCEA) was achieved with a pump with 0.0625% levobupivacaine + 0.4 ug/ml sufentanil) with cervical dilatation of 2 cm in the first-stage labor; Part III: 1 hour after PCEA; Part IV: 2 hours after PCEA, and Part V: Second stage of labor, cervix 10 cm.. Control patients (n=4) were recorded over the same times with no treatment. Abdominal EMG activity was recorded noninvasively from the abdominal surface and various parameters were calculated and statistically analyzed by one way ANOVA. There are significant (P<0.003) reductions in uterine EMG bursts (number/30', Figure) and other EMG parameters after PCEA (Part II to IV) vs. controls. However by the second stage of labor (Part V) there are no differences (P>0.05) in EMG between control patients and patients with PCEA. Also, there are no differences (P>0.05) in times from Part I to Part V for PCEA patients (5.75±2.71 hrs) and controls (5.25±1.71). All women have good deliveries with similar (P>0.05) Apgar scores (PCEA= 9.1±0.6, 1 min.; 9.5±0.5, 5 min.; controls= 9.3±0.5, 1 min.; 9.5±0.58, 5 min.). CONCLUSIONS: PCEA initially induces a substantial reduction in uterine EMG and contractile activity. However, recovery from PCEA occurs by the second state of labor with no effects on progress of labor or delivery. PCEA treated pregnant patients have good delivery results with good outcomes for babies. Effectiveness of Delayed Absorbable Monofilament Suture in Emergency Cerclage. Takashi Yorifuji, Shintaro Makino, Atsuo Itakura, Satoru Takeda. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Juntendo University Faculty of Medicine, TOKYO, Japan. INTRODUCTION: Non-absorbable braided sutures or woven tapes have been widely employed for cerclage . Monofilament macro porous polypropylene was reported to be an appropriate material for the transvaginal surgery . However the prosthetic material may cause of infection following cerclage with a non-absorbable polypropylene tape. However it is uncertain to maintain the tension of absorbable suture until term. To estimate sustaining of effects of emergency cerclages using absorbable monofilament sutures, we investigated the changes of cervical length after cerclage of 6 cases carrying out. We had used a delayed absorbable monofilament suture (1 PDS-Plus®; ETHICON) in emergency cerclages after 20 weeks of gestation at Juntendo University Hospital from January 2011. The patient characteristics, perinatal outcome, cervical length, and obstetric data were collected. These cases performing cerclage were all singletons and did not have a past history of cornization. The indications for the emergency cerclage were sharp decline of cervical length ≤10mm or prolapsed of membranes after 20 weeks of gestation. The cases of bacterial cervitis with erastase positive or clinical chorioamnionitis were excluded. We performed a double cervical cerclage procedure was performed addition to McDonald cerclage 10) . After the first stitch was placed and tied, a second stitch was placed in a similar fashion proximal to the first suture, coloser to the internal os. Subsequently, vaginal washing with and insertion of chloramphenicol vaginal tablets were performed for 1 week. Cervical length was measured using transvaginal ultrasonography every week after cerclage. Prior to the emergency cerclage, we explained the method of the cerclage conscientiously and obtained informed consents from every case. RESULTS: Six cases were identified from our medical records.Mean gestational age at the cerclage was 23.0±0.9. The average latency period between cerclage and delivery was 12.7±4.7 weeks, which allowed for no infants to be born before 30 weeks. Two cases delivered before 34 weeks due to preterm PROM and 4 cases delivered beyond 36 weeks. There was no case which needs removal of sutures, and the no maternal complication including cervical laceration were noted. There were no cases with shortening of cervical length below the levels at the cerclage. The possible usefulness of this absorbable monofilament suture for emergency cerclage has been observed. Maternal BMI and Longitudinal Trends in Leptin and Adiponectin. Cross sectional studies show associations between adipokines and adverse pregnancy outcomes, but little is known about normal adipokine levels over pregnancy. We examined the relationship between maternal BMI and longitudinal trends in leptin and adiponectin in term pregnancies. We included 387 women with singleton term gestations enrolled in a prospective longitudinal cohort study. Maternal BMI was calculated at the first prenatal visit. Leptin and adiponectin were measured in the first, second and third trimesters. We used mixed linear models to examine the longitudinal relation between BMI, leptin, adiponectin, and maternal weight gain controlling for diabetes or hypertensive disorders. The study population included 235 normal weight (BMI <25 kg/m2), 106 overweight (25-<30 kg/m2), and 42 obese (≥30 kg/m2) women. In mixed linear effect models controlling for gestational weight gain, obese and overweight individuals had higher leptin levels compared to normal individuals (figure 1), and obese women had a slower increase in leptin compared to normal and overweight individuals (p <0.0001). Conversely, adiponectin was lower for obese and overweight individuals compared to normal women (figure 2) and concentrations significantly decreased during pregnancy for all BMI strata (p <0.0001). Adiponectin and leptin are associated with BMI. The change over pregnancy in leptin, but not adiponectin, differs in obese women even when controlling for gestational weight gain. Our results suggest that in pregnant as in non-pregnant individuals, both adiponectin and leptin reflect maternal adiposity. Further study is needed to understand predictors of leptin change. is commonly prescribed for the prevention of recurrent preterm birth in women with singleton gestation in the United States of America. Pregnant women on 17-OHPC may also take other medications, so, we hypothesized that 17-OHPC may impact the metabolism of coadministered medications. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of 17-OHPC on the activity and expression of various cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes in the human liver. METHODS: Primary human hepatocytes from four donors were treated with 17-OHPC or vehicle for 72 hours, followed by 1-hour incubation of a validated CYP cocktail of phenacetin (CYP1A2), diclofenac (CYP2C9), S-mephenytoin (CYP2C19), dextromethorphan (CYP2D6), and testosterone (CYP3A4/5). The activity of the P450 enzymes in primary human hepatocytes were measured by quantifying the metabolites derived from the above substrates using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. The gene expression of the P450 enzymes was examined by qRT-PCR. The results showed that in primary human hepatocytes, 17-OHPC at 1 µM increased CYP2C19 activity by 2.8-fold (P<0.01) and CYP2C19 expression by 2.4-fold (P<0.01), compared with that in vehicle-treated cells. Effects of 1 µM of 17 alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate on the activity and expression of various P450 enzymes in primary cultures of human hepatocytes. **P<0.01 compared with control baseline. This induction appears to be concentration-dependent. In addition, a strong positive correlation was observed between the activity and expression of CYP2C19 (r=0.9, P<0.001). Minimal or no increase in the activity and expression of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4 was observed in primary human hepatocytes treated with 17-OHPC. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that 17-OHPC has the potential to alter the activity and expression of certain hepatic CYP enzymes and may cause drug interactions on certain co-administered drugs (eg, several proton pump inhibitors, antiepileptics, and antidepressants) in pregnant women. Labor Epidural analgesia is the most frequently used method in relieving labor pain. The effects that epidural analgesia has on the maternal-fetal outcome, duration of the dilation and expulsive period in labor are highly debated. The purpose of the study is to assess the influence this method has on the duration of labor and maternal-fetal outcomes. We considered women in their first physiological pregnancy that ended with a vaginal delivery. They were divided into two groups: A, women who received epidural and B, women that did not. The two groups were homogeneous with each other in maternal age, gestational age and birth weight average. We evaluated the duration of dilation and expulsion, the APGAR score at 1 and 5 minutes, modalities of afterbirth and quality of lacerations, the fetal-head position during labor and at birth, use of oxytocin, PROM rate and induced labor. RESULTS: Of the 243 patients considered, 88 received analgesia and 155 did not. Statistically significant differences were noted in the duration of the dilation and expulsion period, modalities of afterbirth and extent of lacerations. As far as the dilation period is concerned: in group A 40,91% of the women concluded in less than 180 minutes and 59,09% in more than 180 minutes, while in group B 62,60% finished in less than 180 minutes and 37,40% in more than 180 minutes (p=0,0048). Regarding the expulsion period: in A 36,36% of the women finished in less than 30 minutes and 63,64% in more than 30 minutes, while in B 55,65% concluded in less than 30 minutes and 44,35% in more than 30 minutes (p=0,0125). As for the afterbirth, the curettage rate was 10,23% in A and 22,58% in B (p=0,0162). As for the lacerations, in A, for those patients who had lacerations, these were of III and IV degree in 15% of cases against 0% in B. As far as the newborns'health is concerned, no statistically significant differences were noted in both groups, both at 1 and 5 minutes. As for the position of the fetal-head, oxytocin use, PROM rate and induced labor no statistically significant differences were noted. CONCLUSIONS: Epidural analgesia lengthens the dilation and the expulsive periods. Nevertheless, this does not imply a worsening of the newborns'health. It also has positive effects on the afterbirth, making spontaneous afterbirth easier compared to curettage. This could result from the positive effects that epidural analgesia has on utero-placental blood flow. Maternal exercise has been shown to provide a number of health benefits for offspring. Babies whose mothers exercised during pregnancy are leaner and have improved cognitive scores in childhood. Mouse and rat offspring born to exercised dams have improved glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Here, we hypothesized that maternal exercise would decrease mouse offspring tumorigenesis following treatment with chemical carcinogens. METHODS: Three month old offspring born to sedentary or exercised ICR dams were exposed to a two-stage carcinogenesis model to determine whether or not maternal exercise would provide long-term tumor resistance in offspring. A tumor initiator, 7,12-dimethylbenzanthracene, was applied topically to the shaved skin on the backs of male and female offspring. Two weeks later, and twice weekly thereafter, offspring were treated with a topical application of a tumor promoter, 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Tumors were counted weekly by the same individual blinded to groups until 90% tumor incidence was reached in carcinogen-treated offspring born to sedentary dams. The experiment was terminated, RNA was extracted from skin following euthanasia, and expression levels of genes of interest were quantified with a NanoString nCounter analysis system. RESULTS: Both male and female offspring had significantly decreased tumor incidence (i.e. a delay in first tumor appearance) as a result of maternal exercise. Offspring born to exercised dams also showed a trend toward decreased numbers of tumors compared to offspring born to sedentary dams. Significant differences were found in expression of stress-response genes in the skin from carcinogen-treated mice as a consequence of maternal exercise. Nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2-like 2 (Nrf2), glutathione peroxidase 1, and superoxide dismutase 3, which are all genes involved in antioxidant response, were among those genes whose expression was significantly altered when comparing TPA-treated offspring born to sedentary and exercised dams. We have shown that maternal exercise has exciting potential to improve offspring stress response and tumor resistance. Future studies will further explore the mechanisms behind this protection in the hopes of elucidating translational benefits. We propose to use neonatal foreskin as a novel tissue to evaluate the effects of fetal programming of obesity. We postulate changes in gene expression of metabolic parameters in male infant foreskin are associated with birth weight and reflective of the in-utero environment. This was a prospective cohort study of 55 mother-baby couplets. Foreskin samples were collected at the time of circumcision and grossly dissected into dermal and hypodermal layers. Samples were flash frozen, and RNA was isolated from the adipocyte containing hypodermal layer. Eight samples were excluded due to exclusion criteria (n=4 from twins and 2 from preterm infants) or RNA degradation (n=2). RNA expression levels were analyzed using the NanoString Technologies nCounter system. Expression of 120 target genes assessing glucose transport, insulin signaling, oxidative stress, and inflammatory pathways were quantified and normalized to housekeeping genes. The average gene expression levels of the highest 15th percentile birth weight from our study population (>3900 g, n=7) were compared to the remaining control population (n=40). Univariate and multivariable analysis were utilized to assess correlations between infant and maternal data and gene expression. Hypodermal tissue samples demonstrated up regulation of selected transcripts in larger newborns versus controls. Adipocyte marker, adipocyte protein 2 and glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) mRNA levels were significantly greater in larger neonates, P < .05 and .01, respectively. The proinflammatory adipokine, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI -1) was significantly increased, P < .01. Univariate and multivariate analyses showed PAI -1 expression was significantly increased with pre-pregnancy BMI, P< .05; gestational weight gain, P < .05; and maternal smoking, P < .05. Elevated GLUT4 was also positively correlated with maternal BMI, P < .05. CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression levels significantly varied by birth weight and maternal parameters in a neonatal tissue containing adipocytes. We propose using neonatal foreskin as a novel model with which to evaluate the effects of fetal programming of obesity. Hypoxia is a critical insult causing intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) in many pregnancy complications. Adult offspring born with hypoxia-induced IUGR have a reduction in nitric oxide (NO)-mediated vasodilation. We used exercise as a possible intervention to prevent cardiovascular complications. We hypothesized that aerobic exercise training will improve vascular function in offspring born from a hypoxic environment in utero by increasing NO bioavailability and decreasing oxidative stress. We used a model of hypoxia-induced IUGR. Pregnant Sprague Dawley rats were exposed to control (21% oxygen) or hypoxia (11% oxygen) conditions from gestational day 15 to 21. Male and female offspring from normoxic (control) and hypoxic (IUGR) pregnancies were randomized at 10 weeks of age to either an exercise-trained or sedentary group. Rats were acclimatized to treadmill running then exercised for 6 weeks; 5 days/week, 30 min/day at 20 m/min. After a recovery period of 24 hours, animals were euthanized and second order mesenteric arteries were isolated and mounted on a wire myograph. Cumulative concentration response curves to methacholine (MCh) were performed in the presence of an NO synthase inhibitor (L-NAME) or a superoxide dismutase mimetic (MnTBAP). RESULTS: Exercise enhanced vasodilation in mesenteric arteries from control female offspring (pEC 50 in sedentary 7.25±0.11 vs. exercise 7.53±0.08;p<0.05) and control male offspring (pEC 50 in sedentary 7.32±0.08 vs. exercise 7.69±0.07;p<0.05). Exercise also enhanced vasodilation in IUGR female (p<0.05) but not male IUGR offspring (p=0.8). Area under the curve (AUC) analysis from arteries incubated with and without L-NAME, showed that exercise improved NO-mediated vasodilation in only female control offspring (AUC in sedentary 50.28±10.45 vs. exercise 90.23±12.72;p<0.05) but not male control or either IUGR groups. No differences were found in vasodilation to MCh in the presence of MnTBAP. CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that exercise improves vasodilation in female but not male IUGR offspring. Contrary to our hypothesis, exercise did not improve NO-mediated vasodilation in IUGR offspring. In IUGR females, however, there appeared to be a compensatory vasodilatory pathway that was absent in IUGR males. (1). Outcomes may be due to increased maternal ROS (2). We hypothesized that maternal antioxidant Res treatment before and in pregnancy would improve AL and decrease HC ROS in male OFF. METHODS: From weaning through pregnancy and lactation female rats ate chow (C) or maternal high energy obesogenic diet (MO). Half C and MO mothers received 20mg/kg Res orally for 30d before and in pregnancy (CRes and MORes). Rats were bred at PND 120 continuing the same diet. All OFF ate chow from weaning. At 90d, six males from different litters were tested with Progressive Ratio (PR), AL and retention tests and euthanized to determine HC Malondialdehyde (MDA-spectrophotometry) and ROS (fluorescence). Analysis by ANOVA. RESULTS: MO OFF required more sessions to lever press to reach performance criterion (Fig 1 A-B ) and increased overall motivation to work vs. C (fig 1 C) . HC MDA and ROS increased in MO vs C (Fig  1 D-E) . MORes decreased session number to lever press and partially prevented increased HC MDA and ROS.  Hippocampal (HC) Mechanisms in Impaired Learning in Offspring (OFF) of Rats Fed Isocaloric Low Protein (LP) Diets in Pregnancy (P) and/or Lactation (L). Luis A Reyes-Castro, 1 Euridice Padilla-Gomez, 2 Jazmin Parga-Martinez, 2 Gina Quirarte, 2 Sofia Diaz-Cintra, 2 Guadalupe L Rodriguez-Gonzalez, 1 Peter W Nathanielsz, 3 Elena Zambrano. 1 One factor was independently correlated with gender, with negative values in females and positive values in males (p=0.01). After adjustment for GA, BW and PW, the association was strengthened (p=0.003). Inspection of the factor components revealed major contributions of distance of arteries from the disk edge, variable branching angles and arterial tortuosity. Females had reduced arterial extension on the chorionic surface with increased distance of arteries to the perimeter, reduced branching angle but greater variation in branching angles and reduced tortuosity, with the opposite generally found in males. A similarly composed venous factor was more weakly correlated with gender. CONCLUSIONS: Within a high risk autism sibling cohort, there are identifiable gender differences in placental chorionic vascular network structure. Gender differences are stronger in arterial than venous vascular networks. Association of these factors with autism diagnosis is pending, but we speculate that these differences are due to the fact that arterial network structure is more directly influenced by oscillation/pulsatility of blood flow caused by the fetal heart beat. Antenatal glucocorticoid (GC) therapy decreases respiratory distress syndrome and infant mortality when administered to women at risk for preterm delivery. We have shown that prenatal exposure to clinically relevant doses of glucocorticoids at the time of nephrogenesis leads to impaired Na + excretion in adult male sheep while females are protected from this effect. It is well known that 50% to 70% of sodium is reabsorbed in the renal proximal tubule (RPT). The present study was to determine if there are sex differences in the effects of prenatal Beta exposure on basal Na+ uptake by RPTC and if sex influences responses to Ang II and Ang-(1-7). METHODS: RPTC were isolated from 1-yr-old male (n=14) or female (n=10) vehicle-or Beta exposed offspring (exposure at 0.6gestation) and cultured for 7-10 days. The fluorescence dye sodium green was employed to determine cytoplasmic Na+ uptake in RPTC exposed to different Na+ concentrations in the presence of the Na+/K+ ATPase inhibitor ouabain, Data presented as mean ± standard deviation were analyzed by ANOVA . In basal conditions, when Na+ concentration in media was increased from 30 to 140 mM Na+ uptake increased more (467±67%) in cells from males exposed to Beta before birth than in cells from vehicle treated animals (351±36% P<0.05) There was no effect of Beta exposure on Na+ uptake in cells from females, (254±39% in vehicle, 250±48% in Beta). Basal Na+ uptake was greater in male than in female RPTC from both vehicle and Beta; Na+ uptake was greater in cells from Beta compared to cells from vehicle exposed male sheep after Ang II (10-11M) stimulation (539±177 vs 412±76% P<0.05). There was no enhancement of the effects of Ang II on Na+ uptake in cells from Beta exposed females (370vs 372%). Ang-(1-7) significantly reduced Na+ uptake in both Beta exposed and vehicle male and female sheep. CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that there are sex differences in the effects of prenatal steroid exposure on Na+ handling by RPTC and suggest that the antenatal steroid-induced increase in Na+ uptake is absent in cells from females. Supported by NIH grants HD 17644 and HD 47584. Maternal in part, on endocannabinoid system (ECS). The type 1 cannabinoid receptor is a product of the Cnr1 gene. Cnr1 expression is decreased in visceral adipose tissue (VAT) in obesity. Gene expression and metabolic programming are regulated by epigenetic mechanisms, such as methylation of DNA. Whether MTS or surgically induced-IUGR (sIUGR) alters Cnr1 mRNA expression or DNA methylation of the Cnr1 gene in rat VAT is unknown. We hypothesize that MTS and sIUGR decrease Cnr1 mRNA expression and alter DNA methylation in the promoter of the Cnr1 in VAT rat offspring. METHODS: Pregnant rats were exposed to tobacco smoke from embryonic day 11 to term (MTS). Postnatally, MTS offspring were cross fostered to control dams. sIUGR was induced by bilateral uterine artery ligation on gestational day 19. At weaning, offspring VAT was collected. Cnr1 mRNA levels were quantified. DNA methylation of the proximal promoter, transcriptional start site and intron 1 of the Cnr1 was evaluated by bisulfite modification and sequencing. RESULTS: Results are reported as MTS or sIUGR as % of sex-matched controls (*p<0.05). In female offspring, MTS and sIUGR decreased mRNA levels of Cnr1 in VAT (10%* and 53%*, respectively). MTS and sIUGR increased methylation of CpG's in the proximal promoter of the Cnr1 gene of female VAT (166%* and 150%*, respectively). In contrast, MTS decreased DNA methylation in the intronic region of the Cnr1 gene (65%*) in female VAT with no changes in sIUGR female rats. In male offspring, MTS did not alter VAT Cnr1 mRNA levels or DNA methylation. However, sIUGR increased Cnr1 mRNA levels (195%*) without changes in DNA methylation of the Cnr1 gene. CONCLUSIONS: MTS and sIUGR alter Cnr1 mRNA expression and DNA methylation in a model and sex-specific manner in rat VAT. The CpG density of the Cnr1 gene promoter is relatively low. Increased methylation in the transcriptional start of genes with low density CpG's is frequently associated with decreased gene expression. We speculate that MTS and sIUGR increased DNA methylation in the transcriptional start of Cnr1 gene programming decreased expression of Cnr1 in VAT of female offspring. The transition from the fetal to the neonatal heart requires extensive physiological changes including shifting energy production from glucose to fatty acids, completion of cardiomyocyte differentiation and profound morphologic remodeling to achieve the neonatal-adult circulatory pattern. In early postnatal life, plasma melatonin (MEL) fall from fetal levels since the neonate has not started its own pineal production. Aim. To investigate whether postnatal MEL treatment modifies neonatal heart remodeling and metabolic shifting in energy production. We measured: heart weight and mRNA expression in atrium and ventricles of a cluster of genes involved in 1) fatty acid and glucose utilization (HFABP: fatty acid intracellular transport, HK: hexokinase1 and the nuclear receptors PPARa and PPARg and the coactivator PGC1a); 2) heart growth: glucocorticoid receptor: GR; and 3) heart secretory function: natriuretic peptides ANP and BNP. METHODS: From birth, 10 lambs received 1mg oral MEL daily at 1700 h and 10 vehicle. Four lambs per group were euthanized at 5 days of treatment and six at 12 days. Heart was weighed, right and left atrium and ventricles were stored in TRIzol and mRNA levels were measured by qPCR using RLP0 as constitutive gene. Results are means ±SEM. RESULTS: The heart weight was 5.96 ± 0.23 g/kg bw, after 12 days of MEL treatment vs. 6.75 ± 0.22 in controls lambs (p< 0.05). There was no effect in other organs. Atrium and ventricle gene expression of HFABP, PPARa, PGC1a, GR, ANP and BNP increased in control lambs between 5 and 12 days of age, whilst HK and PPARg remained constant. MEL treatment for five days had no effect in the atrium but increased HFABP, PPARa, PGC1a and GR in the ventricles to the levels observed at 12 days of age in controls. There was no effect on HK and PPARg. The hearts after 12 days of MEL treatment expressed more ANP and BNP, and less HK1 and PPARg and PGC1a than control hearts in the atrium and ventricle. CONCLUSIONS: Postnatal melatonin treatment significantly alters the neonatal heart, presumably accelerating the metabolic shift and heart remodeling. It is unknown yet whether these changes alter cardiovascular function later in life. Use of fetal growth charts assumes that optimal size at birth for immediate health outcomes is at the 50th centile. However, the interaction between maternal constraint of fetal growth and risks associated with smaller size at birth indicate that this assumption may not be valid, especially for perinatal mortality. METHODS: Data of over 1 million births between 28 and 43 weeks gestation from singleton pregnancies without congenital abnormalities in the period from 2000 to 2008 were collected from the Netherlands Perinatal Registry. Distribution of perinatal mortality according to birth weight centile and gestational age was studied. RESULTS: There were 5075 (0.43%) perinatal deaths. Highest mortality occurred in infants with a birth weight below the 2.3rd centile (25.4/1.000 births) and the lowest mortality with birth weights between the 80th and 90th centile (2.4/1.000 births) of routinely used growth charts. Data were almost identical when analysis was restricted to infants born after 36 weeks. From an immediate survival perspective, optimal fetal growth requires a birth weight between the 80th -90th centiles for the population. Median birth weight in the population is by definition substantially lower, implying that the majority of fetuses exhibit some form of maternal constraint of growth. This finding is consistent with adaptations evolved in humans in conjunction with large head size and bipedalism, to reduce risk of obstructed delivery. These data also fit remarkably well with those on long-term adult cardiovascular and metabolic health risks. This fetal endothelial dysfunction may be detectable by measuring the aorta intima media thickness (aIMT). Metabolomics performs an integrated assessment of the variance in levels in metabolites connetted to a pathological condition. This was an exploratory multidisciplinary study. Patients referred to tertiary center for morphological scan were selected and then divided according to those who later developed GDM or not. Inclusion criteria were singleton pregnancies, a correct dating of pregnancy and diagnosis of gestational diabetes (HAPO 2011). Fetal biometry, fetal well being, maternal and fetal abdominal aortic intima media thickness (aIMT), fetal aorta diameter and fetal aorta pulsatility index were measured at 35 weeks of gestation. At delivery a sample of cord blood for a metabolomic evaluation was collected. Statistical analysis Mann-Whitney (p<0.05) was used. RESULTS: 35 patient were included, 20 with GDM and 15 controls. Patients with GDM are older and nulliparous than controls. At 35 weeks the fetal aIMT was significantly increased in cases compared to controls (0.72 vs. 0.52 mm, p = 0.002), as well as the fetal aortic diameter, with a positive correlation between aortic PI and fetal aIMT in the GDM group. Maternal GDM aIMT was significantly higher with a positive correlation with fetal GDM aIMT (p 0.05). No significant differences exist in relation to body mass index gestational age at delivery, birth weight, mode of delivery and Apgar score. In case group metabolomic analysis showed an higher expression of Fenilalanina, Leucina, Isoleucina, Alanina and Triptofano than control one. CONCLUSIONS: Newborns of mothers with gestational diabetes have an increased intima-media thickness and aortic abdominal PI. The metabolomic identification of different expression of amino acids involved in the glucose homeostasis in cases, together with the presence of a subclinical vascular modification, may subtend a fetal adaptation to impaired glucose tolerance. Smoking during Pregnancy and Fetal Telomere Length. Valerie E Whiteman, 1 Anupam Pradhan, 2 Arnut Paothong, 3 Chiaka Nwoga, 3 Lindsey King, 3 Hamisu M Salihu. INTRODUCTION: Prenatal smoking is common despite substantial evidence of increased fetal morbidity and mortality. Telomeres (nucleotide sequences vital to cell division and the maintenance of chromosomal structures) can shorten at an accelerated rate due to environmental factors such as smoking. Shortened telomere lengths are associated with adverse health outcomes as well as accelerated ageing. Studies have shown a relationship between prenatal tobacco exposure and telomere shortening in children, however, there is a lack of data on telomere measures in fetuses exposed to tobacco smoke. We sought to investigate whether maternal smoking during pregnancy affects telomere length of the fetus. METHODS: Pregnant women were recruited upon admission for delivery at a university-affiliated hospital from 2011 to 2012. A self-report questionnaire and salivary cotinine test were used to confirm maternal tobacco exposure. Those who reported smoking while pregnant and tested positive for tobacco were categorized as smokers. Neonatal umbilical cord blood samples were collected from 65 full-term newborns (26 nonsmokers and 39 active smokers). Genomic DNA was isolated from cord blood leukocytes and analyzed for fetal telomere length based on Cawthon Quantitative PCR. This approach provides an average on absolute telomere lengths in genomic DNA of the fetus by determining the Cawthon ratio in experimental samples relative to the reference sample. Bootstrap and ANOVA statistical methodology were used to evaluate the relationship between prenatal smoking status and fetal telomere length. RESULTS: The average maternal age was 25 years (range 18-39) and a mean gestational age of 39 weeks 5 days. Fetal telomere length was significantly shorter among infants born to active smokers (Mean Cawthon ratio = 5755) as compared to non-smokers (Mean Cawthon ratio = 5774) [p<0.05]. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide the first evidence demonstrating shortened telomere length among fetuses exposed to smoking during pregnancy. Smoking during pregnancy is a preventable cause of enhanced chromosomal aging. The potential long-term implications of neonatal "genetic aging" are potentially enormous, underscoring the importance of smoking cessation interventions during pregnancy. FACs, an increase in activity would further reduce peNOS, decrease NO production, and allow for increased cortisol synthesis under stimulated conditions. NIH HDPO131226, HDRO151951. Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is associated with significant neonatal morbidity, mortality and long term health complications. As a reduction in uteroplacental perfusion is an important cause of IUGR, vasodilators -such as the phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor sildenafil citrate -are a potential therapy for IUGR. Sildenafil has been shown to increase fetal growth in mouse models of IUGR, but efficacy and safety studies in large animals are lacking. This study aims to examine the effects of sildenafil citrate on fetal growth in an ovine model of IUGR. METHODS: Ewes carrying singleton pregnancies underwent surgery and insertion of vascular catheters at 96-100 days gestational age (dGA, term = 147 dGA). Catheterisation included tarsal, carotid, jugular and uterine vessels in the ewe, and tarsal arteries and veins in the fetus. Ewes were randomised to either uterine artery embolization to induce IUGR, via injection of microspheres into the uterine artery, at 102-107 dGA, or to a non-embolised 'normal growth' control group. Ewes in the IUGR group were then randomised to receive a daily 12 hour infusion of either sildenafil citrate (75 or 150 mg/day) or vehicle for 21 days; the 'normal growth' control group received no treatment. Blood pressure was measured in the ewe during the first 3 days of treatment, using a pressure transducer connected to either a maternal carotid or tarsal artery catheter. Fetal biometric data was collected at the end of the treatment period. RESULTS: Compared with the control group, lambs born to sildenafil treated ewes showed a trend towards increased body weight (3,915±386 vs 4,535±138 g; p=0.09), ponderal index (34.8±1.9 vs 42.5±3.9 kg/m 3 ; p=0.057) and abdominal circumference (30.8±2.0 vs 33.8±1.10 cm; p=0.2). Sildenafil infusion did not result in a fall in mean arterial pressure (MAP) or rise in heart rate (HR) (control vs sildenafil: MAP 91±4 vs 105±9 mmHg; p=0.2, HR 123±7 vs 122±13; p=0.6). A limited number of sheep have completed the study protocol to date, and the study is ongoing. CONCLUSIONS: Although numbers are limited, early data suggests a trend towards sildenafil citrate having a beneficial effect on fetal growth in this ovine model of growth restriction. We found no adverse effects in the ewe (such as hypotension or tachycardia) related to sildenafil administration. The normoxic conditions were used as a control. The IUGR in pregnant rabbits was induced by uteroplacental vessels ligature. Five mg of human or rabbit placental tissues were used for protein isolation (cytoplasmic/ nuclear fractionation) and RNA extraction. Protein and mRNA levels were determined by Western blot and real-time PCR, respectively. RESULTS: Hypoxia in JAR cells resulted in up-regulation of NFAT5 mRNA and protein at 8 and 16 hours as compared with normoxic conditions. The significant increase of NFAT5 levels was observed in 50% of human placentas of PE patients, as compared to normotensive group. There was also an increase in the levels of NFAT5 in the placentas of rabbit IUGR model (67% of cases). CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that NFAT5 is activated under hypoxic conditions in the in vitro trophoblast cell model, as well in hypoxic placentas from human preeclamptic patients and rabbit model of IUGR. These results suggest that NFAT5 could serve as a potential biomarker of PE or IUGR. Effect of a High Fat Diet on Fetal Growth and Uterine Artery Function. Jasmine F Plows, Joanna L Stanley, Huan Zhao, Philip N Baker. Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, New Zealand. INTRODUCTION: Fetal growth restriction (FGR) is associated with both short-and long-term complications. Pregnant mice lacking the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene (eNOS -/-) deliver growth-restricted pups, and can be used as a model of FGR. Maternal obesity is a risk factor for FGR and many other pregnancy disorders, and can negatively impact both the mother and the growing baby. We hypothezise that feeding eNOS -/mice a high fat diet will induce uterine artery dysfunction and therefore further impair uteroplacental perfusion, resulting in an exacerbation of fetal growth restriction in the pups. METHODS: Control C57BL/6J and eNOS -/mice were randomly assigned to receive either normal diet (4% kcals from fat) or high fat diet (40% kcals from fat) for 8 weeks prior to mating. At gestational day 18.5, the pregnant mice were culled and the pups were removed, weighed, and measured. The uterine arteries were dissected and mounted on a wire myograph. Arterial function was determined by assessing the response to the vasoconstrictor phenylephrine, and the endothelium-dependent vasodilator acetylcholine (ACh). RESULTS: There was a significant effect of genotype (p=0.03) on pup weight; pups from eNOS -/mice were significantly smaller than C57BL/6J controls (0.95±0.09 vs. 1.09±0.02g). There was a significant effect of high fat diet on pup abdominal circumference (p=0.005). The abdominal circumference of pups from the high fat diet group were reduced compared with controls in C57BL/6J (22.6 ±1.3 vs 26.1 ± 0.5mm; p<0.05) and eNOS -/mice (22.2±0.5 vs 23.9±0.9). There was no effect of genotype (p=0.18) or diet (p=0.17) on uterine artery constriction to phenylephrine, as determined by EC50. However, there was a significant effect of genotype (p <0.0001) on maximum relaxation of uterine arteries in response to acetylcholine. Maximum relaxation of uterine arteries from eNOS -/mice was significantly reduced compared to those from C57BL/6J mice (51±5% vs 97±4%; p<0.05). There was no effect of a high fat diet on this measure. CONCLUSIONS: In agreement with results reported elsewhere, the current study demonstrated a significant impairment of uterine artery relaxation in eNOS -/mice. Although consumption of high fat diet did not further impair uterine artery function, pup growth was impacted. Potential mechanisms include altered placental transport. the first trimester onwards in a single Fetal Medicine Centre. A retrospective study on 50 cases of sIUGR in MC twin pregnancies diagnosed on the base of Abdominal Circumference < 10 centile followed in our department, tertiary referral center for fetal medicine, between June 2006 and June 2013. sIUGR cases were classified in three types according to the UA Doppler in the smaller twin: type I with positive end diastolic flow in the UA; type II with stable absent/reverse end diastolic flow (AREDF) in the UA, type III with intermittent AREDF (iAREDF) in the UA. The following perinatal outcomes were analyzed: gestational age at delivery, twin birth weights, weight discordance between twins, occurrence of intrauterine demise, length of stay in neonatal intensive care unit , neonatal mortality rate. RESULTS: during the study period we observed 50 cases of sIUGR: 36 classified as type I, 11 as type II and 3 as type III. In type II and III the birth weight was significantly lower than in type I (p 0.017 for the larger twin and p <0.0001 for the smaller twin) for both twins. Fetal weight discordance was significantly higher in type II and III than in type I and was 19% in type I, 40% in type II and 37% in type III. Progressive fetal doppler deterioration of the IUGR fetus requiring active management was observed in 63.6% (7/11) of type II, in 11.1% (4/36) of type I and in 0% of type III. Unexpected fetal death was observed in 66.7% (2/3) cases of type III. In the type I group we observed two cases (2/36, 5-6%) of unexpected IUD and in four cases (4/11, 36.4%) of type II. CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms that in sIUGR identified by abdominal circumference <10 th , UA Doppler pattern in the smaller twin is a reliable way to classify MC twins complicated by sIUGR and to predict their perinatal outcome. have shown promise as biomarkers for alcohol use during pregnancy. However, concerns regarding over-sensitivity have led commercial labs to adopt high cutoffs and to require both biomarkers to meet cutoffs before a sample is considered positive. Such adjustments render these biomarkers too conservative for use in detecting lower levels of drinking. This study sought to determine whether sensitivity could be improved by considering EtG and EtS singly. METHODS: Five non-pregnant (confirmed) females age 21-39 were given one, two, and three standard drinks during three separate drinking sessions. Participants provided urine samples at 12, 24, 36, 48, and 72 hours after each drinking session. Samples were tested for EtG and EtS by Redwood Toxicology Laborator (California), who reported a sample as positive if EtG was detected at ≥ 100 ng/ml, or if EtS was detected at ≥ 25 ng/ml. RESULTS: All 5 participants tested positive for EtG and for EtS at the 12-hour observation point, after all three drinking phases (1, 2, or 3 standard drinks). At the 24-hour observation, 2 of 5 participants (40%) were positive for both biomarkers after one standard drink; 3 of 5 (60%) were positive for both biomarkers after two standard drinks, and 5 of 5 (100%) were positive for both biomarkers after three standard drinks. There were no positive samples at 36, 48, or 72 hours. No samples were positive for EtG or EtS alone; all were either positive or negative for both. CONCLUSIONS: In a previous study using identical methods, we found that an algorithmic approach to jointly considering levels of EtG and EtS failed to identify T-ace positive women. Given that risky drinking during pregnancy is considered to be in the range of one standard drink per day,a useful biomarker must be sensitive to this level of exposure. Using the cutoff levels currently in place, EtG and EtS appear too conservative to be useful in the detection of risk drinking in pregnancy. Intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) is a poorly characterized multifactorial pregnancy outcome that results in babies born with a suboptimal weight and bearing a higher risk for the development of chronic syndromes of mainly cardiovascular, metabolic and neurodevelopmental nature. IUGR is characterized by limited blood perfusion of the placenta leading to hypoxia and exacerbation of oxidative stress. High oxidative stress may affect mitochondria. Alterations of mitochondrial metabolic activity have been associated with IUGR without known genetic background. Recently, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) was also shown to undergo methylation supporting data from our preliminary investigations that identified 2 differentially methylated (DMRs) regions (MD1 and MD2) in the mtDNA from IUGR pregnancies. These DMRs are located in the body of the mitochondrial genes 12S rRNA and mtCO2 supporting the hypothesis of an impaired metabolic rate of IUGR placentas. We set out to test MD1 and MD2 methylation by pyrosequencing, a highly quantitative assay. Placental biopsies were collected from 14 appropriate for gestational age and clinically normal (AGAn) and 11 IUGR (<5 th %) pregnancies. mtDNA was extracted, bisulfite treated and pyrosequenced. Methylation values were analyzed using the Pearson correlation, non-parametric Mann-Whitney U tests. RESULTS: Both MD1 and MD2 showed lower mtDNA methylation in IUGR compared to AGAn samples. Specifically, MD1 returned a significant lower methylation (p=0.033) and MD2 a borderline significant lower methylation (p=0.066). When merging the methylation data from MD1 and MD2 the significance was further enhanced (p=0.029). Additionally, a stratification of the IUGR samples into <3 rd % and >3 rd % to <5 th % returned a markedly lower level of methylation for the more severe IUGR samples (<3 rd %) suggesting the existence of a trend. CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study supports the hypothesis that mitochondria play a key role in placental functioning and that in IUGR pregnancies they are hypomethylated. This phenomenon can possibly depend from a higher degree of activation of mitochondria intended to counteract the hypoxic condition of IUGR in order to support fetoplacental growth. We are currently working on validating this data by bisulfite sequencing in a more numerous cohort. We have previously shown that adenovirus mediated overexpression of VEGF-A 165 in the uterine arteries (UtAs) of mid-gestation pregnant sheep significantly increases UtA blood flow (~37%) for at least 30 days post-injection, compared with UtAs transduced with a control adenovirus encoding b-galactosidase (Ad.LacZ). This was concomitant with a significant reduction in vascular contractility and significant adventitial neovascularization. Furthermore in guinea pig FGR pregnancy produced by periconceptual maternal nutrient restriction, UtA vector treatment mid-gestation has a tendency to increase fetal weight at term and to improve fetal abdominal growth. Our aim was to study vector spread and expression after Ad.VEGF-A 165 transduction. METHODS: To create FGR, virgin Dunkin-Hartley guinea pigs were nutrient restricted peri-conceptually (70% calorie intake) and time mated. A mid-gestation laparotomy was performed, and 1x10 10 viral particles of Ad.VEGF-A 165 or Ad.LacZ were applied to the uterine and radial arteries bilaterally using a thermosensitive pluronic gel. Dams were sacrificed at term, pups weighed and tissues sampled. Vector spread was analysed using PCR, and VEGF expression assessed by ELISA and immunohistochemistry. Downstream effects of VEGF expression were also examined using immunohistochemistry. RESULTS: Ad.VEGF-A 165 transduction was confirmed by PCR in target arteries of Ad.VEGF-A 165 treated animals, but was not detected in any fetal or placental samples. At term, more than four weeks after vector application, VEGF expression was undetectable by ELISA in target uterine and radial arteries, maternal liver, spleen, kidney, heart, adrenal and ovary. By immunohistochemistry expression of VEGF, and VEGF receptor 1 and 2 was also unchanged. CONCLUSIONS: At term, there is no evidence of transgenic VEGF expression in treated animals, and no fetal or maternal spread. The findings are similar to those seen in FGR sheep. This is a localised gene therapy to the uterine and radial arteries, and may thus be appropriate for use during pregnancy to treat FGR. In the fetal lamb, the placenta becomes the main site for EPO synthesis during hypoxia. We have previously shown in type 1 DM patients that the umbilical vein (UV) to UA EPO ratio at birth increases >1 and correlates negatively with the UA pO 2 during fetal chronic hypoxia, suggesting that the placenta increases its EPO synthesis during fetal hypoxia also in humans. Our aim was to measure EPO gene (EPO) and EPO receptor gene (EPOR) expressions in the placenta of women with DM and/or hypertensive pregnancy. We studied 23 type 1 DM patients, 8 with pre-eclampsia (PE) and 9 healthy controls. All were delivered by cesarean section prior to labor. Placental biopses were obtained and relative placental EPO and EPOR mRNA levels quantified by qPCR using TaqMan R chemistry. TATA box binding protein gene (TBP) was used as a reference gene for normalisation. The calibrator sample consisted of pooled cDNA from women with normal pregnancies. The umbilical cord was doubly clamped and UA and UV samples were collected separately. UA samples were analyzed for pH and pO 2 at birth. The 31 women with DM and/or PE were divided into Group A: those with UA pO 2 <2.0 kPa (N=16) and Group B: those with pO 2 =/>2.0 kPa (N=15). The mean (range) UA pH was in Group A 7.25 (7.16-7.33) and in Group B 7.28 (7.20-7.32) (p=0.06). The mean (range) UA pO 2 in Group A was 1.55 kPa (1.00-1.90) and in Group B 2.50 kPa (2.10-3.20). The mean (range) EPO gene expression from the placental biopsies in Group A was 1.67 arbitrary units (AU) (0.11-8.36) and in Group B 0.79 AU (0.21-2.21) (p=0.027). The EPOR gene expression in Group A was 1.24 AU (0.60-2.22) and in Group B 2.01 AU (1.35-3.44) (p=0.002). CONCLUSIONS: Our finding indicates that EPO synthesis is increased in the placenta during fetal hypoxia also in human pregnancy. Since EPO has protective effects in the brain, it is tempting to assume that the fetus increases its EPO synthesis in order to protect its brain during chronic hypoxia. in pulmonary hypoplasia and pulmonary hypertension, which are often fatal. In order to improve clinical care and counseling, reliable prenatal parameters predicting fetal outcome in CDH are urgently needed. Prenatal predictors of fetal outcome in CDH have been reported to be focused mainly on the assessment of fetal lung volume but a gold-standard parameter has not yet been established. The aim of this study is to establish an accurate predictive marker for fetal lung hypoplasia in CDH. We collected newborn lung tissue at E21 from normal and nitrofen-induced CDH rats (administered 100mg orally at E9) and performed microarray analysis and real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Thirty nine amniotic fluid samples including isolated CDH cases (n = 22) and scheduled Cesarean section (CS) without fetal complication (controls) (n = 17) were obtained with signed informed consent. All amniotic fluid samples were obtained at CS performed after 35-38 gestational weeks from April 2007 to June 2013. Significantly decreased genes in nitrofen-induced CDH lung were lipocalin-2 (9-fold) and GATA-2 (3.3-fold). In lipocalin-2, this result could be confirmed with RT-PCR. Next, we examined the lipocalin-2 level in amniotic fluid using ELISA in humans, this level was significantly lower in CDH cases than in controls (58.9 ng/ml vs 88.9 ng/ml; p < 0.05). A significant positive correlation was observed between amniotic lipocalin-2 level and lung area to head circumference ratio (p < 0.05, r = 0.432). Our results suggest that gene expression level of lipocalin-2 was significantly decreased in the hypoplastic lung in rats and amniotic lipocalin-2 level was significantly lower in CDH cases in human. Amniotic lipocalin-2 can be a useful marker to predict the prognosis in CDH. Previous studies have demonstrated that pregnancy significantly increases Ca 2+ -activated K + channel activity and uterine arterial relaxations, which is inhibited by gestational hypoxia. The present study tested the hypothesis that reactive oxygen species (ROS) play an important role in chronic hypoxia-mediated inhibition of steroid hormone effect in upregulating uterine arterial K + channel activity in pregnancy. METHODS: Uterine arteries were isolated from nonpregnant (NPUA) and pregnant (PUA) (~140 day gestation) sheep maintained at either sealevel or high altitude (3,820m for 110 days, PaO 2 : 60mmHg). K + channel activity and uterine arterial relaxations were determined. Plasma L-arginine and ADMA levels were significantly lower in women with depression (0.298±0.06 and 37.0±9.2µmol/L, respectively) compared to matched controls (0.336±0.08 and 42.1±11.4µmol/L, p<0.05) and across pregnancy. Depressed pregnant women had higher levels of plasma CRP, but no differences urine excretion of ADMA, SDMA, or L-arginine, or plasma levels of Arginase I. CONCLUSIONS: Pregnant women with depression evidence conditionally low levels of arginine. These differences are not explained by urinary excretion or Arginase I levels. The mechanism responsible for the observed differences in L-arginine and ADMA in depressed pregnant women is unclear. Given the link between perinatal depression and adverse pregnancy outcomes we speculate depressed pregnant women may benefit from arginine supplementation. Exosome release may represent a significant communication mechanism between mother and fetus, however, the understanding of their role across the pregnancy remains formative. We hypothesize that during normal, uncomplicated pregnancy the concentration and protein composition of placenta-derived exosomes in maternal blood changes across the gestation. METHODS: Blood Samples were collected longitudinally from normal healthy pregnant women (n=20 per group) during first (6-14 weeks), second (22-24 weeks) and third trimester (32-36 weeks) of pregnancy and non-pregnant women (control) from Davila Clinic (Santiago, Chile). Plasma was collected and exosomes were isolated by differential and buoyant density centrifugation. The number of exosome particles and placental exosome contribution were determined by quantifying immunoreactive exosomal CD63 and placenta-specific marker (placental alkaline phosphatase; PLAP) respectively. Exosomal proteins where identified by liquid-chromatography mass spectrometry (MS, Triple TOF 5600 AbSciex) and submitted to bioinformatic pathway analysis Ingenuity software. All experiments were conducted within an ISO17025 accredited research facility. RESULTS: Exosome plasma concentration was more than 50-fold greater in pregnant women than in non-pregnant women (p <0.001). Maternal plasma exosome concentrations increase a further 2-fold during uncomplicated healthy pregnancies. The contribution of placenta-derived exosomes to total plasma exosomes decreased during third trimester and was negatively correlated with uterine artery pulsatility index. MS analysis identified over 300 different exosomal proteins and gestational age differences of exosome protein content across the pregnancy. The data obtained in this study are consistent with the hypothesis that the number of exosomes of placental origin increase in maternal plasma during gestation and that these exosomes modify their protein content. These results now provide us with a baseline to compare and evaluate complicated pregnancies. We tested the hypothesis that low plasma volume also predisposes to chronic hypertension in normotensive formerly preeclamptic women. METHODS: Analysis of n=138 formerly preeclamptic women in whom plasma volume (PV in ml/m 2 body surface area) was measured (I 125 -human serum albumin indicator dilution method) 6 to 12 months after pregnancy. At the time of the plasma volume measurement all these women were normotensive without the use of antihypertensive medication. Study population was divided into plasma volume quartiles. Blood pressure (median of 9 measurements) was measured on the day of plasma volume measurement and during a second visit, 2 to 5 years (mean: 3.5 ± 0.8 years) later. Hypertension was defined as >140 mmHg systolic, >90 mmHg diastolic or use of anti-hypertensive medication. We corrected for age, mean arterial blood pressure and BMI at first visit, change in weight between visits and the time interval between the two visits, using regression analysis. The highest plasma volume quartile was used as statistical reference. RESULTS: Plasma volume (ml/m 2 ) correlated inverse linearly with mean arterial pressure (mmHg) 2-5 years later as shown in Figure 1 . . Based on the ROC-curve a plasma volume cut-off value of 1314 ml/m 2 resulted in a sensitivity of 92.3% and a specificity 66.7% in predicting de novo hypertension within 5 years after a pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia (Area Under the Curve: 0.86). CONCLUSIONS: Low plasma volume predisposes to chronic hypertension within 5 years after preeclamptic pregnancy. Low plasma volume therefore reflects latent hypertension in these women. Uterine Artery Reactivity to AMP-Activated Protein Kinase in Control and Hypoxic Pregnancy. KL Skeffington, 1 JS Higgins, 1 A N Sferruzzi-Perri, 1 A L Fowden, 1 HW Yung, 1 GJ Burton, 1 LG Moore, 2 DA Giussani. 1163) . Therefore, AMPK is likely to be stimulated by hypoxia, a condition known to limit fetal growth and impair uterine blood flow during pregnancy (Browne et al. AJP. 2011; 300(5):R1221). However, whether AMPK has a dilator role in the uterine vasculature during normal or high risk pregnancy is unknown. We investigated the reactivity of uterine arteries to AMPK in control and hypoxic mouse pregnancy. METHODS: Mice were housed in normoxic (N, n=14) or hypoxic (H, 10% O 2 ; n=17) conditions from day(D) 14 of pregnancy (term~D20). After euthanasia on D19, fetuses were measured and uterine arteries excised for wire myography. Uterine artery dilator reactivity to the AMPK agonist A769662 (1x10-6 M -1x10-4 M) and constrictor reactivity to phenylephrine (PE, 1x10-9 M -1x10-4 M) before and after incubation for 20 min with A769662 (1x10-4 M) were determined. Measurements were repeated after L-NAME treatment (1x10-5M), allowing AMPK-derived NO-dependent relaxation to be identified. In H pregnancy, fetuses showed significant growth restriction (body weight: H 872±33g vs N 1138±32g, P<0.05). The AMPK agonist A769662 dilated uterine arteries of H and N mice to the same extent (Fig.  1A) . Incubation with A769662 markedly decreased the uterine artery constrictor sensitivity to PE (Fig. 1B) . This effect was greater in H mice due to both enhanced NO dependent and independent mechanisms ( Fig.  1 B and C) . CONCLUSIONS: AMPK dilates the uterine artery of pregnant mice near term and this effect is enhanced by chronic hypoxia. Increased AMPK sensitivity may be adaptive in high risk pregnancy to limit cellular energy depletion and maintain uteroplacental blood flow. Supported by the British Heart Foundation (DG) and the NIH (LM). The To clarify the effects of uterine myometrial suture methods at prior cesarean section (CS) and other clinical factors on the incidence of placenta accreta in placenta previa with prior cesarean section (PPPC). METHODS: Between 1994-2011, PPPC in 11 tertiary centers was analyzed retrospectively. Cases were grouped into a pathologically diagnosed placenta accreta group and a no accreta group. Clinical characteristics including methods of uterine closure at prior CS were reviewed and compared using logistic regression analysis. RESULTS: Among 954 placenta previa in 96,670 deliveries, 98 PPPC were revealed to have a history of uterine transverse incision and usage of absorbable thread for myometrial suture at the prior CS (38 with accreta, 60 without accreta). Uterine closure methods were shown. Accreta occurred in 13/35 (37.1%) of single-layer closures (A+B) and 25/63 (39.7%) of double-layer closures (C+D+E+F) (P = 0.805). Cases were re-categorized by the suture methods of the inner myometrial layer, revealing accreta in 20/67 (29.9%) of interrupted sutures (A+C+D) and 18/31 (58.1%) of continuous sutures (B+E+F) (P = 0.008). Logistic regression analysis was conducted for 8 characteristics that showed P <0.10 on univariate analysis (gravidity, parity, artifical abortion, prior CS (one or more), previa type, placental position, maternal age at prior CS, uterine closure methods) and revealed four independent risk factors for accreta.  Present study indicates the possible influence of suture methods at prior CS on the incidence of placenta accreta in subsequent pregnancies. The We sent out questionnaires about subsequent fertility and menstrual complications to 26 women who could be followed-up for more than 3 years. RESULTS: [Study 1] A total of 41 B-Lynch sutures were performed in 5,489 deliveries (1 per 134). All were done at the time of cesarean section. The indications for sutures were placenta previa in 18 (44%), uterine atony in 15 (37%), placental abruption in 5 (12%), partial placenta accreta in 2 (5%), low lying placenta in 2 (5%) and uterine torsion in 1 (2%). Hysterectomy was avoided in 38 of 41 women (92.7%). In 2 cases, both involving partial placenta accreta by histological examination, hysterectomy was unavoidable. [Study 2] Among the 21 women who answered the questionnaire, there were neither complaints of menstrual irregularities nor severe dysmenorrhea. Excluding women with voluntary contraception, 11 out of 18 (61.1%) had subsequent 13 pregnancies without requiring assisted reproductive procedures. The results of the pregnancies were 8 uncomplicated term pregnancies all delivered by elective cesarean section, 2 artificial abortions and 3 miscarriages. Of the 18 women who desired pregnancy after B-Lynch sutures, those who were younger than 35 years at the time of B-Lynch suture had a significantly higher rate of subsequent pregnancy (10 out of 12, 83.3%) compared with those who were 35 years or older (1 out of 6, 16.7%) (p<0.01). CONCLUSIONS: B-Lynch compression suture for PPH is an effective conservative surgical method to avoid hysterectomy. Currently, there are no complications including infertility. Therefore, B-Lynch suture is a reliable method to preserve fecundity in PPH patients. Maternal Obesity Influences Uterine Immune Response and Trophoblast Invasion. Daniel R Tessier, 1 Julien Yockell-Lelievre, 2 Sandeep Raha, 3 Alison Holloway, 4 Andree Gruslin. Lifelong obesity increases the risk of pregnancy complications such as intra uterine growth restriction (IUGR). It also is associated with disruption of normal immune response, a potential cause for adverse pregnancy outcomes. Our objectives were to investigate if maternal obesity alters utero-placental immune response and to characterize the effects of maternal serum from obese pregnant women on trophoblast invasion. A life-long high fat diet (HFD) induced obesity rat model that mimics human IUGR was used for these studies at two crucial gestational ages 15 (GD15) and 18 (GD18). To characterize the immune response, immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to localize TNFa and IL-10 within the utero-placental unit and EMD Millipore custom Multiplex Protein Assay was used to determine their expression levels. To determine the effects of obesity on trophoblast invasion, we compared invasion in HTR8/SVneo cells treated with pooled 1 st trimester serum from obese women with IUGR pregnancy outcomes vs. cells treated with serum from normal weight women with non-complicated pregnancies. RESULTS: IHC demonstrates that TNFa and IL-10 positive cells are localized in the rat mesometrial triangle (MT) at both gestational ages. Milliplex Protein Assay revealed a significant increase in the levels of TNFa at GD18 in the HFD uterine tissue compared to control diet rat uterine tissue. Human trophoblast invasion assays revealed that serum from obese women with IUGR outcomes reduced the capacity of trophoblast to invade compared to serum from normal weight with healthy fetal outcomes. CONCLUSIONS: Maternal obesity induces a pro-inflammatory uterine environment in our obese rat model which is associated with reduced fetal growth and reduced trophoblast invasion. A human cell line treated with serum from an obese pregnancy with IUGR demonstrated reduced trophoblast invasion. These findings suggest that obesity influences uterine immune environment and has the capacity to alter trophoblast invasion in rats. In humans, factors in serum from obese pregnant women can also influence trophoblast invasion, suggesting that obesity has the potential to disrupt normal trophoblast physiology and ultimately altering fetal growth potential.  Female Sprague Dawley rats were fed either a HF diet (45% kcal from fat) or a control diet (C, 10% kcal from fat) for 4 weeks before conception and throughout pregnancy. At 20 days of gestation, pregnant rats were sacrificed and the placentae collected. Real-time PCR was used to measure mRNA levels of inflammatory proteins known to be regulated by the transcription factor, NF-kB, which is the intracellular mediator of TLR signaling. Expression of downstream TLR adaptor proteins was determined by Western blot. RESULTS: Our preliminary data reveal a marked increase in the protein expression of MYD88, an adaptor molecule of TLR signaling, in HF dams compared to C (p < .05). TLR-4 mRNA levels were increased 2.5 fold (p < .05) in the placentae of HF dams, while there was no difference in the mRNA expression of TLR-2. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) mRNA levels were increased 9.4 fold in the placenta of HF dams compared to C (p < .05). Relative to C, placentae of HF dams displayed a trend toward increased mRNA levels (1.7 fold) of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), another downstream target of TLRs and an enzyme responsible for the formation of prostanoids such as prostaglandin and thromboxane. CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that increased expression of TLR-4 and activation of TLR signaling accompanies placental inflammation under conditions of chronic maternal intake of a high fat diet. Next, we aim to confirm that TLR-4 mediates placental inflammation and to determine if FAs and oxidized lipoproteins are the ligands that activate TLR-4 signaling in the placenta. Specifically, these studies were performed using in vitro cultures of human uterine myocytes. Control and stimulated cells (containing 1 -100 ng/ mL of LPS) were incubated in 6-well plates for 12, 24, and 48 hours. Subsequently, the cell homogenate underwent ELISA analysis for the IL-6 cytokine production. Cells stimulated with 100 ng/mL of LPS were also analyzed for TLR4 inhibition with CLI-095 (a TLR4 receptor blocker). These cells underwent ELISA analysis for both the IL-6 and MCP-1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein). Western Blotting was utilized to confirm TLR4 protein expression. RESULTS: Based on multiple sets of experiments, these studies demonstrated significantly increased expression of IL-6 after 12, 24, and 48 hours (p<0.05) in the culture cell homogenate. Significantly increased expression of IL-6 was also demonstrated with increasing concentration of LPS at 1ng/mL, 10ng/mL and 100ng/mL (p<0.05). When TLR4 is blocked by CLI-095, the IL-6 (p<0.05) and MCP-1 expression is significantly reduced compared to the controlled cells after 48 hours. Western Blotting also visually confirmed the detection of TLR4 protein within these cells. These data are consistent with the presence of functional TLR4 receptors on the surface of human smooth muscle myocytes. CONCLUSIONS: These studies have confirmed a direct innate immune response by uterine smooth muscle myocytes; a response that potentially contributes to the mechanisms leading to infection and inflammation associated preterm delivery. The underlying cause of recurrent miscarriages (RM) remains unexplained in 50-75% after diagnostic tests. A multifactorial etiology, including uterine anomalies, endocrine and metabolic factors, maternal autoimmune disorders and thrombophilia, toxic factors (smoking and alcohol) and genetics is assumed. Currently it is still unclear what specific genes are involved. Many hypothesis-based candidate gene studies have been performed to identify involved polymorphisms. The aim of this study was to create an overview of the genetic variants that are reproducibly associated with RM. A systematic review and meta-analysis was performed. PubMed, Embase and Web of Science were searched for studies that assessed the association between unexplained RM (defined as two or more miscarriages) and genetic variants. Genetic variants significantly associated with RM in at least two independent studies were considered as reproduced variants and were included in this study. The association between RM and genes was shown at the allele level and a pooled odds ratio was estimated in a random-effects model. A sub analysis was performed for the association between three or more consecutive miscarriages and genetic variants. The literature search yielded 3574 articles. A total of 99 articles, comprising 173 studies, were included in this meta-analysis. We identified 18 reproduced genetic variants, of which 12 remained significantly associated with RM in a random-effects meta-analysis: F2, FVL, HLA-G, IFN-gamma, IL-18, MTHFR (two variants), PAI-1 , STAT3, TNF-alpha and VEGF (two variants). Odds ratios for these 12 variants ranged between 1.20 to 2.64. Three or more consecutive miscarriages were significantly associated with variants in FVL, MTHFR and VEGF. CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis found 12 genetic variants associated with RM. The majority of these variants are also associated with cardiovascular disease, suggesting that RM and cardiovascular disease share common causal pathways. The identified genes can contribute to disentangle RM in future. Hypertensive pregnancy disorders (HPDs) are a risk factor for coronary heart disease (CHD) and hypertension. However, it is not known whether a woman's pregnancy history also provides information about her siblings future disease risk. METHODS: This is a secondary analysis of a study examining the genetics of hypertension. White, black, and Hispanic siblings were recruited from families in which at least 2 siblings developed hypertension before age 60. This analysis includes all sibships with at least one parous woman, and at least one other sibling. Participants completed questionnaires regarding personal, pregnancy and family medical history. Blood pressure and serum analytes were measured. Hazard ratios were calculated to examine the effect of a sibling history of HPDs on future disease risk. RESULTS: Compared to men from families in which no sister had a HPD, men whose sister(s) had a HPD were more likely to have hypertension or a CHD event. A sibling history of HPDs was not associated with altered disease risk in women who did not have a HPD. Type I Interferon Stimulated Genes in First-Trimester Human Trophoblast Cells. Jared J Romero, Natalia P Smirnova, Russell V Anthony, Thomas R Hansen. Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA. INTRODUCTION: During early pregnancy, interferon (IFN) stimulated genes (ISGs) such as ISG15 have been shown to be up-regulated in human, baboon, cattle, sheep, and mouse endometrium, and we find ISG15 expression in first trimester human placenta. It has been hypothesized that Type I IFN induces ISGs in cultured decidual cells and that either IFN or interleukin 6 (IL6) activates ISGs in human trophoblast cells. To test this hypothesis, two first-trimester human trophoblast cell lines (ACH-3P and Swan 71) were cultured with these cytokines and analyzed by RTPCR. Statistical significance was set at P<0.05. RESULTS: Swan 71 cells had greater baseline ISG15 mRNA concentrations than ACH-3P cells. Culture with IFN (0.1, 1 and 10 ng/ ml) increased Swan 71 and ACH-3P cell ISG15 mRNA concentrations by ~3-fold and ~20-fold, respectively. SWAN 71 and ACH-3P cells had detectable IL6 mRNA concentrations, but IL6 was not affected by culture with IFN. Likewise culture of these cells with IL6 had no effect on ISG mRNA concentrations. IFN-induced signal transducers and other ISGs were examined to confirm induction by IFN. The response of ACH-3P cells to activation by IFN was more robust than the response in Swan 71 cells. In ACH-3P cells cultured with IFN, mRNA concentrations were up-regulated for signal transducer and activators of transcription (STAT) 1 & 2, interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 7 and 9 (but not IRF3) and ISGs in addition to ISG15: Dead (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide (DDX58; aka RIG-I) and IFN induced with helicase C (IFIH1; aka MDA5). CONCLUSIONS: It is concluded that human trophoblast cells are able to respond to IFN through induction of ISGs. The present studies implicate IFN in the induction of ISGs in trophoblast cell lines derived from firsttrimester placenta. IL6 appears not to be involved with induction of ISGs or IFN signal transduction genes in human trophoblast cells. IL6 may induce pathways and responses that are distinct from IFN, which could be predicted based on action through a G-protein coupled receptor, rather than a JAK/STAT coupled receptor. Regardless, these studies provide support to the suggestion that IFN and ISGs are induced and contribute to maternal-placental interactions during the establishment of human pregnancy. This project was supported by Agriculture and Food Research Initiative Competitive Grants 2010 Grants -38420-203977, 2011 and 2012-67015-30215 from the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture. Efficacy of a Parallelized Oxygenator Circuit in a Pumpless Artificial Placenta. Extremely premature infants require intensive mechanical ventilation after birth. However, urgent transition of the respiratory and circulatory systems from fetal to neonatal life frequently expose them to critical respiratory and circulatory insufficiencies. Development of a pumpless artificial placenta may provide a potential alternative therapy to mechanical ventilation. Previous studies suggest that minimizing placental circuit resistance without compromising gas exchanging is essential to the development of this technology. To achieve these requirements, we developed the parallelized oxygenator circuit system. The aim of the current study was to compare the efficacy of a parallel circuit with a single oxygenator circuit using preterm lambs. METHODS: Pregnant Suffolk sheep underwent surgical delivery at 109-135 d gestation (term 147 d). Fetuses were exteriorized and two umbilical arteries and one umbilical vein were cannulated. In the parallelized circuit group (n=6), each arterial catheter was connected to one oxygenator separately with both outlet ends connected to the venous catheter. In the single circuit group (n=5), both arterial catheters were connected to one single oxygenator. Lambs were then delivered, submerged in a saline bath (39.5°C), and monitored until 60 hours after birth. Physiological parameters and blood chemical and gas data were recorded, and then compared for statistically significant differences between groups. RESULTS: Gestational age (mean ± SD) at delivery was significantly lower (130 ± 1.6 vs. 113 ± 1.1 d, p<0.05), survival time was longer (18.2 ± 3.2 vs. 53.7 ± 4.4 h, p<0.05), arterial pH was higher (7.24 ± 0.02 vs.7.45 ± 0.04, p<0.05), and minimum lactate level was lower (120.5 ± 33.5 vs. 36.4 ± 11.0 mg/dL, p<0.05) in the parallel group, compared with that in the single group. There were no significant differences in PO 2 , PCO 2 , circuit flow, circuit resistance, mean arterial pressure, and central venous pressure between the groups. CONCLUSIONS: Fetuses maintained on a parallelized oxygenator circuit showed remarkable improvements in essential physiological parameters. These data suggest that a parallelized oxygenator circuit improves the performance of a pumpless artificial placenta. We have proposed that, given the strong correlation between angiogenesis and neurogenesis, the placental chorionic vascular surface network, laid down principally by the mid trimester, would differ in structure in the context of autism, a disorder of neuronal connectivity. We begin to test this proposition in a small subset of a population based birth cohort. The Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) recruited mothers and newborns in Bristol, Avon, in 1991 Avon, in -1992 . Of a population of 86 cases diagnosed according to the time's criteria with autism, 31 cases with autism, 20 with special education needs, and 20 with normal neurodevelopment had placental photographs that allowed tracing of the arterial chorionic surface networks. A computer algorithm extracted features of the networks, including branch point numbers, branch angles, tortuosity, length, distance between vessels, distance from the vessel end point to the disk edge, and moments of these distributions. Factor analysis was performed for data reduction of 26 variables, and correlation considered p<0.05 significant after correction for multiple comparisons. RESULTS: 8, 7 and 7 factors were extracted from the 3 sets of arterial data. The factors accounted for between 85-90% of data variance in the 3 groups. No correlation was identified among any factors, consistent with differences in basic network organization among the 3 groups. CONCLUSIONS: Factors extracted in data reduction methods are linear combinations of weighted variables that account for data variance. The lack of correlation among factors among these groups is consistent with the hypothesis that there are basic differences in arterial network organization in placentas of children with normal neurodevelopment compared to two groups with abnormal neurodevelopment (special education needs without an autism diagnosis, and autism). This provides preliminary support for our hypothesis that early placental angiogenesis, as measured in the chorionic surface vascular network, may mark early alterations in developmental trajectory that may culminate in childhood neurodevelopmental pathology. score at birth, days of neonatal hospitalization and need of admission in NICU. Unpaired t-test, Mann-Whitney U test, Fisher's exact test and Kruskal-Wallis test were used for statistical analysis. The study sample consisted of 455 pregnancies who met the inclusion criteria: 160 AGA newborn with declined intrauterine growth (cases) and 295 AGA who maintain or improve growth trend as controls. No difference was noted with respect to maternal age, pregravidic and gravidic maternal BMI, parity, gestational age at delivery, neonatal gender, birth weight and Apgar Score. A higher incidence of delivery by caesarean section (p=0.0280), a higher number of days of neonatal hospitalization (p=0.005) and a greater need of admission in NICU (p=0.0161) were observed between cases and controls. The past data showed that US fetal growth monitoring may have a value in fetuses classified as adequate for gestational age if they have shown a decline in fetal growth trend from mid trimester to the term of pregnancy. Independently of neonatal birth weight, even this group of fetuses, who failed to reach their growth potential, represents a high risk category. An accurate identification allows to an adequate prenatal management near term and a prompt neonatal intervention. INTRODUCTION: Impaired placentation is thought to underlie most cases of early Intrauterine Growth Restriction (IUGR). Our aim was to identify key pathological characteristics of placentas from pregnancies complicated by early intrauterine growth restriction, and to examine their relations with maternal hypertensive disease and umbilical artery Doppler waveform abnormalities. Single-center retrospective cohort study of pregnancies with abnormal umbilical artery Doppler flow patterns resulting in a live birth <34 weeks of a baby with a weight <10th percentile for gestational age. Umbilical artery end diastolic flow was classified as being either present or absent/reversed (AREDF). Data were stratified into intrauterine growth restriction with or without hypertensive disease and pathological characteristics were compared between these various conditions according to predefined scoring criteria. RESULTS: Among 164 placentas studied, we found high rates of characteristic histopathological features that were associated with intrauterine growth restriction, including infarction (>5% in 42%), chronic villitis (21%), chronic inflammation of membranes (36%), membrane necrosis (20%), elevated nucleated red blood cells (89%), increased syncytial knotting (93%), increased villous maturation (98%), fetal thrombosis (32%) and distal villous hypoplasia (35%). Chronic inflammation of fetal membranes and syncytial knotting were more common in women with concomitant hypertensive disease as compared to women with normotensive IUGR (p <0.05). Placentas from women with umbilical artery AREDF were more likely to show increased numbers of nucleated red blood cells and distal villous hypoplasia (p <0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Placentas of women with early IUGR show high rates of several histological aberrations. Concomitant preeclampsia is associated with inflammatory changes and umbilical artery AREDF with signs of chronic hypoxia. Antinuclear Antibodies (ANA) in Recurrent Pregnancy Loss (RPL). ANA are a group of autoantibodies whose clinical significance is still unclear. In a recent study we detected a 3-fold higher prevalence in patients with RPL compared to controls. We aimed to identify the antigenic targets of ANA expressed in the sera of these patients and to clarify in a mouse model the mechanisms of ANA-mediated tissue injury. We suppose that immune complexes (IC) precipitating in placental district lead to complement activation and recruitment of inflammatory cells, creating a local inflammatory amplification loop. METHODS: Identification of the antigenic target. Antigenic specificity was tested by western blot (WB) strips containing 15 antigens on sera from 24 RPL patients and 8 controls.Visual observation of pregnancy outcome. At day 9 of pregnancy mice were treated with ANA IgG purified from serum of RPL women and sacrificed at day 15. The number of viable and resorbed embryos was recorded visually. The weight of embryos and placentae was registered. Identification of mechanisms for ANA-mediated injury. Complement factors were analyzed in mice sera and immunohistochemical analysis from decidua and renal tissues was performed to assess IC precipitation and C3 deposition. No antigenic specificity was identified by WB. Examination of the uteri showed similar numbers of implantation sites in the 2 group, indicating that ANA did not affect fertility. The percentage of embryos resorption was nearly 3-fold higher in ANA treated-mice compared to controls. Placental and embryos weight did not differ between the two group. Immunohistochemical analyses showed a different pattern of complement activation in the 2 group. CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggest that the detection of ANA in RPL women could be of value in identifying subjects with potential immune abnormalities which could benefit from specific therapy during pregnancy. Expression of MiR-548 Family MiRNAs Were Down-Regulated in Preeclamptic Placentas. Yuping Wang, Yang Gu, Lynn J Groome. Obstetrics & Gynecology, LSU Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, LA, USA. Several studies have shown that deregulation of miRNAs is involved in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. The purpose of this study was to determine differences in miRNA expression profiles between normal and preeclamptic (PE) placentas. A total of 18 placentas were used in this study, 9 from normal pregnancies and 9 from PE. Total RNA from placental villous tissue was extracted using TRIzol reagent and RNA quality and quantity were assessed by Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. miRNA expression was determined by Affymetric GeneChip 2.0 miRNA Array platform, which detects a set of 1,105 mature human miRNA transcripts. miRNA expression profiles were then analyzed by GenSifter and miRNA associated gene networks were analyzed by Ingenuity. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) was also performed on selected miRNAs and U6 (small nuclear RNA) expression was determined as the internal control for each sample. RESULTS: A total of 42 miRNAs with > 2-fold up-regulation or > 2-fold down-regulation with a 95% significance (p<0.05) was identified between normal and PE placentas. Among them, 6 miRNAs were up-regulated and 36 miRNAs were down-regulated in PE placentas compared to normal placentas. In PE placentas, up-regulated miRNAs include miR-210 and miR-33b, and down-regulated miRNAs include miR-488, miR-155, miR-221, and miR-510, etc. Moreover, among the 36 down-regulated miRNAs in PE placentas, 6 of them belong to the miR-548 family. They are miR-548a,miR-548c, miR-548u, miR-548x, miR-570, and miR-603. Ingenuity analysis showed that all of the down-regulated miR-548 miRNAs are designated to the network pathway 1, which links to genes such as TP53, NFkB, PTPRM (phosphatase), and BAP1 (peptidase), etc. Increased miR-210 expression and decreased miR-548c and miR-488 expression in PE placentas were confirmed by qRT-PCR. CONCLUSIONS: Different miRNA expression profiles were identified between normal and PE placentas. Since down-regulation of miR-548c was found to be a signature in leukocytes from cardiomyopathy patients, down-regulation of miR-548 family miRNA expression is expected to play an important role in the placental dysfunction in PE. Hypoxia plays an important role in placental trophoblast differentiation and function during early pregnancy. Hypoxiainducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1a) regulates cellular adaption to hypoxic conditions in the early pregnancy. However, our current understanding of the role of HIF1a in trophoblast physiology is far from complete. Metastasis Associated Protein 1 and 3 (MTA1 and MTA3) are highly expressed in term placental trophoblasts. The role of MTA1 and MTA3 in the hypoxic placental environment of early pregnancy is unknown. In the present study, we conducted Immunohistochemistry to examine the expression of MTA1, MTA3 and HIF1a expression in the first trimester placental trophoblast. We also conduct western blot to check the dynamic change of MTA1, MTA3 and HIF1a in trophoblast cell line HTR8/SVneo after hypoxia treatment. Furthermore, we over-expressed MTA1 and MTA3 in HTR8/SVneo cells and investigated their effect on HIF1a expression. RESULTS: We found that MTA1 and MTA3 were co-localized with HIF1a in the placental trophoblast of 1st trimester placenta, suggesting the potential roles of MTA1 and MTA3 in the hypoxic environment of early pregnancy. Next, we found that hypoxia treatment induced MTA1, MTA3 and HIF1a in trophoblast cells in the protein level. Last, we found that overexpression of MTA1 and MTA3 up-regulated HIF1a level after hypoxia treatment in trophoblast. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, induced by hypoxic treatment, both MTA1 and MTA3 regulate HIF1a expression in trophoblasts, suggesting that MTA1 and MTA3 are critical in the hypoxia response cascade in the placental trophoblast of early pregnancy. Results were compared between those with (group 1) and without (group 2) intraoperative findings.Intraoperative findings included cord entanglement, placental abruption, true knots, short cord, uterine rupture/dehiscence and cord prolapse. Placental lesions were classified to lesions related to maternal underperfusion, lesions consistent with fetal thrombo-occlusive disease and maternal (MIR) and fetal (FIR) inflammatory responses. Neonatal outcome consisted of Apgar score ≤7 at 5 min, cord blood pH≤7.1 and a composite of sepsis, transfusion, ventilation, hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, phototherapy, or death. RESULTS: Intraoperative findings were observed in 49.5% of 543 ECS (group 1, n=273). Those included cord entanglements in 66.6%, placental abruptions in 22.6%, true knots in 4.4%, short cord in 4.4%, uterine rupture&dehiscence in 3.7%, and cord prolapse in 0.75%. Placental lesions were more common in group 2 (n= 270) compared to group 1; higher rate of lesions related to maternal underperfusion, vascular lesions, 9.1% vs. 4.1%, p=0.012 , villous changes, 39.2% vs. 30.7%, p=0.047, and lesions consistent with fetal thrombo-occlusive disease (villous changes), 13.6% vs. 7.4%, P=0.024, respectively. Inflammatory lesions, MIR and FIR, were also more common in group 2 (p=0.033, p=0.001). Neonatal outcome did not differ between the groups.  Endothelial-dependent and independent-vascular function of mesenteric arteries was assessed using an isometric myograph. Female apo E-/-mice were treated with caffeine (10µg/ day) via drinking water for 7 days. Plasma ADMA, SDMA, arginine, cholesterol, triglycerides and blood pressure were measured. Data were analyzed by repeated measures ANOVA or t-test with significance at p<0.05. RESULTS: Caffeine treated and control apo E-/-mice showed no difference in cholesterol levels. ADMA was significantly lower in caffeine treated mice (0.09±0.04 vs. 0.24±0.05µmol/L, p<0.01). There was no difference in blood pressure prior to caffeine treatment between groups, but blood pressure was significantly lower in caffeine treated (119±4/88±5) compared to control mice (134±5/104±5 mmHg, p<0.05). Methacholine-induced endothelial-dependent relaxation was significantly improved in arteries from caffeine treated mice (35±5%) compared to control mice (49±5%, p<0.05). Endothelial-dependent relaxation was not different between arteries from caffeine treated and control mice in the presence of the nitric oxide synthase inhibitor L-NAME. Similarly, endothelial-independent relaxation in response to nitroprusside was not different between arteries from caffeine treated and control mice. CONCLUSIONS: Acute caffeine treatment in female apo E-/-mice is associated with lower ADMA, a decrease in blood pressure and a significant improvement in endothelial-dependent relaxation in the absence of changes in circulating cholesterol. The potential beneficial effects of coffee consumption on cardiovascular risk and preeclampsia may be related to changes in the metabolism of ADMA. This project supported by National Institutes of Health grant R01-HL091094. Caffeine Coffee is one of the most widely consumed beverages in the world. Coffee consumption is associated with a significant decreased risk of CVD and a decreased risk of preeclampsia, however the mechanism behind this relationship is unknown. Caffeine is the most studied compound in coffee. Caffeine acutely activates 5'-adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (PKA) and acts as an adenosine receptor blocker. Asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) is an endogenous inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase and metabolized primarily by the enzyme DDAH1. ADMA is an independent risk factor of CVD and significantly elevated in preeclampsia. The focus of this study was to investigate if caffeine exposure affects DDAH expression and ADMA levels in endothelial cells. The effect of caffeine on DDAH expression and activity was investigated in endothelial cells in-vitro. Endothelial cell DDAH expression, protein and activity and ADMA were measured. Data were analyzed by ANOVA or t-test with significance at p<0.05. RESULTS: Caffeine significantly increased the expression of DDAH1 in endothelial cells in a dose dependent manner with a maximum 2-fold increase in expression with 50µmol/L caffeine. Caffeine (50µmol/L) significantly increased DDAH1 protein in endothelial cells (180% compared to control, p<0.05) and increased DDAH activity 0.4nmol citrulline/mg protein compared to control, 0.22nmol citrulline/mg protein, p<0.05. Caffeine significantly decreased ADMA in endothelial cells, 1.5µmol/L compared to control, 2.2µmol/L; and increased nitrite levels 250nmol/L compared ton control, 126nmol/L, p<0.05. The PKA inhibitors H89 and PKI (5-24) blocked the effects of caffeine on DDAH and ADMA. CONCLUSIONS: Caffeine consumption is associated with a significant decrease in risk of CVD and preeclampsia, however the mechanism is unknown. Caffeine exposure in-vitro is associated with increased DDAH expression and lower ADMA, a CVD risk factor. The potential beneficial effects of coffee consumption on cardiovascular risk and preeclampsia may be related to changes in the metabolism of ADMA. This project supported by National Institutes of Health grant R01-HL091094. were compared by Pearson's chi-square test to determine relatedness. RESULTS: There was significant overlap between genes down-regulated in CVS-PE and genes increased in the LSE and early IUP DEC (p<0.0001). Some of the 14 genes in common among the 3 groups included classic DEC genes such as IGFBP-1, PAEP, GNLY and SCARA5. There was no significant association between genes down-regulated in CVS-PE and EM genes regulated by TR-conditioned media (p=0.7). CONCLUSIONS: Although impaired trophoblast function has been implicated in the etiology of PE, the present results raise the possibility that deficient (pre) DEC may contribute to or be a proximal event in disease etiology. history of PE were younger at intervention and at survey completion.  Women undergoing intervention for symptomatic RA-FMD reported a prevalence of PE that exceeds a general population risk by an order of magnitude. These results support the histological similarities between the two diseases. Given the rarity of RA-FMD and late onset of its clinical presentation, PE registry cohorts should be investigated further to characterize the etiology and mechanistic relationships between PE and RA-FMD. Since the 95th percentile of the UtA mean RI increases throughout pregnancy,more women in group1 were recognized as having an abnormal UtA velocimetry at the ≥25wks Doppler evaluation than the <25wks assessment. CONCLUSIONS: A persistently abnormal UtA velocimetry relates to an approximately 2-fold increase in the risk of sPE and SGA development in our high risk pregnant population.Our study supports the concept of placentation as a dynamic process,sometimes requiring a longer time to be completed.Patients with late normalisation of UtA waveforms might just have a delayed,although still functional,completion of placentation. In turn,a more intensive obstetric surveillance should be considered in women showing persistently abnormal UtA velocimetry,due to their higher risk of adverse pregnancy outcome. Formerly preeclamptic women (fPE) have an increased risk for end stage renal disease. It is unknown whether this is caused by PE itself, or by common risk factors. Sparse data show that hypertensive fPE have abnormalities in renal hemodynamics, as a possible pathway for renal risk. We hypothesized that also healthy normotensive women with a history of early-onset PE have an unfavorable renal hemodynamic profile. As renal hemodynamics are closely linked with sodium homeostasis, we studied this in relation to sodium intake. METHODS: We studied 18 fPE and 18 controls (age: 36±5 y), all normotensive without co-morbidity, during low sodium (LS; 50 mmol Na + /d) and high sodium intake (HS; 200 mmol Na + /d). At the end of each diet week, MAP and renal hemodynamics (glomerular filtration rate (GFR, 125 I-iothalamate clearance), effective renal plasma flow (ERPF, 131 I-hippuran clearance), filtration fraction (FF; GFR/ERPF)) were measured at baseline and during graded angiotensin II infusion (ang II). RESULTS: Although HS induced a higher MAP in both groups (p<0.001), no differences in MAP were found at baseline between fPE and controls (LS: 83±7 vs 81±8 mmHg; HS: 85±8 vs 86±9 mmHg, p>0.3). Also during ang II, MAP was not significantly different between the groups (p>0.2). fPE showed a significantly higher FF during HS compared to LS, while controls did not. Moreover, FF in fPE tended to be higher compared to controls during HS (fig 1) . During ang II on HS, the difference in FF between the groups was even more pronounced. Change in FF during HS was independent of MAP (r=0.1;p=0.6). CONCLUSIONS: Normotensive fPE women without co-morbidity show abnormalities in renal hemodynamics elicited by HS, suggesting PE itself induces renal abnormalities. It could be hypothesized that dietary sodium restriction has the potential to prevent part of the renal risk after PE. Preeclampsia Model Mouse Using CD40L Gene Delivery Affects Immune Reaction. Yuka Uchikura, Keiichi Matsubara, Yuko Matsubara, Miki Mori, Akihiro Nawa. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ehime University School of Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan. INTRODUCTION: Gene delivery and cytokine injection after conception have been used to generate preeclampsia (PE) model mice. However, these model mice cannot be used to investigate the beginning of PE pathogenesis because early pregnancy is a critical period for PE pathogenesis. It is known that the CD40 ligand (CD40L) is expressed on T cells and regulates the immune system, including helper T cells. CD40L also plays an important role in the antigen-antibody interaction. We succeeded in developing a new breed of PE model mouse with the early pregnancy period using CD40L gene-transfected blastocysts, and we examined the immune reaction in the model mouse. Blastocysts were obtained from uterine horns of ICR female pregnant mice (10 -12 weeks old) after PMSG and hCG peritoneal injection. The blastocysts were incubated with an adenovirus including the CD40L gene and transferred into the uterine horns of pseudopregnant ICR mice. Blood pressure was measured using the tail cuff method and urine samples were collected using a metabolism cage from the 5th day disorders is not fully understood. There is conflicting data on the value of platelet parameters such as MPV as a diagnostic tool for preeclampsia. We investigated if MPV can distinguish Severe Preeclampsia, Classic and Atypical HELLP Syndrome from controls; and evaluate its role as a predictor for these disorders. VEGFR-1 blockade did not affect implantation or maintenance of pregnancy up to E10.5, but did correlate with a significant reduction in decidual macrophage and vessel density (Fig. 2) . CONCLUSIONS: VEGFR-1 is required for macrophage recruitment and decidual angiogenesis, but not the establishment and/or maintenance of pregnancy. Our data suggest that inhibition of VEGFR-1 function in EC results in reduced macrophage recruitment. Expression (TSC-22) is a tumor suppressor gene and its expression is lost in advanced tumors. TSC-22 belongs to a family of transcription factors composed of four major homologues in mammals Gilz, Thg1 and KIAA0669. Although TSC-22 was first isolated as a TGF-b response gene, regulation of its expression is likely to be complex. Various other signalling pathways including progesterone, epidermal growth factor and follicle-stimulating hormone also regulate TSC-22 transcription. Recent studies have shown that Gilz is essential for germ cell development and fertility. The aim of this study was to analyze the role of TSC22 in reproductive tract development and fertility. We perform whole mount in situ hybridization to analyse expression of TSC22 in reproductive tract organs at the various stages of development. Immunohistochemical techniques were used to confirm cellular expression of TSC22 protein. To understand functional role of this gene in reproductive organs, TSC22 gene knockout mice were developed and analysed. RESULTS: Examination of TSC22 expression in embryonic tissues revealed strong expression of TSC22 mRNA in gonads (both sexes) and Müllerian duct (a precursor of female reproductive tract organs). TSC22 protein was highly expressed in adult ovary, oviduct and uterus. In ovary, TSC22 protein was detected in granulosa cells at all the stages of follicular development and corpus luteum. In oviduct, TSC22 protein was mainly localized in epithelial cells. In contrast, its expression was limited to the stromal cells of the uterus. Female reproductive tracts of TSC22 knockout mice were smaller compared to controls. Nonetheless, younger TSC22 mutant female mice showed no appreciable defects in their fertility. We are planning to examine reproductive functions of aged TSC22 mutant and control mice. CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that TSC22, a novel tumour suppressor gene, is uniquely expressed in embryonic and adult reproductive organs in mice. The reproductive organs of TSC22 knockout mice were smaller but showed no obvious pathologies. Other three family members (Gilz, Thg1 and KIAA0669) might compensate for TSC22 in mutant mice. INTRODUCTION: Uterine receptivity and implantation require a complex cascade of endocrine and paracrine interactions. In particular, angiogenesis is critical to support placental vascularization and modulation of proinflammatory cytokines must occur to avert miscarriage. Previous studies from our laboratories have established that the gap junction protein connexin (Cx) 43 is induced by decidualization and plays an important role in the maintenance of endometrial angiogenesis and differentiation. METHODS: Human endometrial stromal cell cultures were prepared from proliferative-phase eutopic biopsies of fertile participants using established methods. The cells were induced to undergo decidualization by exposure to 10 nM estradiol, 100 nM progesterone and 0.5 mM cAMP (E/P/c). Gap junctions, measured by Western blotting, were inhibited by 50 mM 18a-glycyrrhetinic acid (AGA), 1.5 mM octanol or Cx43 shRNA. Cx43 overexpression was induced by recombinant vector transfection. VEGF and IL-6 mRNA and protein were quantified by qRT-PCR and ELISA, respectively. RESULTS: VEGF mRNA and protein expression were upregulated >2-fold after treatment with E/P/c, and these were inhibited by 50-75% when co-incubated with AGA, octanol or Cx 43 shRNA. Cx43 overexpression vectors increased steady-state Cx43 protein levels 5-fold and caused a 15-fold increase in secreted VEGF, even in the absence of E/P/c. By contrast, gap junction interference upregulated IL-6 >2-fold, whereas Cx43 overexpression prevented IL-6 production. All results were statistically significant (P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: In decidualized human endometrial stromal cells, pharmacological inhibition of gap junctions or genetic ablation of Cx43 expression prevented hormone-induced stromal differentiation, reduced VEGF and increased IL-6 secretion. By contrast, overexpression of Cx43 protein upregulated stromal cell VEGF secretion and prevented IL-6 production in the absence of decidualizing hormones. These combined results support the hypothesis that gap junctions, and the low molecular weight metabolites that traverse them, are both necessary and sufficient to sustain these biomarkers of decidualization. Supported by the NIH U54HD55787. Ovarian Hormones Modify Cell Cycle Dynamics, Apoptosis and Telomere Length in Primary Human Endometrial Stromal Cells. Jie Yu, Sarah L Berga, Abril Salinas, Erika Johnston-MacAnanny, Robert N Taylor. Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. Phasic endometrial growth is regulated by ovarian hormones across the menstrual cycle. Although the epithelial layer has the greatest contact with the external environment and is the initial site of embryo adhesion, the underlying stromal cells provide critical mesenchymal and vascular support and regulate the uterine mucosa via paracine factors. We have focused on stromal cells as integrators of physiological and pathophysiological endometrial proliferation. METHODS: Primary human endometrial stromal cell cultures were prepared from proliferative-phase eutopic biopsies of cycling, fertile participants using established methods. Cells were treated in vitro with physiological concentrations of estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P4) to mimic hormone replacement. Under some conditions, cAMP was added to promote decidualization. Cell proliferation was estimated using a tetrazolium dye (MTS) absorption assay and flow cytometry was used to quantify chromosome copy number as a marker of cell cycle dynamics. Expression of PCNA and cleaved caspase 3 proteins were detected by Western blotting. Telomere length was precisely determined using realtime qPCR that simultaneously compared amplified telomeres to singlecopy human 36B4 gene sequences. Different hormone conditions were compared by ANOVA with Fisher's PLSD for post hoc analyses. P<0.05 was accepted as significant. RESULTS: E2 stimulated proliferation, as indicated by MTS and PCNA. By contrast, E2+P4+cAMP x 7 d reduced apoptosis, based on caspase 3 and sub-G1 flow cytometry. Mean±SE stromal cell telomere length (6670±141 bp) increased progressively and was maximal (10485±396 bp) with 10 nM E2 for 7 d. E2+P4+cAMP also yielded long telomeres (10282±933 bp, P<0.05 compared to control), whereas combinations of E2+P4 resulted in slightly shorter telomere lengths (9066±131 bp). CONCLUSIONS: Primary human endometrial cell cultures provide a useful model to study endocrine regulation of the cell cycle, including proliferation, apoptosis and telomere modification, relevant to aspects of endometriosis, hormone therapy and endometrial hyperplasia and carcinogenesis. Supported by NIH grant U01HD66439. Ectopic pregnancies represent 1-2% of all pregnancies and are a medical emergency. Current methotrexate protocols can resolve smaller ectopic pregnancies (pretreatment serum hCG <3000 IU/L), but its efficacy decreases with larger ectopic pregnancies. Therefore, only 25-30% of ectopic pregnancies are suitable for medical therapy and most are treated surgically. Placenta is critically dependent on Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) signalling. We recently reported preclinical and phase I studies suggesting combination methotrexate and gefitinib (orally available EGFR inhibitor) may be safe and efficacious in resolving ectopic pregnancies, with potentially better efficacy than methotrexate. We set out to undertake a phase II study, treating women with larger ectopic pregnancies with combination methotrexate and gefitinib. We performed a phase II single arm, multicentre (Edinburgh and 2 centres in Melbourne) clinical trial. We set out to recruit 28 women with ectopic pregnancies, treating them with Methotrexate (50 mg/m2) and seven daily doses of oral gefitinib (250mg/tab). Primary outcomes was whether or not the treatment resolved the ectopic pregnancy. We also obtained data on time to cure and safety.The sample size provides power to show a success rate of 90%, and efficacy >70%. RESULTS: So far, we have recruited 18 participants. Treatment is ongoing for 1 participant, meaning 17 cases were available for analysis. The median pretreatment (25-75th centiles) serum hCG levels was 2033 IU/L (1578-2834). 4 had a pretreatment hCG >3000 IU/L and the highest pretreatment hCG was 7551 IU/L. 15 were successfully treated (2 required surgery), giving an interim rate of success of 88% (15/17). The median (25-75th centiles) time to resolution was 30 days (25-39). The treatment was well tolerated with no serious adverse events. Recruiting is ongoing. CONCLUSIONS: Combination methotrexate and gefitinib may be an efficacious medical treatment option for tubal ectopic pregnancies with a pretreatment serum hCG between 1000-10000 IU/L. Mitochondrial Proteomic Profiling Reveals Lineage-Specific Expression Patterns in Eggs Versus Somatic Cells. Krystal Trull, Cleo Szmygiel, Dori C Woods, Jonathan L Tilly. Department of Biology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. INTRODUCTION: Mitochondria are critical for many aspects of cell function. The human mitochondrial genome itself encodes only 37 proteins, and thus the vast majority of mitochondrial proteins are encoded by nuclear genes. Although mitochondria are often viewed as rather 'generic" across cell types, cell lineage-specific functions of mitochondria have been reported. However, it is unclear if different functions of mitochondria in different cells, including eggs which rely on mitochondrial function for successful fertilization and embryogenesis, are due to differences in nuclear-encoded genes transported into mitochondria. Here we employed a proteomic approach to screen for differences in mitochondrial protein profiles between eggs and various somatic cells. METHODS: Female C57Bl/6 mice at 2-3 months of age were used. Adult fibroblasts were generated from tail snips, and mature (metaphase-II) eggs were obtained following superovulation. Tissues representing distinct somatic lineages were also harvested, and mitochondrial isolation was performed following lysis on ice using a dounce homogenizer and a mitochondrial isolation kit (ThermoScientific). Mitochondrial proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE, and analyzed following silver staining on a BioRad ChemiDoc MP image analysis system. follicles. In mating trials, these females delivered healthy and normal YFP-expressing pups, which could only have originated from oocytes formed spontaneously in the ovaries during the Dox induction phase. Using what is considered the gold standard method for evaluating the function of stem cells in vivo, our fate mapping studies firmly establish that oocytes generated during adulthood contribute to female fertility under normal physiological conditions (Support: NIH R21-HD072280). Kisspeptin, the neuropeptide product of the Kiss1 gene, has a critical role in driving the hypothalamic-gonadal-pituitary (HPG) axis and fertility. Kisspeptin neurons are most abundant in the hypothalamus, particularly in the anteroventral periventricular nucleus (AVPV) and arcuate nucleus (Arc). These two populations mediate differential effects, with the Arc regulating negative feedback of sex steroids, and the AVPV regulating positive feedback. The latter is responsible for stimulating the preovulatory LH surge in females, and is consequently under circadian control. Little is known about the role or regulation hypothalamic Kiss1 during pregnancy. We aimed to characterise hypothalamic Kiss1 and Kiss1r mRNA expression in pregnant and nonpregnant mice, and determine whether it is under circadian control. METHODS: Using C57BL/6J mice, brains were collected at six circadian time points: 8am, 12pm, 4pm, 8pm, 12am, 4am at diestrus and proestrus of non-pregnant animals, and days 6, 10, 14 and 18 of pregnancy. Hypothalami were dissected into anterior (containing the AVPV) and posterior (containing the Arc) regions. mRNA levels for target genes Kiss1 and Kiss1r, as well as reference genes, were analysed using quantitative PCR. RESULTS: Analyses confirmed Kiss1 mRNA expression in the AVPV and Arc; quantitative assessment showed no indication of circadian regulation at diestrus or any of the pregnancy time points. During proestrus however, Kiss1 expression increased (2-fold; P<0.05) from 4pm to 8pm, coincident with the occurrence of the LH surge. Similarly, Kiss1r was detectable in both the anterior and posterior hypothalamus at all stages and time points; some variability was observed, however no clear circadian pattern was established. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our data are the first to show Kiss1 and Kiss1r expression in the maternal brain during pregnancy. The absence of circadian regulation of Kiss1 during pregnancy, in spite of high estradiol levels, may indicate a disruption of the normal circadian rhythm that operates in the non-pregnant state. Telomeres are non-coding tandem repeats that protect the ends of chromosomes and promote structural integrity. Shortened telomere lengths have been associated with adverse outcomes in women undergoing assisted reproductive technology. However, methods used to measure telomere lengths vary in accuracy and can be subject to misinterpretation. In a prospective cohort study, DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes of women with infertility. Mean telomere length was measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The telomere length for each sample is based on the telomere to single copy gene ratio (T/S ratio) [Ct(telomere)/Ct(single gene)]. Telomere length for each sample was calculated from the T/S ratio for each sample normalized to the reference sample. Telomere lengths of this cohort were compared to age matched controls using a standard curve generated from healthy human subjects. RESULTS: Twenty two women with unexplained infertility were prospectively evaluated and compared to age matched controls (N=298). Five patients had a secondary diagnosis of polycystic ovarian syndrome. There was no decrement in telomere length of infertile patients concomitant with increasing age nor were there infertile patients with very short telomere lengths defined as one standard deviation below the mean. Infertile patients in their third decade had a mean telomere length range of 8.1-8.4 kilobase (kb) compared to a telomere length range of 7.3-10.9 kb in their fifth decade. In logarithmic modeling, telomere length of the infertile cohort did not decrease with increasing age, as seen in the control group. CONCLUSIONS: Methods used to measure telomere lengths can vary in accuracy and can be affected by multiple processing and analytical factors. In this cohort of general infertility patients, a shortening of telomere lengths as has been previously reported in the literature was not detected. PRAE, NICHD, NIH. Thus, unbalances in maternal pro-and anti-inflammatory status can lead to pregnancy disorders. Here, we identified myeloid cell populations in blood and decidua at various gestational ages (GA) and compared phenotypes and distributions in syn-and allogeneic pregnancies. METHODS: Female FVB/N (q haplotype) were mated with FVB/N (syngeneic, n=12) or BALB/c (d haplotype, allogeneic, n=4) male mice. Blood and deciduas were collected at E9.5,10.5, and 11.5. Using multiparameter flow cytometry, myeloid cells in maternal blood and uterine natural killer (uNK) cells in decidua were identified by cell size and surface markers: neutrophils (CD11b + Gr-1 Hi ), monocytes/macrophages (CD11b + Gr-1 Lo ), NK cells (NKp46 + CD122 + ), uNK cells (DBA + ). Phenotypes were typed by expression of CD68, CD11C, CD14, F4/80, CD115, CD206, etc. Cell distributions were expressed as percentages of total CD45 + leukocytes. RESULTS: In syngeneic pregnancies, significantly more neutrophils (23.8 vs 12.5%, p<0.001) and monocytes (5.1 vs 3.7%, p<0.01) were found at E9.5-11.5 vs non-pregnant control blood. NK cells, used as non-myeloid controls, showed no change at all GAs. In allogeneic pregnancies, neutrophils were significant lower (15.5 vs 23.8%, p<0.001) than syngeneic pregnancies, while monocytes were not different. In the placenta, total number of myeloid and uNK cells were 70-80% of all decidual leukocytes. At E9.5-11.5, these populations displayed dynamic changes. CD11b + cells (neutrophils, macrophage, dendritic cells) decreased (50-25%), while uNK cells increased (20-45%). At E11.5, allogeneic deciduas had more uNK cells (60%) and less myeloid cells (12.5%) than syngeneic deciduas (45% and 25%, respectively). 
