15d12c3555269e228f8fdeaedc064ec760646ba5
LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION Organizers
Charles Janeway James Allison Jonathan  Sprent 


The longterm persistence of memory cells within the immune system seems to be largely brought about by intermittent restimulation of these cells. Our experiments and those of others have illustrated the central role that antigen depots play in the continuance of this stimulation. For non-replicating antigens (ie. not viral) the most important sites of storage are on the surface of follicular dendritic cells (FDC), specialized cells that can keep antigen-antibody complexes on their surface for upto 1 year and possibly longer. Because the antigen stored on FDC is undegraded, presentation of this antigen to a memory T cell will require an intermediary APC (FDC are incapable of processing antigen themselves). As the only cells that can efficiently obtain antigen from FDC are antigen-specific B cells we have predicted that the longterm persistence of a memory T cell response will require the presence of antigen-specific memory B cells. As a corollary to this hypothesis it is logical to conclude that in the absence of a n antibody response, and the subsequent failure of FDC antigen localization, the maintenance of T cell memory will be impaired. We have tested this hypothesis in a variety of systems (including SCID mice reconstituted with T cells but not B cells and in normal mice immunized with peptide-pulsed APC to elicit T cell responses in the absence of antibody production). The results so far suggest that indeed the lack of antigen-specific B cells or antibody impairs the efficient development of a longterm memory T cell response. The interaction between a memory T cell and a memory B cell seems likely to be mutually beneficial as the transfer of memory B cells into nude mouse recipients, with antigen-antibody complexes but without T cells, leads only to a relatively short term survival of the memory B cells. We are currently investigating the role of the CD40-CD40 ligand interaction (in addition to lymphokines) in the memory survival process. Data from experiments involving the in vivo treatment of mice with soluble CD40-Fc, indicating a central role of CD40-CD40 ligand interaction in memory B cell generation will also be discussed. The Kb mutant phenotypes are characterized by their inability to present certain peptide epitopes, e.g. ovalbumin257.2~ (OVA) to C n s . In order to determine whether the mutant phenotype is a result of lack of peptide binding we have determined the dissociation constants for complexes between OVA peptide and Kb mutant molecules Kbml or Kbms. The KD values determined did not differ more than a factor 5 from those measured for Kb, indicating that lack of binding of peptide is not the reason for the lack of presentation of this peptide. We are currently investigating wheter it is the structure of the Kbm' or Kh8-OVA peptide complexes that results in the lack of recognition by T-cells. Bulk C n s from C57BV6, K h l , and Kbms mice were stimulated with cells (either R or Drosophila melanogaster) transfected with Kbml and KhE and pulsed with OVA. The C n s generated were found able to kill OVA-pulsed Khl and Khs-nansfected 'I2 cells as well as Kbtransfected T2 cells. However, limiting dilution assay revealed that Kb-mutant mice had a 20-fold lower frequency of OVA-specific CTL precursors. Furthermore, we found that CTLs from Kb mutant mice were more dependent on CD8 for killing, especially if the targets were not syngeneic. These results suggest that the lack of recognition of certain peptides presented by Kb mutant molecules is a result of conformational differences. Under controlled conditions, major histmompatability complex class I and class I1 proteins can fold in vivo and exist on the surface of cells without their normal peptide ligands. Class I molecules can fold in virro, but the folding reaction seems to absolutely require peptides which are specific ligands of the class I protein. Class I1 a and p subunits produced in E . coli can also fold in vino in the presence of a peptide, but the issue of a requirement for a peptide in the class I1 folding reaction has not been resolved. We now show that heterodimers can be isolated from class I1 I-Ek folding reactions which do not include peptides, and that these molecules will subsequently bind specific peptide ligands. The pH dependence of peptide binding for the "empty", in vitro folded I-Ek heterodimers is apparently identical to that of soluble "empty" I-Ek produced in a lipid-linked form in CHO cells. We conclude that at least some class I1 proteins contain all of the information in their primary sequences necessary for folding.  Drosophila cells were cotransfected with these cDNAs, a ml32m-pRMHa construct and a neo resistant plasmid. Stable transfectants were selected with G418 and cells that expressed soluble T13G M3 and CDl.I-L12m complexes were obtained. The soluble CDl heterodimers were used to screen a random peptide phage display library (see Miller e t al. abstract) to identify peptides that bind the non-classical class I CDl heterodimer. The sequences of the clones that bind to CDI describe a peptide motif which is heterogeneous in length at the Nterminus and contains three anchor residues in a seven aminoacids long stretch. Using codon-based deletion mutagenesis on selected peptide phage display clones we have determined the importance of the N-terminal positions to C D l -peptide binding. Surface plasmon resonance studies allowed direct measurement of peptide binding in solution and the determination of affinity constants. Alanine scanning mutagenesis on synthetic peptides will be done to verify the relative contribution of the putative anchor residues to the binding to CD1. V 108 Mary Lynne Hedley, Robert G.Urban, and Jack L. Strominger, Harvard University, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cambridge, MA 0 2 1 3 8 Class II heterodimers assemble in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) with the help of at least one other protein, invariant chain (li). li is thought to prevent the class I 1 pocket from acquiring peptide in the ER and furthermore, directs class I 1 to the endosomal compartment of the cell. Here, li is released and peptides generated from endocytosed proteins bind to class II molecules. We have developed an in vitro system to study heterodimer formation and peptide binding. cONAs encoding invariant chain, DR alpha and DRl beta chains were independently cloned into RNA expression vectors. Minigenes encoding the DR alpha signal sequence followed by sequences coding for one of three peptides were generated by overlapping PCR. Two of the peptides encoded by the minigenes are known to bind DRl, whereas the third peptide does not bind. mRNA was transcribed from these constructs and was added to a rabbit reticulocyte lysate translation mix containing canine pancreatic microsomal membranes. Translation of each product was assayed by SDS-PAGE. Co-translation of alpha and beta chain mRNA followed by immunoprecipitation with LB3.1, a monoclonal antibody specific for alphdbeta heterodimers which does not react with single chains, demonstrated that DR alpha and beta assemble in the microsomal membranes in the absence of li. Co-translation of peptide minigene, DR alpha and beta mNRAs followed by immunoprecipitation suggest that certain peptides can interact with class II molecules in the absence of invariant chain. heterodimedli complex and was used to determine if OR1 assembled with Ii in vitro. Co-translation of all three mRNAs (alpha, beta and invariant) followed by immunoprecipitation with DA6 .147 demonstrated that the OR alphdbeta complex assembles with li in vitro. Data from additional experiments using the in vitro system suggests that at least some peptides can compete with li for binding to alphdbeta complexes in the ER. restricted T cells has been demonstrated by us, to react with MHCassociated, haptenated peptides largely independent of the carrier peptides' amino acid composition (J. Immunol. 149 (1992) 2569 and 151 (1993) 678). It was then argued that chemically trinitrophenylated cells might present an unusually repetitive pattern of TNP-epitopes to such T cells, and that this might relate to the hapten's pronounced allergenic properties. However, allergic responses such as contact sensitivity are widely discussed as being mediated primarily by T cells of the CD4+, class I1 MHC-restricted compartment. We have therefore produced TNP-specific T cell lines and hybridomas of the CD4+ phenotype, restricted to I-Ab, LAd or I-Ed encoded class I1 molecules. Our cells were selected for antigenic reactivity to TNBS modified irradiated syngenic spleen cells. 25 % of our hybridomas and 50 % of our T cell lines were reactive to syngenic spleen cells modified with TNP-protein digests. We also screened several synthetic peptides. known from the literature to bind to I-Ab, I-Ad or I-Ed in which lysine residues were e-N-alkylated by TNP. The same peptides without TNP were not antigenic for our T cells and the recognition could be inhibited by TNP-or MHC class 11-specific antibodies. Some of our T cells crossreactively reacted with TNP-BSA and one of our synthetic TNPpeptides. We computer-compared the sequence of this peptide with the sequence of BSA. The three most similar TNP-BSA-peptides revealed maximally 31 % identity (46 % similarity) to the synthetic peptide, but were not antigenic for our crossreactive T cells. The antigenic peptide within the TNP-BSA sequence must, therefore, be of still lower homology to our antigenic TNP-peptide than the three synthesized sequences. As for class I, also class I1 MHC-restricted TCR, thus apparently may interact with TNP-epitopes in a carrier-independent fashion. We take this to further support our hypothesis that the strong antigenic, and possibly the allergenic properties of haptens such as TNP may be influenced by the repetitive type of hapten-determinants on different carrier peptides resulting from chemical cell modification. In the human, HLA-DR molecules can be clustered into groups based on shared common serologic determinants. Membars of a group (microvariants) differ only subtty from one another in B chain amino acid sequence. One intriguing and complicated group of molecules bear both D R l l and DR13 serologic determinants. To study the effect of microvariation on function, 17 DR11-and DR13expressing wild type and mutant murine L cell transfectants were generated. Mutant DR B chain cDNAs were created by altering amino acids in and around the antigen binding groove. The substitutions utilized amino acids found at the same position in other microvariants in the same group. Cells expressing DRBl*llOl/ *1303/*1304 bound HA 307319 peptide at a higher level than cells expressing other wild type molecules. When DR(u,B1*1304) was mutated to alter position 57 or 58, HA binding was decreased 5 fold. Changing positions 32 and 37 in DR(o,Bl*1304) to residues found in DR(u,B1*1301) reduced HA binding to the level observed for DR(u,B1*1301). Interestingly. changing these positions in the reverse direction ("1301 to *13C4) also decreased HA binding. These results suggest that single amino acid residues in the groove can affect binding; however, peptide binding is also influenced by the milieu of the antigen binding groove of each DR molecule. The effect of microvariation on allorecognition (and sew peptide binding) was assessed using alloprolierative T cell clones (TLC) (R:DRB1*1101, S:DRB1*1102 and vice versa). Some of these TLC recognize L cells expressing DRB1*1102 as well as cells expressing DR13 allelii products. The patterns of recognition suggest that recognition involves the shared u helical regions of these DR molecules as well as a peptide component. These observations demonstrate the power of apparently subtle evolutionary changes in creating this diverse repertoire of antigen binding molecules. Clone AH11112-2 is an HLA-A2.1 -restricted, xenoreactive CTL clone isolated from a C57BU6 (H-Zb) mouse. These CTL efficiently lyse EL4/A2.1 transfectants pulsed with the peptide ALWGFFPVL, corresponding to the naturally occurring epitope identified by mass spectrometric analysis (as AXWFFPVX) of peptides eluted from purified A2.1 molecules. Molecular modelling of the A2,VALWGFFPVL complex suggested that peptide residues P4 and P6 are appreciably solvent exposed, and might form impollant TCR contacts. To address the predictions of this model. we examined the ability of variously substituted derivatives of ALWGFFPVL to sensitize target cells for lysis by clone AH11112-2. Unexpectedly. single substitutions at most positions only minimally affected target lysis. while substitutions Ala-P3 and Ala-P5. occurring at positions expected to be nearly or completely buried in the MHC groove, each gave rise to reduced cell lysis while retaining high affinity (lC5,,-10nM) binding to A2.1. However, Phe-P3 and Tyr-P5 substitutions gave results comparable to the parent peptide. Guided by these initial results. we constructed a limited synthetic peptide library comprised of 1296 different peptides having 6-fold degeneracy at positions P3-P6. in order to examine an expanded array of potential epitopes. The HPLC-fractionated library was tested for its ability to sensitize target cells for lysis by clone AH11112-2. This analysis revealed two prominent. late-eluting peaks of activity. one of which corresponds to the retention time of ALWGFFPVL. as welt as lesser peaks at earlier retention times. We are currently charaderizing these peaks. Our observations thus far indicate that TCR recognition of the class llpeptide epitope shows a non-rigid dependence on peptide sequence, and are consistant with recent observations of others who have suggested that TCR recognition may be sensitive to peptide-induced MHC conformation. However, it is equally plausible that residue substitutions alter the conformation of the MHC-bound peptide, consequently altering T cell recognition. Additionally, our results suggest the utility of synthetic. combinatorial peptide libraries as a means to identify immunologically active and potentially useful peptides for a given T celVtarget system in the absence of information regarding the exact sequence of the naturally occurring epitope. Random peptide phage display libraries were screened with empty soluble class I molecules (purified from Drosophila melanogaster cells which were cotransfected with p 2-microglobulin) following enrichment of candidate phage by panning. Sequencing of positive clones allowed rapid delineation of peptide motifs displayed by these phage. The peptide motifs described are consistent with data obtained from: crystal structures of class I peptide complexes, peptides eluted from cellular class I molecules, and class I-restricted peptide antigen studies. In addition to providing "anchor residue" information, this method provides important binding data concerning the contribution of amino acids which lie proximal to these anchor residue positions. Screening of murine H-2Kb-specific clones with empty class I molecules representing alternative alleles (H-2Kbm1, H-ZKbmB), yields information concerning the requirements for both shared and allele-specific discrimination in peptide binding. Surface plasmon resonance studies allowed direct solution competition measurements of various peptide motif analogs, and were utilized to quantify binding. Murine HMT, CD1 molecules, and several H-2Kb alleles are among the class I molecules successfully screened using this technique. The N-terminal peptide, Acl-11, of myelin basic protein (MBP) can induce experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in PL/J and (PL/JxSJL/J)FI mice, but cannot in SJL/J mice, since Acl-1 1 binds to LA", but not to I-As. We have studied the interaction of Acl-I1 and I-A" as a model system for therapeutic intervention of the autoimmune response seen in EAE. In this study we have identified a major interaction between the arginine at position five in Acl-11 and glutamic acid at position 74 in the beta chain of I-A". We have also identified two residues that differ between I-A" and I-AS that are critical for peptide binding to I-AU. These two residues, positions 26 and 28, lie on the bottom of the peptide binding groove on the beta chain. Mutants that contain an AaU chain paired with an ADS chain which has only these two residues changed to those of APU bind, Acl-I1[4A], a high binding analog of Acl-11, with much greater affinity than does the wild type I-AU. Furthermore, when position 70 in the beta chain, which lies on the helix, is changed to an arginine, as ia found in I-A", binding is reduced to wild type levels. Arginine at position 70 in the beta chain, however, is required for recognition by four of five Acl-I I , I-AUspecific T cell hybridomas that we have tested. The requirement of arginine for the four T cells tested correlates with the presence of a negatively charged residue in the CDRZ region of the T cell receptors, suggesting that the CDR3 regions of the T cell receptors may recognize this residue as well as the peptide. Residues 26, 28, 70, and 74 of the beta chain of I-A" lie in close proximity and may form a pocket that allows Acl-I1 to bind to I-A". These results have provided us with a better understanding of how Acl-I1 sits in the groove of I-AU and will help us to design immunotherapeutic molecules that can specifically interfere with the interactions we have identified between the peptide and MHC. Class I molecules bind peptitles based on the presence of ;inchor residues, whose position and identity depend on the individual class I molecule. We have recentl) detemiiiied peptide-binding motifa for I-ILA-A1, -A3, -BX, -B14 and -BwJI, and have used these motif? to identify new antigenic peptides. I n order to incre:ise the predictive power of tl.ese motifs, u e have developed a ni:ithemsticiil model th;tt w e c:ill the independent binding of sidec1i;iins (IBS) hypothesis to interpret peptide-binding d;it;t. According to tlie 1BS hypothesis, ench amino acid within tlie peptide cmtributes to binding in a f;ishicin that is independent of 11ie rest of tlie peptide. To test the IDS hypothesis, a11 equation is writien out for c:icIi peptide for which binding data is ;Ivnil;tble, in which the for tiiasociatioii is set equal to the product of coc.l'iicietit~ that rspresent the quantirutive importance of each reaitlue. The coefficients are detemiined by solving the set of simii1t;ineous equations coiisi\ting of all of the avsihble binding d:it:i. 13:it:i oti nonbiti~litig 2cptidc.s :ire :ilso useful because they pl:ice :in uppcr limit oii the vdiies of cert:iiii coefficients. When thebe c~i l c~~l~i t i o~~s :ire pcrl'ortiied on peptidebinding data for HLA-A?, it is found th:u tlic. IBS hypothesis :iccouiits for tlie be1i:ivior of tlie v:ist m:ijority of thi: peptides, indicating that signific.uit sidrcliain-sidecli;iiii ititer;ictiotis are unusual. Msny antigenic peptidcs bind tightly to HLA-A2 compared to the pi-edictal binding affinily of all other peptides from the same protein, indic:iting antigenic peptides :ire often among the best possible binding prptides. Occasional antigenic peptides are of rather weak relative affinity, suggesting that these peptides may be processd unusu:illy efficiently, or :~ltern:itively, that certain T cells :ire originally :ictivated by ;I higher affinity peptide, followed by cros\-re:ictive recogiiitioli. University Hospital, Leiden, The Netherlands. Two naturally occuring DR3 molecules dffer by 4 8-chain amino acid residues (positions 26, 28, 47 and 86) whose side chains point into the class II antigen binding groove. Previous analysis has shown that positions 26, 47 and 86 influence recognition by alloproliferative T cell clone suggesting that the functional differences between the DR3 microvariants are mediated primarily through the influence of the variant positions on peptide binding. Murine fibroblast cell lines expressing DR(u,B1*0301), DR(u,B1*0302) and 11 mutant DR3 molecules (created by exchanging the amino acid residues found at the variant DR3 positions) were examined for their ability to bind peptide antigens. The binding of HA 307-319 (DR(u,81*0302)specific) was affected only when position 28 was mutated in conjunction with position 26 or 86 suggesting a cooperative interaction between these positions for HA binding to DR(u,,91*0302). Two peptides (HSP3-13 and SWM 132-151) that are DR(u.81*0301)specific utilize different Combinations of variant DR3 amino acid residues for binding. Changing position 28 or 86 alone significantly reduced HSP 3-13 binding to DR(u,B1*0301) which suggests that both positions are equally important for binding HSP. All of the mutant molecules examined, including single residue mutant 0302 molecules, were able to bind SWM to some degree indicating that all four variant DR3 positions interact with SWM; thus, only by changing all four residues (0301 to 0302) is binding completely abrogated. These data suggest that different peptides utilize different combinations of DR contact residues for binding and may explain why not all peptides isolated from an individual DR molecule contain a similar binding motif. Finally, it is clear that subtle evolutionary changes which created such DR microvariants result in dramatic differences in the peptide repetoires that bind to these molecules. Gp160 and gp120 specific CD4+ T lymphocyte lines were developed and evaluated from I I HIV seropositive volunteers enrolled in a double blinded phase I1 gp160 vaccine trial. We were able to generate gpl60 specific T cell lines in 8/11 and gp120 specific T cell lines in 11/11 volunteers after 3 cycles of stimulation. Each lines was started from PBMC collected 150 days from the beginning of the trial. We challenged the specific T cell lines with a panel of peptides covering constant and variable regions of gp160. We arbitrarily characterized the response as broad or narrow according to the number of peptide pools the antigen-specific T cell lines were able to recognize. All but one gp160 specific T cell lines were able to recognize V3 peptide pool. Moreover 3/7 narrow responders showed the presence of p24 in their culture supernatants demonstrating active viral replication and 014 broad responder had detectable levels of p24. Despite the lines being dev-eloped with IIIB antigens, all of the lines which were tested were able to recognize gpl20(MN). Taken together these preliminary findings, observed in this unique cohort of patients, provide new insight into the character of gp120 peptide recognition by T lymphocytes. This information not only contributes to a better understanding of the functional capabilities of the cellular immune response, but will in the future, help determine the capacity of vaccines to modify this response. MHC class I molecules bind short peptides for cytotoxic T cell scrutiny at the cell surface The peptide binds to a groove formed by the a 1 4 domains of class 1 molecules. Peptide binding occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) where class I molecules also associate with b2-microglobulin (P2m) through their a3 domains. Although p2m is necessary for efficient transport of the complex to the cell surface, whether it is required for efficient peptide-class I binding is still in question Moreover, the events that occur to form the trimolecular complex (i e , class LP2m-peptide) are not yet hlly understood, since work with purified molecules has been hampered by technical ditficulties, such as obtaining preparations of class 1 molecules free of peptides and developing an experimental system that reilects results obtained with intact cells or cell lysates We have used purified, full-length, class I Db molecules isolated from the cell line M A -S (RMA-S-Db) to obtain efficient, specific binding of peptides in the presence or absence of p2m. Peptide binding was determined by a1 domain refolding, as measured with conformationspecific monoclonal antibodies (mAb) in an ELSA assay system In a second set of experiments, Db molecules isolated from RMA cells @MA-Db) and subjected to heat (H-Db) or acid (A-Db) treatment experienced unfolding of both a1 and a3 domains. A-Db regained the al domain conformation upon addition of specific peptides, but, surprisingly, reappearance of the native conformation of the a3 domain also occurred only upon addition of Db-restricted peptides. While H-Db retained the ability to undergo peptide-induced a1 refolding, the native conformation of the a3 domain could not be rescued. These data indicate that first, pZm is not necessary for peptide binding; second, acquisition ofthe native conformation of the al domain of class I MHC is dependent on specific peptides, but not on the structure of the a3 domain, and, third, specific peptide binding affects not only the tertiary structure of the a1 domain but also affects folding of the more distal a3 domain. 1993 ) reflects the conformation adopted by the heterodiier after having bound peptide. However, it is clear from a number of analyses that the conformation of the peptidefree, or "empty" class I1 heterodimer differs from that of the "full" heterodimer. Since it is the "empty" conformation of the class II molecule that must initially bind peptide, we have been interested in determining how this conformation differs from that of the fully folded, peptideassodated class II molecule. Using a broadly DW specific antibody, TAL14.1, we have found that the determinant recognised is dependent on the conformation of the B chain but is also present in monomeric DRP chains except that of the DRB5' 0101 chain. The failure to bind to the monomeric DRB5"OlOl chain is not simply as a result of the loss of the epitope, since TALl4.1 does bind to the peptide assodated DRB5'0101 ap heterodimer, but results from the conformational lability of this molecule compared to other DRB chaiis. We have determined that the instability in the DRB5' 0101 chain is a consequence of ionic interactions between aspartate residues, two of which are unique to the DRB5W101 sequence. By mutating these residues we have increased the stability of the p chain and restored binding of TAL14.1. From the positions of the aspartate residues in the structure of the class II molecule we can conclude that at least the first three p strands and the short (pl) a helix are formed and must interact, suggesting that they are in an orientation similar to that in the native conformation. PEPTIDES, Robert G. Urban, Roman M. Chicz, and Jack L. Strominger. Harvard University, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Cambridge, MA 02138 The predominant peptides bourid to MHC class I1 molecules expressed on human B cells are derived from a relatively limited number of self proteins. We have performed a set of experiments to determine which, if aiiy of these bound self-peptides are uniquely released at pH 4.0 and thus may be released during MHC class I1 recycling in vivo or more readily exchanged than others during pH binding experiments in v i m . To avoid the complications arising from the presence of detergent, intact immunoaffinity purified HLA-DR1 molecules were digested with papain to remove the cytoplasmic tail and transmembrane domain. These highly purified water soluble HLA-DRI molecules were exposed to differing pHs in the presence or absence of high-affinity synthetic peptide. The resulting bound peptides were then acid extracted, and separated by reversed-phase HPLC. Using a combination of mass spectrometry, amino acid analysis, and ultraviolet spectroscopy the ratio of prebound self-peptides to newly bound synthetic peptide was determined. The results unequivocally demonstrate that most of the predominant self-peptides bound to HLA-DRI are not appreciably released during extended exposure to acidic pH. However, some, but not all, forms of invariant chain derived peptides are substantially reduced after extended acidic exposure. These findings provide new insight into the processes of peptide exchange in vitro and imply that the prebound self-peptide repertoire would provide a formidable obstacle to productive recycling of human MHC class I1 molecules in vivo. MHC class &restricted T cell recognition of systematically shortened synthetic peptides derived from a 13-residue T cell epitope was investigated. All 65 possible analogues with a size between 3 and 12 residues were prepared with uncharged termini and with free termini. When the peptides were tested for recognition by a panel of HLA-DR2 restricted T cell clones, a dynamic interaction of MHC and TCR contact residues was deduced. Sometimes, the addition of a C-terminal amino acid residue was found to compensate for the truncation of an important N-terminal residue, and vice versa. Occasionally, deletion of additional terminal residues from a peptide that was non-stimulatory for a T cell clone resulted in a peptide that was recognized again by the clone. To the charged analogues, very few positive responses were recorded. Finally, non-overlapping sub-regions of OMP(49-61) were identified, capable of activating a single T cell clone independently. The results are discussed in the context of a three- Binding of peptides to MHC class II molecules that are affinity purified o r on the surface of cells has been studied. In neither case do the experimental conditions resemble those in endosonies where peptides bind to class I1 molecules after removal of the invariant (Ii) chain. We have developed an experimental system that allows us t o more closely approximate conditions for peptide binding to DR4Dw4 as they occur in endosomes. CHO cells expressing DR4Dw4 (SE24 cells) were transfected with DNA coding for a truncated form of the li chain lacking the first 20 amino acids (SE24A20 cells). Similar to fibroblasts expressing DRlDwl and the truncated li chain (Roche EMBO I. 11: 2841;1992), we observed that the li chain is expressed at the cell surface and that the majority of DR4Dw4 molecules is complexed with the Ii chain. SE24 cells present peptides [two derived from the human immunoglobulin K chain (amino acids 145-159 and 188-203) and one from the HLA-A2 heavy chain (amino acids 52-70)) efficiently to their corresponding DR4Dw4 restricted T cell hybridomas. whereas SE24A20 cells present peptides very poorly. After exposure of SE24A20 cells to pH5.5 in the presence of EDTA and cysteine they became more efficient in presenting peptides. I t was also found that this treatment preferentially removed the invariant chain from the cell surface and that li chain loss did not occur when a mixture of protease inhibitors was present during treatment. Data will be presented to show the effect of individual protease inhibitors on invariant chain removal. thus allowing the identification of the classes of protease responsible for this. Intracellul;; processing of viral proteins produces peptich which associate with class I MHC and are presented to host cytotoxic T cells (CTL). Such virus specific CTL are crucially important in the resistance to many virus infections, and are thought to be important in controlling human infection with papillomavirus type 16 (HPV 16), a virus associated strongly with cervical cancer. We have studied mouse CTL response to the transforming proteins E6 and E7 of HPV 16. Mice were immunised with recombinant vaccinia E7 (vac E7) and T cells were boosted in vitro with E7 transfectants or vac E7 infected stimulators. H-Zb, H-2d and H-2k mice immunised with vac E7 developed E7-specific CTL which killed vac E7 infected targets. An epitope was mdpped by CTL of H-2b mice to a region between amino acids 46 to 65 using transfectants contain E7 N-and C-terminal half constructs and a set of overlapping peptides spanning E7. The boundary of the epitope in H-2b mice was defined to E7 amino acids 49-57. This epitope binds to H-2Db, but has only a weak H-2Db motif. E7 peptide 21-28 contains a strong Kb binding motif, but is not recognized by E7 specific CTL from H-2b mice. We are currently mapping epitopes recognised by E7 specific H-2d and H-2k restricted CTL. To date, none of the overlapping peptides have been recognised, raising the possibility that a host cell protein is involved as a target antigen. LYMPHOCYTES. Andrew, D.P., Berlin, C., Hamaan, A. and E.C. Butcher. Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford CA 94305. In this report we examined expression and function of a4p7 on lymphocytes using a panel of mAbs to this integrin. We looked at the blocking activity of this panel of anti-a4P7 mAbs in several in vim adhesion assays and also mapped the epitopes recognized by the panel of mAbs in competition studies. From the results we conclude that there are unique although overlapping epitopes on a4p7 for each of its various adhesive interactions with MAdCAM-1, fibronectin, VCAM-1 and an as yet uncharacterized ligand on lymphocytes for a4p7. Using a novel mAb to a combinatorial epitope on a4p7 we further show that a4p7 is the major homing receptor on lymphocytes for homing to mucosal lymphoid organs. In terms of expression p7 proved a useful marker in T cell development, been expressed on mature single positive CD4 and CD8 thymocytes but been absent from double positive CD4+vCD8+ve thymocytes, although a minor subset of double negative CM-VeCD8~ve thymocytes expressed p, . The majority of P7Qe thymocytes expressed p7 as a& while a minor non overlapping subpopulation of thymocytes expressed a4P7 at low levels. In the bone manow expression of 87 could be used to subdivide the HSC population Finally, in the periphery, p7 was expressed at high levels on subsets of memory (activated) memory CD4 lymphocytes and using LSelectin a4P7 and a4pI expression it is evident that there are at least 4 subsets of memory CD4 lymphocytes which will differ in their Rafficking properties due to the differences in the homing receptors that they express VLA molecules (0, integrins) are cell-surface ap heterodimers that bind to extracellular mamx (ECM) proteins such as fibronectin and merosin. We demonstrate that the avidity between VLAs and their ligands is down-regulated during T lymphocyte maturation in the thymus. Mouse thymocytes were fractionated into immature and mature populations based on their expression of the heat stable antigen (HSA), recognized by the J1 Id mAb. Virtually all thymocytes expressed VLA-4, -5 and -6. However, predominantly immature (HSA') thymocytes exhibited ECMbinding capacity in vitro. This constitutive binding was down-regulated at the HSA' to HSA transition stage. The low binding of mature HSAcells was not due to decreased levels of VLAs on the cell surface or permanent protein modification since HSA-cells were able to become adherent cells after stimulation with both PMA and ionomycin. Binding to fibronectin was inhibited by RGD and CS-1 peptides, suggesting that both VLA-4 and VLA-5 are thymocyte receptors for fibronectin. Binding to merosin was inhibited by antibodies recognizing VLA-a, or -PI, suggesting that VLA-6 is a merosin receptor. The constitutive binding of immature HSA' thymocytes to ECM was inhibited by protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitors, indicating that PKC plays an important role on regulation of thymocyte adhesion during T cell development. We postulate that a down-regulatory mechanism is responsible for the decrease ECM-binding of mature HSA-thymocytes, and that this mechanism may play an important role in allowing mature thymocytes to leave the thymus and emigrate to the periphery. The molecular mechanism involved in this down-regulation will be discussed. Migration of lymphocytes into sites of inflammation is known to be mediated by adhesive interactions. Additionally, it has long been suspected that a chemoattractant secreted at sites of inflammation might also play a role in recruiting lymphocytes from the bloodstream into the inflammatory lesion. However, the role of chemoattractant~ in lymphocyte transendothelial migration into inflammatory sites has been poorly characterized. We have utilized a novel transendothelial lymphocyte chemotaxis assay to identify and purify a lymphocyte chemotactic factor in supernatants of mitogen-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). The factor was purified by heparin-Sephai-ose, size exclusion, and HPLC chromatography. Amino acid sequence analysis revealed it to be identical to monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-I), a chemoattractant of the C-C chemokine family that had previously been described a\ monocyte specific. We confirmed that recombinant MCP-1 is chemoattractive for purified T lymphocytes and for CD3+ lymphocytes i n peripheral blood lymphocyte (PBL) preparations. Furthe]-more, we showed that the majority of T lymphocyte cbemotactic activity in mitogen-stiinulated PBMC supernatants is neutralized by antibody to MCP-I. Phenotyping of chemoattracted T lymphocytes ahowa that they are an activated. memory subset, expressing the antigens CD26, CD4SRO, and increased levels of CD29. The chemoattracted population is depleted of cells expressing L-selectin and CD4SRA. The T lymphocyte response tn MCP-I is dose-dependent, with maximal chemotaxis occurring at SO ng/ml. The response is chemotactic, rather than chemokinetic. as demonstrated in a checkerboard assay. Furthermore, the response to MCP-I by T lymphocytes is not dependent on the endothelium preaenc in our chemotaxis assay system since the response can be duplicated using uncoated filters. We conclude that MCP-I is the nia.joi lymphocyte chemoattractant secreted by mitogen-activated PBMC. MCP-1 is capable of acting as a potent T lymphocyte, as well a\ monocyte, chemoattractant and this may help explain why monocyteh and T lymphocytes of the memory subset ai-e always found together at sites of antigen-induced inflammation. The p1 or VLA integrins are ap heterodtmeric cell surface receptors that play an important role in T cell function by mediating adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins such as fibronectln (FNI and cell surface counter-receptors such as VCAM-1. A critical but poorly understood mechanism of p l lntegrin regulation involves the rapid upregulation of the functional activlty of p l integrins by T cell activation without corresponding changes in p l integrin cell surface expression. Although studies of pZ integrins have implicated the p2 cytoplasmic domain as a target for intracellular signals that upregulate PZ integrin activity, similar analysis of p1 Integrin activity has not been conducted. Like peripheral T cells, activation of the Jurkat T cell line with PMA or mAb crosslinking of either CD3. CD2 or CD2S results in increased Jurkat adhesion to FN via the a4pl (VLA-41 and a5pl (VLA-51 integrins. Using y-irradiation and multiple selections by panning for mutants that have lost the ability to bind to FN upon PMA stimulation, we have isolated a Jurkat derivative. designated Al, that lacks expression of the p l chain. FACS analysis of mutant A1 reveals that loss of cell surface p1 expression also results in complete loss of cell surface expression of the a3. a5 and a6 chains. Compared to parental Jurkat cells. cell surface expression of a4 is reduced but not eliminated in mutant Al. presumably due to asscciation of a4 with p7. Functional studies show that mutant Al. either unstimulated or PMA-stimulated. is completely unable to bind to either FN or VCAIv-1. lmmunoprecipitation studies using metabolically labeled lysates also show no expression of the p1 chain but normal levels of a4 expression. Northern blotting analysis reveals reduced levels of pl mRNA in muLant A1 compared to parental cells. ReintroducLion by DNA-mediated gene transfer of a full-length p l cDNA results in reexpression of the p l chain on Lhe cell surface. although not to levels seen in parental Jurkat cells. However, adhesion studies show that these trandectants are now able to bind to FN or VCAM-1 and this adhesion can be upregulated by PMA stimulation or CD3 crosslmking. Thus, mutant A1 represents a unique cellular reagent for the analysis of T cell p 1 integrin structure and function. To allow in uiuo studies, which would provide more insight into CD27 function, we have identified murine CD27 (mCD2T) at the cDNA and protein level. The mCD27 gene was mapped to mouse chromosome 6, tighly liked to Ly-4, Tnfr-2 and Hcphl. mCD27 is 65% identical to human CD27 (hCD27). Highest homology of 80% is found in the amino terminal cysteine rich, ligand binding domain, and the carboxy terminal part of the cytoplasmic domain. The structure and expression of mCD27 was compared to that of 4-1BB. another lymphocyte specific member o f the NGF-R family. mCD27 and 4-1BB are 399: identical in the ligand binding domain and have a high degree o f homology in the carboxy terminal part of the cytoplasmic tail. mCD27 mRNA was detected in spleen and thymus, in CD3-/dUiI as well as CD3br'ght thymocytes, but not in non lymphoid tissues; mCD27 mRNA expression was found in resting T cells and was upregulated upon activation. 4-1BB was detected exclusively in activated T cells, where it was expressed with different kinetics than mCD27. Peptide antisera identified murine CD27 as a 45 kDa protein on thymocytes and activated T cells and 4-1BB as a 3540 kDa protein on activated T cells. Mouse complement receptor 1 and 2 (MCR1 and MCR21 are receptors for mouse C 3 and are considered to be the 6 lymphocyte homologues of human CRl and CR2. MCRl also acts as a cofactor for factor I mediated cleavage of C3, a process necessary to generate the C3d ligand form of C 3 which then binds CR2 with high affinity. A s opposed to human CR1 and CR2, however, which are products of unique genes, MCRl and MCRZ are the alternatively spliced products of a common mRNA. MCRl shares with MCR2 the COOH-terminal 15 short consensus repeats (SCRI but has six additional NH,-terminal SCR. To further determine the relationship between human and mouse CR1, and identify C 3 binding and factor I cofactor activity sites, we analyzed mousehuman chimeras in which the C 3 binding domain of human CR2 has been replaced by different regions within the first eight SCR of MCRl . Rosette analysis of our chimeras with erythrocytes bearing different mouse C3 fragments revealed a weak C3b binding site within SCR 1-2 of MCRl . There is no independent C 3 b binding domain within SCR 3-6, but their presence enhances C3b rosette formation to chimeras containing SCR 1-2. 8C12. a mAb which partially blocks C3b interaction with MCRl, binds only chimeras containing SCR 3-4. There is no C3d binding area within the first six SCR, but our data confirm previous studies demonstrating the presence of an additional C3blC3d binding region within SCR 7-8 of MCRl (SCR1-2 of MCR21. Cofactor activity for C3 cleavage is in the first four SCR of MCR1. In summary, like human CR1, MCRl contains two independent C3b binding sites and has unique cofactor activity. These results further support our hypothesis that these two molecules are functional homologues of human CR1 and CR2 despite their pronounced structural differences. Callebaut and A.G Hovanessian, Institut Pasteur, Unite de Virologie et Immunologie Cellulaire (UA CNRS 1157), 28, rue du Dr. Roux 75015 Paris France The external or surface (SU) and transmembrane (TM) envelope glycoproteins of HIV, are involved in the mechanism of HIV entry into cells and when expressed on the membrane of infected cells have the capacity to trigger cell death by apoptosis through interactions with cell-surface CD4 molecules. Recently, we demonstrated that entry of HIV requires the presence and functioning of the T cell activation antigen, CD26. Here we suggest that CD26 may also be involved in the mechanism of initiation of apoptosis by the SU/TM complex in CD4 expressing cells. Previous reports from several laboratories have indicated that CD26 may contribute to T cell activation, and that its dipeptidyl peptidase IV activity may be required during this process. Accordingly, stimulation of CD26 with a specific monoclonal antibody results in a comitogenic effect on T cell activation. This and the observation that CD26 is found to be associated with CD45, suggest that the CD26/CD45 complex through tyrosine kinase-dependent transduction pathways may play a regulatory role in T lymphocyte activation. The HIV envelope SU glycoprotein, through the interaction of its V3 loop with CD26, could probably interfere with the normal functioning of CD26 during the T cell activation process and thus result in an abnormal signaling which is associated with apoptosis. Several reports have shown a selective decrease in the proportion of CD26 expressing CD4+ T lymphocytes in HIV-1 infected individuals. This latter is consistent with the requirement of CD26 for HIV entry, and the fact that HIV producing cells in vitro cultures die by apoptosis. Taken together, these observations favor the hypothesis that CD26 is implicated in the mechanism of triggering apoptosis in CD4 expressing cells by the SU/TM complex of HIV. Ly-49 is a recently identified cell surface molecule expressed on a subpopulation of NK cells and certain T lymphomas. It has been suggested, based on g e n e transfection and antibody blocking studies, t h a t Ly-49 is a negative regulator of NK lytic activity, possibly t h r o u g h an i n t e r a c t i o n w i t h t a r g e t cell class I molecules. W e have found t h a t T lymphomas expressing Ly-49 bind isolated class I MHC molecules b u t n o t class I1 molecules immobilized on plastic. Adhesion t o class I molecules was n o t found with T lymphomas lacking Ly-49 expression. T h e Ly-49 expressing EL4 lymphoma bound Dd and Dk b u t not K d and Kk, demonstrating a restricted p a t t e r n of class I adhesion t h a t is consistent w i t h t h e specificities previously suggested for Ly-49 in NK lytic assays. The observed cell adhesion is class I density d e p e n d e n t and is extensively inhibited b y t h e A1 monoclonal antibody directed against Ly-49. These results provide direct evidence for Ly-49 serving as a receptor for a subset of class I MHC molecules. L-selectin is the principal homing receptor that directs the homing of blood lymphocytes to peripheral lymph nodes via high endothelial venules. It is involved to a lesser degree in lymphocyte homing to Peyer's patches. We have demonstrated rapid changes in L-selectin epitope expression early (10 minutes) after activation of blood B cells in vitro. Using three different monoclonal antibodies specific for the L-selectin molecule (TQ1, Leu& and FMC46) we found that most freshly isolated blood B cells express TQ1 and FMC46, whereas only an average of 60% express Leu8. After activation with pokeweed mitogen in vitro we observed a rapid increase in the number of B cells expressing Leu8, almost to the same numbers as for TQ1 and FMC46. This suggests that some B cells express an alternative form of L-selectin, not recognized by the Leu8 antibody, and that this can be rapidly modified upon activation, possibly by a conformational change. The number of B cells positive for FMC46 and TQ1 remained almost constant at 95% during the first 24 hours post activation, whereas the number of B cells expressing the Leu8 epitope of L-selectin after 24 hours were only 40%. Thus, the activation-induced up-regulation of the Leu8 epitope of Lselectin is transient. Our data indicate that previously described functionally different subsets of B cells based on Leu8 expression are 1) not reflecting L-selectin expression and cannot be reproduced using other L-selectin antibodies, and 2) are reversible, and may reflect the activation status of a given cell. It has been demonstrated that in purified B cells IgE synthesis is induced by a T-cell derived cytokine, IL-4 and CD40 ligand (or anti-CD40). Since these stimulants cause a strong aggregation of B cells, we examined the expression of adhesion molecules such as ICAMl(CD54), LFA-I(CDlldCD18p) and CD43. The incubation of purified B cells from tonsils with anti-CD40 plus IL-4 strikingly enhanced the expression of ICAMl and CD43 but modestly affected the expression of LFA-1 by FACS analysis. The addition of anti-ICAM1 inhibited its aggregation and, suprisingly, enhanced IgE synthesis by such stimulated B cells at 5-10 fold. This enhancing effect of anti-ICAM1 on IgE synthesis was achieved by the increase in the expression of germline transcript of CE gene. However, the mechanism through which anti-ICAM1 affected the germline expression remained to be determined. Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS), is a X-linked immunodeficiency, in whose patients a decreased level of platelets and a defect of Ig production to T-independent antigen are charcteristic features. In the patients, a molecular disturbance of CD43, gplb or cytoskelton perhaps due to an abnormal glycosylation has been shown. But how these defects lead to immune disfunction is unknown. Since in the patients with WAS generally serum level of IgE is increased, CD43 as well as LFA-1 are ligands to ICAMl and since it is reported that the avidity change (an increase of the binding capacity) of LFA-1 to ICAMl may occur by its interaction with cytoskelton, we tested the effect of anti-ICAMI on IgE synthesis by B cells from two patients with WAS. In contrast to the enhancing effect of anti-ICAMI on IgE synthesis by normal B cells, the addition of antiGICAM1 could not enhance IgE synthesis nor augment the expression of germline transcript of CE gene by B cells with WAS, suggesting that in vivo physical association of ICAMl with CD43 or LFA-1 molecule may be defected and its interaction regulates IgE production. The binding capacity of LFA-1 and CD43 in lymphocytes from the patients to ICAMl is now being determined and the molecular characterization of this defect will be discussed. Antigen recognition by mature T cells is associated with a class-specific bias in MHC molecule recognition, with CD4+ T cells responding to MHC class II-and CDW T lymphocytes to MHC class Iassociated antigen. We have recently identified a region in the MHC class II 0-chain that is critical for functional interactions with CD4 (Konig et al., Nature 356: 796, 1992). Here, I show that the a-chain of MHC class II molecules participates in interactions with CD4, too. The threedimensional structure of the class II MHC molecule HLA-DR1 (Brown et al., Nature 364: 33, 1993) suggests that HLA-DRI exists as a dimer of class II afi heterodimers. Also, mutational analyses of MHC class II interaction sites on CD4 reported by other laboratories suggest that CD4 may interact with two MHC class II molecules simultaneously. The data reported here corroborate this hypothesis. Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China Intestinal IEL locate between and beneth the epithelial cells covering the intestine lumen, and are probably the first group of lymphocytes that encounter antigens and pathogens passing through the intestine. composition of ilEL is more complicated than that of peripheral T cells, as shown by the presence of CD4+8+ and aaCDB+ cells. Among the aaCD8+ cells, one fouth to half are ap TCR+ whereas the rest are yS TCR+ cells. To understand function(s) of CD8 ilEL subpopulations, we have developed purification scheme to separate apCD8+ and aaCD8+ iIEL, and characterized them in comparison with lymph node (LN) CD8 cells. We found that the expression pattern of Ly6C and CD44 molecules are different among freshly isolated LN and ilEL CD8 subpopulations. When stimulated with apTCR-specific mAb and peritoneal macrophages in the presence or absence of IL2, apCD8+ ilEL proliferate and produce IL2, interferon-y, and tmor necrosis factor(s), whereas aaCD8+ ilEL are negative for these responses even with addition of anti-CD2 mAb. However, the expression patterns of Ly6C and Thy-I molecules of aaCD8+ ilEL are different before and after stimulation. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) are generally specific for class 1 major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins plus antigen and express CD8 co-receptor molecules. The effector function of some CTL can be blocked by antibodies to CD8 (CD8 dependent CTL), whereas that of others is resistant to blocking (CDS independent CTL). This difference in sensitivity to antibody-mediated inhibition is assumed to reflect variations in affinity of particular T cell receptors (TCR) for antigen. However, with a panel of T cell hybridomas from CTL clones which have different susceptibility to blocking with anti-CDS antibody, we have found that a major difference between CD8 independent and CDX dependent T cells lies in their sensitivity to stimulation, the former responding to lower concentrations of anti-CD3 antibody than the latter. Thus the contribution to cell signalling provided by the co-association of p561ck and CD8 is particularly relevant for CD8 dependent cells. These data challenge the notion that the affinity of an individual TCR for antigen is related to the sensitivity of a cell to anti-CD8 antibodies. Indeed we can show that antibodies to co-receptor molecules have several effects on T cell activation, only some of which may be related to T cell affinity. Parkhouse#, Chris Goodnow*, and Maureen Howard, DNAX Research Institute, Palo Alto CA 94304, 'Dept. of Micro. and Immunol., Stanford, CA, and #Div. of Immunol., Insr. for Animal Health, Pirbright Laboratory, Surrey, England. Murine CD38 is glycoprotein present on the surface of many different hematopoietic cell types. CD3X possesses a unique enzymatic activity which allows the conversion of NAD to ADP-ribose and cyclic ADP-ribose. In addition, Abs to CD38 induce upregulation of cell surface molecules as well as B cell proliferation in conjunction with additional costimuli. We now demonstrate that signalling through CD38 is impaired in two immunodeficient subsets of B cells; XID B cells and anergic B cells derived from the double transgenic mouse model of tolerance developed by Goodnow er al. We have observed that while B cells from both of these mice are competent to receive and respond to signals from T cells, cytokines, and mitogens, they do not proliferate in response to triggering through either the Ag receptor or CD38. Although anergic B cells do not proliferate to these stimuli, these cells can be activated by CD38 and antigen as evidenced by the increases in class II, ICAM-I or other activation markers. This is distinct from the XID B cells where the CD38 response is completely abrogated, suggesting that the block in CD38 signal transduction is at different points in B cells from these two types of mice. The expression and enzymari examined in both types of B cells nnd appear were tyrosine phosphorylated after anti-CD3R triggering were examined. was found to overlap with rylated after Ig receptor XID and anergic B cells. We have also examined proteins which are either directly or indirectly associated with CD38 in an attempt to understand CD3R signal transduction. Our results demonstrate that by a variety of criteria, the CD3X signalling pathway is functionally similar but not identical to the Ig receptor pathway, and therefore, CD3X may play an important role in a variety of Ag driven responses. Malek and Tony J. Fleming, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136. Cross-linking of Ly-6 molecules on T lymphocytes leads to IL-2 production that is dependent upon expression of the TCR C chain and the GPI-anchor of Ly-GNE. More recently we found that co-stimulation of T cells via L y W E and the TCR inhibits 11-2 secretion by a pathway independent of TCR < chain expression. This effect was specific for Ly-6NE in as much as anti-Thy-1 did not block anti-CDSinduced 11-2 production. The present study was initiated in order to determine whether there were unique structural requirements at the level of the Ly-6 molecule for its capacity to activate or block IL-2 production. Functional studies using EL4 cells transfected with various Ly-6 hybrid molecules demonstrated that direct activation of IL-2 secretion or inhibition of anti-CD3induced 11-2 production was independent of whether anti-Ly-mAbs reacted with NH,-or COOH-terminal epitopes of Ly-6. In addition, stimulation of mouse Ly-6 proteins expressed in Jurkat cells antagonized PMNOKT3induced IL-2 production suggesting that the L y 5 inhibitory pathway is operative in human cells. EL4 cells were also transfected with a hybrid construct in which the GPI anchor of Ly-6E was replaced by the transmembrane and a portion of the cytoplasmic tail of H-2Db. Anti-Ly-6NE mAb also blocked anti-CD3E-induced 11-2 production for these cells even through anti-Ly6E failed to directly induced IL-2 secretion. Thus, anti-Ly-6NE blockade of IL-2 production is independent of the GPI anchor of Ly-6. This finding suggests that there may be aspects of signalling via Ly-6 that are solely dependent upon the extracellular amino acid sequence of this protein. with co-immoiilized FN and substimulatory amounts of anti-TcR has a synergistic effect and rolongs the increased phosphorylation past 40 minutes. 8reliminarGxperiments s u y t that this increase in phosphorylation by is inhibited by GD, a seqhuen~ found on many extracellular matrix proteins that forms t e binding site for some inte rin receptors. Consistent with this, Pronectin, a recombinant &-like protein consisting of RGD repeats stimulates even hi her, but still transient, levels of phosphorylation of p120. b e are in the process of trying to identify this tar et molecule of phozhorylation. A likely candidate is foc3 adhesion kinase FA which is a 125kd kinase induced in fibroblast cells after binding to fibronectin. The experiments to determine if p120 is FAK are in progress. LAG-3 is a membrane molecule belonging to the lg superfamily, which is expressed selectively on activated T and NK lymphocytes. This molecule is closely related to CD4 in protein structure, sequence and chromosomal location, suggesting both these two molecules may have shared a common ancestor. Like CD4, LAG-3 molecules associate with class II MHC molecules, however the function of LAG-3 molecule is still unknown. Because this molecule is expressed not only on activated CD4+T cells but also on activated CDI+T cells, yS T cells and NK cells, LAG-3 molecule may have several immunological roles in addition to the interaction with class II MHC molecule. Moreover, so far as we have examined the expression of LAG-3 molecule in mice, it is expressed also on some populations of thymocytes. This suggests that this molecule may be involved in T cell ontogeny in the thymus. The best way to determine the exact function of LAG-3 molecule in vivo is to disrupt this molecule in mice by gene targeting. After cloning cDNA and genomic DNA of LAG-3 gene, homologous recombination was carried out in ES cells. The efficiency of homologous recombination was very high; about one in six neo resistant clones was targeted clone. Injected targeted clones were well transmitted into germ line. As Littman et al reported recently, some helper-T cell function is saved in CD4 knock-out mice and it is possible that this helper function may be compensated by LAG-3 molecules. Therefore, in the mean time, we are disrupting both CD4 and LAG-3 molecules using double knock-out method. We will present preliminary results of analysis of the knock-out mice. Adhesion molecules play a major role in generating chronic inflammatory infiltrates by regulating leucocyte migration and local retention. First, they mediate adhesion to endothelium (EC). Second, they increase tissue retention by enhancing binding to extracellular matrix. Third, they promote homolheterotypic intercellular adhesion which is crucial in antigen responses. Finally, they deliver costimulatory signals for cell activation. CS are potent immunosuppressants affecting many immune functions including cytokine production; the relative importance of these effects is unclear. Since CS induce blood leucocytosis in vivo and reduce cellular infiltration in inflamed tissues, an ability to inhibit cell adhesion and migration may be important. We examined whether preincubation of resting or PMA-activated MNC with CS could inhibit 1) adhesion to IL-1 stimulated EC, measured as % of "Cr-labelled MNC binding to an EC monolayer, 2) formation of cell clusters, assessed by visual scoring on an arbitrary scale of 0-5 (after Rothlein et al) and 3) expression of LFA-I and CD2 adhesion proteins, measured as mean intensity of fluorescence (mif). First, pretreatment with CS was able to inhibit the binding to IL-1 stimulated EC of both unstimulated (22.8% vs 15.9%) and activated MNC (26.6% vs 14.1%). Second, although the initial PMA-induced aggregation was not affected by CS, CS-pretreated MNC had largely disaggregated by 72h (mean aggregation score 1 compared to 4 for non-CS-treated cells). Third, the expression of LFA-1 (155.7 vs 600.2) and CD2 (116.7 vs 261.3) was reduced in CS-pretreated compared to CS-untreated activated MNC. All these effects were mediated through the glucocorticoid receptor since they were inhibited by the receptor antagonist RU-486. In conclusion, CS-pretreated MNC were less able to adhere to EC and to form stable aggregates; consonant with this, LFA-1 and CD2 expression was decreased. We are currently investigating whether these effects are mediated by a direct action of CS on transcription of adhesion protein genes via their glucocorticoid regulatory elements (GREs) or indirectly, via decreased production of cytokines important for regulating adhesion, We have examined the relative roles of CD40, CD54 and MHC I1 signalling in the induction of B cell proliferation and responsiveness to IL-2. We used a non-cognate Thl helper system that is contact as well as IL-2 dependent. Paraformaldehyde-fixed, activated Thl cells induced expression of IL-2Ra. IL-2Rp and B 7 , and upregulated both MHC I1 and CD54 expression on B cells. Both the T-dependent induztion of Ig secretion, and B cell phenotypic chanyes were inhibited by anti-CD54 and MHC I1 mAbs and by a CD8-CD40-L/gp39 construct. We compared this to the effects generated through crosslinking of tnese molecules on B cells. Crosslinking CD40 upregulated expression of MHC 11, CD54 and B 7 , analogous to the effect of fixed Thl cells. Cocrosslinking of MHC I1 and CD54 generated comparable effects. Crosslinking of MHC I1 and CD54 (in the presence of IL-5) induced expression of a functional IL-2R on B cells, but did not induce proliferation. By contrast CD40 ligation induced B cell proliferation, but did not induce IL-2X expression or IL-2 responsiveness. Our data confirm the importance of the CD40:CD40L/gp39 interaction during delivery of T help for B cells, but show that CD40 ligation is not sufficient for B cell differentiation. CD54 and MHC I1 signalling is complementary to that of CD40 in the generation of T-dependent B cell responses to IL-2. We are presently investigating Protein Tyrosine Kinase activation that accompanies CD54 and MHC I1 ligation with a view to defining biochemical signalling pathways critical for these events. Supparted by MRC-Canada. CD-L' I cells are actilated t n signals transduced vid the T cell receptor, CD3 complex in the presence of accessory cells which deliver necessary costimulatory signals. We investigated the costmulator)-role of diverse extracellular matrix (ECMIproteins such as various collagen types. fihronectin. laminin m d undulin for resting and preactivated murine L U 4 + I cells. IIighl!, purified CIM+ 'I cells, treated with plate-hound anti-CDS antibodies, were not induced to IL-L secretion, 11-2 receptor upregulation and proliferation by coimmohilized ECM-proteins. Howe\er, J. contamination of the CD4+ T cell population with small amounts of accessory cells resulted in enhanced IL-L secretion and proliferation induced by coimmohilized coilagens or fibronrrtin. Irradiated splenocytes induced a significantly highcr lecel 01 7 cell proliferation. suggesting that signal\ &li\ci-c.d b? the ECSI-proteins are not sufficient for full T cell activ'ition. .\ntigen-specific cloned T cells reacted to contdct ivith ECII-proteins by augmented 11-2 secretion and expansion. Our data suggest. that cell rurface integrin receptors on resting 1 cellr .ue not activated by stimulation of the T cells through the TCR CI)3 c-ompleu. Rather, preactivation of the T cellr via acceswr? molecules in addition to TCR ligation is required. Thus onl) pr-eactivated C l N + T cells can profit from trimulatory signal, delivered by FChl-proteins. CD53 is a pan leukocyte glycoprotein which is a member of the recently described Transmembrane 4 Superfamily (TM4SF) which span the lipid layer four times. The structure and functional characteristics of these molecules indicate that they may play an important role in transmembrane signaling in different cells. Monoclonal antibodies to members of this family, including CD9, CD37, CD63 and TAPA-1, have been shown to exert effects on activation of human platelets and leukocytes. Recently, it has been shown that cross-linking of CD53 in the membrane of human B cells, monocytes and granulocytes induce calcium fluxes. In order to investigate if CD53 could induce B cell proliferation and differentiation, we have measured responses following cross-linking of CD53 and compared these with signaling through sIgM. The CD53 mAb (MEM53) was not able to activate B cells alone, but increased proliferation was observed after cross-linking with sheep-anti-mouse H+L chain (SAM) We have generated a monoclonal antibody, PlC5, which recognizes a cell surface antigen expressed on human monocytes, granulocytes and activated T lymphocytes. Expression is constituitive for monocytes and granulocytes and is inducible with allogenic and mitogenic stimuli for T lymphocytes. Immunoprecipitation experiments revealed a specific cell-surface labeled polypeptide of 135 kD detected on human monocytes and CD8+ T cells. The P1C5 mAb inhibited T cell activation as assessed by allogenic stimulation in v i t r o . We have used the P1C5 mAb to isolate a fulllength cDNA clone which when transiently expressed in fibroblastoid cells results in cell-surface expression of the P1C5 epitope and a precipitable polypeptide of 135 kD, indistinguishable from that expressed by monocytes and activated T cells. DNA sequencing revealed a novel 3,340 bp insert containing a 1,021 aa open reading frame predicted to comprise a type I integral membrane protein. The extracellular domain contains seven variable-type Ig domains and exhibits moderate but significant sequence homology to several members of the Ig gene superfamily. Our results indicate that the P1C5 antigen is a novel member of the Ig gene superfamily that appears to play a role in T cell activation. The leucocyte integrin LFA-1 (CDlla/CD18) and its major ligand ICAM-1 (CD54) are required for many adhesive functions of leucocytes. Regulation of this intermolecular interaction is controlled by LFA-1 which can alternate between adhesive and non-adhesive states. On T lymphocytes, triggering the TCR/CD3 complex with antibodies induces LFA-1 to bind to ICAM-1 in a transient manner. The activation of LFA-1 following cell surface receptor triggering occurs by unknown "inside-out'' signals which are thought to modulate preexisting cell surface LFA-1 receptors. Phorbol esters have been shown to cause a sustained activation of LFA-1 which suggests that the serine/threonine kinase PKC (protein kinase C) could be involved in the regulatory pathway. We have investigated the role of tyrosine kinases, PKC and intracellular calcium in the regulation of LFA-1 adhesion with emphasis on TCR/CD3 mediated activation. Using inhibitors specific for PKC and tyrosine kinases we have analysed their effects on the ability to stimulate LFA-1 activation. We have measured LFA-1 activation using an adhesion assay in which T cells are induced to bind to rICAM-1 immobilised on plastic. We have also studied the ability to induce the activation epitope on LFA-1 recognised by the mAb 24. Results have indicated a role for tyrosine kinases in a post receptor-occupancy signalling event which seems to be necessary for T cells to adhere to ICAM-1 in a more stable manner. The nature of this signalling event is currently under further investigation. Upon activation LFA-1 undergoes a transient conformational change during which it switches to the high affinity state for binding to CAM-1. However the biochemical correlate which causes LFA-1 activation is still unknown. We wanted to investigate whether the spatial distribution of LFA-1 on T cell surfaces alters upon activation. Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer detected with a FACScan provides a good means for determining the proximity of cell surface molecules. The transferred energy between a Fluorescein labelled donor antibody and a Rhodamin labelled acceptor antibody is proportional to the distance between the antibodies. We measured the energy transfer between activated LFA-1 and various other cell surface molecules and compared it to energy transfer between non activated LFA-I and other cell surface molecules. We found that activated LFA-I acting as an energy donor or acceptor revealed a much higher energy transfer than non-activated LFA-I . This suggests that LFA-I molecules move closer to each other upon activation. Another finding was that higher energy transfer occurred using activated LFA-I as a donor and CD3 as an acceptor than with non-activated LFA-1 as the donor and CD3 as the acceptor, suggesting that activated LFA-I molecules are in closer range to CD3 than nonactivated LFA-1 molecules. In keeping with this finding was the observation that CD4 and CD8 also revealed higher energy transfer with activated LFA-1 than with non-activated LFA-I . No difference in the energy transfer was found between activated LFA-I and non-activated LFA-1 and other leukocyte proteins such as CD45RA or CAM-1. These results provide evidence that upon activation, LFA-1 colocalizes with the T cell receptorKD3 complex. The CD2O/B1 gene encodes a B lymphocyte specific protein involved in the regulation of B cell proliferation and differentiation. Transfection studies with 5' deletion 0 2 0 promoter-CAT consmcts have identified two regions of the promoter between bases -186 and -280 and bases -280 and -454 that contain positive regulatory elements. The proximal region has a diverged octamer binding site termed the BAT box that is likely important in maintaining transcription of CD20 in mature B cells and its induction in pre-B cells. Placement of this sequence element upstream of a heterologous promoter resulted in B lymphocyte specific activity of the construct. Deletion of the BAT box from the CD20,5, promoter-CAT construct resulted in a 50-708 loss of activity compared to wild t y p . An footprint has been identified over this site in B cells. The distal region confers a lymphoid specific activity when placed upstream of a heterologous promoter. Three. of five mobility shift assay probes spanning this region bound nuclear proteins. Two of the sites -450 to -432 and -376 to -355 have been studied in detail using mutant probes and competition experiments with known cis-elements. The first binding site has been identified as a NF-Y site and the second as a BSAP binding site. Evidence for an protein-DNA interaction at the BSAP site has been found. Deletion of the sequences between bases -455 and -410 resulted in a substantial increase in the activity of this consmct compared to CD20. e54 pmmoter-CAT suggesting the presence of negative regulatory elements in this portion of the promoter. Preliminary results with reporter plasmids containing mutations of either the NF-Y or the BSAP sites suggest that both factors have negative regulatory effects on CD20 gene transcription. footprinting of other regions of the CD20 promoter has identified several additional regions likely important in 0 2 . 0 gene transcription including a large footprint just proximal to the major transcriptional start sites. Identification of the proteins interacting with cis-elements in these regions is in progress. These studies are leading to a better understanding of the mechanisms conhulling B lymphocyte specific expression of the CD20 gene. Stephen G. CD7 is the earliest T cell surface marker molecule to appear during T cell ontogeny which is believed to act as an accessory molecule in T cell activation. CD7 has previously been reported to associate with the TCR complex, CD45 and a protein tyrosine kinase. The CD7 cytoplasmic tail contains the coiisensus sequence for PtdIns 3-kinase binding (Tyr-X-X-Met) at tyrosine 197. This motif is also found in the cytoplasmic tail of the co-stimulatory molecule CD28 which has recently been reported to modulate D-3 phosphoinositide lipids, the products of PI 3-kinase activity. We have found that ligation of the CD7 molecule on the leukaemic T cell line Jurkat with a monoclonal antibody also leads to time-dependent elevation of D-3 phosphoinositide lipids, specifically PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 and PtdIns (3, 4) P2. In contrast, monoclonal antibody ligation of CD5, another T cell surface molecule that associates with TCR and is tyrosine phosphorylated but lacks the consensus motif for PI 3-kinase binding, failed to elicit any change in D-3 phosphoinositide levels. These results imply that CD7 may influence T cell activation processes via modulation of D-3 phosphoinositides. The mechanism of CD7 coupling to PI 3-kinase to CD7 is under investigation. V159 Terminally differentiated plasma cells and mouse T cells do not express Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class II genes although class I1 gene expression is observed in pre B cells and mature B cells as well as in activated human T cells. Transient heterokaryons were prepared and analyzed to investigate the mechanisms of inactivation of MHC class II gene in mouse plasmacytoma cells and mouse T cells. The endogenous MHC class I1 genes in both mouse plasmacytoma cells and mouse T cells can be reactivated by factors present in B cells. This reactivation of class II gene is also observed by fusion with a human T cell line which express MHC class II genes but not with a class II negative human T cell line. It appears that the loss of MHC class I1 gene expression during the terminal differentiation of B cells or T cell lineage is due to absence of positive regulatoty factor(?.) necessary for class II transcription. To clone the factor plasmacytoma cells were transfected with cosmid DNA. MHC classs II positive cells were then sorted and cloned by limiting dilution. The cosmid DNA was rescued from the sorted transfectants and it is under characterization. V 160 STIMULATION OF NAIVE CD4 T LYMPHOCYTES BY ACTIVATED B CELLS, Delanie J Cassell a n d Ronald H Schwartz, Laboratory of Cellular a n d Molecular Immunology. National lnstltutes of Health, Bethesda. MD 20892 TcR occupancy a n d a s y e t undefined signals mediated b y interaction b e t w e e n costimulatory ligands on antigen presenting cells (APC) and CD28 on T cells. 87. a ligand expressed on certain APC subsets, hinds CD28 a n d initiates a costimulatory p a t h w a y in T cells triggered via their TcR. CTLA4. a CD28 homologue, has high affinity for 87 and binds to potentially costimulatory ligands expressed on dendritic cells a n d activated b u t not resting B cells. In contrast t o resting B cells, d e n d r i t i c cells a n d activated B cells c a n s e r v e a s stimulators for Activated macrophages are important effector cells for immune responses to many parasites and immune responses are strongly modulated in part by the effect of Th cell-derived cytokines on macrophages. Thl-derived cytokines such as interferon-y, are strong stimulators of macrophage activation, while cytokines produced by Th2 cells, including IL-4 and IL-10, have been shown under some conditions to inhibit macrophage activities associated with inflammatory responses. IL-13, a recently described cytokine produced by Th2 cells, is capable of downmodulating macrophage activity in a manner similar to, but more specific than that described for IL-4. Treatment of activated macrophages with IL-13 reduces the production of monokines in response to IFN-y or lipopolysaccharide, both potent stimulators of these factors. The effect on the production of monokines (such as IL-12) by macrophages could greatly affect T cell subset development. We have also shown that IL-13 affects the production of nitric oxide, which has been implicated in both macrophage cytotoxicity and macrophageassociated immunosuppression. The suppression of nitric oxide by IL-13 leads to a decrease in parasitacidal activity by activated macrophages. However, our data indicate that IL-13 has plieotropic effectswhile the inflammatory potential of activated macrophages is significantly reduced, the potential of other macrophage subsets is unimpaired. These data indicate that IL-13 could be a potent modulator of immune responses in vivo, with effects that embrace both macrophage suppressive and macrophage potentiating functions. Stimulation of a human T cell clone (P28D) by antigen presenting cells (APC, i.e. murine fibroblasts transfected with appropriate MHC class I1 molecules and presenting a diptheria toxoid antigen) results in marked changes of the T cell shape. These changes, observed within a few tens of seconds after the beginning of the interaction between the two cell types, are characterized by a flattenning, and the appearance of long protrusions which allow T cells to interact with several APC at the same time. T cells deformations take place before any detectable increase in intracellular Ca2+ concentration, [Caz+] , (as measured with fura-'2 on the same imaging system) can be observed. When [Caz+] i increases, T lymphocytes stay flat, retract their protrusions but remain in contact with at least one APC. Protein kinase C (PKC) is probably involved in these shape changes. Indeed, PKC activators like phorbols esters also provoked shape changes in T cells (even though less dramatic than those elicited by APC). More importantly, pretreatment of T cells with a PKC inhibitor (calphostin C) prevented the appearance of the morphological changes elicited by APC. The large increase in [Caz+] i triggered by APC plays a key role in the retraction of cell protrusions. T cells which fail to give a [Ca2+li response stay deformed. Application of ionomycin or thapsigargin to these cells provoked not only a [Ca2+li response but also a retraction of elongated pseudopods. Thus, shape changes represent early and transient events in T cells responding to antigen presentation. Their role in the activation of T lymphocytes remains to be determined. Class II-ffcYIuIC/CD18+/CD54+/CD3-phenotype We have previously shown that this cell line is capable of activating naive, allogeneic CD8' T cells in a MHC Class I-restricted fashion. This finding was surprising in that other MHC Class I+/II-cell types (P388D1, L929, BW5147, PAM212, peritoneal exudate cells) were substantially less effective Antigenspecific T cell stimulation requires the delivery of both an antigenic and a costimulatory signal e.g cytokines and/or adhesion molecules In this regard, particular attention has focused on B7iBB1 molecules which are strongly expressed on cells of the Langerhans cell/dendritic cell family. Using a murine antiB7 mAb, we found that 80/1 cells diplayed anti-B7 reactivity similar in magnitude to that seen with cultured Langerhans cells. In contrast, P388D1, L929, BW5147 and PAM212 were negative. Importantly, the continuous presence of anti-B7 mAb in cocultures of 80/1 cells and allogeneic CD8+ lymph node T cells resulted in a 90 -94% inhibition of the MLR Moreover, pretreatment of 80/1 cells with the anti-B7 mAb led to a 57% inhibition of the allogeneic MLR, whereas pretreatment of responder CD8' T cells with anti-B7 mAb had no effect. In summary, we have demonstrated that presence of the costimulatory molecule B7 on the cell line 8O/1 is required for optimal activation of Class I disparate allogeneic CD8' T cells, suggesting that the addition of costimulatory molecules may render non-immunogenic MHC Class I-bearing cells capable of eliciting primary productive immune responses. These findings have important clinical implications concerning the development of vaccination strategies against endogenous pathogens. H L A -D Q , -DR and -D P genes are found within the major histocompatibility complex in man. The homologous genes in mice are HZ-A and H2-E respectively, HLA-DP having no expressed murine counterpait. HLA-DQ is of particular interest because of it's association with a number of autoimmune diseases, eg. IDDM, coeliac diease and multiple sclerosis. However this situation represents rather a paradox as this molecule generally plays a marginal role in antigen presentation in the periphery. It has been suggested that variation in the level of expression of DQ on thymic cells compared to peripheral cells, as well as differences in the distribution of polymorphic residues in the peptide binding groove of DQ and DR molecules, may imply a different mode of operation for DQ in the immune response. Since D Q and DR differ with respect to both the regulatory and coding sequences a comparative study of both these regions is being c2u-ried out using transfectaiits and transgenic mice. /ti vitro analysis of the variation between isotype promoters has involved the sub-cloning of various upstream segments (160, 650 and lO00bp in length) of D Q , DR, H2-A and H I -E to a reporter gene and subsequent transfection into a panel of mouse and human cell lines. These represent examples of thymic, macrophage/inonocyte and B cell lineages. It is hoped that these experiments will help to determine whether the high level of DQ found i n the thymus relative to antigen presenting cells in the periphery. can be attributed to tissue specific promoter elements upstream of the gene. Irr i i w studies involve the further examination of the level of expression and tissue distribution of DQ in HLA-DQw3 transgenic mice, compared to mice in which the endogenous D Q promoter ha\ been replaced by that of H-7-E. To this end we have generated FVB/N mice containing multiple copies of D Q B 1 *0302 cDNA linked to I I 2.2Kb segment of the H-3Eo promoter. Analysis of these mice will be described. Although the most efficient processing and presentation of antigen is carried out by professional antigen presenting cells (eg macrophages, dendritic cells, B cells) evidence has accumulated that other, hut not all, cell types are capable of performing these functions. We have examined the capacity of a murine myoblast cell line (C2C12) to process and present antigen to class I restricted T cell hybridomas. Transfectant C2C12 clones constitutively expressing H-2Kb were produced by lipofection and limiting dilution. Two Kb expressing clones, Kb-5 and Kb-17, when exposed to the ovalhumin (OVA) peptides OVA 55-62 and OVA 257-264 stimulated IL-2 secretion by the Kb-restricted T cell hybridomas IG8 (OVA 55-62) and GA4.2 (OVA 257-264). To analyse antigen processing capacity, native OVA was inuoduced into the cytoplasm of Kb-17 by electroporation and then co-cultured with IG8 or GA4.2. Both T cells were activated to produce IL-2. The unuansfected parent cell line was inactive in both assays. We have also demonsuated by FACS analysis that the C2C12 cell line constitutively expresses low levels of the co-stimulatory molecule B7 and that its expression can be up-regulated by 24 hour exposure to the cyclic AMP analogue dibutyql cyclic AMP (dcAMP). Thus this murine myoblast cell line can present antigenic peptides to, and activate, antigen-specific MHC resnicted T cells. The stimulation of both T cell hybridomas after introduction of native OVA into the myoblast cell line indicates that processing of OVA by myoblasts generates peptides similar to those produced during processing by professional antigen presenting cells. Furthermore the expression of B7 on this cell line can be upregulated via a CAMP driven pathway which is activated after interaction of T cell receptors with MHC molecules. These data suggest that under the appropriate conditions skeletal muscle myoblasts may act as antigen presenting cells, consistent with the possibility that skeletal muscle cells can contribute to T cell activation in autoimmune inflammatory muscle diseaaes. Human melanomas are frequently infiltrated by tumor-reactiveT lymphocytes. The ability of these cells to elicit a specific anti-tumor response in vivo remains however to be established. Because lymphokine production is critical for both proliferative and effector functions of T lymphocytes, we have analyzed the ability of CD4+ and CD8+ melanoma-specific TIL clones to produce major lymphokines: interleukin-2 (IL-2), interferon-y (FN-y) and interleukine-4 (IL-4). as well as tumor necrosis factor (TNF). in response to autologous and allogeneic tumor cells. We report here that all the TIL clones did produce TNF upon stimulation by autologous and by some MHCsharing melanoma cells. Since this production was not observed on allogeneic melanoma lines not sharing a HLA molecule, and neither in response to autologous lymphoblasts, this established that tumorrestricted antigens were effectively recognized by these clones on melanoma cells. Melanoma cell recognition was however unable to induce the production of measurable IL-2, IL-4 or IFNyamounts by all the CD8+ clones from 2 patients (out of 4 analyzed) as well as by the majority of the CD4+ clones from the 4 patients under study. Only the CD8+ clones from 2 patients and some CD4+ clones from one of these 2 patients, did produce IL-2 and F N y under these conditions. Nonetheless all TIL clones did produce normal lymphokine patterns upon stimulation by the phorbol myristate acetate-calcium ionophore combination (PMA-Cal), showing the existence of at least three lymphokine secretion profiles among these clones, which could also be activated by anti-CD3 mAb. Differential capability of melanoma cells, expressing the specific MHC-peptide complex, to activate lymphokine secretion was then established by showing that CD8 and CD4 IL-2 producer clones failed to produce IL-2. in response to some allogeneic melanoma cells which induced as efficient lysis andlor TNF production by these clones as the autologous tumor cells. Defective lymphokine production in response to either autologous or allogeneic melanoma cells, suggests that antigen presentation by some, but not all, these cells is suboptimal or/and inducing anergy .This likely explains the failure of melanoma-reactive TIL to control tumor development at least in some melanoma patients. ANTITUMOR IMMUNE   HOST BONE MARROW DERIVED CELLS, NOT TUMOR  CELLS, PRESENT MHC CLASS I RESTRICTED TUMOR RESPONSE, Alex Y.C. Huang, Paul Golumbek, Elizabeth M. Jaffee. Mqigan Ahmadzadeh, Drew M. Pardoll and Hyam Levitsky, Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimorc, MD 2 1205 Many tumors have now been shown to express tumor specific antigens capable of being presented to CD8c T cells by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. Cunent antigen presentation dogma predicts that the tumor cell itself should present its own MHC class Irestricted antigens to T cells. However, earlier cross-priming experiments have demonstrated that at least some MHC class I-restiicted antigens may also he presented by bystander cells. Here, we show that there is no detectable presentation of MHC class I restricted tumor antigens by the tumor itself during priming of tumor-specific responses. Rather. the tumor antigens are exclusively preescnted by host bone marrow derived cells. We demonstrated that mice primed with a MHC class I negative tumor produced a CDXC T cell dependent antitumor immune response. To further investigate this phenomenon, we have constructed hone manow chimera mice, C57BL6 (H-2b) -> CB6Fl (H-2bxH-2d), which were immunized with a Balb/C deiived murine colonic epithelial tumor, CT26, that has heen transduced with a Moloney-based defective recomhinant retrovirus containing the nucleoprotein (NP) gene from the PRX influenza strain. The tumor-restiicted (H-2d) NP epitope, NP147-155, showed no detectahle recognition by the CTLs generated from the immunized chimeric mice in an in vitro CTL assay. In contrast, the H-2b restricted NP epitope. NP366-374, was strongly recogni7ed by the CTLs. T cells from the chimeric mice primed with splenocytes produced a strong CTL response against minor histocompatibility antigens in the context of either H-2d or H-2h molecules. indicating that the failure of generating CTL against H-2d restricted NP epitope was not due to the selection bias during TCR maturation in the chimeric mice. These results imply that an efficient mechanism exists in vivo for transfer of MHC I-restricted antigens to hone manow deiived antigen presenting cells (APCs). They also suggest that HLA matching may not he critical in the clinical application of allogeneic tumor vaccines. The murine MHC class I1 region encodes two well characterized heterodimers, H-2A and H-2E. In addition, the region contains two other loci encoding potential class 11-like proteins. We have biochemically characterized the heterodimer encoded by one of these, H-20. The other locus, H-2M. has not yet been shown to give rise to any translated proteins. Analysis of cDNA sequences indicate that H-2M is present in common laboratory strains of mice and that it, like H-20, is virtually nonpolymorphic. We have made soluble variants of the H-20 and H-2M molecules by expressing truncated cDNA constructs in Schneider-2 Drosophila cells. These constructs encode the extracellular domains of the a and p chains, either directly, or as fusion proteins with immonoglobulin Fc domains. Protein yield of 0.5-lmg per liter of culture medium has allowed us to purify both H-20 and H-2M to homogeneity. The purified proteins have allowed us to raise antibody reagents against the two molecules and these are now being used to study the expression and tissue dismbution of these class I1 molecules. Purified molecules are also being used to study peptide binding and to determine binding affinities for the invariant chain and for CD4. LElSHMANlA DONOVANI, Paul M. Kaye. Nicola J. Rogers, Julia C. Scott. Department of Medical Parasitology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. London. WClE 7HT. Visceral leishmaniasis (VL) i s chardcterised by a lack of recall T h ltype responses in virro. In mouse models of VL, a disease spectrum ranging from early cure to non-cure can be observed, the batter displaying some. though not all, of the characteristics of human VL. Initial studies had demonstrated that stnins representative of these dfferent disease patterns elicited an early Thl-type response, but that this waned with time in non-curing mice. Importantly, no evidence was found for a reciprocal T cell response involving IL-4 or IL-5 (Kayc ct.al. JJmmun01.146 2763-2770 1991) . As antigen presenting cells isolated from these mice, or infected in virro with L. donovani, are deficient in their ability to support anti-CD3 mediated proliferation of CD4+ T cells, we examined the effect of infection on the expression of costimulatory molecules. Bone marrow macrophages. grown in CSF-1, express low levels of both 87 and HSA. This can be enhanced by 24-48h exposure to LPS, heat killed Lisreria and to a lesser extent by IFN-y. I n contrast to bacterial stimuli, infection with L. donowani amlistigotes fails to up-regulate expression of these molecules and indeed abrogates the basal levels observed in untreated macrophages. Funhennore, infection with this pxasite inhibits, in a dose dependent way, the subsequent response to bacterial and cytokine inducers of 87 and HSA. Immunohistochemical analysis in the liver of non-cure mice demonstrates that HSA and B7 are either absent or expressed at very low levels by infected Kupffer cells and epitheliod cells. These data are the first to suppon the contention that deficient expression of costimulatory molecules may underlie some chronic pllraitic infections. Mice were pulsed with myoglobin intravenously and MHC class Il-positive antigen presenting cell populations from different organs were isolated after various tlme intervals. Specific antigenlMHC complexes were quantitated by cocultivation of the APC subsets with myoglobin-specific T-T hybridoma cells in vifro. Half-lives of antigenlMHC complexes differed both between organs and between compartments of the same organ. Half-lives in peripheral organs (spleen, bone marrow, mesenteric lymph node, and skin) ranged between 2 and 8 h, whereas in the thymus half-lives between 13 h (cortical epithelial cells) and 22 h (medullary dendrltic cells) were observed. Half-lives in vivo were Independent of antigen processing, since intact protein or antigenic peptides yielded similar values. The regulation of half-lives in sifu b biosynthelic MHC class II turn-over and tissue kinetics orthe different APC subsets will be discussed. The considerably longer half-life 01 peptide/MHC complexes in the thymus as compared to peripheral organs may reflect the distinct role which antigen presentation plays in both organs, i. e. induction of tolerance versus induction of immunity. PRIMARY AND SECONDARY T-CELL RESPONSES VSING A TCR-TRANSGENIC MOUSE MODEL, Brian L. Kelsall, Rolf 0. Ehrhardt, and Warren Strober, Laboratory for Clinical Investigation. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892 Oral immunization with protein antigens often results in antigenspecific systemic suppression as well as the induction of local secretory IgA. This unique regulation may be due to antigen processing and presentation by peyer's patch (PP) dendritic cells (DC). We isolated DCs from the PPs of BIO.A mice by transient plastic adherence and analyzed their surface phenotype by FACS analysis, and their ability to stimulate both primary and secondary Tcell responses in vifro using T-cells from mice transgenic for a TCR (Val llVb3) specific for the 88-104 COOH-terminal peptide of pigeon cytochrome C (CyC) and IEk. After one day in culture, as compared with spleen DCs, PP DCs had the same surface expression of B7/661 and antigens recognized by the DC-specific antibodies 33D1, and N418. A 5-10 fold higher level of MHC class II molecules was found on PP DCs. In addition, only PP DCs expressed a novel antigen recognized by monoclonal antibody G8.8. Primary stimulation of peripheral lymph node (LN) T-cells with CyC pulsed spleen and PP DCs resulted in equal proliferation and IL-2 production, but significant levels of Interferon-gamma (IFN-g) only with the PP DCs (121 Ulml for 5x105 T-cells/ml vs. 9 Ulml for spleen DCs, p=0.006). Both FACS sorted CD4+ and T-cells depleated of CD8+ cells with immunomagnetic beads produced IFN-g (155U/ml and 138Ulm1, respectively), as did FACS sorted CD8+ Tcells when supplemented with 50Ulml IL-2 (80Ulml IFN-g) and stimulated with CyC pulsed PP DCs. Primary IFN-g production was blocked with antibodies to murine IL-12 (10 U IFN-g/ml). Secondary stimulation of LN or spleen T-cells with CyC pulsed DCs resulted in a similar increased production of IFN-g with PPDCs (mean 10 fold higher than with spleen DCs in 3 Although sporozoites (SPZ)-specific T cell responses, as partial effectors of protective immunity, and parasitized red blood cells (pRBC)-specific T cell responses have both been induced by exposure to radiation-attenuated Plasmodium sporozoites (SPZ), the cellular and antigenic requirements for the maintenance of the immune protective status have not been investigated. The availability of PBL from protected as well as SPZ-exposed but no longer protected human volunteers prompted us to address this process. Since a repeated in vitro exposure of macrophages to pRBC results in an eventual loss of phagocytic activity, we hypothesized that an intact macrophage function may be one of the key factors in the maintenance of protective immunity by providing steady availability of recognizable antigens required for the expression of memory T cells. Accordingly, our investigations include analysis of macrophage APC function and its interphasing relationship with the pRBC-responding T cells. Preliminary results demonstrate that macrophages pulsed with pRBC lysates induced proliferative T-cell responses of SPZimmune PEL, whereas such responses were suppressed in the presence of macrophages pulsed with intact pRBC. Furthermore, T cells from protected volunteers secreted IL-2, IL-4 and IFN-y in response to intact or lysed pRBC, while only IL-2 was induced in non-protected volunteers. The IL-2 receptor was upregulated only in cell cultures from malariaprotected volunteers. By analyzing the course and mechanism of lymphocyte activation and monitoring the expression of various cell surface markers we hope to gain more insight into the interaction between the parasite and cells of the immune system. Janet Livenidge, *Peter Giabowsb,pd John V. Forrester, Departments of Ophthalmology and Medicine and Therapeutics, University of Aberdeen Medical School, Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB9 2ZD, Scotland UK. Local presentation of retinal antigen by organ resident antigen presenting cells has been suggested as an early event in autoimmune uveoretinitis, leading to activation of autoreactive T cells and enabling their migration across the blood-retina barrier. We have shown that the retinal pi rnent epithelium (WE), which forms part of this banier, profoundfy suppresses the proliferation of lymphocytes to specific anbgen, mitogen or IL-2, even in the presence of exogenous anagen presenting cells. Analysis of supernatants from these cultures reveated very high levels of P G q (90nglml) and nitrite (35ph0,the stable end rcduct of nitnc oxide synthesis. A cDNA probe for the inducible form of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) was generated by RT/PCR of total RNA from cytokine stimulated W E cells which on sequencing showed identity to iNOS cloned from rat hepatoc tes. Using this probe, Northern analysis of total RNA extracted kom cytoldne stimulated W E cells showed induction of a 4.5 kbp mRNA transcript upon cytokine stimulation. Treatment of cultures w i t h indomethacin (Ipplrnl) reduced PG% levels to background and restored proliferahon to control levels despite continued g e n e d o n of elevated nitrite levels (upto 127.5 &Q in the supernatants. L-NMMA, a competitive inhibitor of 1-arginine metabolism reduced both nitrite and PGQ levels and partially restored proliferation. These results support the theory that nitric oxide enhances cyclooxygenase activity and may act as an inducible mediator of immunosuppressive mechanisms within the microenvironment of the eye at the site of lymphocytre activation, Dendritic cells have been reported to be very competent antigen-presenting cells for various soluble protein antigens. Langerhans cells (LC) are dendritic cells that reside in the epidermal skin. It is generally believed that LC, after they have acquired antigen in the skin, migrate to the draining lymph node and prime antigen-specific T-cells. In H-24 mice, an intradermal injection with rat type I1 collagen (CII) in adjuvant results in a strong proliferative T-cell response towards CII and eventually also development of arthritis. To investigate whether LC could be the initiating APCs for the activation of CII-specific T-cells, we have analyzed the capacity of freshly isolated LC, compared to spleen cells (SC) and peritoneal macrophages (PEC), to stimulate CII-specific T-cell hybridomas. It was found that LC were unable to present two distinct Tcell determinants on CII, unless the antigen was administered as a synthetic peptide. Both of these T-cell determinants were, however, well presented by both PEC and SC. In contrast, three other protein antigens, i.e. myelin basic protein, ovalbumin and pepsin, were efficiently presented by LC. Furthermore, both ovalbumin and pepsin were also presented by PEC and SC, whereas myelin basic protein was presented by SC, but not by PEC. These findings suggests that macrophages, rather than LC, are the initiating APCs in the immune response towards CII. Alternatively, macrophages degrade CII into peptides capable of binding to the MHC class I1 molecule on the cell surface of the LC, which then could serve as the APC interacting with the T-cells in the draining lymph node. McCoy, M. Shayne Page, Brian J. Merkel, John K. Inman, and Robert Stutman, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298 The antigen, pigeon cytochrome E, was coupled to human femc transfemn by a heteroligation technique to target antigen into the endosomal transport pathway via transfenin receptors. The ability of various types of presenting cells that do or do not express transfenin receptors to process exogenous antigen in their endosomes was investigated by the stimulation of antigenspecific CD4+ T cells with the transfenin-antigen conjugate in a serum-free assay. When three B lymphoma cells were the source of presenting cells, the conjugate was significantly more potent than native antigen in activating the T cells. The conjugate and antigen were similarly presented by splenic B cells that lack transfemn receptors. Treatment of the presenting cells with chloroquine or paraformaldehyde interfered with the T cell response to the conjugate, indicating thal the conjugate still required processing to activate T cells. The conjugate followed an intracellular pathway similar to transfenin, remaining in low density vesicles. Within 5 minutes after internalization, degraded conjugate was detected in isolated early endosomes and did not accumulate in these organelles, which is consistent with an early processing compartment However, both a macrophage hybridoma and a MHC class E L cell transfectant hardly elicited a T cell response to the conjugate, although stimulation with native antigen was readily observed. These findings could not be attributed to an absence of transfemn receptors or receptor-mediated internalization of the conjugate, nor to differential expression of MHC class I1 molecules or Ii chain by non-B presenting cells. The poor presentation of the conjugate by the L cell transfectant was associated with diminished catabolism of the conjugate, however the macrophage hybridoma rapidly degraded the conjugate to a comparahle extent as a B lymphoma cell. Peritoneal macrophages, which lack transfemn receptors, and the macrophage hybridoma induced a response to the conjugate only at concentrations that allowed internalization by fluidphase pinocytosis, suggesting that the processing of the conjugate by these cells may q u i r e entry into the lysosomes. The lower potency of the conjugate compared to native antigen with non-B presenting cells indicates that these cell types process the conjugate by a different mechanism than used by B cells. Differences in the mechanism of antigen processing utilized by presenting cells of distinct cell lineages may influence immune responsiveness.  V 179 GENERATION OF IMMORTALIZED FUNCTIO-NAL DENDRITIC CELL LINES, Ricciardi-Castagnoli P., Paglia P. and Granucci F., CNR Center of Cytopharmacology, University of Milan, Milan 20129, Dendritic cells are extremely efficient in the presentation of MHC associated peptides and the most potent activators of naive T lymphocytes but the mechanisms responsible for these properties are mostly unknown. Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that a recombinant retrovirus transducing a mycMH2-envAKR fusion gene was able to immortalize cells of the monocytic-macrophage lineage. We employed this vector to generate dendritic cell (DC) lines. One of these, named D2SC/l, constitutively expressed B7/BB1 and the HSA molecules as well as an array of B2 integrins such as the CDl l c (N418) which are known to be good markers of mouse DC. In addition, D2SCI1 cells also express CD2 and CD44 without prior activation. We also tested the ability of D2SC/1 cells to present class I1 restricted antigens. For this purpose, D2SCI1 cells were pulsed in vitro with various amounts of soluble native hen egg lysozyme (HEL). HEL was presented very efficiently by IFNy-treated D2SC/I cells to HELspecific T cell hybridoma 1H11. 3 . Surprisingly, IFNy treatment did not affect the level of class I1 expression although IFNy was necessary to generate APC function. The identification of the IFNy-induced molecules which regulate antigen presentation in DC is in progress but neither cell surface expression of MHC molecules nor the expression of adhesion or co-stimulatory molecules seems to be affected by IFNy. Macrophages and B-cells both function as APC, however, they differ in their capacity to present antigens. Preliminary studies indicate these two cell types also differ in I-chain processing. In human Blymphoblastoid cell lines (B-LCL) a 21 kilodalton fragment of the invariant chain, termed LIP, along with a series of 11-14 kilodalton fragments, termed SLIPS accumulate following treatment with a cysteine protease inhibitor. By comparison only the SLIP fragments accumulate in IFNy-induced human monocytes and macrophages. Biochemical analysis indicates that there are differences between SLIPs from B-LCL and macrophages. Potential explanations for these differences are being investigated through studies to: 1) identify and compare the proteases involved in I-chain processing, 2 ) define posttranslational modifications of the I-chain in each cell type, and 3) localize the site(s) of I-chain proteolysis in B-LCL and macrophages. As surface expression and the generation of functional class I1 complexes is dependent on I-chain release, understanding the molecular events which regulate I-chain processing is critical. 94305 We have previously demonstrated that CD4+ T cells from allcrgic individuals are predisposed to produce IL-4 in respinse to allergens, and that allergen immunotherapy greatly reduces IL-4 production in an allergen specific fashion (J.Exp.Med. in press). The mechanism that results in the reduction of IL-4 synthesis in treated individuals is not known, but may be related to the route of antigen administration (subcutanco~~~ly versus naturally inhaled) and/or the antigen dose (pg injected vs. pg levels inhaled). (APC) type on cytokine production, CD4+ T cells from allergic donors were cultured with various concentrations of antigcii and different AFC, including punfied irradiated autologous macrophages (Mac) or mitomycin C-treated E rosette negative (E-) cells (contaimng B lymphocytes and Mac). We demonstrated that low concentrations of allergen (0.033 pg/ml) favor IL-4 production whereas high concentrations of allergen (3-30 pg/ml) favor IFN-y production. This effect was observed both with allergen and with the nonallergen tetanus toxoid, in both allergic donors and nonallergic donors who had been recently boosted with TT. Proliferation of the antigen specific CD4+ T cells was inversely related to IL-4 production, in that maximal proliferation of CD4+ T cells occurred at high concentrations of antigen, when IL-4 production was minimal and IFN-y production maximal. Addihon of anti-IFN-y mAb to cultures did not reverse the suppressive effect of high concentrations of antigen on IL-4 production, indicating that enhanced levels of IFN-y were not responsible for the observed decrease in IL-4 production. Since at low concentrations of antigen, B cells efficiently present antigen for which they express surface receptors, we tested the effect of APC type on cytokine production in response to allergen by CD4+ T cells from allergic donors, and demonstrated that mitomycin C-treated E-cells induced significant IL-4 synthesis whereas irradiated Mac induced minimal IL-4 production. CD4+ T cells can be modulated by the antigen dose and APC type, and suggest that immunotherapy operates through such mechanisms. Since previous studies have shown that the cytokine profiles of m e m~r y CD4t T cclls are difficult to alter with antl-cytokine antibodies, soluble cytokine reccptors or cytokines themselves, mampulatlon of the APC type may be an alternative mcthod to modify the cytokine profiles of such CD4+ T cells. In order to test the effect of antigen dose and antigen-presenting cell These results demonstnte that cytokme production in m e m~r y Recent studies have provided strong evidence that the failure of the immune system to eliminate tumors that arise de MVO is due to an inability to respond to tumor-specific antigens. We have recently shown that vaccination with irradiated B 16 melanoma cells tnnsduced with retroviral vectors carrying the GM-CSF gene results in generation of potent, specific, and long-lasting anti-tumor immunity. The anti-tumor response was found to be dependent on both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. In addition, examination of the vaccination site revealed an extensive local influx of activated macrophage-like cells as well as a moderate number of granulocytes. Since several studies have suggested that GMCSF plays an important role in the maturation andlor function of specialized antigen presenting cells, we are. examining the possibility that localized expression of GM-CSF by vaccinating rumor cells might specifically enhance tumor-antigen presentation by host dendritic cells. Using the method of Steinman, we have isolated dendritic cell precursors from muiine bone m m w and stimulated their maturation with GM-CSF. These cells were characterized using a combination of flow cytomeuy and viral antigen presentation assays. When immature day 5 or day 6 dendritic cells were pulsed overnight with irradiated wild type B16 melanoma in vim0 and subsequently injected into C57BU6 mice, tumor-specific CD8+ T cells were generated in vivo as demonsuated by in v i m CTL assays. This in vim0 MHC-restricted antitumor activity also correlated with rejection of challenge tumor by mice previously vaccinated with the in vifro primed dendritic cells. V 183 ABNORMAL THYMIC IgG2b EXPRESSION CO-SEGREGATES WITH T-CELL LYMPHOPENIA  IN CROSSES INVOLVING THE SPONTANEOUS  DIABETIC BB RAT, S . Tullin, L. Hornum, M. Jackerott and H. Markholst, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark One genetic component of spontaneous autoimmune diabetes in BB rats is linked or identical to the recessive T cell Iymphopenia trait on chromosome 4. The trait is characterized by severe reduction of peripheral T cells, absence of regulatory TR6 +T cells, and poor response to T cell mitogens. The remaining T cells are enriched for autoreactive capacities. The underlying genetic defect is expressed either in thymocytes or in the thymic APC's of bone marrow origin. Differential screening of a cDNA library from MHC class I1 purified thymic cells from a normal rat with total cDNA probes from lymphopenic and non-lyniphopenic rats, respectively, resulted in identification of 10 different cDNA's detectable with the latter probe only. The sequence of one of these showed 100% homology to the y 2 p heavy chain of immunoglobulin. Northern blotting experiments with size separated thymic R N A from lymphopenic and non-lymphopenic rats showed that the lgy2b transcript was present only in non-lymphopenic rats. However, FACS analysis showed similar numbers of B lymphocytes present in thymi of lymphopenic and nonlymphopenic rats. Since the Igy2b locus is not on chromosome 4, the observed I g G b mRNA level difference appears to be a secondary phenomenon. It remains to be shown whether or not the T-cell lymphopenia of the BB rat is caused by deficient thymic B-lymphocytes. Central to the process of organ-specific autoimmunity is the question of the immune svstem's reaction to peripherally-expressed antigen. Although deletion or anergy seems to act upon selfreactive cells specific for ubiquitous antigens, these processes may not account for tolerance to tissue-specific antigens. To investigate tolerance mechanisms evoked toward proteins expressed specifically on the thvroid epithelium, we have developed a transgenic mouse model using membrane-bound Hen Egg Lvsozvme [HEL] under the control of the rat thyroglobulin promoter ITLK-1 and TLK-2 lines]. Both lines of mice do not displav spontaneous infiltration, and in the low-responder b haplotype, immunization with HEL or HEL peptide does not induce pathology Double-transgenic mice have been made bv breeding TLK-2 with HEL-specific Ig or TCR transgenic mice. B cell numbers, phenotype, and function in (Ig x TLK) mice are equivalent to those from Ig single transgenics, indicating antigen expression in the thyroid has little effect on B cell tolerance. Despite the presence of anti-HEL Ig in the serum, the thyroids in these animals do not displav immune infiltration. T cells from HEL-specific TCR transgenics uniformly express the transgenic Vp at high levels, but show a range of expression of the transgenic V a . (TCR x TLK) mice show a reduction in the numbers of both immature and mature CD4+ T cells expressing high levels of idiotype TCR. Despite this reduction, these mice spontaneously develop marked thvroid infiltration. Double-transgenic animals, nonetheless, are of normal sze and weight, and can reproduce. These results suggest that tolerance to some peripheral anhgens is mcornplete, and that autoimmune pathology can be induced bv increasing the frequency of specific effectors. ' Victoria N. Yuschenkoff and David C. Parker, Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester, MA 01 655 To test the hypothesis that B cells are tolerizing antigen presenting cells in acquired immunologic tolerance we have been examining the role of B cells as APC in vivo. We transfuse spleen cells from transgenic mice expressing the membrane-bound form of human IgM on their B cells into syngeneic, non-transgenic Fvb mice and then challenge the mice with human IgM (Fc fragment) and measure serum antibody responses. We find long-lasting and antigenspecific tolerance in mice transfused with transgenic spleen cells as compared to non-transfused controls or mice receiving normal cells. Adoptive transfer experiments indicate t h a t tolerance exists in both the B cell and T cell compartments of transgenic cell recipients. When mice are transfused with transgenic cells 2 weeks post-challenge priming to human IgM can be blocked and mice transfused 8 weeks post-challenge display reduced anti-human IgM antibody titers. Spleen cell proliferative responses in these mice are also reduced as compared to controls. Experiments in progress include determining where and how long the transfused transgenic cells persist in the recipient mice, examining the capabilities of resting vs. activated transgenic 6 cells in inducing tolerance to human IgM and determining how the transfused transgenic B cells are able to interfere with priming to human IgM. with RIN microsomal membrane proteins and IL-2 using autologous, irradiated PBL as an antigen presenting cells (APC). These T cells also proliferate specifically to stimulation with normal rat islet microsomal proteins demonstrating that the RIN antigenic specificities were present in the normal islets. Using Class 11, allele specific monoclonal antibodies in inhibition of proliferation studies in two patients identified DR-restricted, antigen specific T cells (patients HS and MR). Studies using microsomal preparations from several rat tissues demonstrated that rat brain cortex, cerebellum and cerebrum proteins specifically stimulated the human diabetic T cell lines and clones, in addition to normal islet proteins. Using electroeluted proteins of RIN microsomal membrane preparations fractionated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, showed that the T cell lines (HS and MR) recognised a number of different molecular weight polypeptides which varied in the two cell lines. The fact that some of the antigens recognised by the diabetic patient derived T cell lines are common between islets and brain suggests that either glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), peripherir. or some other unknown anti_gen(s) may be recognised. Present studies are aimed at using recombinant islet proteins and differential screening of an islet cDNA library to begin to define some of the autoantigens recognised by these T cell lines and clones. Proliferation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) in response to anti-CD3 antibody or Staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA) is only partially inhibited by glucocorticoids (GC) at optimum concentrations. GC-resistant proliferation driven by anti-CD3 is dependent on IL-2, while that driven by SEA is not. Since Interleukin-10 (IL-10) has been demonstrated to be both immunostimulatory and inhibitory, we have examined the role of IL-10 in GC-resistant proliferation. Dexamethasone (Dex) had no effect on IL-10 production in SEA stimulated cultures. In anti-CD3-stimulated cultures, IL-10 production was inhibited 50% by M Dex. Steadystate levels of IL-10 mRNA were not correspondingly decreased, indicating an acceleration of message decay or a post-transcriptional inhibition. Anti-IL-10 antibodies failed to reduce proliferation to either stimulus in cultures containing GC, indicating that IL-10 produced during a proliferative response (peak on day 1-2) did not support GC-resistant proliferation. When exogenous IL-10 (2-20 ng/ml) was added at the beginning of culture, IL-2 produced in response to either anti-CD3 or SEA was inhibited 8349% and proliferation in response to anti-CD3 was inhibited 79% (See also J. Immunol. 150:4754, 1993). Proliferation in response to SEA was inhibited only 21%, and this inhibition was increased only slightly, to 32%, upon inclusion of neutralizing antibody to IL-2. These data indicated that GC-treated cultures remained sensitive to inhibition by IL-10. In addition, these data also suggest that proliferation to superantigen may be supported by an IL-2 independent mechanism which is insensitive to both IL-10 and GC inhibition. Collagen induced arthritis (CIA) is an experimental autoimmune disease elicited in genetically susceptible strains of mice by immunization with heterologous type I1 collagen. This experimental disease is mediated by the immune response of both T cells and B cells and susceptibility is restricted by the class I1 molecules of the MHC . In order to study the T cell determinants of bovine t pe II collagen (CII) that mediate the autoimmune response in H-ZJmice, we have identified a cyanogen bromide fragment of bovine CII, CII(124-402), that induces arthritis in DBN1 mice. Using an overlapping set of mimotope peptides to map the T cell response to CII(124-402), we have determined that the I-Aqrestricted T cell response to this collagen fragment is mediated by a single immunodominant antigenic determinant. Consequently, this determinant plays a central role in promoting the production of the collagen specific antibodies and the induction of CIA in H-29 mice. Characterization of this immunodominant determinant revealed that the core residues required for T cell stimulation consists of only 8 amino acids and is located at amino acids 260 through 267 of bovine CII. In order to identify which of these amino acids are critical for I-Aqrestricted antigen presentation, alanine-substituted analog peptides were tested for their ability to he recognized by CII(124-402)-primed T cells. Alanine substitutions at positions 260 (I), 262 (G), 264 (K), and 266 (E) all reduced the ability of the analog peptides to stimulate the proliferation of CI1(124-402)-primed T cells with respect to wild t pe peptide, indicating that these amino acid residues are critical to I-Ahestricted T cell stimulation. Alanine substitutions at the other four positions did not significantly alter their stimulatory capacities. This systematic analysis of the contribution of each of these amino acids, in conjunction with sequences of other peptides known to bind I-Aq, have allowed us to propose a eptide binding motif for the collagen arthritis susceptibility allele, I-Ab: V188 THE  CLONING  OF  CD70  AND  IT'S  IDENTIFICATION AS THE LIGAND FOR CD27 The non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse is a widely studied animal model of type I diabetes. Investigations of the pathogenesis of diabetes in NOD mice have provided evidence that autoreactive I' cells participate in the process of beta cell destruction. It is thus of interest to iderltify antigens that target beta cells to this T cell mediated destruction. In an analysis of islet-specific T cell lines establishcd from islet infiltrates obtained from pre-diabetic NOD mice, we observed a potent proliferative response to insulin. An analysis of nominally islet cell-specific T cell clones derived from these lines revealed that a high frequency of these clones were insulin-specific. T cell hybrids derived from the islet-specific T cell lines also exhibited insulin specificity. The prevalence of insulin-specific T cells within populations of islet infiltrating cells and the availability of antigen within the beta cells may combine to produce extensive beta cell damage. The a n t e r i o r chamber (AC) of t h e eye i s known t o be an immune p r i v i l e g e d s i t e , due i n p a r t t o t h e l a c k of MHC a n t i g e n e x p r e s s i o n , t h e l a c k of lymphatic d r a i n a g e and t h e p r e s e n c e of r e p r e s s i v e f a c t o r s such a s t.ransforming growth f a c t o r -p ( T G F -P ) . I n j e c t i o n of IFN-y i n t o t h e AC i s known t o overcome t h e s u p p r e s s i o n of a n t i g e n -s p e c i f i c DTH responses normally s e e n i n t h e eye. Transgenic mice e x p r e s s i n g i n c r e a s e d Results from the structural analyses of autoimmune antibodies to DNA have indicated that autoimmunity to DNA develops as a selective, antigen-specific immune response to DNA. The recurrent and preferential expression of both germline and somatically-derived variable region structures among autoimmune anti-DNA antibodies suggests that DNA or, more likely, DNA-protein complexes may provide the immunogenic stimulus necessary for the development of autoimmunity to DNA. More recent results from similar analyses of immune antibodies to DNA have confirmed the previous results. Normal, non autoimmune mice immunized with calf thymus DNA-peptide complexes produce anti-DNA antibody with serological and structural charactenstics similar to those of autoimmune anti-DNA antibodies. Under appropriate conditions, DNA can be immunogenic even in mice that are not predisposed to autoimmunity. When analyzed for their ability to bind to DNA from different species, both serum and monoclonal antibodies from both autoimmune (NZB x NZW) F1 mice and calf thymus DNA-peptide immune, normal mice bind to DNA from different organisms with different relative aviditles. Antibodies from both immune and autoimmune mice bound to viral DNA poorly. Both IgM and IgG monoclonal antibodies bound better to mammalian DNA than to bacterial DNA. Autoimmune IgM monoclonal antibodies bound calf thymus DNA with higher avidity than mouse DNA. Autoimmune IgG antibodies generally bind equally well to calf thymus and mouse DNA. These results suggest that tolerance to DNA may not be complete in normal, non autoimmune mice. Immunization w i t h heterologous DNA can eventually induce antibody with specificity for homologous DNA. It is not yet clear whether this possibility can also apply to autoimmune responses to DNA. Further analyses of both immune and autoimmune antibodies should provide more information about how specificity for self DNA develops in autoimmunity to DNA and about the nature and specificity of immunoloBcal tolerance to DNA. Recent work has shown that the immune response to a variety of antigens can be manipulated in vivo so a s to diminish the T cell immune response. In experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, successful downregulation of the immune response has been accomplished by administration of antibodies specific for the p chain of the predominantly used T cell receptor (TCR) or by injection of T cell clones, antigenic peptide analogs, or TCR peptides. Despite these successes, t h e mechanism of the downmodulation remains obscure, largely because it is difficult to follow a small population of T cells with a specific TCR in vivo. In order to explore the mechanisms involved in immunomodulation we have used ap TCR transgenic(TG ) mice, in which > 90 % of the T cells are CD4+ and bear the same cytochrome c-specific antigen receptor, and thus have a large population of T cells which can be followed in vivo . In vivo responses of the mice depend on t h e route of administration and the vehicle. Subcutaneous injection of PCC in CFA leads to sustained activation whereas intraperitoneal injection in IFA gives rise to initial activation followed by a state of relative anergy. Examination of cell surface markers in both cases reveals the T lymphocytes isolated from the animals demonstrate a CD4+CD69hiCD45RBlo phenotype. In neither case do cells develop a cell surface phenotype which has been associated with T cell memory. Initial attempts at manipulating this model system have shown that monoclonal antibodies specific for the p chain lead to elimination of antigen specific cells and to a downmodulation of the response. TCR peptide injection has led to decrease in T cell activation a s measured by CD69 levels. We are currently evaluating the mechanism of this phenomenon. The results of these studies will prove useful in optimizing ways to manipulate the T cell immune response in autoimmune disease. V 195   GENERATION OF CD4+ TCR TRANSGENIC MICE  SPECIFIC FOR THE SV40 T ANTIGEN: A NEW  TOOL TO STUDY INDUCTION OF TOLERANCE VERSUS  AUTOIMMUNITY IN A TRANSGENIC MOUSE MODEL,  'Irmgard Forster, #Ryo Hirose, #Jeff Arbeit and #Douglas  Hanahan, 'Institut fur Genetik, Universitat Koln, 50931 Koln,  Germany, and #Hormone Research Institute, UCSF, San  Francisco, CA 94143 Transgenic mice expressing the SV40 large T antigen (Tag) under the control of the rat insulin promoter (RIP) have been shown to be either tolerant toward Tag or develop a n autoimmune reaction against their pancreatic 13 cells depending on the onset and level of Tag-expression in ontogeny. We have isolated CD4+ and CD8+ Tag-specific T cell lines from infiltrated pancreatic islets of an autoimmune RIP1-Tag5 mouse and have cloned the T cell receptor (TCR) variable region genes expressed in one of the CD4+ T cell clones. The genomic V138.3-DB2.1-J132.4 and Va2-JaMT1-27 V gene rearrangements encoding an I-Ak restricted Tag-specific TCR were inserted into cosmid vectors already containing the TCR a and 13 constant region genes (provided by D. Loh) and used to generate TCR transgenic mice. Two lines of transgenic mice were obtained in which either 5.10% (Tag-TCR1) or 70-80% (Tag-TCR2) of peripheral T cells express the transgenic T cell receptor as identified by a clonotype specific antibody. Naive T cells from both transgenic lines proliferate vigorously in response to Tag-stimulation in vitro. The Tag-TCR mice are presently being bred to the RIP-Tag transgenic lines. Since the transgenic TCR has been cloned from a T cell known to be involved in the Tag-specific autoimmune reaction it will be interesting to follow the fate of the transgenic T cells during their development in either the tolerant or autoimmune Tagtransgenic backgrounds. Tc e l l s bearing Fc receptors for Fc portions of immvloglobulin (Ig) heavy chains have been reported to play a regulatory role i n Ig isotype production. T-cell Fc g m receptor, a factor produced by activated T-S U~~K C S S O~ cells during immune response plays. an important role i n the termination of IgG type of antibody response. Any derangement i n thc levels of the production of these receptors genetically or otherwise, can result in the continued production of antibodies iieyond the required levels. A siil>stnntial autoirrnune dnmsge to D-cell of pancreas i n type I dinlxtics i s supported by autoantibodies to pancreatic i s l e t cells and t o insulin. An indication o f elevated immmnoglobulin levels a s hyper R c e l l s function i s also been related to altered helper to suppressor ratio; l a t t e r k i n g reported decreased i n type T diabetes. We estimated T-cell Fc ganma receptor levels i n IDDM patients and compared w i t h the controls. ?he method ewloyed was t o obtain lymphocytes from whole blood and suh.jected to C o n 4 mediated activation for the expression of these receptors. 'Ihe activated T-cells ( A T C ) release these receptors when suspended i n senim f r e e modiiini. ' h e mean levels o f T-cell Fc gamma receptor i n control suh:jects (12.5 + 2.90), IDDN patiehts (3.3 + 0.72). Rir observation suggest t h a t t h e significant redriction in the receptor levels appears to he due to reduced nuinher of Tsuppressor cells. Significance of the results will he discussed. Type II collagen induced arthdtis (CIA) in mice is a T cell dependent, MHC dass II associated disease with similarities to human rheumatoid d t i s a). In mice, estrogen treatment has been shown to supprw the disease both prophylactically and theraptically. Both sexes of mice, casbated 01 n o d , are modulated by estrogen treatment To ~IY to found out the mechanism through which estrogen perform its suppressive effect in CIA we have investigated the eecis on lymphocyte activation The I cell dependent anti CII autoanhibody response are decreased but the B cells in the spleen are polydonaJly stimulated by estrogen Analyses of anti cI[ T cells rk m.vo by the delayed type of hypersenSlivity test, DTH, showed a suppressed response aft= estrogen treatment. We now report a reduction of gIFN producing T cells in draining lpphnods 10 days after immunization with CU after estrogen treatment, measured by a moo EIJSPOT assay. A correlation to a suppressed proliferation of anti OI specific T cells, measured with 3H-thymidine incorporation, was found. Further maIyses of the + m e profile of T cells during estrogen treatment are ongoing using bioassays with qoldne dependent cell lines, mice with disrupted 1 1 4 gene and semiquantitative PCR tedmiques. Anti-Sm antibodies are specific markers of human SLE and of murine models of this disease. In humans, the anti-Sm Abs are mostly lgGl and in MRUlpr mice, IgG2a; both are T-dependent isotypes. Other Ipr strains, such as BG/lpr, do not produce anti-Sm Ab spontaneously. The present study is aimed at identifying the cellular expression of background genes responsible for generation of the anti-Sm Ab response in MRUlpr mice. We used double chimeras made by transferring MRUlpr and B6/lpr-H-2k bone marrow into irradiated allotype heterozygous F1 mice. We used two different set of F1 host mice, viz., (MRUlprxMRUlpr-lghb)Fl and (MRUlplxBG/lpr-H-2k)Fl mice to examine the influence of non-lymphoid genes on auto Ab production. FACS analysis after 5 months of reconstitution revealed that both MRUlpr and BGApr-H-2k cells co-existed in roughly equal numbers. Antibody produced by each donor could be distinguished by allotype-specific assays. lgG2a anti-Sm was made only by MRL-derived B cells despite the presence of T cells which might potentially provide help to the BG/lpr 3 cells. The frequency of anti-Sm Ab producing individuals was similar to that of unmanipulated MRUlpr mice (about 25%). lgG2a antichromatin and total IgG2a was mostly dominated by the MRLderived B cells in both sets of mice. B6-derived B cells produced more rheumatoid factor (RF) against their own anti-lgG2bb, while RF against anti-lgG2a was dominated by MRL-derived B cells. Also, the antibody profiles in both sets of host F1 mice were identical. This suggests that the commitment to produce anti-Sm and other auto Abs is determined by MRL-or BG-background genes which are expressed in (?pre) B cells and not in T cells or non-lymphoid cells. Structural analyses of anti-DNA antibody variable regions by us and others have demonstrated that both IgM and IgG anti-DNA antibodies i n autoimmune (NZB x NZW)F1 mice have the characteristics of secondary immune antibodies. These characteristics include recurrent and preferential expression of particular VH and VL genes and somatically denved structures that promote antibody binding to DNA. The most striking of these somatically derived structures i s the expression of one or more arginines in VH-CDW. Moreover, the avidity of anti-DNA antibodies for binding mammalian duplex, B-form DNA can be correlated to the relative positions of arginines in VH-CDR3. Arginines in VH-CDR3 of anti-DNA antibodies appear to be generated by junctional diversity during V-D-J recombination. There i s a much higher frequency of appearance of arginines in VH-CDR3 of autoimmune anti-DNA antibodies than for antibodies i n general. The purpose of this study was to determine whether antibodies from autoimmune mice have a higher frequency of arginines in VH-CDR3 in general when compared to antibodies from non-autoimmune mice. To answer this question we have compared the heavy-chain variable region sequences for monoclonal antibodies derived from LPS-stimulated B cells from pre autoimmune (NZB x NZW) F1 mice with those derived frm LF5 stimulated B cells from, non-autoimmune BALB/c mice. Both DNAbinding and non-DNA binding monoclonal antibodies from both types of mice were analyzed. Our results indicate that variable region structures of anti-DNA mAbs from the normal BALB/c and the (NZB x NZW) F1 mouse respectively are similar in all respects including the frequency and positlon of arginine residues i n VH-CDIU. Therefore the recurrent expression of somatically denved vanable-region Structures among autoimmune anti-DNA antibodies, particularly arginines in VH-CDR3, i s due to clonal selection and not to inherent differences i n antibody formation and expression in autoimmune mice. Since the selected structures common to anti-DNA antibodies promote protein binding to DNA, DNA or DNA containing complexes are likely to be the antigen(s) that stimulate and drive the anti-DNA antibody response in autoimmune mice. T lymphocytes play a critical role in the development of murine collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). As in rheumatoid arthritis, susceptibility to CIA is associated with the expression of particular MHC Class II molecules. In susceptible mouse strains, immunization with heterologous type II collagen (cll) induces an autoimmune disease with progressive joint destruction. To analyze T cell recognition of cII we have isolated T cell hybridomas that recognize a chick cII peptide fragment, cll(255-270) (TGELGIAGFKGEQGPK). We examined the response of these T cell hybrids to both denatured chick cII and mouse cII and found that chick cll was recognized, but mouse cll was not. We then assessed the role of particular amino acid differences between chick and mouse cII. Three residues in cIl(255-270) differ in these two species: residue 255 (T in chick to A in mouse), residue 258 (L to P) and residue 266 (E to D). Truncation analysis indicated that loss of residue 255 resulted in a 30 fold drop in activity. The peptide 258-270 was 100 fold more potent than 260-270. Replacement of residue 266 with alanine, or removal of this residue, resulted in loss of detectable peptide activity. These results suggested that all three positions that differed between chick and mouse were important in determining the stimulatory capacity of this peptide. Finally, we examined the activity of chick cll(255-270) bearing individual mouse substitutions, as well as the mouse cIl(255-270) peptide. The mouse substitutions at positions 255 and 258 had no effect on peptide activity. In contrast, substitution of the mouse residue (Asp) for the chick residue (Glu) at position 266 resulted in a 3000 fold reduction in the stimulatory capacity of the peptide. The activity of the peptide bearing this single substitution was identical to mouse cIl(255-270). These results indicate that a single, very consewative difference between self and nonself can dramatically effect T cell peptide recognition. Immunological tolerance to tissue specific autoantigens can be achieved by deletion or inactivation of autoreactive T cells, or by "ignorance", although other mechanisms might be involved. We have generated a T-cell receptor transgenic line (HNT-TCR) in which most CD4 T-cells express an !-Ad restricted, influenza hemagglutinin (HA) specific TCR. These mice were crossed with Ins-HA transgenic mice expressing HA in the pancreatic islet cells. Double transgenic mice showed no evidence of thymic or peripheral clonal deletion or clonal inactivation. The peripheral CD4 T-cells from double transgenic animals responded as well as cells from HNT-TCR mice to HA in calcium flux and proliferation experiments. However, two distinct phenotypes were observed in double transgenic mice depecding on the strain on which the transgenes were backcrossed. While mice backcrossed on the BALB/c background did not develop diabetes and rarely showed some low grade insulitis, double transgenic mice on the B10.D2 background developed early spontaneous autoimmune diabetes with a penetrance rate of more than 70% in some litters. The islet infiltrates were extensive, consisting mostly of CD4 and CD8 T-cells. The genetic effect noted here bears a striking resemblance to the genetic influence over immune responses to Leishmania major infection in which BALBlc mice develop a predominant Th2 response while B10.D2 mice generate a Thl inflammatory response. Preliminary results suggest that a similar mechanism operates in our system. The presence of antigen reactive, but non-pathogenic CD4 T-cells in BALB/c mice suggests a new mechanism of tolerance induction in which autoreactive CD4 T cells are induced to differentiate away from a pathogenic phenotype. This might be classified as "clocal diversion". EAE is an autoimmune disorder of the central nervous system (CNS) mediated by CD4' T lymphocytes specific for myelin basic protein (MBP). MBP-specific T lymphocytes can be isolated from healthy individuals, suggesting that the auto-reactivity to MBP is normally controlled, either in the induction phase andlor in the effector phase of the autoimmune response. In the present report we have examined whether regulatory mechanisms controlling the effects of MBP-specific autoagressive T cells could exen their activity at the level of the target tissue. In order to by-pass the inductive phase of the immune response, we have generated a MBP-specific T cell line derived from F1 hybrids between EAE-susceptible (DA) and EAE-resistant (AO) strains of rats. A myelin basic protein (MBP)-specific T cell line derived from F1 hybrids between EAE-susceptible DA strain and EAE-resistant A 0 strain was capable of inducing clinical EAE in F1 hybrids and DA, but not in A 0 rats. In vitro restimulation with MBP presented by A 0 antigen-presenting cells (APC) resulted in the generation of a MBPspecific subline restricted by RTl" MHC products which induced clinical EAE in F1 hybrids but not in the A 0 parental strain. Deletion of hosts' leukocytes using sublethal irradiation and cytotoxic drugs did not abrogate the resistance of A 0 rats, which argues against the involvement of hosts' lymphoid cells in the regulation of autoagression. However the preliminary results indicate that the transforming growth factor-p (TGF-P) affect the induction of EAE in this model. When susceptible DA host were treated with Salmonella typhi murium aroA mutant producing TGF-P the clinical signs of the disease did not develop. We postulate that TGF-P may differentially affect the functions of resident cells in the CNS of susceptible and resistant strain and the in sifu activity of the inflamatory cytokines during EAE development . The zona pellucida is an extracellular structure that surrounds the ovarian and ovulated oocytes. It has three major glycoproteins, ZP1, ZP2 and ZP3. ZP3 functions in fertilization as the sperm receptor. A 13-mer peptide from mouse ZP3 has a T cell epitope that induces autoimmune oophoritis, and a B cell epitope that reacts with antibody to murine ZP3. When the B epitope was partially truncated, the ZP3 peptide no longer induced antibody to the B epitope, but unexpectedly they elicited an antibody of the IgG class to the zona pellucida. That an exclusive T cell peptide of murine ZP3, without co-injection of the whole ZP3 protein, elicited autoantibodies whole ZP3, was confirmed as follows. First, the ZP3 T cell peptide did not contain additional B cell epitopes that crossreacted with native ZP3. Second, a T cell peptide from ZP2 was able to elicit the antibody which reacted with ZP3 protein. Interestingly, induction of autoantibody to the mna pellucida did not follow the ovarian disease process since the antibody response proceeds ovarian pathology, and ovariectomy 2 days following immunization did not affect induction of antibody response. These results suggest that ovarian self antigens normally drain from the ovaries and, in the extra-ovarian sit, stimulate B cell response in the presence of activated T cells. This autoantibody amplification phenomenon demonstrates conclusively that 1) self reactive B cells for ovarian autoantigens respond to endogenous ovarian antigen in vivo following activation of ZP3(or ZP2)-specific helper T cells, and 2) serum antibody in an autoimmune disease need not mirror the immunogen that initiates the disease process. Nonetheless, the autoantibodies bound to the ulna pellucida in vivo and are potentially important in disease pathogenesis. Collagen type II Induced Arthitis (CIA) is an erperimental model for rheumatoid arthritis. A dominant, heterologous T-cell epitope in CIA was inkoduced into a genomis clone of mouse 9 -e II collagen (cn) by changing one nucleotide which lead to an ammo add shift from D to E 'Ihe mutated gene was micro kjected into f e r t i k d C3HQ eggs ( a H-2q mouse sirain susceptible to CM ) and two transgenic lines were founded; The same epitope wa5 also intrcduced into a cassette construct of collagen type I ( which is a systemically available protein ) and miaoinjected i n UHQ. Again 2 founders were identified and given the name TX-1 and TSC-2. LNC from MMC-tramgenes respond both to heterologous CII and a synthetic peptide of the T cell epitope, but the proliferation is reduced. LNC from TSC-transgenes have no proliferative response to the peptide.This supports the belief that a is not negatively selected for in the thymus in contrast to systemielly available collagen Rather the T cells appear to be tolerized in the pedphery. The M C -1 mice do not spontanously develop arthiitis but they are susceptiile to ClA with a lower inddmce compared to normal C3HQ mice ( 40 and 100 % respedidy ). This system will be further investigated to enable us to follow the precise regulation a n d maturation of T-cells towxds a specified auto antigen not present i n the thymus. This lack of tolerance allowed forthe development of an inflammatory response in those mice with ruptured lens capsules. These results demonstrate that, for at least some tissues, lack of self reactivity is maintained by "clonal ignorance" rather than clonal anergy. AND BIOCHEMICAL ANALYSES OF SELF-TOLERANCE, Kim-Anh Nguyen, Joshua Kavaler, and Jan Erikson. The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA Anti-DNA antibodies are associated with the autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We have evaluated the mechanism by which anti-DNA B cells are regulated in anonautoimmune background by generating Balb/c mice whose B cells bear the V H~H~ heavy chain and the Vk8 light chain transgenes (Tg's). These transgenes encode an immunoglobulin (Ig) specific for singlestranded DNA (ssDNA). Earlier work had shown that although these anti-ssDNA B cells dominate the peripheral B cell pool and can be recovered as hybridomas, anti-DNA antibodies are not elevated in the serum of V~3H9/Vk8 mice. In this study, we have attempted to define these anti-ssDNA B cells phenotypically and functionally to determine if they are inactivated (anergized). We have found that splenic VH3H9/Vk8 Tg B cells consistently express reduced surface Ig when compared to their non-Tg counterparts. In response to the B cell mitogen LPS, VH3H9/Vk8 Tg B cells proliferate as well, or nearly as well, as non-Tg B cells. In contrast, when stimulated in an Ig-specific manner via Goat anti-Mouse IgM F(ab)'2 fragments, Tg B cells proliferate much less than non-Tg B cells. Finally, we have assessed V~3H9/Vk8 Tg B cell function in cognate T-B interactions. Non-Tg B cells exposed to Rabbit anti-Mouse IgM F(ab)'2 fragments internalize. process, and present the F(ab)'2 fragments to T cell clones specific for rabbit Ig, thereby activating the T cells. The B cells themselves are also induced to proliferate and secrete Ab with the cognate T cell help. VH3H9/Vk8 Tg B cells function equally well as antigen presenting cells in this system, and they also proliferate well. Despite their proliferative ability, however, VH3Hg/Vk8 Tg B cells could not be be stimulated under any of the above conditions to produce significant amounts of antibody relative to the non-Tg controls. We conclude, therefore. that these anti-ssDNA Tg B cells are anergized. and that this functional inactivation involves a block in their differentiation into antigen secreting cells upon stimulation. We are in the process of determining whether this block i s mediated by differences in early signalling events, such as tyrosine phosphorylation of activation-associated proteins. index (SI, 13Hl-thymidine uptake) of 5 4 and transferred (lo7 cells/mouse) severe EAE in all (28/28) SJL mice tested. In comparison, P14 showed a SI of 260 but failed to cause EAE in any (0131) mice after passive transfer of 2x10' cells. This was reflected by total incorporation of 35S-cys/met and c3H]glycerol into cellular proteins and lipids, respectively. Compared to P14, SC8 showed 53% less 35S-protein and 28% less 13H1-lipid labeling after PLP-stimulations. However, fractionation of cellular protein and lipid classes revealed qualitative differences. Gel electrophoresed proteins showed that SC8 cells had significantly higher labeling of proteins weighing 40,000. In contrast. P14 showed greater labeling of all other proteins with prominent labeling of proteins near 70,000. Lipids separated by TLC showed that P14 had incorporated more [3HI-glycerol into phosphatidic acid (PA) and produced low levels of 13H1-diacylgycerol (DG). Although PA can act as a precursor for DG, it represents a common intermediate for phospholipid biosynthesis. SC8 produced high levels of c3H1-DG, a protein kinase C activator, rather then channeling lipid metabolism into the biosynthetic intermediate PA. These results demonstrate that encephalitogenicity does not always directly correlate to PLPstimulated proliferation or total protein and lipid production. Fractionation of protein and lipid classes demonstrate quality differences in the types of proteins and active lipid metabolites generated during PLP-stimulation that may explain why less reactive SC8 cells are encephalitogenic and highly PLP-reactive P14 cells are not. Research into the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis (MS) has focused on myelin antigens as potential targets of autoimmune attack. Proteolipid protein (PLP), which makes up more than 50% of central newous system myelin, is a hydrophobic membrane protein with many properties that historically have made it difficult to study. The use of synthetic peptides based on the PLP sequence provides an alternative method for studying the immunologic properties of PLP. Using PBL from MS patients, long term TCL established in the presence of PLP reacted weakly to PLP in proliferation assays, however, these same lines were much more reactive to synthetic peptides of PLP. Thus, we established T cell lines (TCL) from the peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of MS patients in the presence of 5 separate synthetic PLP peptides. In 6/7 MS patients, proliferative responses were elicited most often to PLP 40-60 compared to four other PLP peptides (PLP 89-106, 103-120, 125-143, and 139-154), however, in 5/7 MS patients the response to PLP 89-106 gave the highest stimulation indices. Characterization of PLP 40-60-responsive TCL from a single MS patient, MSI, indicated that 6/7 TCL proliferating to the peptide also lysed PLP 40-60 pulsed autologous targets. All cytolytic PLP 40-60 TCL were CD4' and MHC class II restricted and further analysis of MSI TCL showed that the PLP 40-60 TCL were restricted by DR4 whereas the MBP TCL from MSI were restricted by DR6. These results suggest that MS PBL recognize several PLP peptides, with the predominant response to PLP 40-60. Since these cells phenotypically resemble T cells known to mediate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, it is possible that they may play a role in the pathogenesis of MS. To determine whether PLP peptide reactivity is associated with MS, we are currently examining Pf3L reactivity to various peptides of PLP and MBP in MS patients and normal HIA DR matched controls. strains by the injection of purified mouse cardiac myosin emulsified in Complete Freunds Adjuvant. We have previously demonstrated that this autoimmune myocarditis is induced by cardiac myosin-specific CLM+ T cells, and that antibodies are not involved in the induction of disease. We were interested in the role of T helper subsets in the inductive phase of this disease, and postulated that ineffective regulation of the immune response by Thl and Th2 cells is responsible for the breakdown of tolerance to the self antigen, cardiac myosin. IL-4 is critical for the differentiation of Th2 cells. Because a Thl-mediated response against cardiac myosin is most likely to be essential for the induction of disease, we studied the role of IL-4 in controlling disease induction. First, we found that a non-responder strain, C57BL/6, can be converted to a responder strain by systemic neutralization of IL-4 with the monoclonal antibody 11811. 4 of 5 11B11-treated mice got severe myocarditis, where 4 of 5 rat 1s-treated controls had no myocarditis. To further define the role of IL-4 in disease induction, we immunized mice which are deficient in ThZderived cytokines due to disruption of the IL-4 gene (Nature w. 245, 1993) . The IL-4 knockout mice immunized with myosin got severe myocarditis (5 of 5), whereas the immunized normal control mice did not get disease (6 of 7). These data show that IL-4 is critical in the regulation of the immune response to the self protein cardiac myosin. Whether this regulatory function is mediated directly by IL-4, or in conjuction with Th2 cells is not currently known. The mechanism of IL-4 mediated regulation of this autoimmune response is actively being investigated. This study investigates antigen mimicry in autoimmune disease induction at the level of the T cell peptide. A nonamer peptide from murine nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 6 chain (ACRB), which shared four amino acid residues with a nonamer peptide of murine ovarian zona pellucida glycoprotein ZP3, induced murine autoimmune oophoritis and IgG autoantibody to the zona pellucida. Crossreaction between the ACR6 and ZP3 peptides was established by the response of a ZP3 peptide-specific, oophoritogenic T cell clone to both peptides in association with IA(dBb). By substituting the ZP3 peptides by single alanine, four amino acids within the ZP3 peptide were found to be important for ovarian autoimmune disease, autoantibody response, and stimulation of the ZP3specific T cell clone. Substitution with conservative amino acid of three residues also ablated activity, whereas the fourth, a phenylalanine, was replaceable by tyrosine without loss of activity. Of the four critical amino acids, three were shared between the ZP3 peptide and the ACRB peptide. Moreover, polyalanine peptides with the four critical ZP3 amino acids or the four amino acids common to the ZP3 and ACRB peptides, induced immune response to ZP3 and elicited severe ovarian autoimmune disease. Thus, organ-specific autoimmune disease can occur through immune response against unrelated self (or foreign) peptides that share with a self peptide sufficient common amino acid residues critical for activation of pathogenic, autoreactive T cells. Both AU and Ak murine class I1 alleles present the immunodominant N-terminal Acl-11 peptide of myelin basic protein (MBP). In u-haplotype mice immunization with MBP Acl-11 induces experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), whereas Ak-expressing strains are less susceptible. We have been investigating how differences in the AU vs. Ak presenting molecule and in the TCR repertoire may give quantitatively and qualitatively different responses to this self peptide. Ak and AU differ by 16 residues, 6 in A, and 10 in Ap; the Ap differences appear to be responsible for T cell restriction. Transfectants have been generated expressing chimeric Ak/u molecules with single or multiple residues from the other allele; effects of these substitutions on T cell responses have been examined with panels of MBP Acl-11-specific Ak-and Au-restricted T cell hybridomas. Peptide-binding studies indicate that the peptide binds approximately 6-fold better to A" than Ak and that this may be due to the origin of residue 26 in the Ap P-sheet. Evidence from substitutions at polymorphic residues 38 and 61 suggests that these residues may affect peptide conformation in an allelespecific way. The side chains of these residues are in van der Waals contact. Substituting the k or u residue at either or both of these positions dramatically reduces the T cell responses without corresponding reductions in peptide binding, suggestion effects of these substitutions on peptide conformation. Functional assays with the transfectants and computer modeling studies suggest that the positioning of the side chains of 38 and 61 depends on the combination of residues at these positions and also on the origins of other nearby polymorphic Ap residuek). Genes of the HLA and T cell receptor (TCR) complex seem to contribute to the susceptibility of a number of autoimmune diseases. Nonetheless, they seem not to be sufficient for disease induction. To eliminate the influence of the genetic background we decided to study monozygotic twin pairs that were dis-or condordant for multiple sclerosis (MS). A general skewing of the TCR repertoire in affected individuals, visible only after stimulation with antigens was detected.' In vitro stimulation of PBL from MS patients with myelin basic protein (MBP), a suspected target antigen in MS, resulted most often in an overrepresentation of Va8-positive T ce1ls.l The sequence analysis of those T cells showed extensive CDR3 region heterogeneity for all individuals with severe MS. Normal control twins, the healthy individual of a discordant twin set and a twin set with a very mild form of MS showed restriction in their CDR3 regions. Tetanus toxoid (TT)-specific Va8positive T cells that had been generated from the same individuals displayed very limited heterogeneity regardless of disease. The CDR3 regions of MBP-and TT-specific T cells differed from each other. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic articular inflammatory disease that afflicts about 1% of the population world-wide. Increased risk for RA appears to be associated with certain HLA-DR haplotypes, such as DRB1*0101 (DRI) and DRB1*0401 (DR4Dw4), suggesting that these HLA-DR molecules are involved in presentation of antigens to the arthritogenic T-cells in the inflamed joints of RA patients. Thus far, the nature of the antigens responsible for initiation of RA pathogenesis or for sustaining the chronic inflammation in RA are unknown. We have searched for peptide sequences in cartilage proteins which encompass a DR4Dw4 peptide binding motif and synthesized 30 peptides thus selected. Using a direct, semi-quantitative in vifro binding assay (Joosten et al. submitted) we determined the relative affinity of these peptides for HLA-DR4Dw4. Subsequently, we investigated whether these peptides have the potential to induce Tcell activation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from RA patients. The results of these studies will be presented and discussed in light of the inflammatory response. Blocking of the antigen presentation function of MHC molecules by competitor peptides with high MHC binding affmity has been proposed as a potential immunotherapy for MHC-associated autoimmune diseases. To study the mechanism of disease inhibition by competitor peptides, we selected the MBP72-85 induced EAE, and the Mycobacteria induced AA model in Lewis rats. After in v i m definition of an EAE-and AA associated competitor peptide it appeared that, in MBW2-85 induced EAE the efficacy to inhibit disease development correlated with the MHC binding aMinity of the. Competitor peptides. Furthermore, by increasing the MHC binding affinity of the EAE inducing peptide the capacity to inhibit disease induction by addition of competitor peptides decreased. However, In the AA model, although the EAE analogue had a superior MHC binding affmity, the AA analogue was a better inhibitor of the disease. Remarkably, in contrast to what was seen in the EAE model and what was expected of a MHC competitor peptide, the AA analogue induced T cell responses cross-reactive with the original disease associated epitope. Therefore, it is concluded that besides MHC blockade an antigen specific mechanism was involved in AA inhibition by the AA analogue. Whether this antigen specific effect is due to a direct effect of the analogue on the arthritogenic T cells or to T cells activated by the analogue inducing protective regulatory T cell responses is currently under investigation. B cells accumulate in the spleens of mice lacking ap T cells. We tested serum Ig isotypes in 16 TCRa-/-and 14 matched TCRa+/heterozygotes. Surprisingly, the homozygotes showed higher levels of IgG (mean 11.9gll) due to an increase of IgG, while the heterozygotes showed consistently lower levels of IgG (mean 3.4 gll). Co-culturing B and y& T cells from the TCRa-/-mice showed that y6 T cells augment B cell expansion and IgGl production. To examine the 'non-ap T cell' -mediated help, T cells from TCRa-/-and connol Balb/c mice were cultured with either Con A or PPD. As expected high levels of IL2 & ILA were secreted by T cells from the control Balb/c mice in response to Con A but not to PPD. In connast, IL4 was detected in the supernatants of cultures derived from TCRa-I-mice in response to both Con A & PPD. Hypergammaglobulinemia and autoantibodies are hallmarks of some autoimmune diseases. We found significantly higher levels of anti DNA autoantibodies in TCRa-/-mice compared with TCRu+/-mice, more apparent for anti dsDNA (p= 0.0002) than for anti ssDNA (p= 0.01). Likewise, positive results were obtained with the TCRa-/-sera tested by Westem blot of Hela cell lysates & by immunoprecipitation of labeled Hela cell lysates. These results suggest that a cause of generalised auto-immunity may be an absence of ap T cell regulation. HSP70 reactive T cells have been isolated from inflammatory sites in several models of autoimmune diseases. Toxins that induw HSP70 expression (1.e. lead, cadmium, aminoglycosldes) are known causes of interstitial nephritis, often associated with T cell Infiltration. Our studies were designed to Investigate whether locally induced HSP and HSP-reactive T calls participate in chronic inflammation in experimentally induced tubulointerstitial nephritis. lmmunoreactive HSP70 was identified in kidneys of cadmiumtreated mice after 5-6 weeks,whereas interstitial infiltrates were seen after 6-10 weeks. Western blots of total cellular protein from cultured syngeneic renal tubular cells (MCT) probed with an Ab to inducible HSP7O revealed no detectable expression in unmanipulated cells, but induced expression with heat shock (420, 4h). Dose dependent increases in HSP expression were observed in cells treated with CdClZ 3.4x10'% at 12 and 16 h but not with lower cadmium doses. To investigate the role that HSP70 recognition plays in the development of interstitial nephritis, a T cell line (CdCL) was established by eluting T cells from the nephritic kidneys of SJL mice treated with CdClZ for 13 weeks. In parallel, a T cell line (HSP-1) was produced by immunizing SJL mice with an irnmunodominant synthetic peptide fragment of M. bovis HSP65: an antigen-specific control T cell line (HEL) was used for comparison. All T cell lines were CD4+, CDE-, a/p TCR+ and caused a DTH response to the appropriate antigen, but not to irrelevant peptides. HSP-1 and CdCi T cells were cytotoxic to heat shocked and CdCi2 pretreated cultured tubular cells in a dose dependent manner, whereas cytotoxicity was not observed with HEL cells. None of the T cell lines were cytotoxic to unmanipulated tubular cells. Moreover CdCl and HSP-1 T cells, but not HEL T cells, induced inflammatory renal parenchymal infiltrates on subcapsular transfer into cadmium treated mice prior to the development of CdC12 infiltrates, but at a time when immunoreactive HSP70 was detectable in the kidney. These results demonstrate that T cells reactive to an endogenous neoantigen are activated and participate in the inflammatory response initiated by an exogenous toxin. We believe that this paradigm is common and that interruption of these events could ameliorate progressive interstitial nephritis, irrespective of the initial insult. The NOD (Non-Obese Diabetic) mouse is a model for human type I diabetes. Lymphocyte infiltration into the islets of Langerhans occurs and later, destruction of islet cells leads to diabetes on a unique genetic background which includes I-A g-7. In our colony, diabetes usually occurs between 12 and 24 weeks of age with over 90% incidence of diabetes in the female animals. The aim of the study was to examine the role of the addition of the costimulatory molecule B7 onto islet cells in relation to a genetic background that predisposes to diabetes. NOD mice were crossed with transgenic C57BLJ6 mice expressing the human B7 molecule specifically on the islets of Langerhans. By 10 weeks of age, intense insulitis is seen in the (NODxB7) F1 mice and diabetes has developed in one mouse at this age. When the F1 generation were backcrossed to NOD, 4 out of 21 mice, which were B7 transgene positive and homozygous for NOD MHC, developed diabetes at 4 weeks of age and one mouse at 6 weeks. Histology has shown that, at 4 weeks, there is an intense lymphocytic infiltrate in the remaining islets of those mice developing early diabetes compared with littermates which are transgene positive but heterozygous for NOD MHC. The lymphocytic infilwte comprises B cells, CD8 positive and CD4 positive cells. These results indicate that the increased costimulatory capacity of islet cells allows the activation of lymphocytes which have the potential to cause diabetes in F1 mice which have a reduced genetic susceptibility and would not normally develop the disease. This increased level of activation also causes accelerated diabetes in mice that have a genetic background that predisposes to spontaneous diabetes. in B1O.TCRa congenic mice (H-2b; VDa) failed to augment EAMG. Therefore, the increased susceptibility observed in the VOc haplotype mice might be due to, the overexpressed nondeleted VD genes, and/or the deleted VD6/VD15 or the linked genes. To study the contribution of VD6 gene in EAMG pathogenesis, C57L mice (H-2b; VOa) were depleted of VO6+ cells with anti-VD6 monoclonal antibody before each immunization with AChR in CFA. FACS analysis of PBLs showed 4 % VD6+ cells in the antibody-treated group against 11.8% in the PBS-treated group. Functional depletion of VD6positive cells was confirmed by TCR-VD cross-linking assay. Five of nine (56%) VD6 cell depleted mice developed muscle weakness characteristic of myasthenia gravis(MG) in contrast to two of eight (25%) PBS-treated mice. This preliminary finding suggests that VD6+ cells might play a n important role in the suppression/regulation of a n autoimmune response to AChR and EAMG pathogenesis. The augmented EAMG susceptibility in TCR-VDc mice might be due to the deletion of the regulatory V06 gene. Similar TCR-specific regulatory mechanism might operate during the onset, remissions and relapses associated with MG or other autoimmune diseases. The multideterminant protein myelin basic protein (MBP) is the autoantigen in experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model for antigen specific T cell mediated autoimmune disease. For mice that express the H-2" haplotype, MBP Acl-11 is the dominant encephalitogenic determinant. It is known that most T cell clones specific for Acl-11 express T cell receptor (TCR) Vp8.2, and of all clones analyzed, regardless of TCR Vp, all utilize Dp2 and Jp2 elements. The NZW mouse strain (H-2z), which contributes to the spontaneous "lupus-like'' illness in (NZB x NZW)Fl mice has deleted Dpz and Jpz gene segments. NZW express class I1 (I-A and I-E) gene sequences with H-2uclass II. We Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that has pleiotropic effects on a wide variety of tissues. It has been shown that TNF-a is produced very early during thymic development and that administration of anti-TNF-a antibody can block normal thymic development in mice. Our recent study has demonstrated that administration of TNF-a in newborn NOD mice, in contrast to the results obtained with adult mice, accelerates disease onset, while anti-TNF-a treatment inhibits insulitis and completely prevents diabetes. The T cell response in TNF-a treated mice to a panel of pancreatic beta-cell autoantigens including murine GAD65 and 67, peripherin, CPH and HSP65 was enhanced, but was almost absent in anti-TNF-a treated animals. These data suggest that the acceleration of IDDM by TNF-a is possibly via up-regulation of an autoimmune response to the target organ while prevention of the disease by anti-TNF-a treatment may be mediated by down-regulation of these responses. To further determine the mechanism by which these treatments elicit their effects, we have investigated the regulatory effect of TNF-a on bcl-2 and Fas proto-oncogene expressions in lymphocytes during early development. and on thymocyte activation. Preliminary data has shown that TNF-a does not appear to modify bcl-2 expresssion in thymocytes. but does reduce Fas expression in CD4-CD8-cells, whereas Fas expression is up-regulated in CD4+CD8-subsets. Moreover, TNF-a inhibits thymocyte activation as measured by antibody specific for CD69, an early T cell activation marker. These TNFa mediated effects on thymocytes may correlate with positive or negative selection and could therefore contribute to the enhanced T cell autoimmune response and the acceleration of IDDM in the young NOD mice treated with TNF-a. Dendritic epidermal T cells (DETC) reside in the epidermal layer of skin where they establish intimate contact with keratinocytes. The strict tissue localization and absence of clonal diversity in the TCR of DETC led to suggestions that the immunological role of these cells may be distinct from that of peripheral a and p T cells expressing diverse TCR. We previously established that freshly isolated as well as cloned DETC release IL-2 and proliferate in the presence of stressed keratinocytes. This response was specific to DETC and judged by several criteria appeared to involve a signal transduced through the invariant Vy3/V61 TCR. However the functional consequence of this interaction remained to be characterized. We now demonstrate that activated DETC secrete at least one growth factor with specificity for keratinocytes. The mRNA coding for this cytokine was amplified following reverse transcription and cloned. Analysis of the DNA sequence indicated that the mRNA coded for a protein identical to mouse keratinocyte growth factor (KGF). To our knowledge this represents the first report of KGF synthesis by a cell type other than stromal fibroblasts. We. have failed to detect expression of KGF by T cells other than DETC consistent with the notion that DETC have a specialized function which involves KGF. Thus our current view is that, expression of KGF by DETC follows recognition of stressed or injured keratinocytes with the functional consequence of maintaining the integrity of the skin by allowing for timely and localized proliferation of keratinocytes. Goldberg, ShuChen Lyu, and Carol Clayberger, Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5247 Donor specific tolerance mediated by blood transfusions is a well established phenomenon. Class I MHC molecules have been shown to be critical for this effect, and peptides obtained from the structure of class I MHC were capable of mediating similar immunoregulatory effects in a non-allele specific manner. To investigate whether MHC class II was also capable of this effect, peptides were synthesized corresponding to the conserved alpha helical domains of several human MHC molecules. One 25 amino acid peptide, derived from the alpha helix of DQ A 03011, was found to inhibit in vitro proliferation, CTL precursor formation, and lysis of target cells by established CTL. This inhibition was not reversible with the addition of IL-2. The peptide was also found to be effective in vitro on rat lymphocytes. A series of 15 amino acid peptides that encompassed the 25 amino acid peptide and a series with single amino acid substitutions were synthesized. The activity of this peptide was defined to the 15 amino acid peptide from residues 62 to 76 of the primary sequence. Amino acid 69 was found to be critical for the peptide's effect. Additionally, data on the mechanism of effect of this peptide will be presented. The regulatory function of 76 T cells in CD8 CTL responses has been exploited in exogenous minor lymphocyte stimulating (MIS) antigen-lainjected mice. Adult mice of Mls-lb intravenously given 2000Rirradiated Mls-la bearing cells were found unable to mount hapten trinitrophenol (TNPkself specific CTL response if MIS is co-injected in the in V I Y O CTL inimunization , Previously a CD5+CD8-T cell from Mls-treated mice was shown to mediate the CTL tolerance by adoptive transfer experiments. Here we further identify the CD5 T cell to be not of Vg 2, 6, 7, 8 or 11 subtypes. In stead, it is a CD3+ag-y6+ T cell. Thus, a y6 'T cell can be activated in a viral infection ( for instance, by Mls-la as in this report) and it down-regulates the CTL responses nonspccifically in the individuals. It has been postulated, based on several investigations in mouse and human that y6 T cells are activated in response to cellular stress induced by trauma or infection. Their functional response to these activation signals and how this contributes to host immunity is poorly defined. It has been demonstrated that yS T cells can perform effector functions similar to up T cells, most notably cell cytotoxicity and cytokine production. It is the latter function that we have investigated in Vyl. 1 and VyZ transgenic mice infected with parasites that produce either Thl or Th2 responses. Mice (C57BL/6) that usually develop protective Thl responses to infection with Listeria monocytogenes or Leishmania major, but are transgenic for the Vyl.1 TCR chain, are less protected than their corresponding nontransgenic littermates. This was measured by following the magnitude of the localized inflammatory response, enumerating the infectious organisms and quantifying cytokine production. In contrast, in preliminary experiments with mice infected with Nipposfrongyhs brasiliensis, a parasite that is repelled by a Th2 response, the Vyl . 1 transgenic mice generated a more aggressive response to the parasite compared to nontransgenic littermates. Experiments with infected Vy2 transgenic mice are ongoing and the results will be presented at the meeting. These data suggest that at least a subpopulation of yS T cells may function at sites of trauma and injury to recognize stressed cells and, as a result, initiate and/or influence the type of immune response generated. The scid genetic mutation in mice produces a severe deficiency of functional lymphocytes. Associated with this defect is abnormal organization of the microenvironment in lymphoid organs. Mice can be cured of this lymphoid deficiency by grafts of bone marrow from immunocompetent mice. Mice transgenic for the Vyl .1Cy4 TcR chain demonstrate a marked skewing of the yS repertoire towards expression of the Vyl.lCy4 TcR chain throughout development. These mice are characterized by alterations of lymphoid stromal elements and an early appearance of T cell reactivity. Herein, we have examined the effects of reconstituting scid mice with bone marrow cells &om mice transgenic for the Vyl.lCy4 TcR chain and non transgenic littermates. Both scid and reconstituted scid mice were analysed using multicolor flow cytometery and extensive immunohistological staining. The scid thymic microenvironment showed a rudimentary medulla, relatively disorganized and collapsed cortex, with T cell maturation arrested at the CD3-4-8-stage. The spleen and lymph nodes of these mice show no delineation between T & B cell areas. Following reconstitution with bone marrow fiom the transgenic mice the isolated thymic medullary elements were observed to undergo massive expansion, contrasting normal development, organizing into a morphologically and phenotypically delineated cortex and medulla. In addition, peripheral lymphoid organs in these mice showed distended PALS, extensive T cell areas and B cell follicles. These observations indicate that T cells expressing the transgenic Vyl.lCy4 TcR chain may play a developmental role in the formation of a functional thymic microenvironment and therein a repertoire of immunocompetent r cells. The majority (50 -90%) of y6 T cells in the peripheral blood of adult individuals expresses a T cell receptor (TcR) which uses Vy9 and V62 as variable elements. Little is known about the distribution of other Vy gene elements in the remaining 10 -50% of y6 T cells. We have generated a monoclonal antibody (mAb) termed 23D12 which recognizes 3 different Vy elements, i.e. Vy2, Vy3, and Vy4. The specificity of mAb 23D12 was defined by flow cytometry (FCM) analysis of a large panel of T cell clones and transfectants expressing molecularly well-defined y6 TCR elements. Here we have studied the Vy gene expression in peripheral blood y6 T cells by three color FCM analysis applying established mAb directed against Vy9 and Vy4, as well as mAb 23D12 directed against Vy2, Vy3 and Vy4. On average, 79.9% of y6 T cells expressed Vy9, 11.9% Vy2/ Vy3, 4.4% Vy4, and 7.5% one of the remaining Vy5, Vy8, VylO or Vyll elements. There were remarkable variations in the y6 subset composition between individual donors. The majority (69.8%) of Vy2/Vy3/Vy4-bearing cells coexpressed V61. This is in contrast to Vy9-bearing y6 T cells, of which 83.1% used V62 and only 12.7% V61. Taken together, this data identifies Vy2/Vy3 as the second most frequently used set of Vy elements in human peripheral blood y6 T cells. y16 T cell diversity, we have cloned and sequenced the variable region junctions of V61 T cell receptor transcripts in the human small intestine and colon. Intestinal mucosal biopsies were obtained from defined regions of small intestine and colon via fiberoptic endoscopy. After extraction and reverse transcription of biopsy RNA, V61 specific transcripts were amplified by PCR and then cloned and sequenced. RESULTS: One V61 transcript predominated within each intestinal biopsy, although a broader population of sequences was represented at a very low frequency. Moreover, individual biopsies obtained within a several centimeter region of either the small intestine or colon contained identical dominant transcripts. The V61 transcripts that were dominant in the small intestinal biopsies differed from those that predominated in the colon biopsies of the same individual. Moreover, the dominant transcripts present in the small intestine and colon biopsies differed among different individuals. The majority of V61 transcripts in the small intestine and colon were in frame. These data indicate there is marked regional oligoclonality of the V61 bearing 716 T cell population in the human small intestine and colon, and favor the notion that positive selection plays a major role in shaping the V61 repertoire in the intestinal tract. This work was supported by NIH grant DK35108. Hubert T Kim, Edward L. Nelson, and Carol Clayberger, Departments of Pediatrics and Cardiovascular Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 Although y,6 T cells have been postulated to act as a surveillance mechanism which eliminates transformed or otherwise damaged cells, little is known about tumor recognition by y,6 T cells, including the antigens that are recognized and the molecules that present them. Previously, we described human y,6 cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) which recognize autologous B cell lymphoma (J. Exp. Med. 169:1557 , 1989 . We now show that these y,6 T cells lyse heterologous cells transfected with tumor immunoglobulin light chain gene. Furthermore, the light chain is recognized as processed peptide in an idiotype specific manner. T cell recognition does not involve classical MHC antigens, but could be blocked by antibodies directed against the heat shock protein grp75. These findings show that y,6 T cells can recognize highly polymorphic antigens such as tumor idiotype, and implicate heat shock protein as the antigen presentation molecule. Several unique features distinguish y6 T cells from the more frequent ap T cells. y6 cells are, for instance, more abundant at epithelial sites such as the gut, skin, liver and female reproductive tract, while ap cells dominate in the lymph nodes and spleen. In addition, y6 cells are produced in distinct waves during ontogeny with cells expressing TCR Vy5 being produced earliest and seeding the epidermis. These are followed by Vy6+ cells, then other y6 T cell types. In addition, it has previously been shown that while the precursors of Vy5' cells are to be found in fetal liver they are not detectable in adult bone marrow. Furthermore, a fetal thymic microenvironment is required. Specific circumstances may be required for the generation of other y6 cell types. We have reconstituted unmanipulated s c i d mice with 3 sources of haematopoeitic precursor cellsfetal liver, neonatal spleen and adult bone marrow. Recipients were examined 8 weeks post-transfer f o r reconstitution of lymphoid cells in the thymus. lymph nodes, spleen, liver, gastrointestinal epithelium, epidermis and uterine epithelium. Both the T and B cell compartments were reconstituted, with fetal liver giving closest to normal reconstitution (normal cell numbers were observed in some organs) and adult bone marrow gave the poorest reconstitution. This difference could not be fully overcome by increasing the bone marrow inoculum. Regardless of the source of precursors, the T cell compartment was more extensively reconstituted than the B cell compartment. Within the T cell compartment y6 cells generally were not reconstituted as well as ap cells. While some y6 subsets appeared in normal numbers others, such as the V p + subset, were present in significantly lower numbers than normal. These results may well reflect the pattern of T cell development in ontogeny with subsets that normally develop prenatally and around birth relatively diminished in number compared with normal, and later developing subsets present as normal. The Thymus Leukemia (TL) antigen is a nonclassical class I molecule encoded by the T3 and TI8 genes in the mouse MHC. It is expressed on epithelial cells in the mouse intestine and in other sites. The TL antigen shares a number of structural features with classical class I molecules. In addition, we have shown that it requires 82m for surface expression and it is capable of interacting with CD8 However, transfection of both RMA-S and D. rnelanogaster cells demonstrates that unlike classical class I molecules, stable surface expression of TL antigen is completely independent of TAP (peptide antigen transporter) function. We have shown previously that y6 intestinal epithelial cells (EL) become activated and release granules containing serine esterase in response to short term culture with intestinal epithelial cells. The IEL responsible for this are mostly Vy5+, CD8+ T cells. Studies of epithelial cells from p2m deficient mice demonstrates that class I molecules are required this response, and it can be blocked by anti-TL mAbs, suggesting that the TL antigen is recognized by Vy5+ E L . We have now studied y6 T cells in transgenic mice that overexpress TL antigen under the control of the H-2D gene promoter. The total number of y6 T cells or Vy5+ cells is not increased in the spleen or circulation of these mice. However, among the IEL, there is a 2-3 fold decrease in Vy5+ lymphocytes. These data suggest that overexpression of TL antigen leads to negative selection ofy6 EL, and they are consistent with the proposed recognition of TLa by many Vy5+ E L . Results from bone marrow chimeras will determine the cell type responsible for this apparent negative selection. THE LIGAND FOR CD40 ACTS AS A COSTIMULATORY SIGNAL FOR THYMIC yS T CELLS Fred Ramsdell, Michael Seaman, Ky Clifford and William C Fanslow Department of Immunobiology, lmmunex Research a n d Development Corp , Seattle, WA 98101 yS T cell receptors are distinct from those of ap T cells We have analyzed the ability of the CD40 ligand (CD40L) to activate neonatal thymic yS T cells CD40L is expressed on activated T cells and has been shown to induce B cell proliferation a n d immunoglobulin secretion as well as monocyte activation We now demonstrate that, in the presence of an anti-TCRyS antibody, CD40L is able to induce the proliferation of neonatal thymic yS cells The presence of CD40L also leads to enhanced expression of a variety of activation associated antigens including CD25, CD69, CD44 and Ly6C In addition to proliferation, CD40L induces nonspecific cytolytic activity in thymic yS T cells as well as the production of interferony (IFNy) a n d TNFa We were unable to detect IL-2 or IL-4 production in response to CD40L . and antibody blocking studies indicate that the mechanism of activation appears to involve IL-I but is independent of IL-2, IL-4 and IL-7 These results suggest that, in addition to its effects on B cells a n d monocytes, CD40L can co-stimulate the activation of 5 andq chains of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) complex THE TCR COMPLEX BY y/S T CELLS and the ychain of Fc receptors (FcRy) constitute a family of proteins important for the expression of, and signal transduction through, these receptors in hematopoietic cells. In order to analyze the in vivo function of these molecules for developement and function of T cells, we have generated mice lacking the expression of < chain by gene targeting and characterized T cell developement in these mice. Differentiation of thymotytes was impaired in double positive and single positive populations in <-deficient mice. TCR expression was reduced in most T cells from thymus, spleen, lympho node and peripheral blood. By contrast, CDBaa+ TCRyS+ intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes (iIEL) in these mice expressed a normal level of TCR. Biochemical analysis of the TCR complex in these cells from <-deficient as well as iiormal mice revealed the predominant usage of FcRyin the TCR complex. Funhermore, yS+ T cells in epithelia of the skin and female reproductive organs from <-deficient mice also showed relatively high TCR expression, indicating the usage of FcRy. These observations demonstrate the preferential usage of FcRy by yS+ T cells localized in epithelia of normal mice. Considering that these cells are thought to play an role in the surveillance of body surfaces that are exposed to environnient, the cells may exhibit distinct signaling capability and function. Medicine, Denver, CO 80206. The role of yS cells in bacterial infections is currently being investigated. In Lisferia monocyfogenes, yS cell percentages have been reported to increase in the peritoneum and the liver during the course of the infection. Our initial studies in C57BU10 mice have shown that yS cells percentages are not notably increased in t h e livers of Listeria-infected mice but do show surface changes during infection, including a change in light scatter (size change). Around day 5, the V66.3' yS cell percentage begins to decrease as compared to total y6+ cells; these cells encompass the HSP-60 reactive subset. At the same time, hybridoma analysis indicates a preferential expansion of a different subset of liver y6 cells, the Vy6N61 cells previously reported to reside in the epithelium of the female reproductive tract and of the tongue. This increase suggests this subset is activated in the response to listeria. Functional studies on this subset are in progress. We have attempted to learn more about the development of T cells expressing the y&TCR by analysing the biology of the subsets of y?i expressing cells among the CD4TD8cells of the mouse thymus. Three such subsets can be defined using the surface molecules HSA and Thy-1 as markers, these being HSA+Thy-I+, HSA-Thy-l+ and HSAThy-1-. The proliferation rate, population turnover, survival in culture, lymphokine profiles, TCR V-gene usage and appearance during ontogeny have been analysed for these three populations. The data show that essentially only one population (HSA+Thy-l+) has many cells in division or is turning over at a significant rate. Since $5 thymic emigrants express the same HSA+Thy-l+ phenotype, it seems likely that this thymic population is the one that gives rise to exported yS cells. However the production rate by the thymic population (-105 cells per day) exceeds the number previously estimated to be exported per day to the spleen and lymph nodes (-104 cells per day, Kelly et al, Int Immunols 331,1993), suggesting that some form of selection may be occurring. This is supported by differences in the Vy usage between the thymic population and the exported cells. There are also differences in Vyusagebetween the three thymic populations, with more V p + cells found in the HSA+Thy-I+ group. Vy3 and Vy4 are detectable but rare in all populations. The origin and function of the two HSA-populations remains mysterious, but their low turnover makes it unlikely that they are precursor or product cells of the HSA+Thy-I+ population. They appear to be long lived and stable, and this is supported by their survival in culture in the absence of cytokines, while the population which is turning over in uivo, requires several cytokines for optimal growth in vitro. Data on the ontogeny of the three populations will be presented. The goal of the present studies have focused on determining the basis for TCR76 cell activation and repertoire development. We have found that TCR76 cells require two signals for activation. The first signal is transduced through the CD3/TCR76 complex. However, autocrine IL-2 production and proliferation are dependent on costimulation through CD28 ligation. expressing certain V region elements are selectively expanded in vivo. The expansion of V72' cells in C57BL/6 mice was found to be genetically linked to TCR6 allotype. The percentage of V72' cells in the adult is four-fold greater than in the neonate, thus expansion of V72' cells occurs after birth. The junctional diversity of the V72-C7 rearrangements after birth also supports a selective expression of a subset of V72' cells. Finally, B6 mice housed in germfree conditions were found to express similar levels of \-72+ 7 6 T cells as their normally housed counterparts. Thus, expansion and diversification of V72' cells is a postnatal event that dues not require microbial antigenic exposure. V6 usage. A total of 64 hybridomas were produced in three independent fusions. Strikingly, 81% of the hybrids used ValO' &chain. In contrast, no V72' hybridomas (0111) from a nonpositively selecting strain, DBA/2, were ValO'. Analysis of the Va 10-J6 rearrangements in the B6 V72' hybridomas found that two junctional lengths predominate. Further characterization of the nature of the predominate junctional length is presently being examined by sequencing the Va 10 gene the relevant T cell hybridomas. Thus, TCR76 cells that utilize V72-Va 10 receptors are selectively expanded in B6 mice. In addition, these rearranged receptors may express a restricted CDR3 region. In addition, we have previously shown that TCR76 cells 86 V72' hybridomas were produced in order to examined We and others have shown that TAP molecules can translocate antigenic peptides across the endoplasmic reticulum membrane in an ATP-dependent fashion. These results are consistent with TAP being a member of the ATP-binding cassette family of transporters. A major question remaining is the peptide specificity of TAP. Our initial report (PNAS 90,9130) suggested that MHC class I binding peptides of 8-10 amino acids in length were the optimum substrate for TAP, with the exception of one 9-mer peptide derived from a signal sequence. Furthermore, longer peptides (>20 amino acids) were not good substrates. Here, we have further defined the length and sequence requirements for peptide translocation through TAP. Competition analysis was performed using a 125I-labeled peptide which contains an N-linked glycosylation acceptor site. Peptide translocation into the ER was measured in permeabilized cells (Swei) by the extent of glycosylation of the labeled peptide. Peptides of length 7 amino acids are very poor substrates, while peptides of length 11 or 12 amino acids are still good substrates. However, the efficiency of transport is significantly reduced for peptides > 15 amino acids. Sequence specificity was also addressed through the substitution of specific amino acid residues within the peptides with alanine. Furthermore, a photoactive peptide analogue was synthesized which can photolabel TAP molecules. This allowed us to directly demonstrate that the competition analysis measures the specificity of TAP-dependent translocation and not other steps in the peptide transport pathway. Thepim-f gene encodes a serinehhreonine protein kinase and is thought to play a role in the signal transduction events associated with lymphocyte activation Stimulation of PBMCs with phorbol ester and calcium ionophore results in a rapid but transient increase inpim-f mRNA levels with the peak expression occurring 4 hours post-stimulation. Treatment of PBMCs with phorbol ester alone was found to inducepim-f mRNA expression suggesting that the activation of protein kinase C is one pathway involved in the accumulation of this transcript. In contrast, treatment with ionomycin alone caused only a minimal increase inpim-f mRNA expression Prm-f expression was also examined in lymphocyte subpopulations and found to be constitutively expressed in resting T cells and B cells. Furthermore, the basal level ofpim-f mRNA could he increased by PMNionomycin stimulation of a/p-T cells (-5-fold) and y/G-T cells (-7-fold). In contrast, pim-1 expression was not inducible in normal B cells. Examination ofprm-f mRNA turnover in resting and PMNionomycin treated PBMCs revealed that pim-f mRNA stability was increased after stimulation. Pim-1 mRNA stability was also compared between transformed cell lines and resting primary lymphocyte cultures. The results of these studies suggest that the increased stability ofpfm-f transcripts observed in transformed cell lines and mitogen stimulated primary lymphocytes may be linked to the growth rate of the cell. Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510 Intracellular association of invariant chain with MHC class I1 prevents class I1 from prematurely binding peptides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and targets and retains class 11 in endocytic compartments. Human invariant chain exists in four forms, p33, p35, p41, and p43, generated by a combination of alternative initiation of translation and alternative splicing. Here w e have compared all the four forms for their transport characteristics in the absence of class II and their ability to associate with molecular chaperone calnexin. Hetero oligomers containing p35 or p43 remain in the ER, whereas homo oligomers containing p33 or p41 exit the ER and are sorted to endosomes. The sorting of invariant chain to endosomes takes place via the Golgi apparatus and their accumulation leads to enlargement of the endosomes. p43/41 forms are more stable than p35/33 forms, both in the ER and following transport through the Golgi apparatus. Experiments conducted using dithiothreitol (DTT)-treated cells suggest the possible role of ER-redox potential in the transport of invariant chain forms. All the four forms of invariant chain associate with calnexin. The roles of glycosylation and transmembrane sequences of the invariant chain forms in their association with calnexin will be discussed. processing, affinity of peptides to class I molecules and the T cell repertoire. In BALB/c mice (H-Zd) the CTL response to native gp160 of HIV-1 strain IllB is specific for a 10-mer peptide (p18-10 restricted, although this epitope contains a 9 amino acid sequence (residues 319-327) which comprises an Ld specific binding motif. To evaluate the factors contributing to T cell repertoire selection, the potential to induce dually restricted CTL to this epitope was analyzed in the H-2d haplotype. Peptide sensitization of Dd target cells demonstrated that the 10-mer was recognized more efficiently than the 9-mer by gp160 specific CTL. However, the 9-mer was more potent than the 10-mer in inhibiting lysis of Ld target cells by CTL specific for an Ld-restricted peptide derived from mouse hepatitis virus, demonstrating that the 9mer bound efficiently to both class I molecules in vitro. To enhance promiscuous class I presentation in vivo 'preprocessed' forms of the gp160 epitope were expressed using recombinant vaccinia viruses (vac). Immunization with recombinant vac expressing either the 10mer, or 9-mer including an initiation Methionine (M318-327 and M319-327, induced Dd-restricted CTL specific for native gp160. By contrast, recombinant vac expressing 8 gpl60 residues (M320-327), generated Ld-restricted CTL specific for peptide, but not native gp160. The lack of a Ld restricted response to native gp160 may therefore not be attributed to a limited T cell re ertoire, but to class I restriction, controlled by a single amino acid within one epitope, demonstrates that non anchor residues may have a profound effect on differential MHC restriction and CTL induction. comprising residues 318-327. This response is exclusively D d inefficient processing of gp160 for presentation on L f; . The switch in TRACHOMATIS lNFECTED L CELLS, P. Robert Beatty and Richard S. Stephens, Program in Infectious Disease, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 CD8 T cell mediated cytotoxicity has been well documented for bacteria that infect and replicate inside macrophages. Chlamydia trachomutis primarily infects non-phagocytic cells, grows within an endosomal vacuole, and evades degradation by avoiding lysosomal fusion. Important questions for bacteria that do not enter the cytoplasm is whether cytotoxic CD8 T cells recognize infected cells and what antigen processing pathway might be utilized inside non-phagocytic host cells. We used L cells infected with C. truchornatis to examine in vitro cytolysis of target cells by immune spleen cells. The cytotoxicity was CD8 T cell mediated and dependent on the increased expression of ICAM-1 on the target cells. To examine mechanisms of antigen processing, we added brefeldin A to infected target cells which eliminated the cytolytic response. Cycloheximide treatment of infected cells reduced lysis to background levels. The brefeldin A results demonstrate the need for intact golgi apparatus, and the effect with cycloheximide establishes the need for host protein synthesis. In contrast, inhibitors of exogenous antigen processing mechanisms did not alter chlamydia specific lysis. Chloroquine and ammonium chloride when added to the assay had no effect on cytolysis and indicate that exogenously obtained antigens are not required for immune lysis. Inactivated chlamydia, still capable of attachment and uptake, did not elicit killing in our cytotoxicity assay indicating that active chlamydia replication is necessary and that production of nascent protein antigens is required. Our results implicate the endogenous processing of chlamydia1 antigens to achieve specific lysis of infected target cells in vitro. It will be important to identify in which endosomal vesicles chlamydia proteins encounter class I MHC molecules because no antigens have been detected outside the chlamydia vacuole. A central role of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I1 molecules is to present antigenic peptides to CD4+ T cells1 Primarily, they display peptides derived from exogenous proteins, but can sometimes present endogenously synthesized protein derivatives'. MHC class I1 molecules are closely associated with the invariant chain (li) during assembly and intracellular transpon li is thought to have several functions1-', including: direction of class I1 molecules to the endosomes, where they can encounter degraded, endocytosed as well as blockage of the peptide-binding groove so that it is not available until the Idclass I1 complex dissociates in the endosomes8-I0. Both functions suggest that the presentation of endogenous proteins might be altered with antigen presenting cells (APCs) lacking the invariant chain. We have tested this by mating a "knock-out'' mouse line devoid of the invariant chain* with transgenic lines expressing a fragment of myelin basic protein (h4BP84-105) in MHC class I1 positive cells By screening a panel of MBP reactive T cell hybridomas, with differing fine specificities within this complex epitope, we find that IiO splenic APCs present a broader range of endogenously synthesized epitopes from the MBP fragnment, than APCs from Iif mice. Moreover, these additional epitopes are represented among specificities of T cells derived from I?, transgenic mice, expressing the MBP fragment in the thymus. This apparent lack of self-tolerance has interesting imp1ica:ions for autoimmunity Kruisbeek Division of Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands Myelin Basic protein (MBP) is an intracellular protein associated with the myelin sheath in the central nervous system. Tolerance to this cytoplasmic protein in H-25 strains of mice has been hypothesized to be due to immunological ignorance, that is, the lack of availability of the antigen to the immune system. However, there is some evidence that some form of myelin basic protein is present in the thymus in neonatal animals, but the fact remains that there are MBP reactive T cells present in adult mice of the H-2s haplotype. We are considering another alternative explanation for the presence of MBP reactive T cells in the periphery of unprimed mice and that is alternative processing of cytoplasmic proteins. We are investigating whether MBP present intracellularly is processed into different epitopes from exogenous MBP for T cell recognition. Sequences 2.0 kb 5' of the MHC classll promoter have been shown to confer tisue specific expression for the MHC class I 1 gene product. We have inserted this 2.0 kb sequence upstream of an MBP minigene construct and transfected it into a B cell lymphoma LS102.9. This minigene has also been placed under the control of an immunoglobulin enhancerlpromoter from an lglmyc translocation. An additional construct is being made providing targeting to the ER and endosomal vesicles by adding sequences encoding the cytoplasmic tail and transmembrane domain of the MHC class II associated invariant chain, which has been shown to target to endosomal vesicles. Cells transfected with these constructs are being tested with a T cell hybridoma which recognizes the major epitope produced by challenge with exogenous MBP. In addition, these cells will be tested against bulk T cells generated by injection of exogenous MBP or injection of the transfected cells into H-2s mice. Our lab has previously mapped to the MHC a gene involved in class I1 antigen processing and presentation, using a set of mutant B-LCL derived by mutagenesis and immunoselection of B-LCL 8.1.6; 8.1.6 contains an 800 kb hemizygous deletion within the class I1 region of the HLA. The lesion in these mutants results in a failure to form normal intracellular class II/peptide complexes which is manifested by: 1) conformationally altered, unstable class I1 dimers; 2) association of Ii chain derived peptides with DR; and 3) an inability to present whole exogenous antigens. Available evidence suggests that the affected gene maps to a 230 kb interval within the MHC hemizygous deletion of 8.1.6. We describe here the isolation of a set of mutants which manifest global alterations in class I1 conformation and stability similar to those seen in the 8.1.6 derived mutants. The new mutants, which were derived by mutagenesis and immunoselection of a B-LCL which contams a different hemizygous deletion of chromosome 6p, are complementary with the 8.1.6 derived mutants in somatic cell hybrids. These results suggest the possibility of an additional locus whose product is involved in the assembly of class IVpeptide complexes. Alternatively, complementation in these mutants could occur by intragenic means, perhaps by molecular complementation in a homomultimeric protein. The proteasome is thought to be the cytoplasmic protease responsible for the generation of peptides presented by MHC class I molecules. Two subunits, LMF' Z and LMP7, of the proteasome are encoded in the MHC class I1 region of the genome and the expression of LMPZ and LMP7 can strongly be induced by IFN-y. We have observed previously that this induction not only leads to the enhanced presence of LMP2 and LMP7 in the proteasomal complex, but also to the disappearence of certain other subunits. We have now further characterized the events taking place during the incorporation of LMP2 and LMP7 into the proteasome. Our data indicate that both LMP2 and LMP7 replace a disinct other subunit. The respective subunits are constitutively expressed and highly homologous to the MHC-encoded ones. The results will be discussed with regard to proteasome function and antigen processing. Transporters associated with antigen processing, TAP, are considered to transport short peptide fragments from the cytosol to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, where they are loaded on MHC class I molecules. In vivo the lack of functional TAP2 molecules allow tumor cells to escape from T cell mediated immune surveillance. In v i m the TAP molecules have been shown to influence the rate and spectrum of peptides being transported over the ER membrane. Here we address the questions how different TAP molecules i) affect the tumorigenicity of tumor cells in vivo, and ii) affect the peptide repertoire presented by MHC class I molecules at the cell surface. Ad i), three independent TAP2 transfectants (mouse, rat, and human) ofthe antigen presentation defect mouse lymphoma RMA-S were inoculated S.C. over a minor histocompatibility harrier, MiHa, and monitored for outgrowth. All three TAP2 transfectants grew out and were subsequentially rejected equally well as the wild type line RMA, whereas the non-transfected RMA-S grew out and killed the A.BY mice. Ad ii), naturally processed peptides were eluted under acid conditions from either intact cells or immuno-afinity purified MHC class I molecules ofthe three RMA-S TAP2 transfectants. The eluates were analysed on reverse phase HPLC and capillary electrophoresis, CE. In addition to this a functional identification of epitopes was performed utilising cytotoxic T lymphocytes specific for either three MiHa, or a tumor antigen. The HPLC-and CE-profiles differed between the three TAP2 transfectants. However, the three MiHa and the tumor antigen previously characterised on the wild type line RMA were identified by the CTL in each peptide-eluate. The data suggests a general capacity of the TAP molecules to transport certain peptides, among which the CTL epitopes screened for here are found. In addition to this each TAP molecule appear to have a unique fine specificity for peptides as indicated by the differences in the HPLC-and CEprofiles, though further chracterisation of the material remains to he done. Finally, the restored rejectahility by the TAP2 transfections pinpoints the decisive role that one single gene can have on T cell mediated immune surveillance. Generally, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules present processed foreign peptides to specific T cells. The recently described genes, LMP2, LMW (subunits of proteosome complex) and TAPl, TAP2 (ATP-dependent transporters) have been shown to regulate antigen processing for MHC class I molecules. However, such genes have not been defined for MHC class II molecules. We have generated antigen processing mutants for MHC class IImediated antigen presentation. These mutants fail to present whole antigens but retain the ability to present peptides to antigen-specific and MHC class II-restricted T cell clones. This indicates that these cells have certain defects in antigen processing. Our aim is to utilise these mutants to study pathways and genes which may control MHC class IImediated antigen processing. The putative gene (s) involved in antigen processing for class I1 molecules have been localised in the MHC class I1 region. Invariant chain (Ii) prevents binding of endogenous peptide to MHC class I1 molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum and hence dissects MHC class II from MHC class I pathway of antigen presentation. MHC class II molecules in processing mutants are predominantly occupied with an Ii peptide, called CLIP (class 11-associated Ii peptide). We have also developed an experimental system to determine binding characteristics of Ii to MHC class 11 molecules by utilizing the CLIP. Antigen processing and presentation to T cells is observable only in intact cells, and a genetic approach to the identification of the proteins involved in this pathway is therefore attractive. We are using a defective "promoter-trap" retrovirus as an insertional mutagen in order to isolate new antigen presentation mutants. We have used Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, which are functionally haploid, as our antigen presenting cell, which have been transfected with the murine ecotropic retroviral receptor to make them susceptible to infection by the promoter-trap retrovirus U3-Hygro (Chang et al, 1993, Virology, 193, 737). The U3Hygro retrovirus has a promoterless hygromycinR gene 30 nucleotides from the 5' end of the provirus LTR, such that it is only expressed following integration downstream of an active cellular promoter. A CHO line transfected with murine MHC Class I Kk, and a cytoplasmic influenza virus hemaglutinin (HA) was previously used for U3Hygro mutagenesis, but was found to have high background in the experiment due to loss of transfected markers. Therefore this cell line has been further transfected with a second Class I Kk, and an HA-puromycinR fusion protein construct. A cell line (Y10) that is highly susceptible to CTL lysis and extremely stable against loss of transfected markers has been isolated and characterised. 3 x 107 cells of line Y10 were infected with the U3-hygro virus selected with HA specific, Kk restricted CTL and hygromycin to obtain approximately 100 potential antigen presentation mutants. We are characterising these cell lines to identify the sites of retroviral insertion using 5' RACE PCR, and will use the criterion of multiple independent insertions to identify candidate genes for further investigation. We have exploited TAP polymorphism to investigate the specificity of the rat peptide translocator. Liver microsomes of SHR and Lewis rats, each expressing a distinct allelic variant of TAP (cirnb and cima respectively), accumulate different sets of peptides. The use of MHC congenic rats allowed unequivocal assignment of this difference in translocation capacity to the MHC, independent of the class I products expressed. The COOH-terminal residue of the peptide seems of overriding importance for substrate recognition, although other sequence elements of the peptide also contribute to the specificity of the translocation process. Both the cima and cimb TAP complexes translocate peptides with a hydrophobic COOH-terminus. However, the ability to translocate peptides with a COOHterminal His, Lys or Arg residue is unique to the cima transporter. Thus, the specificity of the TAP peptide translocator imposes restrictions on the availability of peptides for antigen presentation by class I molecules. The LLO molecule is a virulence factor secreted from Lisreria monocyrogenes which is required for the organism to escape the phagocytic vesicle and replicate in the cytoplasm of the infected cell. Previous work has shown that amino acids 91-99 are presented to protective CD8 T cells in an H-2Kd restricted fashion. We Antigen presentation by class I MHC moleules, enabling recognition by cytotoxic T lymphocytes, plays a crucial role in host defence against most viruses. We have investigated the assembly and transport of class I MHC in cells infected with herpes simplex virus (HSV). We used mutant viruses with the UL41 gene which shuts off host protein synthesis deleted. Here we find that class I is synthesized normally, but fails to become sialated. In contrast, transferrin receptor is sialated normally, indicating a selective retention of MHC in a sialyltransferase negative compartment, probably the endoplasmic reticulum. Failure of sialation was seen with both HSV-1 and HSV-2. Drug treatment of cells indicated that an early gene or genes are responsible for the effect. A pulse chase study showed that whereas some retained class I allelic products were stably associated with f32microglobulin, others were retained as free heavy chain, suggesting that HSV interferes with assembly as well as transport of class I. No HSV protein was found to co-precipiate with class I MHC. The effect of HSV may be similar to that recently described for murine and human cytomegaloviruses (CMV), which are distantly related to HSV in evolutionary terms. However, in contrast to hCMV, class I heavy chains in HSV-infected cells are not degraded. QS-21 i s a purified saponin from the bark of the Qui//aja saponaria Molina tree from South America. When QS-21 i s used in vivo as an adjuvant with soluble proteins there i s a 10 to loo0 fold higher antibody response compared to antigen alone but most interestingly, a CTL response i s generated. We are using an in vitro model system of antigen processing and presentation to study how QS-2 1 is able to stimulate a Class I restricted CTL response. The CTL clone 83 recognizes an ovalbumin (OVA) peptide in the context of H-2P. When intact OVA i s mixed with EL-4, H-2b target cells, the OVA cannot enter the cytosol of the cell and therefore i s not processed and presented by H-2b on the cell surface. However, when QS-21 i s mixed with the OVA and EL-4, the OVA i s able to enter the Class I processing pathway and sensitize the EL-4 for lysis by 83. Thi s does not appear to occur simply because the QS-2 1 has permeablized the cell membrane and OVA has entered the cytosol. Other saponins and surfactants do not allow OVA to enter the cytosol of the cell, and the target cells can be labeled with sodium chromate to the same extent as the controls. EL-4 can be pulsed with OVA, washed, and then exposed to QS-21 and there i s still enhanced OVA presentation. Additionally, EL-4 can be pretreated with QS-21 for 10 minutes and rested for up to four hours before the addition of OVA and still show enhanced antigen processing and presentation. Since 3521 can be added before, during, or after OVA, these data suggest that QS-21 may be affecting the cellular mechanism of antigen processing resulting in enhanced antigen presentation on the cell surface. Ming-Zong Lai a n d Ming-Hsien Lin Feng, Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 11529, Taiwan, R. 0. C. We have recently identified a weak I-Ad-binding peptide PB1 capable of enhancing the reactivity of other I-Ad-restricted T cells. The augmentative effect was not due to the crossreactivity of PBI peptide with antigens. The strict I-Ad specificity suggests that PB1 enhanced the recognition of antigen-I-Ad complex by TCR. The association of PB1 with I-Ad was a priori to its additive effect, because late addition of PB1 had little effect after antigen-MHC complex was immobilized. Many of I-Ad-binding peptides displayed a similar additive effect even though such enhancing effect could only be detected under very restricted condition. FBI was distinct for its prominently augmentative effect on all the I-Ad-restricted T cells analyzed. A similarly enhancing activity was demonstrated on a synthetic transferrin receptor peptide with minimum affinity for I-Ad. In contrast, no augmentative activity was detected on another weak I-Adbinding peptide hen egg lysozyme 46-61. It was found that the binding of PBl and transferrin peptide, but not hen egg lysozyme peptide, stabilized I-Ad expression. It is postulated that for a peptide to enhance the presentation of other antigens, two criteria must be met: (1) the binding of peptide should increase the biochemically stable compact form of MHC molecule, (2) the affinity for MHC should be relatively low to allow the displacement of other peptide. This is supported by that the binding of specific peptides to I-Ad was increased in the presence of PBI. The inclusion of FBI in the immunization mixture also enhanced T cell responses i n vim, suggesting the possibility of using low-affinity peptide to promote specific immunity. and T2 cells maps in the class I1 region of the HLA gene complex, and the gene involved is thought to control the ability of cells to process and present exogenous class 11-restricted antigens. BLS cells that express DR molecules stimulate influenza hemagglutinin (HA) restricted T cell clones after incubation with the preprocessed peptide HA307-319, but are defective in the presentation of the exogenous HA protein. The DR molecules on the surface of BLS cells do not display epitopes recognized by conformationally sensitive antibodies that bind peptide-class I1 complexes, suggesting that DR molecules in BLS cells are not stably associated with peptides. These data suggest that the mutated gene which controls class I1 structural gene transcription also regulates the expression of a gene controlling antigen processing. This transcription factor does not regulate the synthesis of MHC Class I or TAP genes. Cell fusions using BLS lines from different complementation groups resulted in the surface expression of wild-type class I1 molecules. Thus, HLA class I1 structural genes and a gene required for class 11-restricted antigen presentation are transcriptionally coregulated. The more centromeric paired MHC Class II DQ loci, DQA2 and DQB2 (formerly DXA and DXB), have not previously been shown to be translated, despite apparently normal gene architecture. Transcription of DQA2, but not DQB2, has been reported. We have raised polydonal antisera in rabbits to synthetic immunogens representing the C-termini of DQAI, DQB1, and the putative products of DQA2 and DQB2. Western blotting of cell lysates from a panel of homozygous typing cells (EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid lines) shows that the antisera to DQAl and DQA2 both detect 33K proteins (consistent with Class II a chains). Competition experiments with the peptides used for immunization demonstrate the specificity of both these reagents. Immunoprecipitation of biotin-labelled cell surface proteins indicates that DQA2 is expressed on the surface of at least one cell line, although at a much lower level than DQAI. Preliminary results suggest that surface-expressed DQA2 in this line is associated with a 28K protein (consistent with a Class 11 p chain). MHC class I molecules bind peptides of 8-1 0 residues derived by proteolytic events in the cytosol. The translocation of antigenic peptides into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is mediated by TAP, MHC encoded membrane transporters. Although the transport of peptides into the ER has been extensively studied, the contribution of events in the ER to the production of class I binding peptides is uncertain. It remains unknown whether all proteolysis occurs in the cytosol and correctly sized peptides are transponed or whether a variety of potential class I substrates are transported and further modified in the ER. To characterize the contribution of this intracellular compartment to antigen presentation, recombinant vaccinia viruses (rVV) were constructed to contain two MHC class I determinants in tandem: peptide 147-1 55 of influenza virus nucleoprotein (NP), and peptide 52-59 of vesticular somatitis virus K protein. Translocation of the 17-mer peptides into the ER was facilitated by the hydrophobic signal sequence of E3/19K glycoprotein of adenovirus, and experiments were conducted in TZ cells, eliminating TAP dependent transport of peptides. Both N(s2-59) and NP(i47-155) were efficiently presented in T2 cells when located at the C-terminal position of the tandem peptides. A control construct without the signal sequence did not present either peptide in TZ cells, demonstrating that presentation was dependent upon signal sequence translocation into the ER. To assess the extent of ER processing, rW expressing full length NP, containing the (x-interferon signal sequence to facilitate translocation to the ER. was examined. None of the three defined class I determinants of NP (50-57, Kk; 147-155 Kd; 366-374 Db) were presented in TZ cells, demonstrating that the observed processing was limited to peptides. The results demonstrate that that peptides longer than the minimal residues can be modified in the ER/secretory pathway to bind MHC class I molecules, provided that MHC class I-binding C-terminal residues are available. Although the nature of ER peptidase activity is unknown, the results are consistant with an N-terminal peptidase activity involved in peptide trimming. Stefan Martin and Hans Ulrich Weltzien, Max-Planck-Institut fiir Immunbiologie, Stiikweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany. We have previously shown that H-2Kb resmcted, trinitrophenyl (TNP)specific CTL reactive to the hapten in position 7 of octameric Kb-binding peptides are highly dependent in their antigen specificity on the sequence of the carrier peptide (J. Immunol. 151:678 (1993)). Primary in v i m induction of CTL with different H-2Kb-bmding peptides modified on the E-amino group of lysine in position 7 revealed that such CTL are capable of specifically recognizing the unmodified carrier structure, although with lower efficiency. Using glycine designer peptides we could demonstrate that the TCR of these T cells contained two independent contact sites for a) TNP-lysine in position 7 and b) a second "subepitope" made up of amino acid side chains in positions 3 and 4 of the Kbassociated octamer. In the case of chemically altered self peptides this specificity might be expected to result in the induction of self reactive CTL. To test this hypothesis we used a Kb-binding self peptide from C57BL/6 mice (Falk, K., and 0. Rotzschke. 1993. Sem. Immunol. 581). This peptide was TNP-modified on its lysine residue in position 7 and used for primary in v i m induction of CTL. A CTL line was generated which was not only reactive to the T"-modified self peptide but also to the unmodified self peptide. These findings lead us to propose the following hypothesis concerning the induction of autoimmune reactions by chemicals: self reactive TCR may possibly not be eliminated by thymic negative selection if they react to only one of two possible contact points on MHC-associated self peptides. Haptenization of such "monoreactive" non-immunogenic self peptides could lead to the generation of a second "subepitope" and hence to an immunogenic suucture capable of primary induction of resting T cells. Once activated some of these T cells might react to the hapten-free self peptide resulting in autoimmune reactions. Studies to evaluate the in vivo relevance of our results are underway. A Chinese hamster ovary fibroblast, transfected with murine MHC class I1 genes, inefficiently stimulated CD4' T cells specific for antigens containing disulfide bonds including ovalbumin, hen egg lysozyme, and pork insulin. By contrast, the fibroblasts efficiently presented synthetic peptides indicating that the cells express a processing defect. In agreement with our previous findings with cytochrome c and Staphylococcal nuclease, the cells effectively activated a A-repressor-specific T cell, which recognizes an antigen lacking disulfide bonds. The poor ability of the fibroblasts to process antigens was associated with the presence of disulfide bonds within the antigens. Diminished aspartic acid-mediated proteolysis of the antigen could not account for the phenotype, because cell lysates from the fibroblast possessed significantly more acidic aspartyl proteolytic activity than lysates from a B lymphoma cell. A somatic cell hybrid, generated by fusing the hamster fibroblast with a murine L cell fibroblast, very efficiently processed ovalbumin and hen egg lysozyme, suggesting that impaired processing was genetically complemented and was a recessive trait. The hamster fibroblasts were capable of processing two distinct denatured forms of ovalhumin and a carboxymethylated preparation of hen egg lysozyme either as effectively or more efficiently than a B lymphoma cell. Thus, the Chinese hamster ovary cells are defective in processing antigen with disulfide bonds, which involve an impaired ability to unfold these antigens. We have previously shown that expression of murine invariant chainchondroitin sulfate (Ii-CS) can enhance stimulation of primary murine T cells stimulated by alloantigens or by superantigens such as Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB). This enhancement is mediated by interactions between li-CS and CD44 (Cell 74257). Using EL4 cells transfected with murine MHC class I1 (LAd) in the absence and presence of mutant forms of murine Ii, we showed that expression of Ii-CS was required for enhanced T cell responses. Thc ability of CD44 to bind Ii-CS uas demonstrated by prccipitation of murine Ii-CS with a soluble form of human CD44, CD44Rg . Given that human soluble CD44 could bind to tnurinc Ii-CS, we tested whether the panel of EL4 transfectants, expressing murine class II and li, could be used to stimulate human T cells. For this purposc. we tested proliferative responses of human T cells to supcrantigcns presented by murinc class I1 I-Ad expressed on the tmn5fectants. We found that SEB stimulated human CD4+ T cells when presented by murine class 11, and SEB was required for stimulation bccausc human T cells did not proliferate to I-Ad alone. Using this systcm, we found that the proliferative response of human T cells to SEB was significantly enhanced when murine li was co-expressed with I-Ad. This cnhanccment was dependent on the expression of 11-CS, because Ir.inafcctarrls crpressing a mutant form of Ii lacking chondroitin sulfate did riot ciihancc the proliferative response as well as wild-type Ii. Similar rcsults werc found using SEA as antigen. These data suggest that, as with murinc T cells, the proliferative response of human T cells can be cnhanccd by li-CS. We are exploring whether li-CS provides accessory fiinctioii for uniquc subsets of T cells, though preliminary data indicated that reaponses of negatively-selected naive (CD45RAt) and memory tCD15ROc) T cells were both enhanced by Ii-CS. Other subset differences  to acidic compartments where antigen is degraded into peptides that can bind to MHC class I1 molecules. There has been much debate about which endocytic compartment is involved in antigen processing and whether the invariant chain is necessary for class 11-restricted presentation. Here we show that two distinct processing pathways can function in the class 11-restricted presentation of exogenous antigens. The natural antigen influenza virus A was used to test the requirements for the HLA-DR1 -restricted presentation of the immunodominant epitopes 18-29 in the matrix protein (MI) and 307-318 in the hemagglutinin protein (H3) to specific CD4+ T cells. The processing and presentation of M1 followed the "classical pathway" in that it required (i) Ii expression, (ii) protein synthesis, and (iii) a function encoded in the MHC class I1 region. In contrast, processing of H3 could follow an alternative pathway in that it was independent of (i) Ii expression, (ii) protein synthesis, and (iii) other functions encoded in the MHC class I1 region. Thus, mature class I1 ap molecules have the ability to acquire immunogenic peptides derived from intact antigens for presentation to CD4+ T cells. CESSING Bod0 Ortmann and Peter Cresswell, Section of Immunobiology, HHMI, Yale University School of Mediane, New Haven,CX 06510 One of the most important defense mechanisms of the mammalian imune system against virus infected cells, tumor cells, and allografts involves cytotoxic T-lymphocytes. These MHC restricted cells recognize antigenic peptides presented by MHC class I molecules on the surface of their target cells. Peptides bound to these class I molecules are derived from endogenous, mainly cytoplasmic proteins. Most probably they are generated by the action of a cytoplasmic multicatalytic proteinase complex, the so called proteasome. As shown by three independent groups, transport of these peptides into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where binding to the class I molecule occurs, is facilitated by a heterodimeric transmembrane protein complex formed by the transporters associated with antigen processing (TAP 1 and TAP 2). In the ER class I heavy chains and to some extent class 1-p~microglobulin dimers are bound to the ER resident chaperone calnexin (IP90 in human, p88 in mouse). Little is known about the relationship of the peptide transporters and assembling class I heavy chain-P2-microglobulii-peptide complexes. Here we provide evidence that TAP 1 is associated with the chaperone calnexin and that class I molecules are retained in the ER in assoaation with TAP proteins. MHC class I1 aand P-chains associate immediately after translocation in the ER with a third polypeptide known as the invariant chain (Ii). Ii association inhibits peptide binding to immature class I1 a P I i complexes and plays an important role in the delivery of newly synthesized class I1 MHC glycoproteins to endouomes. However, the intracellular transport pathway(s) for the targeting of these molecules to endosomes has not been fully elucidated. We have previously demonstrated that class I1 aPIi complexes could he targeted to the endosomal pathway by rapid internalization from the cell surface. We now show that, following internalization, Ii dissociates from the aPIi complexes with a t112 of approximately 1 hr. In addition, we demonstrate that dissociation of Ii from the surface aPIi complex is ATP dependent and requires the activity of endosomal proteases. Additional data will be presented demonstrating that the internalization of surface aPIi complexes is an important mechanism for the delivery of class I1 molecules to endosomes. Okadaic acid, a membrane permeable phosphatase inhibitor, blocked both the assembly and transport of HLA-B7 from t h e ER. I n contrast, Brefeldin A blocked transport, but not assembly of HLA-B7 molecules. Combined treatment with both drugs resulted in intermediate levels of assembled HLA-B7. These d a t a suggest that endogenous phosphatases a r e required for assembly of HLA-B7 complexes. One potential explanation for these results i s that okadaic acid blocks the transport of class I molecules a t a site before loading with peptides occurs, thereby sequestering class I molecules from a peptide loading compartment, whereas treatment with Brefeldin A, which induces retrograde transport of Golgi Examination of the amino acid sequence of the DR p chain (the a chain being monomorphic for DR) has revealed that risk for RA correlates with a cluster of polymorphic residues located between a.a. 67-86. This is exemplified by the DR4Dw4 and DR4DwlO alleles which differ at only 4 a.a.'s: positions 67,70,71, and 86. DR4Dw4 has the highest relative risk factor for RA among DR alleles while the DwlO subtype has one of the lowest. Based on the recently Folved Class I1 DR1 structure, these residues are located in the alpha-helical region of the molecule which is involved in peptide binding and T cell receptor contact. Previous studies have utilized site-directed mutagenesis to examine the role of these residues in T cell stimulation. These have typically involved conversion of amino acids in a starting "backbone" DR molecule (usually DR7 or DRI) into that found in another allele, usually DR4Dw4 or DwlO. Such inter-allele conversions frequently result in a change in the charge of the amino acid side chain which might be expected to have drastic effects on T cell stimulation. Furthermore, the effect of such changes on peptide binding has not been measured directly. In an effort to examine the fundamental role of these residues in antigen presentation, we have converted a.a.'s 70,71, and 86 of the DR4Dw4 p chain into alanine residues, either singly or as a double 70+7 1 mutant by site-directed mutagenesis. Wild-type or mutated DR ctrJ heterodimers were expressed in CHO cells as a GPI-linked surface protein. This allows for isolation of soluble molecules for use in direct binding assays. The effects of these alterations on antigen presentation function will be presented. Xenopus is the only ectothemic vertebrate in which a true MHC has been identified at the functional, biochemical and genetic levels. Moreover, X. laevis is a pseudotetraploid, whose MHC genes seem to have been diploidized by a yet unknown silencing mechanism(s). Our work shows that Xenopus dass I molecules are differently expressed during ontogeny: while tadpoles have no detectable m!WA, dass I transaipts begin to appear at the time of metamrphcsis. This expression gradually increases until it reaches adult levels. Xenqous is, therefore, a suitable model to begin to understand the developmental regulation and evolution of MHGlinked genes. The Hsp 70 gene family, being very conserved, can help to eluadate the mechanism of silenang of MHClod in polyploid animals. Polymorphismstudiesdemonstrate that two to three Xempus Hsp 70 genes segregate with known MHC haplotypes. Another Hsp 70 gene was detected which, as in mamnals, does not map to the MHC. Ws condude that the physical assodation between MHCdass I, dass II and Hsp 70 genes is an ancient one. A large number of non classical Class I genes have also been identified and they appear all to be linked on a chromosome distinct from the one containing the MHC proper. Data relating to the expression of these genes during development will also be discussed. active immune response. These cells recognize peptides derived from antigenic proteins that have been processed and presented on the MHC class I1 molecules of specialized antigen presenting cells (APCs). Antigen processing is thought to occur in a compartment related to late endosomes or lysosomes. Normally, antigens enter this compartment via endocytosis. We have utilized the targeting signal of the lysosomal membrane LAMP-1 protein to target a model antigen directly into the endosomalflysosomal compartment. This unique intracellular pathway concentrates the antigen in this compartment, resulting in marked enhancement of presentation to MHC class I1 restricted T cells. The data directly implicate LAMP-1 containing compartments as the site for antigen processing and association with MHC class I1 molecules and suggest a novel strategy to enhance the potency of recombinant vaccines. Evidence suggests oligomorphic class I molecules bind a stenotopic (narrow) range of peptides and are expressed at low levels at the cell surface. The MHC class I-b molecule M3' is specific for N-formyl peptides and presents endogenous mitochondrial peptides from subunit 1 of NADH dehydrogenase (ND1). Taking advantage of our understanding of this specificity. we sought to investigate the molecular basis for poor surface representation of M3'. We constructed a chimeric molecule with the nl and a2 domains of M3' and the a3 domain of Ld, allowing use of available mAb against a conformation-independent epitope of Ld to quantify surface expression and measure peptide binding using a cell-free approach. Transfected, but not control, BlO.CAS2 (H-2M3b) cells were lysed readily by M3'-restricted mCTL. Thus, the chimera bound, trafficked and presented endogenous ND1 peptides. However, despite high levels of M3'-Ld mRNA, transfectants were negative by surface staining. This finding was consistent with inefficient trafficking to the cell surface. Incubation at 26OC resulted in detectable cell surface expression of M3'-Ld. Incubation with exogenous specific peptides at 26'C (but not at 37%) greatly enhanced expression of M3'-Ld in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting stabilization of unoccupied molecules. @,-microglobulin (p2m) associated stably with the chimeric heavy chain in labelled cell lysates only in the presence of exogenous specific peptide, indicating M3'-Ld heavy chains were in excess of endogenous peptide availability. We used the &m-association assay to determine the optimal length of peptides binding to M3a-Ld. Peptides of eight o r twelve amino acids bound effectively. Our data show that surface expression of M3'-Ld is limited largely by the steady-state availability of endogenous N-formyl peptides. Moreover, the antigen binding cleft of M3' may accept a range of peptide lengths longer than do other class I molecules. This broader range may be an adaptation to temper the N-formyl requirement, thus expanding somewhat the range of bacterial peptides restricted by M 3 ' . This MHC molecule may normally be expressed at higher levels only during infection by intracellular bacteria. Immunization with irradiated P. berghei SPZ induces protective immunity characterized in part by CD4+ Thl and CDW T cell responses. The T h l cells proliferate to SPZ, and to recombinant circumsporozoite (rCS) protein, but not to CS protein peptides. Alternative priming with CS protein peptides induces T cells recognizing CS protein peptides but not intact SPZ. and hence, these were considered cryptic specificities. Among the cryptic determinants, three peptides mapping to a.a. 51-70, 71-90, and 271-290 correspond to the conserved regions of the Plasmodia CS protein and the fourth to the central repeat region. T cell lines and clones obtained from the cryptic peptide priming acquired anti-SPZ proliferative reactivity following in vitro expansion without loosing peptide specificity. This unexpected finding led us to investigate the usefulness of these clones in in vivo anti-SPZ protective immunity. Furthermore, the availability of T cell clones with anti-SPZ and peptide reactivities allowed us to investigate the mechanisms of recognition of SPZ vs. CS protein peptides. Preliminary data based on the requirements for SPZ and peptide presentation to T cells and lymphokine production suggest that activation by these two forms of the malaria antigen is distinct. Currently, we are in the process of evaluating specific mechanisms of T cell activation by CS peptides and SPZ by examining Vp usage, signal transduction, fine epitope mapping and costimulatory molecules. These results will enhance our understanding of the immune response to malaria parasites. Supported in part by WHO/Worid Bank TDR. MHC class I1 np heterodimers assemble shortly after synthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The aPIi complexes are subsequently transported to an endosomal compartment. It is not yet clear whether the transport route goes directly to endosomes from the trans-Golgi network, or whether newly synthesized class I1 molecules are targeted to endosomes by rapid internalization from the cell surface. To address this question we have quantitated the biosynthetic rate of class I1 molecules and the rate of internalization of surface npIi complexes. In addition we have determined that some of the internalized apIi complexes recycle back to the cell surface. Altogether these data suggest that an important fraction of newly synthesized class I1 molecules are transported to endosomes via the cell surface. Immune responses to Human-derived proteins were studied in mice that are transgenic for the Human MHC-class I1 protein, DR4Dw4. The DR4 in the transgenic mice is chimeric such that the antigen-binding portion of the molecule (alp1 domains) is retained, whereas the rest of the molecule corresponds to the murine I-E protein. The transgenic mice are fully functional and have normal DR4-restricted immune responses. Endogenous peptides were sequenced from DR4 that was purified from the Human B cell line, Priess. Two of the peptides identified were from the constant region of the Kappa protein of Human Immunoglobulin (Ig), residues 145-159 and 188-203. T cell hybridomas specific for both kappa peptides were generated from transgenic mice injected with Human Ig. The T cell hybridomas respond to Priess cells in the absence of exogenous antigen and are peptide-specific and MHC-restricted (both chimeric and native DR4). In addition, the T cell hybridomas secrete lymphokines in response to immobilized kappa/DR4 complexes and both hybridomas respond to similar numbers of relevant peptidemR4 complexes. The T cell hybridomas were used to quantitate the number of kappdDR4 complexes in Priess cell lysates. Approximately 17% of the Priess-derived DR4 is bound with the kappa 188-203 epitope; whereas only 1% of the DR4 is occupied with the 145-159 epitope. The data is consistent with the HPLC analysis of endogenow peptides bound to Priess-derived DR4 in that peptide 188-203 is found in higher abundance than peptide 145.159. Transgenic spleen cells, in the presence of Human Ig, also elicit responses from the T cell hybridomas. However, much less Human Ig is required to stimulate the T cell hybridoma specific for 188-203, suggesting that the kappa 188-203 peptide is the dominant epitope of the kappa protein. Thus, Human Ig is processed similarly whether the antigen is endogenous or exogenous to the antigen presenting cell. Additional studies have demonstrated that the two kappa peptides hind with similar affinities to purified DR4 over a wide pH range, suggesting that affinity alone does not dictate the pattern of kappa epitope dominance. A role for intracellular processing in epitope selection is suggested by two observations: 1) the dominant epitope contains an internal cysteine residue that is involved in a conserved intramolecular disulfide bond and 2) the subdominant epitope contains a cathepsin B site. Using an in vitro model system where Salnwnelh typhimuriurn expresses a defined T cell epitope, we investigated the parameters that effect the efficiency of processing antigenic epitopes expressed in this bacterium for presentation to T lymphocytes. The HEL(52-61) epitope, which binds the murine major histocompatibility complex class I1 (MHC-11) molecule, I-Ak, was expressed as various soluble fusion proteins in S. typhimurium such that the epitope was expressed in different bacterial compartments (i.e. surface-exposed, facing the periplasmic space, or in the cytoplasm). Murine peritoneal macrophages mediated phagocytic processing of viable S. typhimrrium expressing the HEL(45-62) epitope for presentation via LAk regardless of which bacterial compartment the epitope was contained within. Minor differences in processing efficiency, which may be due to bacterial compartmentalization or local protein context of the epitope, could be overcome by increasing the relative amount of epitope per bacterium, indicating that epitope abundance is an important factor for efficient processing of epitopes from bacteria. This processing pathway required phagocytosis of bacteria followed by passage through an acidic compartment, suggesting a pathway involving phagolysosomal degradation of the bacteria to liberate epitopes that bind MHC-I1 for presentation for T cells. When low levels of HEL(52-61) was constitutively expressed, the epitope was processed more efficiently from rough lipopolysaccharide (LPS) S. typhimuiurn strains compared to their isogenic smooth LPS counterparts. In addition, expressing HEL(52-61) in S. fyphimurium strains containing a mutation inphoP, a locus involved in delaying macrophage phagosome acidification, resulted in more efficient processing and presentation compared to the same epitope expressed in strains with a wild typephoP allele. These data suggest that factors associated with virulent strains of S. typhimuriurn, such as smooth LPS and phoP expression, may have a role in effecting the efficiency of phagocytic processing of epitopes expressed in S. typhimirriitm for presentation via MHC-11. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) can be secreted by plasma cells as a pentameric and hexameric polymer. Pentameric IgM consists of five pzL2 monomeric subunits that are disulfide bonded in a circular array and are held together by one J chain molecule. The hexameric form of IgM consists of an additional monomeric subunit and lacks J chain. J chain, a 15-kDa glycoprotein, is associated via disulfide bonds with the terminal cysteines of two p chains of a pentameric molecule. The formation of pentameric IgM is favored in plasma cells that express J chain, whereas in absence of J chain the hexameric form dominates. There are no clear data showing in which subcellular compartment the assembly of IgM occurs. Therefore, the goal of this work is to determine where in the cell and in what order IgM is assembled. We found that in a p only expressing murine hybridoma cell line p assembles together with J chain into oligomeric forms. Since these polymers can be precipitated with BiP, an ER-resident protein, we conclude that the polymerization process occurs in the ER. In addition, we showed that in a p,~producing hybridoma line the assembly of pentameric IgM occurs by combining pL-subunits. Since almost all of the oligomeric intermediates could be precipitated with BiP, we conclude that pentameric and hexameric IgM is assembled in the ER of a plasma cell. We have been studying human T cell clones and lines which recognize the influenza hemagglutinin peptide 307-319 (HA 307-319). in the context of different class 11 DR molecules. Two T cell clones,3BC6.6 and BC8, recognize HA 307-319 in the context of DR4. Clone JS515.11 recognizes HA 307-319 only in the context of DR7. We have sequenced cDNAs coding for the T cell receptors expressed by all of these clones. 3BC6.6 and JS515.11 each use V a l and VR3 gene segments yet interact with different DR molecules. 3BC6.6 and BC8 have identical HLA and peptide specificities yet use different Va and V5 T cell receptor gene segments. In order to better understand the molecular basis for these results, we have set up an in virro system to study recognition of major histocompatibility complex plus peptide by transfected cognate or mutated T cell receptor chains. A reporter gene coding for 5-galactosidase under the control of an interleukin 2 promoter element has been introduced into a human T cell receptor negative Jurkat cell (Glaichenhaus er 01, 1991, J. Immunol. 146, 2095-2101). a and I3 T cell receptor cDNAs were transfected into the recipient cell line using various expression vectors. 5-galactosidase activity was observed as a result of activation by the appropriate peptide plus MHC molecule. 5-galactosidase activity was peptide dose dependent and could be observed as early as four hours after presentation. Chimeric T cell receptors constructed from the receptor cDNAs derived from clones 3BC6.6, BC8, and JS515.11 have also been constructed and expressed in this system. Analysis of the reactivity of cells expressing these constructs and other site directed mutants should help to map important TCR and HLA contact residues. usage in both TCR a-and B-chains. Closer examination shows that the majority of these sequences encode negative and positive charged residues at their respective TCR a-and &chain VJ or VDJjunctions. These junctions form the third complementarity determining regions (CDR3) of the TCR polypeptides involved in dimct interaction with the class I-bound peptide. Crystallographic analyses of Kb-peptide complexes predict that the major determinant from OVA, peptide OVA2~7.261 (SIINFEKL), contains two exposed charged sidechains which can contact the TCR. These are the negatively charged glutamic acid at determinant position 6 (P6) and the positively charged lysine at P7. To examine whether the TCR a-chain makes contact with P7 lysine, we have established a single chain TCR transgenic C57BU6 mouse line where all T cells express a TCR B-chain derived from the OVA-specific CIL clone B3. Stimulation of naive TCR B-chain transgenic T cells with a P7 substitution peptide analogue induces CTL that no longer recognise the wildtype OVA257.2&1 determinant, suggesting that the TCR achain from the T cell clone B3 can determine the specificity for this midue. Consequently, these results identify CDR3 residues contacting known exposed peptide sidechains from a structurally defined class I-bound antigen. We have analysed the T cell receptor (TCR) repertoire found in the MHC Doyle, Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, N C 27710. W e have generated a panel of approximately fifty mutant class II proteins, each containing a single amino acid substitution in either the p l or p2 domain of t h e HLA-DR1 protein. The altered gene products have been expressed in a class Il-negative human B lymphoblastoid cell line that has been co-transfected with the HLA-DRu cDNA. Transfected cells have been analysed for CD4 binding using a cell adhesion assay that measures a direct CD4-class II interaction. Mutations in an exposed loop encompassing amino acids 41-55 of the p l domain of HLA-DR1 appear to effect the C D 4 interaction. Implications of this model will b e discussed. The mutant class II proteins have also been analysed using alloreactive and antigen-specific CD4dependent DR1-restricted T cell clones. Results obtained in these studies m a y reflect a subtle difference in the requirement for peptide involvement in allorecognition a s compared t o T cell receptor recognition of nominal antigen. Additional mutations in the p2 domain also appear to alter CD4 binding and T cell recognition. These results are consistent with previous studies of CD4-dependent T cell recognition of the murine class II molecule I-Ad.  School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 Analysis of the T-cell receptor (TCR) repertoire has been used to identify specific T-cells which may play a critical role in the pathogenesis of certain autoimmune and infectious diseases. We have been using this approach in our investigations of sarcoidosis, a multiorgan granulomatous disease of unknown etiology that frequently affects the lungs, lymph nodes, skin and eyes. T-cells at sites of disease are predominantly CD4+ and show signs of recent activation via the TCR receptor pathway. We hypothesized that this activation would result in preferential expansion of a limited number of TCR specific T-cells. TCR VO expression was analyzed in bronchoalveolar lavage lung and blood T-cells of sarcoid patients and for comparison, normal individuals using anti-TCR antibodies and a quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Compared to normal lung and blood, subgroups of sarcoid patients demonstrated biased expression of one or more VO genes with VO5, 8. 15, 16 and 18 utilized most frequently in a biased fashion. Furthermore, dramatic skewing of the TCR repertoire was apparent when sarcoid lung and blood T-cells were expanded by short-term culture with IL2. Sequence analysis demonstrated this bias was the result of oligoclonal expression of TCR VO genes and WBS usually dominated by a single VO-gene, consistent with cn antigenic response. Interestingly, the V(D)J junctional region af several of the dominant VO sequences contained a commm RGR or RGGR sequence motif. Such homology in the hypervariable CDR3 region of the TCR suggests recognition of a similar or identical antigenic determinant. Together, these observations suggest it is possible to identify critical antigenspecific T-cells in a granulomatous disease of unknown etiology. Isolation of these T-cells would allow testing of their antigenic specificity in hopes of identifying the underlying stimulus causing this disorder. TcR6, cells of the lymphoid lineage. Furthermore, its expression is developnentz&, regu!ated during thymic development. In order to better understand the transcriptional mechanisms that control thymic development of CD8+ cells, hypersensitivity mapping was used to map two hypersensitive sites (HS) in both cell lines and fresh human peripheral T cells. A minimal 691bp T cell-specific enhancer was identified in proximity to a prominent T cell-restricted HS in the last intron of the CD8a gene. This enhancer was composed of a cluster of binding sites for T cell-specific factors as well as a 5'-Alu element which contained functional GATA-3, bHLH and LyF-1 binding sites. This minimal enhancer was located just downstream of a half Alu-element which when included in reporter constructs significantly reduced enhancer activity. Interestingly, the repetitive Alu-sequences appear to form a cruciform structure as demonstrated by P1nuclease mapping, chloroacetaldehyde mapping of unpaired bases, and deletiodsite-directed mutation analysis of DNA secondaql structure. T cell receptor (Tcr) a and p chain heterodimers are responsible for the antigen specificity of 90% of T lymphocytes while the remainder carry heterodimers composed of y and 6 chains. Human Tcr p variable genes have been classified into 24 families with a family defined by members which share greater than 75% nucleotide sequence homology. It has recently been estimated that the 24 human Vp families charactcrized encompass some 51 transcriptionally active gene segments. Surveys of several hundred Tcrp cDNA clones have failed to establish further Vp families which presumably, if they exist, must bc poorly represented in the peripheral blood repertoire. It is likely, therefore, that the majority of human Vp regions which are rearranged conventionally and are transcriptionally active have already been described. In order to investigate whether additional Vp familes characterize the human T cell receptor repertoire we have examined Vp sequences from an invcrse PCR Tcrp cDNA library of the chimpanzee, man's closest living relative. One clone which could not be assigned to any human Vp family crosshybridized with human Tcr p chain cDNA. This new family has been called Vp25. Chimpanzee and human Vp25 are closely related. Comparison using the Lipman-Pearson method gives a similarity index of 94.6% over a consensus length of 112 amino acids. On the evidence of southern blotting with cDNA probes, Vp25 segments in human and chimpanzee appear to represent single member gene families and no restriction fragment length polymorphism was evident with the restriction enzymes used. Equalisation of TCRp cDNA followed family-specific quantitative PCR showed that the gene is expressed at similar levels in the chimpanzee and the human. The actual level of expression in the human is less that 0.5% of the total Tcrp repertoire. Transpecics DNA hybridization using novel sequences from closely related species may be a powerful tool for establishing the full extent of T cell receptor a and p repertoires. We have analyzed the interaction of T cell antigen receptor (TCR) and its ligands by mutational and transfectional analysis. The D10 T cell clone originally isolated from AKR mice by immunizing chicken conalbumin responds to this peptide presented by Ak molecule. This clone is also alloreactive to Ab,v,PJl. mdd. The TCRB chain used by this clone is VL18.2 and therefore reactive to SEB but not to Mls-la. Several amino acids in the CDR1, CDRZ and CDR3 domain of this TCRB chain have been mutagenized and transfectants expressing these mutations have been generated. Several interesting observations have been made by these transfectants. Experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (EAMG) is inducible in C57BLi6 (B6;I-A") mice by immunization with Turprdo crrlijimficn acetylcholine receptor (TAChR). Congenic B6.C-H-2'""" iiiice with discrete substitutions in the MHC class I1 peptide binding site are relatively resistant to EAMG. As a consequence of MHC striictiire bin12 mice fail to recognize an epitope which is iiiiiiiiiiio-doiiiiiiant in B6 mice, peptide 146-162 of the TAChR cy subunit. This peptide has been shown by others to be capable of inducing iieonatal tolerance to EAMG induction. Binding of p146-I62 to I-A" is mediated by side chain interactions with Y I S I , V156 and to a lesser degree S157; these residues define a binding niotif xhich is conserved among three other AChR epitopes. The strength of MHC binding correlates with the pattern of epitope dominance. Residues Dl52 and K155 are dominant T cell contacts. S157 and 1158 are also important; substitutions of these positions yield TCR antagontat peptides. Interestingly, although individual T cell clones could be inhibited by one or inore antagonists. no single antagonist inhibited all clones. Since recognition ofp146-162 was previously sliowii to preferentially involve Vp6, V-D-J sequences of p146-162 reactibe clones, hybridomas and lymph node T cells were determined. Highly conserved p chain junctional sequences were found to contain glutaniic acid (E) and to a lesser extent aspartic acid (D). A minor popiilatioti ofp146-162 reactive Tcells utilized Vp8.2, the V p gene with highest homology 10 Vp6, aasociated with V-D-J sequences containing E or D. These studies indicate considerable struct~iral constraints on TCR recognition of the iniportant p146-16?/1-Ab ltgand and several potential target5 for tiiiiiiiiiie tnterventioii i n EAMG. T cell receptors (TCRs) recognize peptide antigens bound to MHC molecules. According to the affinity hypothesis, TCRs should have a lower aflinity for the peptide/MHC complexes which positively selected them than for the peptide/MHC complexes which could negatively select them. To test this, soluble TCR and MHC protein were made using the baculovirus expression system. Two TCRs were chosen for this study, 5KC(Vp3) specific for a moth cytochrome C (MCC) peptide in the context of I-Ek and DO-1 I.lO(VpS.2) specific for an ovalbumin (OVA) peptide bound to I-Ad. Soluble I-Ek made in moth cells was functional since it could present peptide antigens as well as SEB and SEA to T-cell hybridomas. Likewise soluble TCR molecules made in moth cells were also functional since they bound to MHC with SEB or specific peptide and inhibited the antigen presentation to T-cell hybridomas specifically. Affinities were measured using a BIAcorem (Pharmacia Biosenser). I-Ek plus MCC peptide had significantly higher affinity compared to I-Ek plus non-relevant peptide for the 5KC TCR. Currently w e are testing the affinity of the 5KC TCR for I-Ek plus several peptides that were isolated from thymus I-E molecules. The hierarchy of affinity may suggest candidate peptides for positive selection of the TCR m VIVO. WITH ITS LIGAND MHC CLASS 1 Paula Kavathas*, Daniel J. Leahyc, and Pamcia A. Giblin*, *Departments of Laboratory Medicine, Genetics, and Section in Immunobiology, Yale Univserity, New Haven, CT 06520-8035 and +Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205-2185 The CD8 dimer interacts with the a3 domain of its ligand, MHC class I, through two Ig variable-like domains. A crystal structure informed mutational analysis has been performed to identify amino acids in the CD8da homodimer that are likely to be involved in binding to class I. Several key residues are situated on the top face of the dimer within loops analogous to the complementarity determining regions (CDR) of immunoglobulin. In addition, other important amino acids are located in the A and B p strands on the sides of the dimer. We find that the positive surface potential of CD8 appears to be important in class I binding thus complementing previous work demonstrating the importance of a negatively charged loop on the a 3 domain of class I for CDXafa-class I interaction. The potential involvement of amino acids on both the top and the side faces of the molecule is consistent with a bivalent model for the interaction between a single CD8du homodimer and two class I moleculea and may have important implications for signal transduction in class I expressing cells. A model was generated showing how two molecules of HLA calss I can interact symmemcally with one CD8 dimer in an orientation analogous to the orientation found in crystal structures for dimers of HLA class I1 molecules. This model predicts that CDRcda interacts not only with the a3 domain of class 1 bur also the a2 domain. The non-human primates Pan troglodytes and Afucaca mulatta have been used as animal disease modeis for the investigation o l AIDS and collagen-induced arthritis, due to their close phylogenetic relationship with humans. MHC, immunoglobulin and T cell receptor molecules are componen6 of specific immune responses. The MHC class I and class 11 molecules of Pan troglodytes and Macaca mulatta have been extensively investigated and studies have revealed that most primate MHC allelic lineages arc stable structures that prcdate speciation. To investigate the adaptive immune response in thesc primates further, we have cloned and sequenced TCRp cDNA that is derived from the peripheral blood of a healthy chimpanzee and rhesus monkey after inverse PCR. We have obtained the sequences of 58 chimpanxe and 56 rhesus monkey TCR p chains, and in both species Vp genes are rearranged to D and J segments as in humans. Alignment of variable region sequences shows that key residues are conserved relative to other TCR p chains and immunoglobulins and arc probably responsible for the conserved domain framework. Vp genes from hoth chimpanzee and rhesus monkey can be assigned to equivalent human Vp families. and are usually identified with particular family members. We have sequenced representatives from 15 chimpanzee and 18 rhesus monkey Vp families, and in general the chimpanzedhuman relationship is closer than the human/rhesus relationship as expected from phylogeny. Phylogenetic trees created using Vp amino acid sequences from all three species show that Vp family members from diiferent species cluster together rather than by species, indicating relative stability of these genes through primate evolution. This indicates that T cell receptor variable regions arc inherited in a trans-species manner analogous to MHC alleles. Lack of Vp divergence between species, the absence of novel Vp's and relative conservation of Vp mRNA levels suggests that the ancestral primate of human, chimpanzce and rhesus macaque which existed approximately 30 million years ago, had reached an equilibrium between germline TCR variability resulting from tandcmly repeated Vp genes and juncuonal variability which is mostly somatically generated. The KBrestricted Plasmodium berghei circumsporozoite peptide PbCS 253-260 (YIPSAEK)I was N-terminally conjugated with photoreactive iodo, 4-azidosalicylic acid (IASA) and at the TCR contact residue Lys 259 with 4-azidobenzoic acid (ABA), to make IASA-YPSAEKI. Seven independent CTL clones were derived from mice immunized with this conjugate. All clones recognized the peptide derivative as well as YIPSAEK(ABA)l in a Kd resmcted manner, hut failed to recognize IASA-YIPSAEKI or the parental PbCS peptide. Selective photoactivation of the IASA group allowed the covalent attachment of the peptide derivative to Kd molecules. Incubation of covalent P815 cell-associated or soluble Kd peptide derivative complexes with the cloned CTL and photoactivation of the ABA group resulted in TCR photoaffinity labeling. The TCR of two clones were selectively labeled at the p chain, while the TCR of the other clones were labeled to various relative extents at both chains. The TCR of the latter clones expressed Vpl encoded p chains that were paired with a chains containing the Ja TA28 segment. These TCR gene elements were not utilized by PbCS specific CTL clones. The TCR of the two other clones expressed different gene elements. Molecular modeling of one of the Vpl, J a TA28 expressing TCR showed a prominent hydrophobic pocket formed in part by the O R 3 equivalent region of the a chain and the CDR2 region of the p chain. In the bound state the Lys (ABA) side chain of the ligand intruded into this pocket, with the ABA group being stacked between the J a TA28 encoded Trp and Tyr 48 of the Vpl segment. The photoaffinity labeled site on the a chain was localized by peptide mapping in the CDR3 region. It is concluded that TCR expressing these particular gene elements can avidly bind this photoreactive ligand, which favoured their preferential positive selection in vivo. The number of Va gene segments varies from mice to mice and is estimated between 75 to 100. On the basis of their structure, Va are grouped into about 20 subfamilies. Southern blot analysis revealed that most of the Va are organized in clusters composed of a copy of Va belonging to different subfamilies. To seek further the organisation of the mouse TCR a locus, we analyzed in detail a Va subfamily and search for new Va. From a serie of genomic clones derived from B1O.A strain encompassing these clusters, the structure of all the Va2 was determined. Comparisons indicate that the Va2 can be organized in 3 structural subgroups composed of 3 members for Va21,6 for Va2II and 3 for Va21II. Several Va2 are identical indicating recent duplications, the most divergent Va2 display 7.4% of nucleotide differences leading to 5.2% of amino acid replacements. All the crucial residues of the folding in Ig like domain are conserved in the Va2, this allowed us to use an Ig model to predicted the localization of the variable positions. The great majoritv of the differences are in regions that are predicted to be exposed to the solvent, including the loops corresponding to the 4 CDR. By the study of T cell lines, hierto undescribed Va were found, one of them corresponds to a new subfamily composed of two members localized to each extremity of the TCR Va locus, in association with one member of the Val3 and VaBMB subfxnilies. Together, these data highlight the successive duplication units involved in the process of expansion and contraction of the V a gene subfamilies. CD4+ T cells play a crucial role in the development of lupus in MRL-lpr/lpr mice: i) incomplete deletion/ silencing of CD4+ T cells results in both polyclonal B cell activation and infiltration of T cells within the spleen, lymph nodes. kidney and other organs: and ii) anti-CD4 antibody therapy ameliorates disease and prolongs survival. Because CD4 is normally involved in both tolerance induction and T cell activation, we questioned whether abnormal signal transduction through CD4 influenced activaton of autoreactive T cells in this strain. For this purpose, signal transduction in CD4+ T cells derived from MRL-lpr/lpr and normal mice were compared, using both CD4+T cell clones and bulk CD4+T cell populations, isolated from mice of varying ages. Cross-linking of surface CD4 resulted in deficient tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins in MRL T cells. By comparison, tyrosine phosphorylation was similar among MRL and normal CD4+ T cells after crosslinking with either anti-TcR antibody or anti-CD3 antibody, and following co-culture with Con A. lck protein expression in MRL. CD4+ T cells was lower than normal. However, following stimulation with Con A, Ick enzyme activity was comparable in MRL and normal T cells. The observed differences could not be explained by variation in surface CD4 expression, and they were present in an autoreactive MRL T cell clone as well as in T cells isolated from pre-diseased and diseased mice. These results raise the possibility that abnormal signaling through CD4 may contribute to the impaired tolerance and the expansion of autoreactive T cells exhibited in MRL-Ipr/lpr mice. CD4 T-cells recognize antigen as peptide fragments bound to the groove of class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules through the a/p T cell antigen receptor (TCR). Peptide-MHC complexes are presented on the surface of various accessory cells, and with appropriate co-stimulation, activate the T cell through the TCR. One theory of T cell activation states that TCR occupancy drives the activation of specific T cell functions in a manner quantitatively dependent upon the presentation-density of the peptide-MHC complex. Another view is that qualitative differences between T cell ligands can independently control the activation of specific T cell response genes. We now demonstrate that single C-truncations of a peptide antigen are associated with a structural change in the extracted I-As-peptide complex as revealed by SDS-PAGE Furthermore, we show that these single C-truncations alter the presentation density of the peptide on live APC. C-truncated antagonist peptide doses were increased to effect peptide presentation-density equal with the peptide agonist, and part of the CD4 T cell clone's proliferative response was restored. By contrast, a dose approximately ten-fold in excess of this level of the antagonist peptide was required for interferon-gamma release. These data therefore support the role of qualitative differences in ligand structure in determining the functional outcome of CD4 T-cell recognition; and, suggest that peptide antagonism may be partially overcome by increasing the presentation-density of a particular ligand conformation. Thymic selection of the developing T cell repertoire in immature CD4+CD8+ thymocytes, with the fate of individual thymocytes determined by the specificity of TCR they express. However, TCR expression in immature CD4+CD8+ thymocytes actively downregulated in CD4+CD8+ thymocytes by CD4-mediated tyrosine kinase signals that are generated in the thymus as a result of CD4 engagement by intrathymic ligands. In the present study we have examined the effect of CD4 overexpression in CD4+CD8+ thymocytes on activation of CD4-associated p56Ick tyrosine kinase and regulation of TCR expression. Augmented CD4 expression in CD4+CD8+ thymocytes did not result in cOmmensurate increases in associated p56ICk molecules, so that CD4 expression was quantitatively disproportionate to that of its associated signaling molecule p56Ick, Interestingly. we found that CD4 overexpression significantly interfered with the ability of CD4 crosslinking to activate associated p56Ick molecules and significantly interfered with the ability of CD4 to regulate TCR expression. Thus, this study provides an example in which receptor overexpression leads to decreased receptor signaling competence. The extent to which weak responses to class I molecules containing h u m a n a 2 or a 3 domains i s due to species specific interactions with murine CD8 w i l l be discussed. CD45 is a family of transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTP'ases) shown to play a key role in T cell activation p r e s u m a b l y b y regulating t h e t y r o s i n e phosphorylation of protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) or their substrates. In man, regulated alternative splicing generates 5 CD45 isoforms that differ only in their extracellular domains. These isoforms are differentially distributed on T cells having distinct activation requirements a n d in vitro functions. HoweLer, the role of the different CD45 isoforms is unknown and has been difficult to study because individual T cells simultaneously express multiple isoforms. Furthermore, reexpression of different individual CD35 isoforms into CD45-negati\,e mutant cell lines has proved difficult to accomplish. Wc have now dcvcloped a unique CD45-negative human CD4+ T cell line (J-AS-CD45) by stably transfecting Jurkat cells with an antisense gene that specifically targets endogenous CD45 expresrion. These cells lack both cell surface and cytoplasmic CD4.5 as d e t e r m i n e d b y i m m u n o f l u o r e s c e n c e a n d immunohlotting of whole cell lysates. J-AS-CD45 demonstrates defective activation signaling through both the CD3 and CD2 pathways, as evidenced by markedly decreased IL-2 production and minimal calcium flux compared to wild-type controls. We have recently transfected J-AS-CD45 with rDNAs encoding the smallest ( 1 8 0 kDa) a n d largest (220 kDa) CD45 isoforms, generating J-AS-CD45[0] a n d J-AS-CD45[ABC] cell lines, respectivelj.. Each of these stable cell lines expresses the appropriate single isoform as detected by immunofluorescence a n d v\cstern blotting. Preliminary studies reveal that cxprcsrion of cither of these isoforms can restore activationinduced IL-2 production and calcium flux. Studies comparing p56lCk and p59fYn activity, activation-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of intracellular substrates. and preferential acti\ation requirements between these cells, are currently undemaj.. Results of these studies will be discussed. Recent work in a number of laboratories has shown that membrane immunoglobulin (mIg) is associated with mb-l and 829 gene products, and several other proteins including tyrosine kinases, p95""", and possibly CD 45 on the surfaces of B lymphocytes within a structure now referred to as the B cell receptor complex. Experiments utilizing site directed mutagenesis of mIg constructs has suggested that the association of the mb-I and 829 gene products with mIg is mediated through interactions involving the transmembrane domains of these proteins. However mIgM as well as the mb-I and B29 gene products all express large glycosylated exodomains. While the Fc domain of secreted immunoglobulins is known to participate in several recognition phenomena, the function of the Fc domain of mIg, as well as the function of the mb-l and B29 exodomains are unknown. To investigate the possibility that these domains are important for mb-I and B29 gene products to hind to membrane IgM, we examined mb-l and B29 gene product binding to secreted IgM. Secreted IgM is similar to the extracellular domains of membrane IgM, but lacks the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains. In our experiments, mb-l and B29 gene products were demonstrated to bind to 7s secreted IgM, and to a lesser extent to 19s secreted IgM. The binding was prevented by treating secreted IgM with N-glycanase or neuraminidase. These observations imply that mb-l and B29 gene products can bind to membrane IgM through an interaction solely involving extracellular domains, and that this interaction is mediated by carbohydrate. Supported in part by NSF grant MCB 9220169. CD4, is a 55 kDa surface glycoprotein which, in addition to acting as a co-receptor providing modulatory signals for antigen receptor-driven T lymphocyte activation, also participates in the motility of CD4+ lymphocytes and myelocytes following exposure of cells to a number of factors. The signal transduction mechanism which is induced during T cell motility has, however, yet to he defined. A signaling component that may he directly involved in CD4 mediated chemotdxis is the T-cell specific protein-tyrosine kinase, p56' Ck. a member of the src kinase family, which associates with the cytoplasmic domain of a number of molecules including CD4. Because previous studies have demonstrated that the chemoattractants HIVgpl20 and CD4 monoclonal antibodies (Mab) when crosslinked on the cell surface are capable of inducing p56'ck enzymatic activity, we investigated the possible requirement for p56' Ck in CD4-mediated motile responses induced by CD4 Mah. We examined antibody induced lymphocyte chemotaxis i n a series of murine T-cell hybridoma lines which have been transfected to express human CD4 and mutants of CD4 which have modifications in their cytoplasmic domains which result in the disruption of the association of p56'ck with CD4. Our experiments demonstrate that CD1 antibodies induced dose dependent motile responses in cells expressing normal human CD4, however, no migration occurred i n cells with CD4 mutations incapable of binding p56lck. Anti-T ccll receptor antibody induced chemotaxis in all the murine cell clones under all conditions. An examination of the enzymatic activity of the kinase in response to maximal chemotactic concentrations of CD4 antibodies, however, demonstrated no increase in CD4 associated p56lCI activity. In addition, the tyrosine-kmase specific inhibitor, Herbimycin A, at doses and exposure times which inhibited all CD4 associated kmase activity, had no effect on lymphocyte migration. Our data sugzerts that the physical association of p561ck with CD4, and not the enzymatic activity of the kinase, is the essential component for lymphocyte motile responses. We propose that p56'ck IS acting, under these conditions, as an "adapter", linking CD4 with other signaling or structural molecules. Activation of T cells via TCR results in the phosphorylation of tyrosines in the three tyrosine activation motifs (TAMS) of the <subunit of CD3, which is believed to involve the tyrosine kinase Zap-70. Activation of mast cells and basophils via the high affinity IgE receptor results in the phosphorylation of tyrosines in the single TAM of both the y and p subunits, which appears to involve the tyrosine kinase, syk. We investigated the specificity of the TAMs in the yand p subunits of the high affinity IgE receptor, to determine if these were capable of activating T cells. Chimeric receptors with the extracellular domain of CD8a, the transmembrane domain of either CD8a, y, or p, and the cytoplasmic domains of y or p were constructed, transfected into TCR-Jurkat 31-13 cells, and the ability of these receptors to activate after crosslinking with anti-CD8 antibodies was determined. We observed that chimeric receptors with cytoplasmic domains from either y or p subunits induced both early, (phosphorylation and Ca+2 mobilization) and late (IL-2 secretion) events in cellular activation. Chimeras with transmembrane and cytoplasmic y domains could not be expressed on the cell surface, while those with transmembrane and cytoplasmic p domains were expressed on the cell surface, but were non-functional. The role of the transmembrane domains o f y and p and TAMs that interact with syk rather than Zap-70 in the activation of T cells which contain Zap-70 will be discussed. The CD4 molecule interacts with a monomorphic domain of MHC class Il molecules leading to enhanced T cell activation. CD4 has been pro osed to act either as a co-receptor by interacting with the same &C class11 molecule which presents the pe tide to the T cell receptor. Alternatively, in vitro systems have grnonstrated tha: CD4 can enhance Tcell activation by interacting with an MHC molecule which is not involved in peptide presentation to the T cell receptor. Three different in vitro systems have been set up in the lab which address the two functions of CD4. Using a battery of CD4 mutants spanning the four extracellular domains of CD4, we have shown that the co-rece tor function of this molecule invofves residues which are situate! on the gp120 bindin domain and others which are located on the other face of CD4. fn contrast, the co-ligand function of CD4 involves the face of CD4 which does not encompass the gp120 binding site. Recent experiments have enabled us to show on the crystal structure of class I1 the presence of two sites implicated in an interaction with CD4. The implication of these sites In monomeric and dimeric forms of class I1 will be discussed. T o understand the role that the T cell receptor (TCR) alpha chain plays during T cell activation, other than recognition of the class I1 major histocompatibility complex molecule (MHC) and its associated peptide, we have subjected it to mutational analysis. In order to identify sites that are involved in TCR signal transduction andor interaction of the TCR with other surface molecules, specific mutations were made in amino acid residues postulated to lie on the face of the alpha chain that contacts solvent but not Class I1 MHC and peptide. The ability of such mutant receptors to interact with antigen on presenting cells was assessed in vitro. Hades#. Jay A . Berzofsky* *Molecular Immunogenetics and Vaccine Research Section. Metabolism Branch, and #Experimental Immunology Branch. National Cancer Institute. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda. MD 20892 The MHC class I molecule Dd as well as H-2U.P. and Y, were found to present peptides PI8 and HP53, two determinants of HIV-I gpl60, to CD8+ murine cytotoxic T lyinphocytes (CTL). The usage of Vp in T cells showing an unexpected crossreaction between these two peptides was remarkably conserved ( primarily V p S family, wlth some use of Vp14) despite the extensive 'TCR V p diversity of the non-crossreactive CTL, which did not use VpS or 14. This correlation of Vp usage with fine specificity was consistent in H-2d.u.and P (PcO.OI). hut not in H-2q. The correlation of Vp use with peptide fine specificity independenr of MHC resfriction is all the more surprising in view of the finding that mice hearing a genoinic deletion of \'pS can still produce T cells with cross-reactive phenotype, implying that other Vp can still produce this specificity. We therefore asked whether the MHC restriction of these T cells was different, and found that H-2d.p.and I J cells mutually crosspresent the peptides PI8 and HP53 to allogeneic CTL lines and individual clones of each of the other haplotypes, whereas none of these cross-present to H-2q CTL. nor do H-24 targets present to CTL of the other halotypes. This degeneracy of MHC restriction is novel for class 1 molecules. Moreover. the observed restriction in Vp usage occurs only in the unique set of CTL that exlllhlt both peptide-crossreoctive fine specificity and MHC allogeneic crosspresentation. The observation that a strain of nuce in which the V p 8 family is genornically deleted can still make CTL of this phenotype using another V p deinonstrates the plasticity of the class I MHC-restricted repertoire when the dominating receptor is not available. It is widely assumed that differences in antigen-specific T-cell receptor (TcR) affinities for various peptide-MHC (pepMHC) complexes exercise a major influence on T cell development and function. Since T cells interact transiently with target cells or APC, only a limited time is available for specific reactions to occur between the TcR on T cells and pephlHC complexes on target cells or APC. Therefore, it is important to determine how rapidly this reaction can approach equilibrium and thus whether TcR affinity values have physiological relevance. We found that the TcR on a clone of CD8' cytotoxic T cells reacts rapidly with its principal naturally occurring pepMHC ligand (equilibrium was approached in 1-2 min), and that the affinities of this TcR for a set of closely related soluble pepMHC complexes varied over a 1000-fold range, with values for individual complexes correlating well with the ability of their peptide moieties to sensitize target cells for lysis by the cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Even with an intrinsic affinity constant as low as 3 x l o 3 M-1 for a particular pepMHC ligand, target cells that presented this complex could stimulate a specific T cell response. A ubiquitous system f o r expressing functional a-P heterodimeric T cell receptors, Luc Teyton, Brunmark A,, Scott C., Jackson M., Boismenu R., and P.A.Peterson. Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 92037 California. The study of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules -T cell receptor (TCR) interactions have been limited by the difficulties to produce large amounts of soluble molecules. The production of functional empty MHC molecules has been reported recently in a Drosophila expression system. We have taken advantage of this same system to engineer and produce soluble TCRs. The transmembrane domain of each a and p TCR cDNAs has been deleted by PCR to connect the extracytoplasmic region dircctly to the cytoplasmic tail. A six histidine tail was added at the N-terminal part of each construct to allow an efficient first purification step. Both cDNAs were subcloned in the metallothionein-driven Drosophila expression vector pRmHa-3 and transfected along with a neomycin-resistance gene into SC2 Drosophila melanogaster cells. After G-418 selection the expression was tested after 3 days of copper sulfate induction by immunofluorcscence and purification by nickel-agarose chromatography. Transfected cells produced a 65 kD heterodimer made of one a and one p chain associated by a disulfide bridge which were recognized by anti-idiotype antibodies. Functionality of the purified molecules was shown by blocking specific T cell responses. The following series of 5 different receptors and their corresponding MHC ligands has now been produced : 2C (Ld), HY (Db), HA ([-Ad), OVA (I-Ab), OVA (Kb). The affinities of TCR 2C for Ld+p2CL peptide complexes and TCR HY for Db+MBO peptide complexes have been measured using plasmon resonance tcchnique. They both were found to be in the micromolar range and to correlate with the functional blocking expcriments. This analysis demonstrated limited heterogenicity of the VR repertoire in 6 breast cancer patients, VR3 and VR15 being the predominant repertoires. The levels of clonal restriction, as measured by the usage of JR gene rearrangements within VR3 and VR15 families, was analyzed by southern blotting of PCR amplified products. VDJ sequence analysis of restricted repertoires further confiimed the clonal restriction of Txells in breast cancer patients. To study the effect of long termer vivo culture of TIL on their TCR repertoire, TIL from 2 patients were cultured in the presence of IL-2 for 23 and 46 days, respectively. In both cases, there was an increase in the total number of TCR repertoires expressed in long term cultured cells (from 5/22 at day 0 to 18/22 at day 23). These results indicate that in breast cancer, the TCR repertoire may be restricted and long term culture of TIL in the presence of IL-2 may result in POIYCIOMI activation of Tcells. In the case of ovarian cancer, TIL from 3 patients were cultured in the presence of IL-2 or in the presence of irradiated tumor, and TCR from these samples was analyzed by RNase protection assay. Selective usage of the VB6.3, VR8.1 and VR13.3 T-cell receptor gene products was found. Moreover, amplification of restricted repertoires was relatively enhanced in TIL cultured in the presence of irradiated tumor, potentially due to antigen-specific stimulation provided by irradiated tumor. These fmdmgs will guide in the development of antigen-specific cellular therapies for breast and ovarian cancer. Chimpanzees and rhesus monkeys are suitable for the production of animal models for human autoimmune and immune-mediated discases due to their close evolutionary relationship with humans. As a first step towards investigating the contribution of specific T-cell receptors (TCR) to disease, we analysed the achain T-cell receptor rcpcitoirc in a healthy animal of each species. RNA was extractcd from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of one chimpanzee and one rhesus monkey. Using human C a amplification primers for linear PCR we cloned and sequenced ten C a clones of the rhesus monkey and five or the chimpanzee. Nucleotide sequences (amino acid sequences) of the human and chimpanzee C a genes showed a similarity of 97.1% (95.6%). C a nuclcotidc sequences (protein sequences) of the more distantly related rhesus monkey were 93.4%' (86.7%) similar to humans. Conservatlon at both the nucleotide and the amino acid level is evident from a comparison of the Ca region in eight different mammalian species. RFLP's were generated with multiple restriction enzymes on human, chimpanzee and rhesus monkey gcnomic DNA using C a probes. The results indicate the existence of a single C a gene in the two non-human primates with evidence of polymorphism. We have designed primers for the invcrse PCR on the hasis of the C a sequence of the rhesus monkey. Twenty V a and J a regions have been charactericd. Further investigation o i the a chain repertoirca of nonhuman primales is in progress. Palmer, Basel Institute for Immunology, CH-4005 Basel, Switzerland. The antigen speafic T cell receptor (TCR) is composed of the cdp or I S TCR heterodimers which are non covalently associated with a group of invariant polypeptides collectively referred to as CD3. While the antigen specificity of the TCR is determined by the variable domains of the cdp or 18 chains, the components of the CD3 complex are necessary for the assembly of, and signal transduction through, the TCR complex. We were interested in the role of the constant domain of the TCR B chain in connecting antigen recognition with triggering T cell functions. To this end we truncated the TCR B chain within the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains and introduced these mutant TCR i? chains into a TCR O-negative T cell hybridoma. Preliminary results suggest that we have identified a region within the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains that does not affect TCR surface expression but is absolutely required for the induction of T cell functions in response to TCR stimulation. Since the region does not display any homology to a known signalling motif, it is unclear at present whether this domain directly interacts with other protein (s) or is involved in a conformational change of the TCR 13 chain during TCRmediated signal transduction. thc pcrccmtagc of I'BL Vp2-Ivmphocytcs was u,ually Iuwu than 6%. Similarly \'b5 dnd \ID6 were ovcrreprr%!nled in ihc lung with respccl io I'BL in 6 and 7 patimts, riywctiwlv In HI' group, thc highlv rxpreswd V p on BAL T ccII, w,m-Vp? (4 patients, valu1.5 ranging Iruni It1 to 34"!1, V p .1 subject\, VJIUL'S ranging Irom d lo I?'? ,, V / h (4 G3w,, v.rIu~.\ ranging Iron1 d to 12 5'1) and \' ,M !4 patients. valucj irtrm n ID 1lP'.J ' This pcrccntdgc of HI' I'RI. expressing thc above rcporlcd V p w.i> usually Iouw than 6'; HIV-I infrckd patic,ntb showcj ail ~nL'rr'iprr'slon of HAL \'I2 (1 patients, and \'p3 13 pdtient~l with rt'>pxr to PBL \2'hr.n BAL I cvll. <tnJ PBI w r r ? c i i l t u r c d in the prcstwLe 3 mphyloniccdl enlt*rotdxinr, 1 prtililir.itir r tn&x varied a i c t d i n g to the Jirlcrcmt t m n s uwd I'iirthcrmr>rv. \vh,.n B.\L T d l~ u r I'BL wLn, cultured ~n t l i i , prtk'nck. of difft,rL,nt c'niur.it.\xins ,ind mAbs rei~igiuzing tht. p5i and p i 5 ll:2 rL'cepior5 w c o b s c r \~d d inarkzd inhihir.,ry t~r h~i t (ranging from 75 toR5': ) bv thew antibodies on the in wtra enten%wn in.iucrd proIiIc,ration. Thew data JtwiNin>tratc that thr TCR rqx'rtoirc'oi lung Iyniphqtes is nor Jvtrrniincj by random aampling ui priphc,ral h1.io.l nrtmLiiiiiilrar cclls but I , likdv to bc thr .onseqiimrcor thc ~n t c r~c t m with \ p . c i l~ Jikux. rcldtcd antljicns V 343 TARGETED MUTATION OF THE B CELL ANTI-GEN RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED MOLECULE, mb-1. Raul M. Torres, Heinrich Flaswinkel, Michael Reth, and Klaus Rajewsky, Institute for Genetics, Cologne and Max Planck Institute for Immunobiology, Freiburg. The B cell antigen receptor complex (BCR) on B lymphocytes is composed of the clonotypic immunoglobulin molecule together with the gene products of mb-1 and B29, Ig-a and Ig-b. These Ig-associated proteins function as the signal-transducing moiety each harboring a cytoplasmic tyrosine-based activation motif (TAM) also found in the signal-transducing proteins associated with the T cell receptor, FcyRIII, and FcERIP/~. Several studies using chimeric proteins transfected into cell lines have previously identified this motif as a critical element .n the signal transduction via these surface receptors. Within the context of a plasmacytoma cell line, reconstitution of a BCR with an Ig-a, mutated at both TAM tyrosines, results in defective antigen receptor signalling as assayed by increased tyrosine phosphorylation. Nevertheless, the in vivo significance of this motif within mb-1 and 829, as well as the molecules per se, has not been addressed. To approach these questions, we have generated embryonic stem (ES) cell clones in which both tyrosines of the Ig-a TAM have been mutated t o phenylalanine. In addition, using these clones, mice will be generated which lack Ig-a, either throughout or conditionally in development. We wish to discuss the phenotype of this null mutant upon reconstitution of the B cell lineage in RAG-2-deficient mice with ES clones homozygous for the deleted locus. During antigen presentation, a close association between CD4 and the T cell receptor (TCR) occurs due t o both molecules interacting with the same major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecule. The potential consequences of such an intimate interaction on TCR specificity were recently addressed using CD4 loss variants of murine T cell hybridomas specific for the hen egg lysozyme (HEL) peptide 52-61(1-3). In the presence of CD4, T cells responded strongly t o any peptide containing the core sequence, HEL 52-61, regardless of Nand C-terminal composition (2) . However, in the absence of CD4, most T cells could only respond to peptides containing the C-terminal tryptophans, Trp62 and Trp63. Thus, T cells require CD4 in order t o tolerate changes in the composition of the peptide termini. In order, t o investigated which portion of the molecule regulates this pheno e, a series of CD4 mutants were cytoplasmic tail of CD4 responded comparably to the wild-type cell, any alteration of the D3D4 domains of CD4 abrogated their ability to respond t o peptides which lack Trp62 and Trp63. Furthermore, using fluoresence resonance energy transfer, a direct interaction between the D3D4 domains of CD4 and the TCWCD3 complex was demonstrated. These observations are currently being investigated hrther using CD4 domain-shuffled and site-directed mutants. domains of CD4 modulate differentially signalling through the T cell receptor. transfected into a CD4hybridoma( 9 1, While cells which lack the Cross-linking of membrane-bound immunoglobulin (mIg) receptors on B cells causes proliferation and differentiation of B cells or the inhibition (apoptosis) of their growth. It has been reported that the mIg receptor-mediated signaling induces rapid activation of Src-like kinases and tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins in B cells. Various kinds of Src-like kinases such as p53/56bn, p55blk, p59fyn and p72SYk have been shown to associate with B cell antigen receptor complex and to be activated after cross-linking of receptors. HS1 gene is specifically expressed in hematopoietic cells and encodes a 75 kD protein. The Nterminal half of HS1 protein is rich in basic and acidic residues and has three and half copies of a 37 amino acid repeating motif, each of which contains a helix-turn-helix motif. The C-terminal motif is rich in acidic residuces and has potential a-helix containing an amphipathic region and an SH3 motif (Kitamura et al, 1989). HS1 protein is identified both in cytoplasm and nucleus. We showed that p75HS1 is a major substrate of protein-tyrosine kinase, p53/561Yn, activated by cross-linking of B cell antigen receptors. Our recent study indicates that HSl protein plays a crucial role in regulating or transducing signals from B cell antigen receptors via protein tyrosine kinases directly to the nucleus. Currently we are analyzing the mice devoid of IS1 protein due to the targeted gene disruption. Preliminary results indicate that HS1 protein may be involved in signaling for cell proliferation as well as induction of apoptotic cell death of the lymphocytes. Cross-linking of membrane IgM receptor on B cells by anti-IgM antibody leads to activation and growth in mature B cells but induces growth arrest and eventually cell death by apoptosis in immature B cells. To study the dichotomy of antigen receptor-mediated signaling at different stages of B cell differentiation, we chose to focus on the regulatory role of CD45, a membrane-bound protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP). To this end, CD45-ne ative clones were isolated from immature B cell line WEHI-231 (IgM IgD") and mature B cell line BAL-17 (lgMhiIgDhi) by mutagenesis, complement-mediated cytotoxicity and limiting dilution. The CD45-negative clones were then compared to the parental line with respect to anti-IgM antibody-induced biochemical changes. In immature WEHI-231 cells, tyrosine phosphorylation was constitutively induced in CD45-negative clones and was not enhanced by anti-IgM antibody stimulation. Ca" flux induced by anti-IgM antibody stimulation was slightly delayed but significantly prolonged when compared with the parental line. Further, CD45-negative clones showed stronger growth arrest and DNA fragmentation than the parental line and revertant clones, indicating that IgM receptormediated growth arrest and apoptosis in immature B cells are negatively regulated by CD45. In contrast, CD45-negative clones derived from mature BAL-17 cells had distinctly different characteristics in protein tyrosine phosphorylation, Ca" flux, and cell growth induced by anti-IgM antibody. One interpretation is that CD45 may have differential effects on antigen receptor-initiated signaling events in immature and mature B cells. It may be that the content of protein tyrosine kinases or the substrate of CD45 is different in these B cells. These factors may ultimately affect the bifurcation of signals leading to cellular activation and tolerance. Previous data of our laboratory demonstrated that the H-2Kb class I MHCrestricted T cell response to trinitrophenylated "self'' is directed against Kbassociated, TNP-conjugated peptides. The overwhelming proportion of these TNP-specific cytotoxic T cells (CTL) was found reactive to TNPlysine in the central position 4 of Kb-bound octapeptides. A large part of these CTL did not differentiate between "TNP-4" peptides of differing amino acid composition, i.e. they reacted in a carrier-independent fashion. Despite apparent restrictions in the statistical variability of their antigen specific receptors (TCR), T cells of greatly varying primary TCR structures were found to react to a given "TNP-4" peptide/@ combination. More recently, we have produced a second, highly carrier-dependent type of TNP-specific CTL by primary in vitro stimulation with Kb-binding octapeptides carrying TNP-lysine in the peripheral position 7. The TCR of these CTL were shown to contact not only the hapten determinant in position 7 but also an amino acid epitope of side chains in positions 3 and 4 of the haptenated peptides. The structural repertoire of these carrier plus T " specific TCR revealed itself as extraordinarily limited: Cn. induction with different "TNP-7" peptides, using unprimed T cells of different individual mice, selected for u.g-TCR of defined fine-specificities resulting from rearrangements of identical VCJJu and Vg/Jg combinations. Besides contributing valuable information concerning the TCR contact sites for hapten and peptide determinants, these findings imply that carrier-specific in contrast to carrier-unspecific anti-hapten CTL are recruited from an exmmely preselected pool of precursor T cells. Thus, the hapten/carrierspecific TCR repertoire appears to be particularly narrowed by negative thymic selection. The few "successfull" T cells of this type may, therefore, be enriched for "errors", i.e. for cells which in their effector phase or in recall reactions may also react to the respective un-haptenized peptides. In the case of bona fide self peptides, this would result in drug-induced autoimmune reactions. T cell receptor (TCR) specificity for Ag:MHC ligand is determined by the complementarity determining regions of the TCR ap chains. The importance of the CDR3's has been addressed in previous studies. Here, the influence on specificity by non-CDR3 of the TCR a-chain is studied by genetic mutational analysis. A TCR mutant with changes in the amino-terminal TCR a-chain can still recognize the antigenic peptide. However the specificity for the MHC ligand is dramatically different, allowing recognition of antigenic peptide only within the context of certain MHCs. By using M H C mutants and peptide antigen, an interaction between T C R a -c h a i n and M H C H V R 2 is mapped. Interestingly, a change in residue 51 (CDR2) of TCR achain causes a change in peptide specificity while leaving the MHC specificity largely unchanged. Thus, a-chain TCR amino-terminal region is involved in both MHC and peptide interaction. Furthermore, the identification of an interaction between a single TCR amino-acid residue and a single antigenic-peptide residue provides powerful information in determining the rotational orientation of the TCR on Ag:MHC. activation. In order to approach the size of CD4 and presumably traverse the length of the TCR, it has been predicted that the connecting peptide region of CD8 will have to adopt an extended structure. Therefore, altering the charge in this region of the molecule may have a profound influence on either the conformation of the CD8 heterodimer itself, or on the way in which CD8 can interact with other molecules on the T cell surface. These changes occur specifically on p and not CD8a, indicating that the primary role of the CD8p chain may be regulatory, influencing the physical structure of the CD8 complex. T-lymphocyte activation in response to T-cell Receptor (CD3) engagement is supported by interaction with costimulatory molecules including ICAM-I, ICAM-2, B7IBB-1, LFA-3, and VCAM-1. To identify whether ICAM-R costimulates T-cells we measured T-cell proliferation, IL-2 receptor (CD25) and transferrin receptor (CD71) expression in response to recombinant ICAM-R coimmobilized with a suboptimal concentration of the CD3 specific antibody OKT3. We report that ICAM-R induced upregulated expression of CD25 and CD71, as well as dosedependent proliferation of human peripheral blood T-cells when coimmobilized with suboptimal OKT3. Furthermore, costimulation with either ICAM-R or ICAM-1 induced comparable proliferation at identical concentrations. Anti-CD18 (TS1/18) or anti-CDlla (TS1/22) inhibited ICAM-R mediated costimulation, demonstrating at least a partial dependence on interaction of ICAM-3 with LFA-1. ICAM-R, but not ICAM-1 is expressed on "resting" (CD45RA+) as well as "memory" (CD45RO+) T-cells. To identify whether ICAM-R and ICAM-1 costimulate different T-cell subsets we tested the relative ability of each molecule to costimulate proliferation of CD45RA+ or CD45RO+ T-cells. Our studies indicate that either ICAM-R or ICAM-1 is able to costimulate proliferation of CD45RA+ or CD45RO+ T-cells. These results demonstrate that ICAM-R interacts with LFA-1 to costimulate both "resting" and "memory" T-cells. Bergmann* and Urszula Krzych#, Departments of *Biology, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC 20064 and # Immunology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, DC 20307 Exposure to irradiated P. fakiparum sporozoites (SPZ) induces protective immunity in human volunteers and the arising T-cells respond to SPZ and blood stage antigens (pRBC). The analysis of pRBC-specific, CD4/CD8-and CD45RO/RA-bearing T-cells revealed striking differences between protected and non-protected individuals. pRBC-specific CD45RO+ (memory) T-cells were evident only in protected volunteers. Furthermore, the majority of pRBC-reactive T-cells from protected and naive persons were CD4+, whereas induction of CDB+T-cells correlated with the loss of protective immunity. Current data suggest that the CDB+T-cells have suppressive function leading to down-regulation of IL-4 and IFN-y. The analysis of the TCR variable (V) chain usage among the pRBC-reactive Tcells showed preferential induction of Vp5, Vy4, and VS2 subpopulations and that depended on the stage-specificity of malarial antigens used for the in vilro expansion of T cells. We are currently evaluating the phenotype and the function of the induced subpopulations, including cytokine-patterns, and are analyzing mechanisms of T-cell activation by pRBC-stage antigens by examining the cell surface molecules that might be involved in the signal transduction and the subsequent activation events in response to pRBC antigens of P. falciparurn. The outcome of this study will clarify mechanisms and cellular interactions that lead to immunity against malaria or that are responsible for the loss of protection. Supported in part by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (Be 1553/1-1). Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine. Autoantibodies specific for the Sm B and D proteins of uridine rich small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles are a serologic hallmark of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and constitute one diagnostic criterion for the disease. Indirect evidence suggest., that the production of Sm autoantibodies is T cell dependent and antigen driven. How T cell tolerance to the Sm proteins is abrogated in SLE is unknown. We have recently identified the presence of T cells reactive with a model autoantigen, cytochrome c (cyt c) in the T cell repertoire of normal mice. These T cells are specific for "cryptic" cyt c peptides not normally produced during processing of the intact cyt c by antigen presenting cells (Apcs). Such T cells therefore escape known mechanisms of thymic tolerance and remain functionally quiescent. We pmpose that T cell responses to cryptic epitopes on the Sm D protein can initiate and perpetuate autoimmune responses characteristic of SLE. In order to determine whether cryptic T cell epitopes exist on the Sm D protein, nonautoimmune strains of mice were with synthetic murine Sm D peptides emulsified in complete Freund's adjuvant. One peptide spanning Sm D amino acids 46-60 consistently elicited strong autoreactive T cell proliferative responses from Balb/c (H2-d) mice. In contrast, immunization of mice with native Sm D failed to induce proliferative responses from murine lymph node cells, nor did T cell hybridomas specific for peptide 46-60 respond to native Sm D, indicating that peptide 46-60 constitutes a cryptic T cell epitope. Immunization of BlO.BR (H2-k) mice with Sm D peptides revealed T cells reactive with peptides 2 6 4 and 56-70, demonstrating that cryptic epitopes are determined in part, by the MHC background of the mice. T cells from MRUlpr (H2-k) mice immunized with Sm D peptides responded to a broader array of peptides (1 140,56-80) than those from BIO.BR mice. Because the Ipr gene results in loss of thymic deletion of self-reactive T cells, these findings indicate that T cells specific for peptides which normally wouldbe deleted in mice with H2.-k haplotype, are permitted to exist in MRUlpr mice. Taken together, these results suggest two important mechanisms by which lupus-related T cell responses can occur: 1) T cells specific for cryptic Sm D epitopes exist as part of the normal T cell repertoire, but remain quiescent until the appropriate cryptics are presented by APCs, as might occur during aberrant processing of self proteins; and 2) the genetic background may allow autoreactive T cells to escape thymic deletion and contribute to the spontaneous development of autoimmune disease. Thl, Th2, and Tho T cell clones derived from an ovalbumin peptidefl-Ad specific TCR transgenic mouse by selective exposure to IL-4 during primary antigenic stimulation in vifro were analyzed for cytokine mRNA expression by a double label in sifu hybridization protocol utilizing both 35S and digoxigenin labeled riboprobes. The frequency of cells expressing cytokine mRNA correlates well with the protein detected in the supernatant by sandwich ELISA and bioassay. Activation of these T cell clones with peptide antigedAPC demonstrates significant heterogeneity among individual T cells in the population. Stimulation of these clones with graded antigen doses demonstrates that the frequency of mRNA positive cells is increased with increasing antigen dose, without significantly changing the brightness of individual cells as detected by either the Digoxigenin or 353 labeled riboprobes. Stimulation with peptide presented by fibroblasts co-transfected with I-Ad and murine 87, compared to I-Ad single transfectants, demonstrates a profound effect of B7 costimulation on the expression of IL-2 and IFNy by the Thl line and on IL-I0 by the Th2 line, but relatively little effect on IL-4 expression by the Th2 line. The grain density per cell for the IL-2 probe on cells activated with B7+ APC was significantly increased, but for IFNy and IL-4 the grain density per cell was not significantly affected by B7 costimulation. Double label analysis demonstrates that the IL-2 mRNA expressing cells are a subset of the IFNy mRNA expressing cells in the Thl clone, while the IL-5 and IL-10 mRNA expressing cells are subsets of the IL-4 mRNA expressing cells in the Th2 clone. Analysis of the cloned Tho population that produces all of these cytokines shows that very few individual cells co-express lFNy and IL-4, indicating that a "Tho clone" may have an unstable cytokine expression phenotype rather than a mixed phenotype. These data emphasize that T cell activation is a fundamentally heterogeneous process both within cloned populations and between different cytokine genes as indices of activation. Supported by AR03555 and DK44240. The relationship of helper-dependent (HD) a n d helperindependent (HI) CD8+ cells was addressed with the aid of the 2C TCR TG mouse. 2C cells recognize three class I alloantigens: Kbm3, K b m l l and Ld. Purified resting 2C CD8+ cells proliferate strongly to Ld (B10.D2) in the absence of exogenous IL-2 and produce large amounts of IL-2 and show high expression of IL-2R. By contrast, 2C cells d o not proliferate to b m l l unless the cells are supplemented with IL-2. Without IL-2, the cells synthesize IL-2R but not IL-2. These findings indicate that the response of 2C cells to Ld is HI, whereas the response to b m l l is HD. Since HI and H D responses can be generated by the same population of resting 2C cells, the data rule out the possibility that HI and HD CD8+ cells are derived from different lineages or represent different development stages. The data favor the idea that HD and HI responses of CD8+ cells are a reflection of a difference in the avidity of T/APC interaction: HI responses depend o n high-avidity T/APC interaction whereas H D responses reflect weak T/APC interaction. We have found that CD8 molecules play a n essential role in HI responses. Thus addition of anti-CD8 mAb converts the response of 2C to B10.D2 from an HI to an HD response. Conversely, the HD response of 2C to b m l l changes to an HI response when the 5% of 2C cells expressing the highest density of CD8 were tested. At the effector stage, CD8+ CTL cause strong lysis of B10.DZ target cells and intermediate lysis of b m l l target cells. By contrast, purified CD8-2C CTL kill only B10.D2 and not b m l l target cells. The finding that CD8+ and CD8-2C cells cause equivalent lysis of B10.D2 target cells implies that lysis of these target cells is CD8 independent. Interestingly, however, CD8-2C CTL are 30-fold more sensitive to inhibition with anti-TCR antibody (182 Fab) than CD8+ CTL. The implication of this finding will be discussed. The protozoan parasite Theileria annulata causes the lymphoproliferative disease tropical theileriosis, which threatens millions of cattle worldwide. The disease is particularly severe, and often fatal, in "exotic" cattle imported into endemic areas such as Africa, India and Asia. Although the role of the immune response in fatal cases is poorly understood, vaccinated or drug treated animals produce anti theilerial antibodies and theileria specific cytotoxic T cells. Recent work in this department has demonstrated that T.annulara infected cells induce strong proliferation of both CD4 and CD8 T cells from both naive and immune animals in vitro. However, it has not been possible to establish theileria specific CD4+ lines and clones from the periphery of immune animals. This finding has important implications for the generation of immunity in naive animals. Currently we are investigating the activation of T cells within lymph nodes draining the sites of parasite inoculation in naive animals. IL 2R' cells are seen reacting to areas of parasite induced lymphoproliferation early in the infection. In addition, IL 2R-cells expressing a T cell activation marker are observed after IL 2R' cells have left the node, and many of these cells are apoptotic. These findings are discussed in relation to our in vitro observations. to immunization with pneumococcal cell wall polysaccharide (PnC), a type ll thymus independent antigen that contains PC. However, when the PnC antigen is presented as a complex with TEPC-15 or McPC-603 antibodies (which are specific for F'nC), a vigorous immune response occurs in which the TG mice produce 10 -50 fold more anti-PnC antibody than when immunized with antigen alone. Interestingly, MOPC-167, which expresses the VH and VL regions used to encode the transgene antibody, was found to be a relatively poor "carrier" for PnC eliating a weak anti-PnC antibody response in M167 (p, W) TG mice. In vivo administration of antiCD4 antibody dramatically reduced the response to TEPC-I5/PnC complexes suggesting that the response is mediated by immunoglobulin (idiotype)-dependent helper T cells. Furthermore, we find that M167 Tg mice primed with TEPC-15/PnC complexes and subsequently challenged with MOPC-167/PnC complexes produced fivefold less anti-PnC antibody than mice primed and challenged with TEPC-l5/PnC complexes. The results indicate that unresponsiveness to PnC is due not to tolerance of the transgenic B cells but rather to the lack of T cell help resulting from T cell tolerance to the transgeneencoded idiotype. The requirement for self-recognition in the TG mouse response to PnC was also demonstrated by showing that the unresponsiveness to PnC could be overcome by immunizing mice with PnC coupled to self erythrocytes; Tg mice respond to PnC-MRBC as vigorously as to PnC coupled to foreign (sheep) erythrocytes. These results demonstrate that "autoimmunity" may be required to promote beneficial immune responses.  and Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, K t e m Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA 23501 W e have analyzed vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)specific CTL responses to determine whether VSV precursor C n s (pcTLs) can be primed in vivo in t h e absence of CD4+ cells. Our studies demonstrated that secondary anti-VSV CTL responses in vitro were markedly reduced by CDll-depletion prior to priming in vivo with VSV. Limitin dilution analysis indicated that t h e vast majority (>Wf) of VSV p C n s failed to become primed w h e n exposed to VSV in t h e absence of CD4+ cells. A second minor population (<5-1@/0) of p C n s was identified that was reproducibly primed in CD4-depleted mice. VSV-infection of CD4-deficient mice was associated with the appearance with time of a splenic CDS+CD8+aS-TCR-population that was amplified relative t o intact, VSV-infected mice. Three-color flow cytornetry indicated that the majority of t h e CD5+CD8+ cells w e r e m5-T cells. Thus, despite the presence of z6-T cells, a population known to secrete cytokines, most VSV p C n s still required classical CD4+ Th cells t o achieve efficient priming in vivo. In contrast to CD4depleted mice infected with free, infectious virus, CD4deficient mice primed with VSV-infected, activated B cells mounted normal secondary anti-VSV CTL responses in vitro. Precursor estimates indicated that virtually all VSV pcTLs became primed using this cellular immuno e n CD4-independent priming could not be a c h i e v e 2 using VSV-infected, activated T cells, another permissive cell type for VSV replication. Thus, most of VSV p C n s require inductive signals from classical CD4+ Th cells for priming and that this requirement may be regulated by the antigen presenting cell in vivo.  After an identical antigenic challenge, e.g. Lrishmonin major, BALB/c mice develop a strong, but unprotective. T!L? response while C57BU6 elicit a protective Thl response. The basis for this phenomenon is not known. In the current study we developed an in virro model that permitted us to preferentially elicit Thl or Th2 cytokine profiles from BALB/c and C57BL/10 mice. Briefly, purified CD4 cells were primed in virro by two rounds of polyclonal stimulation, and the resulting CD4 effector cells were restimulated with anti-CD3 to assess their lymphokineproducing potential. For both strains of mice. exogenous IL-2 and IL-4 added during both priming cultures resulted in effector cells producing high lcvels of I L 4 upon final restimulation. These data demonstrate that CD4 cells from both mouse strains have the capacity to produce high levels of IL-4. In contrast, when only exogenous IL-2 was added to the first culture, and no exogenous cytokines were added to the second culture, BALB/c mice generally developed IL-4-producing effector cells while C57BL/IO mice did not. Although IL-2 was added to the first culture in all cases, the level of IL-2 during the second priming culture was a critical regulatory element. Thus, when anti-IL-2 mAb was added to the sccond culture of cells from BALB/c. IL-4-producing effector cells were convened to a C57BL/lO-like pattem of high IL-2 and low IL-4 production. Further. when IL-2 alone was added to the second prime of cells from C57BL/lO mice, the resulting effector cells produced substantial levels of IL-4 and little IL-2. similar to the results seen in BALB/c. Therefore. the higher endogenous level of IL-2 in BALB/c mice as compared to C57BLIlO mice was an important factor regulating the preferential development of IL-4-producing cells in BALB/c mice. These data suggest IL-2 plays a complex role in Th cell regulation, i.e. the levels of IL-2 at different times during activation may be critical to the development of appropriate immune responses. Naive CD4 T cells cannot help resting B cells for Ig secretion. Using T cells lrom TCR transgenic mice, able to react to a defined peptide Ag (pigeon cytochrome c fragment 88-104) presented on IEk, we show that lack of help is due to the fact that naive T cells are not activated on resting B cell\, with activation requiring a high level of costimulation. Provision of a costimulus (anti-CD28, or Ag-presenting dendritic cells, activated B cells, fibroblasts expressing 8 7 alone or 8 7 and ICAM-I) induced naive cells 10 help Ag-specific resting B cells immediately in co-culture experiments. and as little as a I day preactivation period also promoted help for IgM secretion. FACS, Ah blocking, and mRNA analysis showed that helper activity correlated with T cell CD40L expression and IL-4 \ynthesis. Initial naive T cell activation on costimulatory APC resulted in 1L-2 secretion alone, and no CD40L expression, suggesting that 1L.-4 and CD40L were only induced after a second stimulation event follo~ing re-encounter with Ag. IL-4 i\ the dominant factor in driving naive Th to secrete ThZ-type cytokines, although the source of IL-4 in vivo is in doubt. Because we found naive Th could produce some IL-4 early (24-36 hr), but only after encountering AglAPC more than once, we reasoned that multiple restimulation events might induce enough endogenous IL-4 to allow naive Th to drive themselves towards the Th2 phenotype. Preliminary experiments using highly costimulatory APC (B7 and ICAM expressing fibroblasts) support this hypothesis, and show that 3 or 4 restimulations during a 12-day culture can produce Th effectors capable of secreting large quantities of IL-4 and IL-5, as well as some IFN-y and IL-2, and able to induce good IgM, IgGl and IgE secretion from B cells. Secretion of Th2-type cytokines correlated with increasing amounts of endogenous fL-4 accumulated during the culture period. A single stimulation resulted in effectors producing only IL-2 and IFN-y. Interestingly, multiple stimulations on resting B cells did not induce significant IL-4 or IL-5 secretion, suggesting that autocrine production of IL-4 may require a high level of costimulation during multiple Ag recognition events. These studies promote the hypothesis that naive Th may be capable of directing their own differentiation toward the Th2 phenotype and that the type of cell presenting Ag and the frequency of Ag/APC encounters may be critical to this proceys. Human Interleukin-13 is a novel cytokine which has been shown to affect human B cell and monocyte functions. In the present study, details of the production of IL-13 by human T cells and T cell clones were determined and compared to those of IL-4. IL-13 was produced by CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets isolated from PBMC and CD4+ Tho, Thl and Th2 clones and CD8+ T cell clones The production of IL-13 was induced rapidly and was relatively long lasting. IL-13 mRNA was maximally induced 2 hours after activation of the T cell clones and was still detectable at 4 8 hours, whereas IL-4 mRNA expression was more transient and no longer detectable after 12 hours. These results were confirmed by determining the kinetics of intracellular production of IL-13 protein and its secretion. Moreover, IL-13 could be induced in T cell clones by multiple modes of activation, including activation via a single stiniulus like Ca++ ionophore A23187, PMA, antiLCD3 mAbs or PHA. Generally, the highest levels of IL-13 were produced following activation of T cells by antiLCD3 mAbs in combination with IPMA. Production of IL-13 was inhibited by Cyclosporin A, but not by IL-10. Taken together, these results indicate that IL-13 is expressed in T cell clones more abundantly and independently of IL-4. Interestingly, unlike IL-4, IL-13 did not act as an autocrine T cell growth factor for T cell clones and was not able to induce CD8a on CD4+ T cell clones or CD4+ cord blood T cells, indicating that these cells may not express a functional IL-l3R. Its expression pattern and lack of activities on T cells suggest a unique role for IL-13 in human immune responses. The present studies have been expanded to include investigations of oligonucleotide response elements derived from the nucleotide sequence of the IFN-y promoter which share sequence similarities with previously identified promoter elements from T cell activation genes. S T (signal transduction) mechanisms which result in T cell activation often involve the protein products of cellular proto-oncogenes, We have investigated whether there are oncogene components of the nuclear complexes which interact with IFN-y promoter response elements. Comparison of the composition of these complexes from normal, leukemic and autoreactive cells may lead to further insight on how molecular targets of the ST pathways of T cells are disrupted in certain pathogenic diseases. We have also used molecular probes such a s the calcineurin (CN) gene product and antibodies against the T cell surface receptors CD3 and CD26 to better understand the molecular differences in the targets of ST resulting from different activation pathways. We have also studied lymphokine (IL-12) mediated transcriptional activation of the IFN-y promoter, to further understand how different ST pathways induce the synthesis of IFN-y mRNA. Since IFN-y enhances transplantation antigen (MHC) expression, it is directly involved in normal and pathogenic immunoactivation that can result in heightened graft rejection or autoimmune disease. Therefore, we have also investigated the mechanism by which immunosuppressive drugs act to inhibit IFN-y mRNA synthesis. In conclusion, IFN-y has important antitumor properties, while its dysregulated synthesis may contribute to autoreactivity. Therefore, further studies on the regulation of IFN-y synthesis may lead to our ability to manipulate its synthesis for therapeutic benefit. Proliferation of T-cells in vitro is stimulated by specific antigens presented in the context of HLA, non-specific mitogens, and various cytokines. The expansion of T-cell clones is generally performed by the addition of a combination of these stimuli. Apart from IL-2, the relevance of many cytokines for the expansion of T-cell clones in vitro is unknown. We investigated the role of IL-10, IL-12 and TNF-ol on the proliferation of CDB' cytotoxic T-cell (CTL) clones, and CD4+ proliferative or CTL clones. The proliferation of these T-cell clones was analyzed one week after the last refeeding in the absence of antigens or mitogens. No proliferation was observed in the absence of IL-2. In the presence of IL-2, IL-10 significantly increased CD8' CTL proliferation as measured by 'H-Thymidine incorporation on day 2 and 4 of culture by approximately 50%. Only 1 of 5 CD4+ clones was affected. IL-12 induced some proliferation of CD8' CTL clones in the first 2 days after stimulation, which was followed by a strong inhibitory effect from day 4 to day 7 in the presence of IL-2. Only 2 of 5 CD4' T-cell clones were late inhibited by IL-12. Thus, IL-12 induced a late inhibitory effect on CTL clone expansion. After treatment with IL-12, the CTL's underwent morphological changes including accumulation of cytoplasmic granulae, suggesting further cytotoxic differentiation. TNF-a inhibited only 2 of 5 CD4+ clones, but strongly inhibited the proliferation of all CDB' CTL's from day 2 after stimulation. Using PCR, the endogenous cytokine production of the T-cell clones was analyzed. The CD8' T-cell clones produced no IL-2, IL-I0 or IL-12. A valuable amount of TNF-a was produced, but, as measured by Elisa, less than 0.5 ng/ml was released into the medium in a period of 4 days, which was insufficient for effective inhibition. The CD4+ clones only produced IL-2, and low amounts of TNF-ol. These results indicate that endogenous production of these cytokines didnot influence the results. In conclusion, antigen independant proliferation of CD8+ T-cell clones can be modulated by the addition of IL-10, IL-12 or TNF-a in the presence of IL-2. These cytokines may be relevant for the clonal selection of proliferative or cytotoxic T-lymphocyte clones. Little is known about signal transduction leading to I L 4 production from helper T cells. W e h a v e used a Tho cell hybridoma. GA15. to define the intracellular signalling p a t h w a y s associated with IL-4 production. Stimulation of GA15 cells with either anti-CD3 mAb 2C 11 or high doses of Ag induced IL-4 mRNA expression a n d IL-4 secretion. These two stimuli also i n d u c e d phosphatidyl inositol (PI) hydrolysis: however, the doses of Ag and 2 C l l required to induce PI hydrolysis did not correlate with the doses required t o i n d u c e IL-4 production, arguing that this pathway was not tightly coupled t o IL-4 production. The protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein was f o u n d to inhibit IL-4 mRNA expression, suggesting that tyrosine phosphorylation was required for IL-4 production. To examine the role of tyrosine phosphorylation, G A 1 5 cells were stimulated with 2 C 1 1 or with Ag and APC and CD3-associated proteins were isolated by immunoprecipitation. Western blotting with antiphosphotyrosine mAbs revealed the presence of a tyrosine phosphorylated protein in the activated GA15 cells. This protein w a s identified as CD3c using 2 D gels. To determine whether there was a correlation between CD3L phosphorylation and IL-4 production, IL-4 mRNA expression was analyzed from the same cells used for the Western blotting. Interestingly. the same d o s e s of 2 C 11 a n d Ag were required t o induce both I L 4 production and CD3c tyrosine phosphorylation. These data suggest that CD3c phosphorylation might either be required for IL-4 production or might be a marker of a required pathway. Experiments are underway to directly test these possibilities. While there is an increasing knowledge of the generation of T helper cell effector cells h vitro, very little information is available concerning the development of effector T cells after exposure to antigen in vivo. Effector cells generated in vitro are large blast-like cells which display an activated phenotype (L-selectin-, CD45ABC, CDMhi). They exhibit either Tho. Thl or Th2 patterns of cytokine secretion depending on the cytokines present during culture. In orderto study in vivo CD4 T helper effector cell development, we have developed an adoptive transfer model using naive CD4 T cells from transgenic mice (Tg) with a Vp/Vall T cell receptor (TCR) that is specific for the 86-104fragment of Pigeon Cytochrome C (PCC) and IEk. These antigenspecific CD4 cells are transferred, along with J11 d1 B cells, into C3lUHeSnJ-SClD mice. Recipient mice are immunized with soluble PCC on day 0 and day 28 and the phenotype and function of the TCR Tg CD4 T cells are evaluated at various time points. The transferred CD4 T cells undergo a dramatic shift wlth almost all detectable CD4 cells pa.rlicipating. CD4 effector cells elicited during the primary response (days 4,7 and 10) express an activatedmemory phenotype (L-selectin-, CD45RB+, '21344~~) and a Tho (IL-2 with a small amount of IL-4 and IFNy) pattern of cytokine secretion. After the initial response, peaking a 7 days after antigen, the majority of the CD4 population disappears, but the few cells remaining can respond and expand again when antigen when antigen is introduced later. CD4 cells involved in the secondary response (day 35) also come to express an activatedhemory phenotype and they secrete a Thl (IL-2 and IFNy: no IL-4 or lL-5) panem of cytokines. These results indicate that this model offers the a way of following the development of effector and memory cells in vivo and can be useful for studying the regulation of T effector cell and memory development. Flow cytometric analysis of expression of these isoforms on CD4+ T cells has defined three subsets. The major ones are either CC76' IL-Al16-or CC76 IL-A116+. The third subset is CC76+ IL-A116+, ie. co-expresses both isoforms at a high intensity. Cells were sorted from a calf that had been immunised with inactivated respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). In proliferation assays CD4+ IL-A116-CC76+ cells failed to respond. Both the IL-A116+ CC76+ and IL-A116+ CC76subsets within the CD4+ population proliferated in response to RSV antigen indicating two phenotypes of memory CD4+ T cells. Differences in the cytokines produced by subsets were shown by PCR. The different phenotypes had distinct tissue distribution and recirculation patterns. In particular, in the lamina propria from areas of the gut mucosa that was devoid of organised lymphoid structures CD4+ T cells were mostly (95%) of the memory phenotype. Recently, we have demonstrated that interleukin-4 (IL-4) induces tyrosine phosphorylation of several cellular proteins including IL-4 receptor (IL-4R) itself and association of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3kinase) to the IL-4R. Although PI3-kinase is known to bind a specific amino acid sequence, YXXM, which is tyrosine phosphorylated, the IL-4R does not have this motif in the cytoplasmic domain, suggesting that PI3kinase may associate with the IL-4R through some other tyrosine phosphorylated protein. Here In this study, w e present identification of tyrosine phosphorylated protein with molecular weight of 9 2 kDa (p92) which associates both PI3-kinase and the IL-4R upon IL-4 stimulation. We have detected p92 in both immunoprecipitates of PI3-kinase and the IL-4R in several different cell types after IL-4 stimulation. Interestingly, p92 was recognized by anti-c-fes antibody. Furthermore, c-fes associates with the IL-4R in COS7 cells transfected with both IL-4R cDNA and c-fes cDNA. These data indicate that IL-4 induces association of c-fes with both the IL-4R and PI3-kinase. suggesting that c -f e s may function as an adapter molecule between the IL-4R and PI3-kinase. Crosslinking of glycosylphosphatidylinositol @PI)-anchored proteins, such as mouse Ly-6 and Thy-1, leads to IL-2 secretion and T cell activation whereas engagement of Ly-6A/E uniquely inhibits L-2 production induced via TCR. Little is currently known concerning the molecular basis by which GPI-anchored proteins regulate JL-2 production. In this study, we have examined the ability of an anti-Ly-6AE mAb to regulate transcription factors conuolling IL-2 expression. Stimulation of Ly-6E transfected EUJ cells with anti-CD3~ or anti-Ly6-mAbs strongly induced nuclear NF-KB @65-p50) and AP-1 binding activities and increased NF-AT activity while OCTl, Ocrz and NF-Y binding activities were not significantly changed. CREB and TCFl(a) binding activities were selectively induced by anti-CD3~ but not anti-Ly6AE mAb suggesting that signaling via TCR and Ly-6 was not identical. Costimulation of these cells with both mAbs produced substantially reduced levels of APl, NF-AT and especially NF- binding activities whereas CREB and TCFl(a) activities were induced to a level seen after stimulation by anti-CD3~. In contrast to Ly6AE. anti-Thy-1 induced only the NF-AT and APl binding activities but not NF-KB and did not inhibit anti-CD3~-induced N F -a @65-p50) suggesting that distinct signals are generated via Thy-I and Ly-6. Using the 2B4.11 T cell hybridoma and a mutated variant revealed a crucial role of 6 chain for Ly6AE activation of NF-KB. However, the inhibitory effect of anti-Ly-6AE mAb on anti-CD3e induction of NF-KB @65-p50) appeared to be independent from the < chain. Taken together, these results strongly support the notion that there is selective targeting of transcription factors following T cell activation via the Ly-6, Thy-I and C D~E . The inhibition of anti-CD3~-induced L 2 production by anti-Ly6AE may be a result of competition for a crucial signal transduction element possibly required for activation of NF-KB. An estimate of the precursor frequency of these HTLV-I tax specific CTL (pCTL) indicated an extraordinarily high frequency of 1 in 75 to 1 in 280. This suggested that HTLV-I specific CTL may contribute to the pathogenesis of HTLV-I associated neurologic disease and may therefore be a good target for immunotherapeutic attempts to eliminate these cells. The addition of the immunodominant peptide specific for these CD8+ CTL to either long term cytotoxic T cell clones or freshly isolated peripheral blood lymphocytes with defined CD8+ cytotoxicity resulted in complete inhibition of peptide-specific cytolysis. Mechanisms for this inhibition are being investigated with the most likely candidate being propriocidal inhibition due to apoptosis. These results suggest that the use of immunodominant peptides may be rational therapy to eliminate these immunopathogenic cells in vivo and potentially ameliorate disease. TITIS. 0. Kilgus, R. Fritsche, L. Braun-Elwert, R. Holzhauser, P. Nemeth, and G . Stingl. Dept. of Dermatology, Univ. of Vienna Med. School, Vienna, Austria Evidence exists that contact hypersensitivity (CHS) is mediated by THI cells. Atopic dermatitis (AD) histologically and clinically resembles CHS and, in some patients, "aeroallergen" patch tests result in eczematous skin lesions resembling AD; on the other hand, AD is also associated with elevated IgE serum levels, a feature suggesting TH2 involvement. The type of T helper cell subsets activated in AD and the signals provided by them have not yet been unraveled. We therefore investigated whether the cytohne profile in vivo in atopic dermatitis differs in any way from that of non-atopic forms of eczema, e.g. CHS or nummular eczema (NE). RNA extracted from 4 mm punch biopsies of atopic dermatitis (n=7), CHS (5 biopsies from 3 patients), NE (n=l). and normal skin (n=5) was investigated using suitable constructs for competitive quantitative PCR for 1L-2, -4, -5, -10, IFN-g, and glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3PDH). In normal skin, we were able to detect low levels of IL-2, -10, and IFN-g, but neither IL-4 nor -5. In AD lesions, the following pattern was observed: 1L-4 and/or -5 were positive in most samples (6/7), IL-2 and -10 were upregulated to a variable extent and, remarkably, no significant induction of 1FN-g was detected in any of the samples. In contrast, in 4 of the 6 biopsies of non-atopic eczema, marked induction of IFN-g in addition to 1L-2, -4, -5, and -10 was observed. These data indicate that AD & has features of a TH2 immune response when compared to CHS or NE and, thus. that an eczematous (type IV) skin reaction can occur on the basis of a TH2 response. However, both in AD and CHS, TH1 and TH2 cytokine expression was not mutually exclusive in vivo; rather, the balance appears to be shifted to either side depending on the individual as well as on the disease. Both Thl and Th2 cells are thought to differentiate from a common pool of precursors as a consequence of activation by the ligand, the MHCiantigen complex. It is not known how the structure of the ligand itself influences the production of lymphokines, for example, IFNy (Thl) and IL-4.'IL-5 (Th2). A murine CD4' T cell clone specific for myelin basic protein (MBP) responded to its immunodominant determinant, Acl-9, by both IL-4 secretion and proliferation. A strong heteroclitic proliferative response to peptide variants of Acl-9, with hydrophobic amino acid residues at position 4, correlated with their ability to bind strongly to the restricting MHC molecule, I-A". We have studied how stimulation of T cells with variants of different MHC-binding affinities resulted in differential lymphokine secretion patterns in vitro. Furthermore, the effect of MHC-binding affinity on the frequency of IL-4nL-5 or IFN-y-producing cells was studied in vivo. Our data suggest that MHC-binding affinity of antigenic determinants is crucial for the differential development of cytokine patterns in T cells and therefore represents a potential target for immune manipulation of Thl or Th2 cells involved in autoimmune as well as allergic responses. Supported by funds from NIH. To investigate the cellular immune response to HIV-1 we analyzed gagspecific CTL activity in long-term asymptomatic HIV-1 infection. Methods: 15 Longterm asymptomatic individuals with CD4 counts > 500 celllpl after more than 7 years of infection were selected from The Amsterdam Cohort Study on AIDS. CTL activity was measured on W r labelled autologous B-LCL, infected with recombinant vaccinia viruses expressing HIV-1 gag. Both bulk and limiting dilution CTL assays were performed with PBMC after Ag-specific stimulation. Results: Bulk CTL response after Ag specific stimulation is MHC class I restricted and mediated by CD8 + T-lymphocytes. Longitudinal studies, spanning 7 years, showed high gag CTLp frequencies and a low virus load. CTL response was directed against several epitopes in gag. Conclusions: Sustained, broad anti-HIV cellular immunity may correlate with maintenance of the asymptomatic state in long-term survival by controlling the viral replication. The selective activation of CD4+ T cell subsets with distinct profiles of cytokine production has been shown to play an important role in the pathogenesis of human inflammatory or allergic diseases. To determine whether cell adhesion/ activation molecules are involved in this process, we have characterized the level of expression of 28 activation or adhesion molecules on the surface of a panel of human CD4+ T cell clones representative of T h l and Th2 cells. The T cell subsets could not be distinguished by the cell surface markers examined, including isoforms of CD45. To test the possibility that differential activation of costimulatory pathways is another mechanism for selectively modulating cytokine production by CD4+ T cells, the profile of cytokines produced by human CD4+ T cell clones representative of Thl or Th2 cells, in response to ligation of different costimulatory molecules was measured. Thl-like T cell clones secreted the same profile of cytokines, irrespective of which costimulatory pathway was engaged. However, the profile of cytokines produced by some, but not all, Th2 T cell clones depended upon costimulatory signals activated. The two T cell subsets did not differ in their proliferative response when different costimulatory pathways were activated. These results indicate that the costimulatory pathways activated by antigen presenting cells can selectively influence cytokine production by a CD4+ T cell subset. A surface protein expressed on T cells has been characterized using natural autoantibodies. This protein has an apparent molecular mass of 100,000 (plOO), and appears to be noncovalently associated to two PI-linked molecules, Thy-1 and ThB. The insensitivity to PI-PLC treatment suggests that plOO protein has a transmembrane domain. This protein is expressed by the majority of thymocytes, all peripheral CD8 cells but only -60% of CD4 cells. In the present study, we show evidence that pl00 protein is involved in signal transduction through Thy-1 molecule. Only peripheral CD4 plow cells, but not CD4 p100cells, proliferate in response to Thy-1 cross-linking by anti-Thy-1 antibodies whereas both populations express high levels of Thy-1 molecules on their surfaces. Control stimulation by anti-CD3 antibodies or concanavalin A induces identical thymidine uptake of both populations of CD4 cells. Similarly as observed for proliferation, only CD4 p100+ but not CD4 p100-cells release cytokines, such as IL-2, LFNy, and IL-4, after incubation with anti-Thy-1 antibodies. Furthermore, plOO expression is also required for aggregation phenomena observed during Thy-1 mediated activation since CD4 p100-do not aggregate after Thy-1 crosslinking. However, concanavalin A induces aggregation of both CD4 populations. Finally, immunoprecipitation followed by in vitro kinase assay reveals that anti-Thy-1 antibodies can coimmunoprecipitate several phosphorylated proteins of 90, 60, 56 and 33 kDa, from total CD4 cell lysate but not from CD4 p100cells. Altogether, these data stongly suggest that pl00 protein provides a link between the PI-anchored molecule, Thy-1, and intracytoplasmic kinase(s). Protein tyrorine kinase p59" is known to associate with the membrane proximal portion of CDJ-Sand to be essential for PI hydrolysis & Caz+ flux as obtains in Thl cells upon antigen-receptor occupancy. Conversely, p59" is not known to associate with the FccRI-y chain which is present in lieu of CD3-{ in TcR-CD3 of ' LGL' end appears to mediate transmembrane signalling A central question in understanding how tumors evade immunologic rejection is what effect tumor presentation of antigen has on the activation of antigen-specific T cells. Such an analysis has previously been difficult because of the cryptic nature of most tumor antigens, and the inability to identify antigen specific T cells present at a low precursor frequency. We utilized TCR transgenic mice which have 20% of their peripheral T cells specific for influenza HA peptide (aa 11 1-120) presented on I-Ed. HA was expressed in two H-2d tumor lines after transfection and selection. Renca-HA, an HA transfected renal cell carcinoma model, is MHC class 11-, but can be induced to express class I1 antigens after exposure to interferon. A20-HA is an HA transfected B cell lymphoma which constitutively expresses high levels of MHC class I1 antigens. In vitro, naive transgenic T cells proliferate vigorously after stimulation with A20-HA but not A20 wild type, while proliferation is seen in response to Renca-HA only if it has been pretreated with &interferon. Remarkably, both Renca-HA and A20-HA grow progressively in transgenic mice after subrenal capsule or i.v. injection respectively. Clonotype+ T cells are not deleted. Histology reveals no significant inflammatory response to the HA bearing tumors relative to non-transfected tumor. Tumor explanted from these mice retain HA expression, and explanted A2O-HA cells still stimulate naive transgenic T cells in vitro. Purified T cells from tumor bearing mice are being analyzed for their capacity to respond to HA peptide + APCs in terms of proliferation and pattern of cytokine expression. Developmcnt of retrovirus-induced immunodeficiency (MAIDS) in diseasesensitive inice (e.g. Bh) is associated with a Th2 pattern nf cytnkine expre\sion while a more Thl-like pattern develops in disease-resistam mice such as strain 12Y or BlO.D2. To determine if thc halance of Thl andTh2 cytokines is a crucial determinant o i re nce or scnsitivily to MAIDS, we examined the course o i disease in mice in which thia halance was disrupted hy the administration i r i am-cytiikinc inAb, ci)nsliluuve cxprc4on trf a cytokine lroni a transgene, or hy the inability to produce specilic cytiikines resulting from sene knockours. We found first, that ti-eatiiient ot Bh inice with anti-IL-4 niAh from the time of infection lhrou@h X wecka or at various intervals beginning 4 wecks post infection had n i l prominent effecl on the devclopment of MAIDS. Furthermore. BIO.D2 mice treated with anti-IFN-y mAb were not rendered susceplihle tcr MAIDS. Second, we observed that Bh mice honiwygciu.\ for a disrupted IL-4 p i c (6 generation hackcross) dcvcloped diaase like normal Bh animals. Finally, we showed that 12Y mice hearins an IL-4 transgene were unaltered i n lheir resistdnce to MAIDS, even though the level o f IL-4 cxprcsaiiin is sufficienl to render thcin susceptihlc to Leishmania m a p . In addition. n o siena of MAIDS were observcd in IL-4 transgenic mice trealed with anti-IFN-y niAh. However, Bh mice infected with L. major as an inducer of a Thl cytokine response and treated with anti-IL-4 mAh showed greatly reduced manifestations o i MAIDS. These findings suggest that the ccrntrihutions of cytokines Lo development 01 resistance iir scnsilivily to MAIDS are more comlex than lor inl'ecuons with certain parasites and thai MAlDS cannot he explained simply by crussregulatriry intluciiccs i l l Thl and Th2 cytokines. T helper cells can be subclassified according to the lymphokines they secrete following activation in to two types: Thl cells which secrete 11-2, IFN-y and mediate the delayed type hypersensitivity response and Th2 cells which secrete IL-4, IL-5, IL-10 and provide help for specific B cells. T h l and Th2 cells cross-regulate each other via the action of the lymphokines they secrete. We present the analysis of a mathematical model of the regulation between T h l and Th2. This model involves Thl, Th2 and the lymphokines IL-2, IL-4, IL-10 and interferon-y. The different effects of the lymphokines and their couplings have been modeled so that they reproduce in vifro results. Le. they take into account the biological variability between cells, the time delays, the competition (antagonism and synergy) between lymphokines and the role of macrophage in the effect of lL-10. AU the components of the T h l and Th2 system which have been experimentally tested are put together to build a model of the cross regulation between the two kinds of T helper cells. The model has been tested experimentally using a panel of T h l and Th2 clones. This model is a direct translation in equations of what is assumed or understood about this system. The model is run on a supercomputer for different immunological conditions. The immediate goal is to compare the predictions of the model with corresponding in vitro situations. The ability of this model to reproduce in vitro experiments is important to see whether the Thl/Th2 system dynamics can be reduced to these components or whether it involves other ingredients. A longer term goal is use this model to get insight in vivo, in situations where the dynamics of the cross-regulation between Thl and Th2 seems to play an important role in the regulation of the immune response. Th2 development respectively. Both cytokines act directly on naive T-cells and not on APCs. Quantitative RT-PCR analyses indicate that IL-12 (and probably IL-4) may regulate the transcription of endogenous cytokine genes in response to antigenic stimulation, Experiments are being done to determine if this is due to an effect of the exogenous cytokines on the production of transcription factors specific for IL-2. IFN-y and IL-4. IL-12 induced Thl-like populations can be converted to IL-4 producers by exposure to exogenous IL-4, but Th2 differentiation is not reversible. Splenic adherent cells (SAC) are more potent inducers of Thl cells than purified B lymphocytes, because SAC secrete IL-12 and may express costimulators that are required for the production of IL-2 but not IL-4. The concentration of antigen to which naive T-cells are exposed also influences the cytokine phenotypes of the T-cells that develop. We are examining the effect of antigen concentration on the transcription of cytokine genes and on the expansion or inhibition of either subset. Finally, analogs of the cytochrome c (81-104) peptide containing substitutions in TCR contact residues are being used to define the influence of TCR-antigen interactions in the develoDrnent of Thl and Th2-like cells. Mary Poss and Gary Peterman, ICOS Corp., 22021 20th Ave SE, Bothell, WA. 98021 We have examined human T lymphocyte activation in response to monoclonal antibodies specific for CD3 and ICAM-3. For these studies, peripheral lymphocytes were separated into resting and activated subsets by discontinuous gradient centrifugation on Percoll. High buoyant density, resting cells were composed of CD3+ T cells which contained both CD4SRA+ and CD4SRO+ cells and were negative for CD69, CD25 and CD71. In contrast, medium buoyant density activated cells were composed of CD3+ cells which contained both CD4SRA+ and CD4SRO+ cells but were variably positive for CD69, CD2S and CD71. Kinetics of response to activation through the T-cell antigen receptor and ICAM-3 was evaluated biochemically and phenotypically for each population. We find that the medium buoyant density fraction appears to be in a primed state and the level of this state of activation was variable among donors whereas the high buoyant density fraction displayed a truely resting phenotype regardless of donor. Cells from the medium buoyant density fraction responded more quickly in protein kinase C and MAP Kinase translocation assays in response to OKT3 than did cells from the high buoyant density fraction. Cells i n both fractions were capable of translocating PKC but not MAPK following engagement of ICAM-3 with immobilized antibody for up to 90 min, although this response was seen more consistently with high buoyant density cells. We conclude that resting lymphocytes obtained by Percoll density centrifugation contain both CD4SRA+ and CD4SRO+ cells may provide a good model for activation mediated by ICAM-3. The hematopoietic form of protein tyrosine kinase p 5 9 f v n has been implicated in T-cell signal transduction and activation. In this study, we examined the requirement of Fyn expression for the generation and functional activation of murine T H I and T H~ clones. We derived a panel of antigen-specific CD4+ T-cell clones having the characteristics of T H~ (producing IL-2 and IFN-y) and T H~ (producing IL-4) subsets from fyn-1mutant mice (kindly provided by Drs. P. Stein and P. Soriano) immunized with ovalbumin. These T-cell clones did not express normal Fyn protein as determined by immune-complex kinase reaction using ant;-Fyn antibody. Upon antigen stimulation, T cell clones from both normal and fyn-imice demonstrated comparable levels of functional responses, including lymphokine secretion, proliferation, and antigenspecific cytolysis. Thus, p59fvn is not required for differentiation and antigen-induced functional activation of T H I and T H~ subsets. We are currently studying the early signaling events (e.g., tyrosine phosphorylation of several substrates) in these fyvn-Tcell clones, and these results will be presented. results in a chronic wasting disease, oRen followed by death. We have previously shown that pZm-mice develop CD4+, MHC class 11-restricted CTL following LCMV infection, and that these cells are capable of transferring disease to immunosuppressed, infected animals. We have now investigated the roles of cytokines in LCM disease. p2m-mice were treated with neutralizing antibodies against interferon (IFNI-y or interleukin (DJ-4 prior to i.c. infection with LCMV. Pretreatment of p2m-mice with anti-IFN-y prevented weight loss and death following LCMV challenge. In contrast, anti-IL-4 antibody had no apparent effect. This suggests that a T H~ type T cell response may play a role in LCM disease i n p2m-mice. Given the wasting nature of LCM disease in these mice, we measured the production of TNF-a by L C Wspecific, MHC class 11-restricted CTL. In response to LCMV, CD4+ T cells from p2m-mice produce TNF-a, and induce bystander lysis of non-infected, TNF-a sensitive target cells. TNF-a, however, is not solely responsible for the cytotoxic effects of these cells, since a neutralizing anti-TNF antibody did not totally inhibit antigen specific lysis. Further, TNF-a resistant target cells are also killed in an antigen-dependent, MHC-restricted manner by CD4+ T cells from LCMV infected pZm-mice. TNF-a production by antigen specific T cells suggest that this cachectic cytokine may mediate weight loss in LCMV infected p2m-mice. Neutralizing antibody experiments zn viuo will directly address this question. A s has been shown in the mouse, cytokines like IL-4 and IL-12 play an important role in the differentiation of CD4+ T cells into Th2 and Thl T cell subsets. respectively. In human however, studies on the effects of cytokines on the differentiation of T cells into subsets with different cytokine production profiles have only been carried out in antigen primed T cells and little information is available about the effects on immunologically naive T cells. Therefore, we have investigated the effect of various cytokines on maturation of CO4+. CD45RA+ cord blood (CB) T cells, which produce high levels of IL-2 and Icw levels of IFN-.( upon primary activation, but no detectable amounts of IL-4 and IL-5 and are thus limited in their capacity to produce Th2 cytokines. Highly purified CD4+ CB T cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 mAb, crosslinked on CD3P-expressing L cells that had been cotransfected with B7 and LFA-3, in the presence of recombinant (r)lL-4, rlFN-y and rlL-12 or combinations thereof. Six days later, the cells were restimulated with anti-CD3 mAb presented by L cell transfectants and the cytokine production was measured by specific ELISA in 48 h culture supernatants. Culturing the cells in the presence of rlL-4 resuited in the production of IL-4 and low levels of IFN-y upon restimulation. On the other hand, CB T cells cultured in rlL-12 or rlL-4iriL-12, produced high levels of IFN-y. Interestingly however, rlL-12 grown cells also produced significant levels of IL-4 upon activation, whereas the addition of rlL-12 to rll-4-cultured cells had a synergistic enhancing effect on the production of IL-4. The rlL-12-mediated induction of IL-4 production was rat enhanced by the addition of a neutralizing anti-IFN-ymAb, whereas it was cnly slightly inhibited by the addition 01 rlFN-y. These results indicate that IL-12 is not only involved in the development of CD4+ Thl T cells, but in that of CD4+ ThP-like T cells as well. Addition of equal amounts of autologous CD8+ T cells to the CD4+ CB T cell cultures was found to inhibit the differentiation into IL-4 producing cells. Resuits based on experiments using neutralizing anti-IFN-y mAb indicated that this effect seems to be only in part mediated by IFNy. This notion was underscored by the finding that addition of rlL-12 to the culture system, which resulted in the differentiation of IL-4 producing cells, also induced high production ievels of IFN-y. The nature of the inhibitory activity displayed by CD8+ is currently under investigation. Tieno Germann, Institute for Immunology, 55101 Maim, Germany. IL12 was reported to be a macrophage-derived cytokine decisively involved in cellular immune responses, especially by activating CD4' and CD8' T cells as well as NK cells. We investigated the influence of IL12 on the development of naive CD4' T cells activated by immobilized anti-CD3 mAb in the absence of accessory cells. Differentiation of naive CDCT cells was monitored by determining the secondaly production of IFNy (TH1) and IL4 (TJ). In combination with a T cell receptor mediated signal IL12 turned out to be a potent inducer of T,I development. This effect of IL12 could be abolished by neutrallzing anti-murine IFNy (mIFNy) mAb but IL12 could not be replaced by exogenous mIFNy. Further experiments revealed that TH1 development of naive CD4' T cells depends on the coordinate action of IL12 and IFNy. Another cytokine involved in T,-differentiation is TGFDI. TGFDl was reported to enhance IFNy production by CD4' T cells and to support their differentiation to T,1 cells. In contrast to these data, we found that TGFDl strongly inhibited the IL12 induced production of IFNy by naive CD4' T cells as well as their development towards T,1 phenotype. These data were confirmed using neutralizing anti-TGFDI Ah. IL4, a cytokine known to be essential for TH2 development of naive CD4' T cells, completely abolished TH1 differentiation promoted by IL12. Conversely, ILI 2 could not prevent IL4 induced T,,2 development even in the presence of relatively low amounts of IL4. Thus, our data demonstrate that IL12 is a potent differentiation factor for TH1 cells and that its effect depends on the costimulation by IFNy. Furthermore, it was found that TGFDl and IL4 arc potent inhibitors of the TH1 differentiation inducing capacity of IL12. We have developed CD-4 + T-lymphocyte lines specific for gp160, gp120, and tetanus toxoid (TT) in HIV seropositive patients enrolled in a double-blinded, placebo-controlled, gp160 vaccine therapy trial. CD4+, antigen-specific, T-lymphocyte lines were developed from the PBMCs of 10 patients, 150 days after beginning either gp160 or placebo injections, by repeated stimulation with autologous APC's pulsed with gp160, gp120, or TT. Supernatants from lines which were specific for antigen after the 3rd stimulation were analysed for the presence of IFN-G, TNF-B, IL-4, IL-6, andp24 . Results: Out of 29 lines from 10 patients: Observed Frequencies for IFNG, p24 Conclusions: Although, the numbers are too small for statistically significant comparisons, we are intrigued by the fact that of the supernatants which were positive for TNF-D, none were simultaneously positive for p24, whereas approximately 45% of the cultures which were positive for either IL-6 or IFN-G were simultaneously positive for p24. Only one supernatant had dectectable IL-4, and it was negative for p24. Infection of BALBic mice with LerAhmania leads to a fatal progressive disease while C57BL/6 mice undergo spontaneous healing The immunological basis for this difference is due to the expansion of distinct CD4' T cell subsets, Th-2 in BALBic and Th-l in B6 in response to Leihmanra antigen Immunization of the susceptible strain prior to infection can confer either protection or exacerbation of the disease depending on the choice of immunogen and the route of immunization One of the prominent proteins on the parasite surface, PSP, can confer a good degree of protection when used as an immunogen in BALBic and CBA mice hut peptides derived from this protein can he either innocuous or partially protectice Using synthetic peptides covering the entire sequence of PSP we show that many T cell determinants exist in the PSP sequence and that several of them are promiscuous and shared almost the identical core amino acid residues in different strains tested We also show that the choice of peptide within a determinant envelope IS essential for the induction of a Th-1 response there are peptides within the same envelope that induce an undesirable Th-2 component These findings should be of importance when defining a peptide vaccine for Ieishmanlasls  The activation of human myelin-reactive T cells is widely considered to be of pivotal importance to the development of multiple sclerose (MS). The rational development of antigen-specific intervention in MS requires information on exactly which of the multitude of different myelin proteins trigger autoreactive human T cells. In this study, we aim at identifymg such proteins. Experimental approach Human peripheral blood T cells from HLA-typed healthy donors as well as from d e f~t e MS patients were cultured in Vine with delipidated human m y e l i proteins for two weeks. As antigen source, purified myelin was used from either affected MS brains or control brains. Total CNS myelin proteins from the same sources were also fractionated by reversed-phase HPLC and these HPLC fractions served as test antigen in a standard proliferation assay in which responses of the short-term bulk cultures were assayed. Results Proliferative responses of human T-cell cultures were mainly directed against one or a few minor protein components of human myelin. Although the expected large amounts of MBP and PLP were present in both stimulatoly and test-preparations (as confirmed by SDS-PAGE and ELISA), both major myelin proteins triggered only marginal proliferative responses. In all HLA backgrounds tested, the strongest proliferative responses were directed at the same protein fraction, levels of which may be different between MS and control brains. Upon reversed-phase HPLC, the highly immunogenic protein fraction did not co-elute with either MBP, PLP, MOG or MAG. We currently aim at the characterization of this protein fraction. transformahon. IL-2 was the most abunaant cytokine thou h it was expressed b less than 5% of the activated T cell's. I#N-y was simificantlv rss abundant K 2 % ) . and IL4. IL-5. and IL-10 were barelv. thbgh. reiroduciblx, ddtected (0.1236; 0.052%. and 0.034 %I, respechvely). Surpnsingl , the frequency of cells that co-expressed two cytokines was quite. h i d The frequency of cells that co-expressed IL-2 and IFN-y in thi prim res onse was 4 0 % of the single-positive II-2or IFN-r-Droducine C~S . &us. these two "Thl" cvtokines show verv pour cobdinate rGulation in individual T cells in a rimary antigenk rtsponse. On secondary stimulation. the frewenc) of 1!-2/1FN-ydouhlepositives increased, though it remained a minorify of all IL-2 and IFN-y nositive cells. The nmduction of "Th2" cvtokines was dramaticallv increawd in the secoridary stimulation. IL-4'and IL-10 showed 78-anb 250-fold increases. respectively. Ccmdinate activaLion of the IL-4 and 1L-10 genes @ the Same 'cell waS the exce tion rather than the rule, thou h co-expression was greater than that &I IL-2 and IFN-y. Of all tfe cytokme airs examined, IL-4 and IJ-5 were the most frequently coexpressel IL-4 and IFN-y showed the greatest tendency towards segre ation of expression, rarely co-expressed after the primary stimuEtion. These data establish that there is tremendous heterogeneity of individual c tokine gene expression during the early antigenic response of CD4+ T cel?s. Co-expression of any airs of cytokines, much less "Thl" and " p 2 " cytokmes, is generally tRe exception. ~t appears that the majority of cells that generate a cytokine response, even in a clonal, transgenic o ulation, tend to activate sin le cytokine genes during a given rouncforantigenic stimulation, and on& a minority of the total cells stimulated generates a cytokine response at all. As the cells undergo additional rounds of activation, there is increased frequency of c tokineproducing cells and evolution of more coordinate expression of Ziferent c tokine pairs, but this is in no case absolute. These data suggest that the d10 phenotype is in fact apopularion phenotype rather than an individual cell phenotype, as previously assumed. While cytotoxic activity is generally considered to reside in the CD8+ population of T lymphocytes and not in the CD4+ population, clear exceptions to this rule exist. CD4+ cells with cytolytic capabilities have been identified, but they are often believed to kill by a mechanism distinct from that used by CD8+ CTL. In the present study, a cytotoxic THI CD4+ clone was shown to express mRNA for perforin, a molecule implicated in the cytotoxic mechanism of CD8+ CTL, while a noncytotoxic TH2 CD4+ clone was shown to lack the perforin message. This observation demonstrates that CD4+ CTL potentially ldll by the same mechanism utilized by CD8+ CTL and poses the question of what regulates the development of cytotoxicity in CD4+ cells. Data from this laboratory have shown that when NK cell depleted murine splenocytes were activated by either allogeneic spleen cells for five days or ConA + PMA for three days, cytotoxicity was reshicted to CD8+ cells. In the case of ConA + PMA activated cells, this cytolytic capability could be correlated with the presence of mRNA for perforin. That this message was CD8 specific was shown by immunodepletion of CD8+ cells with anti-CD8 antibodies and complement at the effector stage with the concomitant loss of cytotoxicity and perforin message. However, CD4+ CTL could also be generated in a primary allogeneic culture if they were activated either in the absence of CD8+ cells or with a stimulus that activates only CD4+ cells. This suggests that activated CD8+ cells exert an inhibitory influence on the development of cytotoxicity in the CD4+ population. Experiments are currently in progress to assess the relative role of cell contact versus soluble mediators in this effect using the Costar TranswelP system and to determine the role of perforin in killing by primary CD4+ Cn. However, recent studies have shown that the TCR alpha chain may also contribute to superantigen recognition, but the structural role remains undefined. In addition, whereas superantigen recognition is not classically MHC-restricted, we have previously shown that the specificity of some T cells is influenced by polymorphic differences in the MHC presenting molecule, implicating potential contacts between the TCR and MHC.' In an attempt to understand the molecular contribution of the alpha chain to superantigen recognition, we have analyzed the Mls-l specificity patterns of a panel of T cell hybridomas with limited TCR sequence diversity The hybridomas expressed TCR with identical beta chains (transgenic Vp8. IDPJp2.3CP2) and alpha chains containing one of two V a l 1 family members, V a l 1. Ib or V a l 1.2b, that differ in only 5 amino acids. The Val1.1 and Va11.2 hybridomas showed distinct patterns of reactivity to MIS-I: the V a l 1.1 hybridomas were independent of MHC effects, whereas the V a l I .2 hybridomas were variably influenced by MHC polymorphism. Sequence analyses are in progress to correlate these differences in fine specificity with Ja and junctional sequences. The data suggest two potential roles for the alpha chain, one mediated by the V a element and the other by Ja and junctional sequences The data will be discussed in terms of a Although superantigen-mediated deletion of CD4+ lymphocyte subpopulations has been proposed as a possible mechanism for CD4+ cell loss in AIDS, evidence that an AIDS virus can act as a superantigen has been inconclusive. SIVsmmPBjl4, a variant simian immunodeficiency virus isolated from a pig-tailed macaque, stimulates the proliferation of macaque T lymphocytes in vitro and in macaques induces an acutely lethal disease characterized, in part, by lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly. To determin whether SIVsmmPBj14 acts as a superantigen, in vitro and in vivo studies of T cell receptor (TCR) V0 repertoire were undertaken using a PCR-based quantitative method. While PHA did not cause the perturbation of TCR Vb repertoire, sIVsmmPBj14 stimulated the expansion of T lymphocyte subpopulations expressing the VA7 and V014 gene families. Such VA7 and VA14 expansions could be confirmed by multiple RNase protection assay. Furthermore, the expansion of the same lymphocyte subpopulations was also detected in PBL and lymph node cells of virus-infected macaques. These results suggest that SIVsmmPBj14 encodes a superantigen that may contribute to its ability to induce an acutely lethal disease. T cell activation by peptide: MHC molecules can be antagonized by non-stimulatory analogs of that peptide. Multiple altered peptides, each containing a single substitution for the amino acids identified as T cell contact residues, were used to examine the antagonist response. In addition, w e investigated this TCR antagonism using staphylococcal enterotoxin (SE) superantigen to stimulate hemoglobin-specific [Hb(64-761 Th cells because its activation pathway may differ from conventional antigen. Interestingly, superantigen activation of these Th cells was antagonized by hemoglobin peptide analogs even though agonist (superantigen) a n d antagonist (altered peptide) bind at different sites on the MHC molecule a n d TCR. The antagonism appeared to b e a fundamental block in T cell activation as cytokine production and proliferation were reduced in T h l or Th2 clones, and cytokine production and apoptosis was inhibited in a T cell hybridoma. When multiple altered peptide ligands were made at a single amino acid position (amino acid 73), peptides with agonist, partial agonist a n d antagonist characteristics were generated. Interestingly, the peptides that functioned as partial agonists for these Th cells also antagonized T cell responses, and thus were a subset of the peptide antagonists. In summary, our results demonstrate that analogs of immunogenic peptide are potent antagonists for Th cell responses induced by superantigen as well as immunogenic peptide. In studying the kinetics of T cells restimulated with SEB, we made an unexpected observation; while the cells displayed a nonresponsive phenotype on day 3 after restimulation, a vigorous response was seen on day 1 and, to a lesser extent, on day 2 after restimulation. This is not an in rim artefact as in viw SEB primed T cells proliferate as well on day 1 and 2 after restimulation, though less pronounced. Whether this enhanced proliferation in fact leads to apoptosis (as recently shown in other systems) remains to be examined. Either way, the term anergy clearly requires further qualification, with, for SAs, implying a change in kinetics rather than nonresponsiveness in all parameters of T cell activation. The superantigen Staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) stimulates T cells that bear specific TCR VD elements. Binding of SEB to MHC class II molecules is a prerequisite for recognition of the complex by TCR irrespective of the allele or isotype of class II. For example T cells can respond to superantigens even when bound to xenogeneic class I1 molecules. This lack of stringency in the h4HC requirement for T cell activation by superantigen suggested to us that plate bound anti-SEB monoclonal antibodies might mimic class n on the surface of antigen presenting cells (APC) and present superantigen to an appropriate T cell hybridoma. To test this hypothesis four antibodies that recognize different epitopes of SEB were generated, characterized and used to present SEB to a T cell hybridoma bearing TCR VD 8.3. The antibodies include, 2B33, which blocks binding of SEB to MHC class I1 and a second antibody, B87, blocks the TCR recognition site on SEB. Antibodies were coated onto plates overnight, SEB was then added followed by the T cell hybridoma. Three of the four antibodies which bound SEB led to stimulation of the T cell hybridoma in this assay as measured by a -2 production. The antibody B87 did not result in T cell stimulation, however, this was not surprising since this antibody prevented T cell responses to SEB even when the superantigen was presented by appropriate APC. Moreover, SEB mutants that have lost their ability to bind to h4HC class I1 molecules can stimulate T cells when presented by anti-SEB monoclonal antibodies. This study shows that plate bound monoclonal antibodies can substitute for MHC class I1 in presentation of SEB to T cell hybridomas. The mean frequency (t 1 SD) of VB3+ CD4+ T cells in cell cycle following in vitro stimulation with staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) increases from 5% 2 4% on day 1 to 42% t 10% on day 4 of culture. This figure is substantially higher than the 1% of CD4+ T cells which is detected in SEBstimulated limiting dilution culture conditions. To determine whether cell death might contribute to the difference between cells entering cell cycle and the those surviving to expand clonally. we determined the amount of DNA released into the supernatants of SEB-stimulated cell cultures in the presence or absence of added cytokines SEB stimulated cultures of lo6 cells contained 5.1 2 1 pg/DNA/mL which was significantly greater than the 3.9 2 0.6 pg/DNA/mL found in the unstimulated control cultures (p<O.OS) Addition of 10 u/mL of IL2, IL4 or IL6 increased the fraction of cells entering cycle and reduced the amount of cell death. Our results suggest that the frequency range for Vb3+ cells entering cell cycle is suficiently narrow to permit comparisons between different physiologic conditions, as following in VIVO tolerance induction protocols. As applied to human subjects, statistically significant differences in the frequency of blood Vp3 cells stimulated by SEB which entered cell cycle were found between severely ill and healthy individuals. Thus p-chain V ( D ) J recombination provides a mechanism to escape from SAG mediated deletionlanergy of an entire Vp subset. Staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA) and E (SEE) are two closely related bacterial superantigens that bind to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I1 surface antigens, and activate discrete subsets of T lymphocytes bearing certain variable elements of the T cell receptor (TCR) p chain. In order to characterize interactions between bacterial superantigens and TCR, we defined the regions of SEE responsible for mediating Vp-specific stimulation using a series of chimeric enterotoxins that incorporated specific residues of SEE at analogous positions in SEA. The potential of these chimeras to stimulate purified populations of human T lymphocytes and competitively bind to HLA-DRl molecules was assessed by flow cytometry. Two regions of SEE located near the amino-terminus (residues 20.21 and 24) and carboxylterminus (residues 200,206 and 207) were required to restore wild-type stimulatory properties to a chimeric molecule. The amino-terminal residues appear to be important only in the activation of T cells with SEE, while the carboxyl-terminal residues are necessary for both SEA and SEE-mediated activation of T cells. MHC class I1 binding was not altered by the exchange of either amino or carboxyl-terminal residues, suggesting that the functional domains responsible for TCR specificity and class I1 binding affinity are distinct. Alignment of the chimeras with SEB places the regions 20-24 and 200-207 on two structurally contiguous loops of SEB thought to partially comprise a TCR binding pocket. Thus the residues of SEE that mediate Vp-specific interactions reside in domains at either end of the enterotoxin molecule, and may coalesce to form a common TCR binding site with multiple specificities. As superantigens, the staphylococcal enterotoxins (SE) stimulate polyclonal T cell populations based largely on the expression of responsive T cell receptor Vp elements. One salient feature of SE action is the specific and high affinity binding to non-polymorphic regions of MHC class II molecules. The effect of this interaction between SE and MHC on T cell activation was studied. CL-1 is an HA307-319 specific, HLA-DR1 -restricted human T cell clone. The TCR from CL-1 was cloned from cDNA and sequenced. It expresses Vp13.1 and Va 1.3. It responds to SEC2 by secreting IL-2, but does not respond to SEA, SEE, or toxic shock syndrome toxin (TSST). HLA-DRl-expressing B cells were pulsed with antigenic peptide, then cultured with CL-1 in the presence of various concentrations of SE. There was a SE concentrationdependent decrease in the amount of IL-2 released by the T cells. This inhibition of T cell activation was not due to negative signalling via class II on the T cell. CL-1 was non-specifically stimulated by immobilized anti-CD3 antibody, 64.1. When the anti-HLA-DR anitbody, L243 was added, there was a 75% decrease in IL-2 secretion. No similar effect was seen with SE at concentrations that inhibited antigen-specific T cell activation. SE have also been shown to cause T cell anergy that can prevent subsequent antigenspecific T cell activation. CL-1 was cultured in the presence of high concentrations of SE. While culture in SEC2 was able to abolish the subsequent activation of CL-1 by peptide plus APC, no effect was seen with SEA. In addtion, SECP, but not SEA, caused the expected alteration in CL-1 surface phenotype: decrease in surface CD3 and increase in surface CD25. Finally, SEA was able to competitively inhibit the binding of fluoresceinated avidin to B cells that had been pulsed with biotinylated HA307-319. This suggests that SE and peptide can occupy the same MHC molecule, and implies a topology for SE/MHC interaction. Taken together, these data demonstrate that SE binding to MHC can prevent activation of an SE-non-responsive T cell. This inhibition is probably the result of steric effects and suggests a role for SE or their derviatives as immunomodulatory agents. Our previous functional analysis of a panel of Mlsla responsive, VB6 T hybridoma clones indicated that elements of the T cell receptor (TCR) in addition to VB determined responsiveness to bacterial superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) in T cells expressing VB6, a VB element not commonly associated with SEB responsiveness. This conclusion was indicated by the finding that while the majority of the T cell hybridomas were not SEB responsive, a minority (approximately 20%) were; the pattern of responsiveness of the VB6 hybridomas to endogenous superantigen Mlsla showed that responsiveness to SEB was not due to nonspecific effects such as relative levels of TCR or adhesioiUaccessoly molecules. A B chain cDNA sequencing analysis indicated that 5 chain junctional elements did not, autonomously at least, determine SEB responsiveness in the VB6 T cells; this was confirmed by transfection of B chain cDNA derived from a responsive T hybridoma into a non-responsive T hybridoma. No transfer of SEB responsiveness was seen in cells transfected with either B chain from the responsive T hybrid or their own B chain cDNA despite observation of an increase in TCR expression and Mlsla responsiveness in both relative to controls transfected with vector alone. An a chain sequencing analysis of the SEB responsive and non-responsive VB6 T hybridomas indicated (i) that a chain junctional elements did autonomously detemne the functional phenotype and (ii) that Va4 expression was associated with SEB responsivness in VB6 T cells. A functional analysis of a separate set of T hybridomas expressing Va4 and various VB elements provided further evidence for the role of Va4 in facilitating SEB responsiveness in VB6 T cells. Transfection experiments will test for the autonomy of Va in this function. Two classes of agents that are targeted to certain TCR Vp gene products, monoclonal antibodies and superantigens, have successfully employed for the experimental prophylasis a n d therapy of autoimmune diseases. Monoclonal a n t i -v p antibody stimulates T cell proliferation, lymphokine production, anergy and apoptosis in vitro. Superantigens induces a complex response, including the induction of deletion via apoptosis, cytokine release, and anergy. Surprisingly however, in vivo the response elicited by both reagents obey rather different principles. Thus, 1) SEB causes the secretion of a variety of cytokines (interleukins 1,2,3,4,10 To investigate whether this proteolytic cleavage is a requirement for viral superantigen presentation, protease recognition motifs in the vSAG-6 amino acid sequence were disrupted. These mutant constructs were then expressed in a B-cell line and tested for their ability to stimulate VP3+ T-cell hybrids in v i m . The molecular weight of the vSAG-6 proteolytic fragment predicts cleavage at a tetrabasic protease motif found at amino acid 171. This cleavage motif, recognized by the ubiquitous endoprotease furin, is found at the cleavage site of many viral and endogenous glycoproteins. Surprisingly, mutation of this predicted cleavage site to a sequence that should no longer be recognized by furin or dibasic-specific proteases does not abrogate cleavage of vSAG-6. These mutant molecules are still effectively presented to Vp3+ T-cell hybrids. Further mutations of this and other putative cleavage sites are currently underway. Biochemical analyses and the stimulatory activity of these mutants should identify the vSAG-6 cleavage site@), the substrate specificity of proteases able to mediate this cleavage, and whether any cleavage is necessary for vSAG presentation to T-cells. Milk-borne mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) is a type B retrovirus that induces mammary carcinoma in mice. Infectious MMTV, as well as genomically integrated Mtv proviruses, encode superantigens that, in association with permissive MHC class I1 molecules, are recognized by T cells expressing an appropriate T cell receptor Vg product. A series of experiments has been carried out to determine the role o f superantigenic stimulation in host susceptibility to MMTV infection. Newborn mice that either did or did not express a transgenic Ea class I1 product were exposed by foster nursing to milk-borne MMTV, and were then analyzed for MMTV superntigen-induced Vaspecific clonal deletion of T cells and for MMTV infection. It was found that only mice expressing the Ea transgene undergo Vp deletion. When MMTV infection was assayed in these mice by ELISA of viral p28 in milk o r by PCR analysis of mammary tissue, it was found that susceptibility to infection was similarly dependent upon Ea expression. These results demonstrate that susceptibility to MMTV infection, as well as susperantigen-induced Vp-specific T-cell deletion, is dependent upon expression of a permissive class I1 MHC product. This observation is consistent with a permissive role of superantigenic stimulation in MMTV infection and/or viral replication. Bacterial superantigens (SAg) are potent inimunomodulatory toxins that share the ability to bind MHC class I1 molecules and interact with specific TCR Vo elements to stimulate T cell proliferation and cytokine release. We recently exploited this immunological specificity to purify a new streptococcal SAg, SSA, from the culture supernatants of a serotype M3 S . pyogenes strain causing streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (STSS). The striking N-terminal homology of SSA to staphylococcal enterotoxin superantigens SEB and SEC raised questions regarding the origin and dissemination of the SSA gene. In order to characterize further the relationship of SSA to other bacterial SAg, and to determine the distribution of ssa among group A Streprococcus, we cloned the SSA gene. ssa is a 783 base pair open-reading frame encoding a predicted 260 amino acid protein that is similar in length to several other bacterial SAg. The deduced sequence of SSA is 60.2% identical to SEB, but only 49% identical to streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin A. Purified recombinant SSA retained the SAg activity attributed to the native molecule and stimulated T cell proliferation in an MHC class [I-dependent, Vo-specific manner. Southern blot and PCR analysis of 138 group A streptococcal strains representing 65 M protein serotypes and 15 non-typable strains found ssa to be widely disseminated, but restricted to only 10 of the 80 clonal lineages examined. The ssu-positive lineages were in several instances phylogenetically diverse and had not shared a recent common ancestor. Analysis of the ET 2-M3 lineage, a clone causing STSS, severe invasive disease, and rheumatic fever, found evidence for temporal variation in ssa association. Contemporary ET 2-M3 disease isolates had ssa, but two older isolates of this clone recovered in 1910 and 1920 lacked the gene. The clonal and temporal distribution pattern of ssu suggest a relatively recent acquisition of this SAg-encoding gene by the ET 2-M3 S. pyogenes lineage, perhaps by horizontal nansfer and recombination. Vp T-cell receptor. By tri-color FACS analysis, we show here that clonal deletion of SEB-specific Vps already occurs at the immature CD4+8+ double positive (DP) stage. In addition, we observed an increase in the percentages of SP a n d D P thymocytes expressing the activation markers CD25, CD28, CD71 and HLA-DR. In uiuo treatment with SEB resulted also i n a n induction of clonal anergy. Thymocytes from SEB-treated SCID-hu mice did not proliferate when restimulated with SEB in uitro, but produced significant amounts of IFN-y, GM-CSF and IL-10. The lack of proliferation corresponded of a failure to secrete IL-2 upon restimulation with SEB in uitro. This clonal anergy could be reversed in uitro by either IL-2 or anti-CD28 mAb or by B7 transfected P815 cells, resulting in optimal Tcell proliferation a n d IL-2 production. These d a t a demonstrate t h a t in uiuo administration of SEB leads to activation, clonal deletion and clonal anergy of SEB-specific thymocytes. The clonal anergy can be reversed in uitro by triggering the CD28/CTLA4-BBl/B7 pathway. Superantigens are a class of amiiens characteriied by their ability to selectively activate Tcells bearing particular TCR Vpelements. Because of this feature. superantigens have profound effects upon the TCR repertoire. Failure to respond appropriately to superamiiens could be indicative of defects in thymic selection and peripheral tolerance induction. We therefore assessed the effect of staphylococcal enterotoxins (SEs) on various immne parameters of T cells from Bobreeding diabetes-prone (BE-DP) rats. These rats spontaneously develop an autoimmune illness similar to human type I diabetes mellius. Although the Vpfamilies stimuhted by various SEs were similar in BBDP and normal rats, the BB-DP T cells consistently responded less vigorously than did those of normal animals. BB-DP T cells were also more susceptible to anti-CD4 monoclonal antibody blockage of the SE response than that of normal rats. It has previously been shown that in vivoadministratwn of staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEE). an exogenous superantigen, induced deletion and anergy of muse T cells bearing particular TCR Vpfamilies. We readily induced in viwononresponsiveness to SEB in normal rat T cells with in vNo injections of SEE; however peripheral T cells from BB-DP rats were more resistant to anergy induction by in vivo administration of SEE. About 50% of BB-DP T cells are a short lived population that survives for only a few days to weeks in the periphery. This short lived population can be eliminated from the periphery by thymedomizing the animal. Thymectomy of normal rats reduced their number of T cells by a b u t 20%; whereas BB-DP T cells were reduced by about 50%. T cells from short term thymedomized B E DP rats remained resistant to anergy induction by in vivo SEB administration. Surprisingly, thymectomy of normal rats resulted in resistance to anergy induction by in vivoSEB treatment. We hypothesize that a short lived T cell populaton in normal rats may be responsible for the induction and/or maintenance of anergy in the long lived T cell population. This regulatory short lived population may be abnormal in the BB-DP rat such that peripheral tolerance is less easily achieved and/or maintained in these animals. Mycopiasma fermentans incognitus has attracted much attention recently as a possible cofactor in some cases of AIDS disease progression. This organism was initially isolated by Lo et al from patients with AIDS and later from asymptomatic HIV-seropositive patients and non-HIV-infected individuals how died of a mysterious flulike illness. In order to better understand how this organism might accelerate HIV disease progression we tested whether antigenic preparations from Mycoplasma fermenfans incognitus could stimulate murine T cells. We report that a protease-sensitive factor IS released from this pathogen that stimulates strong proliferative responses in primary murine T ceii cultures. This stimulatory activity, which is primarily found in culture supernatants, is also associated with Exposure of human thymocytes to bacterial enterotoxins results in deletion of thymocytes expressing specific TCR V-1s genes. The factors contributing to this deletion may relate to the inherent nature of the T-cell at a given stage of development. Here we demonstrate that phenotypically immature, CDl+, human thymocytes are capable of proliferating in response to SEB in the presence of autologous CD2-flo thymic APC. The response is triggered by low concentrations of SEB, requires the participation of the TCR and IL-2R molecules, and is sensitive to Cyclosporin A. Thymocytes expressing specific V-1s genes are expanded, including two V-B genes that have not previously been shown to engage SEB. In view of previous data, our results suggest that the factor(s) determining deletion or expansion of immature T-cells are not inherent to the developmental state of the T-cell. We present evidence supporting the role of the CD4 molecule as an integral part of T-lymphocyte recognition of at least two bacterial superantigens: SEA and TSSTl. It is proposed that the superantigen qualities of these toxins may be due, in part, to a molecular mimicry of the CD4 molecule. We have previously shown that vSAG7 (Mls-la) is synthesized in vivo as a 45 kDa precursor protein but the carboxy-terminus is found on the cell surface as an 18.5 kDa protein, possibly a result of proteolytic processing at a tetrabasic amino acid motif ending at amino acid 171 (Winslow et al. Cell 71: 719-730). More recently, using antibodies that recognize both the carboxy-and amino-termini of vSAG7 we have demonstrated that the carboxy-and amino-termini are associated noncovalently, and that the proteolytically processed vSAG binds to class I 1 molecules. Although we detect some binding of the full-length vSAG to class 11, proteolytic processing appears to enhance class II binding. Analysis of the carbohydrate structure of vSAG7 reveals that proteolytic cleavage occurs in a golgi or post-golgi compartment. Furthermore, in addition to proteolytic cleavage at amino acid 171 (the putative proximal cleavage site), we have evidence that processing occurs at two additional sites. The sizes of the carboxy-terminal products are consistent with cleavage occuring at basic residues preceding amino acid 192 (the putative distal site) and at amino acid 73 (the putative transmembrane site). Processing at the putative distal site appears to abrogate class II binding. Site directed mutagenesis of the putative proximal site (RKRR to GEEF) eliminates the predicted proteolytic cleavage product and vSAG7 surface expression, suggesting that cleavage at this position is required for vSAG7 function. We are continuing our use of targeted mutagenesis to clarify the locations of and the requirements for proteolytic processing in vSAG7 presentation. The P210 BCR/ABL oncogene i s a naturally occuring fusion gene generated by the reciprocal t(922) chromosomal translocation, a cytogenetic marker of chronic myelogenous leukemia. To understand the molecular mechanism by which BCR/ABL transforms cells, we chose to analyse the range of cellular genes whose expression is altered by the activated BCR/ABL serine-tyrosine kinase. We have . and LPS all act as B cell differentiation factors as defined by their ability to stimulate immunoglobulin H and L chain mRNA and induce high rate antibody secretion. We have compared the ability of these differentiation factors to stimulate various genes during B cell differentiation using clonal inducible B cell lymphomas. We find that each stimulation has distinct effects on the gene programs expressed by differentiating B cells. For example, both 11-5 and 11-6 independently stimulate increases in ps, kappa, and J chain mRNA. LPS also stimulates p and kappa transcripts, but fails to transcriptionally activate 3 chsin to significant levels. This difference results in definable differences in the type of secreted IgM polymer which predominates following differentiation. There are also significant differences in the activities of the two lymphokines. For example, while 11-6 acts only as a differentiation factor. 11-5 also augments B cell proliferation, indicating that these two lymphokines have different composite activities. Moreover, the differentiation stimulated by 11-5. but not by 11-6, is partially inhibited by 11-4. Inhibition is not at the level of 11-5 receptor expression since 11-4 inhibits differentiation, but not proliferation induced by IL-5. 11-5. but not 11-6, stimulates increases in MMTV proviral gene expression. On the other hand, while neither of these lymphokines activates c-myc expression above constitutive levels, LPS stimulates a pronounced and transient increase in c-myc transcripts. These results demonstrate that while 11-5. 11-6 and LPS act as differentiation factors for B cells, they induce differentiation using at least partially distinct pathways. Since differences in gene expression can be detected within four hours after stimulation, these results imply that early activation events distinguish these modes of stimulation which lead to pronounced differences in gene expression. Nevertheless, each of these different signaling pathways coalesce into the same result, at least with respect to antibody secretion. Experiments to assess the consequences of these differences on the fate of B cells, and to identify genes which distinguish these early differentiative events, are currently underway. Normal human B lymphocytes are considered refractory to expression of DNAs introduced by transfection. By analyzing the expression of a reporter gene transfected into normal human B lymphocytes by electroporation, we have found that the cells are capable of expressing a reporter gene. However, maximum expression was detected only at very early times (6-9 hrs) after transfection and declined rapidly to background levels by 24 hours. These kinetics were in contrast to the kinetics of expression of the same reporter gene in human B cell lines. In cell lines, expression increased steadily reaching maximum levels at approximately 36 hours after transfection and then declined slowly. To investigate the differences between normal B cells and established B cells that lead to the differing kinetics of expression of transfected genes, we have electroporated cells at various times following infection by EBV. Infection of B cells by EBV causes the cells to proliferate indefinitely in culture, a process referred to as immortalization. The immortalized cells display changes indicative of activation including the secretion of immunoglobulin and a vast increase in CD23 at the cell surface. We have found that a change in kinetics of expression of transfected DNA occurs rapidly (within 3 days) following infection by EBV. We are investigating the factors that influence expression in normal and EBV infected human B cells. The timing in evolution of the emergence of immunoglobulin Qg) and T cell receptor (TCR) molecules from a common rearranging precursor is unknown. We have isolated a novel Ig superfamily molecule by PCR from the nurse shark which contains one V domain and 5 Cl-SET domains. Analysis of several cDNA clones has indicated that 1)The V domain shows great diversity and 2)The C domains are identical in sequence. The V domain differs from canonical V domains found in Ig and TCR molecules in that part of the predicted CDR2 loop is missing, and the region corresponding to CDR3 contains from 1-5 cysteines. Hybridization with a V probe under lowered stringency conditions detect from 2-4 bands; since the diversity of expressed V regions exceeds that of the germline, somatic mutation may also be conhibuting to the generation of diversity. Data concerning the germline organization of the rearranging gene segments will be presented. We have recently produced a battery of monoclonal antibodies Specitic for the protein found in nurse. shark serum encoded by the cDNA. Transformation of 3 lineage precursors by the Abelson murine leukemia virus appears to specifically arrest their development. Such cells generally retain unrearranged immunoglobulin kappa alleles that are transcriptionally inactive. We demonstrate that nontransformed pre B cells expanded from the mouse bone marrow efficiently transcribe germ-line kappa alleles. In addition, they contain activated complexes of the transcription factor NF-KB, in contrast with their Abelson-transformed counterparts. Using conditionally transformed pre B cell lines, we show that the viral transforming protein, a tyrosine kinase, blocks germline kappa gene transcription and negatively regulates NF-KB activity and the functioning of the kappa intron enhancer. We are exploring the biochemical mechanism by which v-abl inhibits transcription and rearrangement of the kappa locus during pre B cell differentiation. While monoclonal antibodies against human CD40 have been available for some time, to date there have been no antibodies available against the murine homologue. We have generated a panel of monoclonal antibodies against murine CD40 (mCD40) by immunising rats with soluble, recombinant mCD40. All antibodies specifically bind recombinant murine CD40 expressed on L cells. At least two functional groups of antibodies have been identified, one group induces B cell proliferation in the absence of co-stimulators, and the other group will not induce proliferation either on its own or with IL4, but will synergise with the agonistic antibody or with anti-lgM to induce proliferation. These antibodies have been used to deterinine expression of CD40 in iiiurine bone inarrow B cell haematopoesis, w i t h interesting reulth. CD40 is expressed early in niurine B cell ontogeny, on : I proportion ot B220'"*, IgMpro/pre B cells, but is down-regulated on ;I wbset ot 8220'"" IgM+ immature B cells. These B220'"" I g M + C D 4 0cells differentiate overnight into CD40t cells, and thus would appear to precede this larger population. Since these immature B cells are thought to be the tolerance susceptible stage, and CD40 is of importance in rescuing cells from apoptosis, we investigated the functional importance of CD40 down-regulation using sorted immature B cells. As expected, both CD40+ and CD40~ subsets of the immature population were induced to programmed cell death by anti-lgM stimulation, and both populations proliferated in response to CD40 stimulat~on, presumably because of differentiation of the CD40cells. However a combination of anti-lgM and CD40 antibody resulted in apoptosis of the CD40~ subset, but proliferation of the CD40 positive subset. The possible relevance of this down-regulation of CD40 in relation to tolerance induction in response to self antigens will be discussed. BIOLOGICAL ROLE OF HUMAN IgM H E X M R S C Todd Hughey and Ronald B Corley, Department of Immunology, Dukeuniversity Medicalcenter, Durham, NC 27710 Secreted IgM is classically described as a pentamerlc molecule assembled from five H L> monomeric subunits disulfide-bonded together with an additional pobpeptide, the J chain However, studies in the mouse have clearly shown the exlstence of a second functional polymer form ofIgM, anIgM hexamer Surprisingly, these studies have shown that IgM hexamers never contain J cham and are capable of activating complement up to 20 times more efficiently than IgM pentamers This increased efficiency ofIgM hexamers in activatmg complement represents a potentially important mechanism by which low affinity IgM antibodies can increase their biological activity At thls time, however, the physiologic functions ofIgM hexamers remain unclear IgM hexamers could be beneficial, contributing to immune responses to antigens where clearance is greatly dependent on complement activation, such as the immune clearance of bacterial pathogens However, IgM hexamers could be deleterious due to their high efficiency in activating complement, particularly in IgM-mediated dlseases We are particularly interested in the biology of human IgM hexamers Monoclonal IgM antibodies and IgM autoantibodies obtained from immunodeficient patients and EBV transformed B cells have been screened for the presence of IgM hexamers A number of these samples contain two polymeric forms of secreted IgM Analysis of these two polymer types by SDS-PAGE and sucrose density gradients indicates the presence ofpentameric and hexameric IgM The identification of sources for both human IgM pentamers and hexamers has allowed us to begin analysis of these two molecules with respect to J chain content and the ability to bind to the polymeric Ig receptor Current work is also focused on comparing theability ofboth polymer forms to activate complement (Supported by NIH grant A131209) We have recently described tlie cloning of a novel lynipliocyte-specific G-protein-coupled receptor endowed with tlie typical hallmark of seven Iraiisiiieinbraiie-spanning regioiis, desigiiated BLRI. We report here the isolation of tlie hlrl gene. encoding the iiiurine homologue of human R L R I . We demonstrate that expression of blrl is restricted to certain differentiation stages of lymphoid and neuronal cell liiieages, i n p'micular. to mature B cells, atid to distinct cell layers of the cerebellum. Rlrl consists of two cxoiis encoding a protein of 374 amino acid iesidues which shows an overall lioiiiology of 83% to the human receptor. The rirst cxtiaccllular amino-teriiiiiial domain is less conserved with an identitiy of about 47%. In addition, comparison of the promoter region of the human aiid tlie muiine genes ievealed that the position of multiple transci iptioii lactor binding sites :ire niaiiilaiiied siiggestiiig ;I conrcrved regulation or the hlrl gene in both rpccies. Lllrl-specific ti-;inscripts we! e observed in secoiid:iry lyiiipliatic organs ;itid to a l e s w extent in brain of adult mice but not in other tissues. RNA irr .sill( hybridization localized blrl transciiption to primary follicles and to thc mantle zone of secondary rollicles. SCID inice in which inatuie B cell development i9 seveiely impaired exhibit il strongly reduced level of hlrl-specilic RNA in tlie spleen Activation of iesting splenocytes of N M R l inice Ict to [lowii-rcgiilati~)ii of hli-l cxpicssioii. Intercstiiigly, the hlrl gene is also expressed during late embryogenesir i n fetal liver and lwaiti In view o r the icin:iik:ihlc expicr\ion pattciii i i i llic B cell liiic;ige wc suggest that niiiriiie BL,R 1 may repreaciit a cytokinel iieuiopeptide ieceptor exerting regulatory functions on reciiculaling mature B lymphocytes. CD22 is a B cell-restricted transmembrane glycoprotein that has recently been shown to mediate heterotypic aggregation between B cells and other hemopoictic cells. Based on the developmental kinetics of CD22 expression, it is likely that this molecule plays a role in B cell activation. Studies have shown that cross-linking of CD22 decreases the threshold of activation for quiescent B cells. Moreover, expression of CD22 is required for signal transduction events that are initiated by antigen receptor (AgR) cross-linking. We have demonstrated that CD22 physically interacts with the B cell AgR, membrane immunoglohulin (n;Ig), as well as the protein tyrosine phosphatase (PTP), CD45. Thus, it appears that these receptors interact with one another in the membrane and may exist as a hetcrotrimeric complex. Additionally, both mIg and CD45 werc observed to regulate the tyrosine phosphorylation of CD22 via their associated protein tyrosine kinase and PTP activities, respectively. Crosslinking of either mIg or CD45 resulted in a rapid increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of CD22 (within 30 sec to 1 min). We further demonstrated that tyrosine phosphorylation of CD22 mediates its association with src homology 2 (SH2)-containing proteins including phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Thus, it appears as though CD22 is part of a multi-i-eceptor complex and that its accessory function in the B cell is regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation. Phosphoiylation of CD22 leads to the recruitment of signal transducing molecules containing SH2 domains that presumably associate with CD22 through binding to specific phosphotyrosine motifs. Finally, deletion of CD22 from a B lymphoma cell line using chemical mutagenesis and negative selection was observed to abrogate signal transduction via the AgR, further supporting the conclusion that CD22 fuiictions as an important accessory molecule in the B cell. Membrane IgD is co-expressed with IgM on the surface of mature B cells. Antigenic stimulation of surface IgD+ cells does not lead to increased IgD expression and antibody-secreting plasma cells no longer express surface IgD. The serum concentration of secreted IgD has been shown to vary over 100 fold between individuals, ranging from < 2 to 250 ugiml. It is known that IgD catabolism does not vary between individuals with low and high serum levels (Rogentine cr al J. Clin. Invest. 45. 1966), therefore differences must lie I n the rates of secretion of IgD. Two forms of IgD mRNA, encoding the secreted and membrane bound immunoglobulin, can be found during all stages of B cell differen tistion. Serum IgD concentrations were quantified in 15 normal donors using a radial diffusion assay. PBMCs were purified using ficoll gradients and the percentage of CD19+ and surface IgD+ B cells assayed by cytofluorometry. The fluorescence intensity of anti-IgD stained cells was used as a measure of relative levels of expression of surface IgD. The lack of correlation between serum IgD and number of IgD' B cells was confirmed (Fraser and Schur, Clin. Immunol. Imrnunopath. 19. 1981). In addition no correlation was found between serum IgD and the relative level of surface IgD expression. Current studies are examining the relative steady state levels of the two forms of delta mRNA in B cells from individuals with high and low serum IgD levels to elucidate the molecular basis for differences in IgD secretion. the predominantly used V, region in pre-B cells, but it is very rarely expressed in mature B cells. Recently, it has been shown that immunoglobulin p-chains, the heavy (H) chains of IgM, in pre-B cells must associate with two proteins, (A5 and VpreB), and that the formation of this complex is required for the development of pre-B cells into mature B cells. Based upon these findings, we contend that pre-B cells that express p-chains with V,81X regions are not activated to become mature B cells, because these p-chains do not associate with X5 and VpreB. I will test this model using a subclone of the pre-B cell line 18-81. This subclone (F) expresses p-chains with the V,81X region only in the cytoplasm but not on the cell surface. We also isolated a surface p-chain positive variant of F, FM10. We hypothesize that FMIO has acquired a mutation that allows surface expression of p in this cell line. Genetic and biochemical analysis of the surface p-negative clone, F, and the surface p-positive variant, FMIO, will be discussed. We have previously shown that mIgM, mIgD and mIgC are associated with similar heterodimers. Recently it has become evident that the isotype related differences between the heterodimers are posttranslationally defmed. In order to further investigate the architecture of the BCR, we biochemically analyzed the intermolecular interactions in mIgM, mIgD and mIgG complexes. Following disruption of the disulfide mediated intermolecular interactions, Iga was found no longer associated with IgS nor the mIgH chain. In contrast, the association between I@ and the mIgH chain was largely unaffected. These findings indicate that I@ primarily facilitates the interaction between the heterodimer and the mIgH chain. Iga may function in stabilizing this interaction andlor mediate the association with other membrane molecules. Several B-d specific transmembrane molecules (eg. CD19 and CD22) have been described to be associated with the BCR. CDS is an accesory molecule expressed on T cells, a subpopulation of normal B cells and characteristically on BCLL cells. On T cells CD5 bas been shown to be physically and functionally coupled to the TCRJCD3 complex. We found that CD5 is similarly associated with the BCR complex on normal and malignant B cells, and serves as substrate for BCR induced tyrosine kinase activity. These findings suggest that T and B cells use a similar mechanism to associate with and activate accesory molecules. Moreover, CDS' B cells have an exclusive potential to modulate antigen receptor mediated signals. Regulation a n d Function of bcl-2 D u r i n g B Cell Hume<istasis i n the central and prripheral B cell pmla is controlled by a cmtinous production of B cell prr'curstirs in the hone marrow, as well as by the rat" of survival and death of B cells. The high rate of cell death during B cell devclopment i s due, in part, t o n selection prticesa by which B cells that fail to display surface IgM or those that express antigen receptiirs fur self are clrrnally rliminated by aptrphrsis. The intracellular signals that control the survival of devrluping B cell> arc largely unknown. A clear candidate for such a role is the hcl-2 prrit[i-riiic[igi'ne, whuse pniduct priirnotea cell mrvival by inhibiting apoptirtic cell death. Thr physidijgical role of the endogenous Bcl-2 protein is unclear because its expression in develnpmg B cdls and its ahility ki modulate apoptusih are undetermined. We have atudicd in detail the exprrssion o f Bcl-2 during B rcll development by three-color flow cytiimetric analysis. Our results shown a btriking developmental regulation of the Bcl-2 protein in B lympliwytes. Bcl-2 is highly expressed in pro-B and mature B rellb hut d<i\viiregulntrd at the pre-B and immature B cell stages o f devvlopni<wt. Imp<irt.intly, CvprcssiGm < i f Bcl-2 perfcrtly <orrelatcs with s~~ccphbility to apoptosis mcdiated by dr*xamethasrinc in vivo. T.irgeting of Bcl-2 to prc-B cells and immaturt' B cella rescucd the cells from d c x . i m~~t h . i~i~n c -i i i~i i i i r~d apcq'toss. I n ordcr ti1 'ibbi'.b, Bcl-2 in the pnlcrss of iluii,il did<tioii ot st4-rc.ictivc imm.iturc B crll prccursors. nuiilatdl C57BL/h mice WUK injcctcd intrdpcritirncally with F(ah)z gcmt anti-mtrusc IgM puly< Ioml antihody which mimmics the delectiiin process. Two days hlhving iiilc,ction, therr 1va5 ,I selcctive cIimin.itiiin of IgM+lgD' immature B cells cxprcbsing low Ievelb of Bcl-2. 1ii conhast, Bcl-2111K11 IgM+lgD-immaturc B cells and IgM+IgD+ mdturc B cellb largely survived anIi-lgM treatment. Importantly, ovcrexpressiun 111 a bcl-2 tranbgcne in B~l -2~~'~ IgM+lgDimmature. B rellb failed t,! prwcnt thcir anti-lgM-induced cell death . Thchc rebulls strongly suggt'bl t h d t downregulation of BcI-2 rlt the prc-B and immature B cell5 stage5 facilit.itea appropriate selection of developing B cella following physiological c d l death signals. Yet, clonal deletion a t the immature B cell btdge hut not glucc~corticoid-induced apoptosis is independent (if Bcl-2 After o r during clonal selection, Bcl-2 is upregulated 111 mature B cells and meintams peripheral B cell mrvival. While NFKB is responsible for the induction of the intron enhancer, the 3' enhancer is controlled by a region that acts to repress mscriptiond activity. We have now identified a novel nuclear factor which binds to a site within this repressor region. The factor, which has tentatively been named KSF (kappa silencing factor), is lymphoid specific. It cannot be detected in cell types such as fibroblast, osteosarcoma, monocytes or myeloid cells. In lymphoid cells on the other hand, KSF exists in multiple forms. Slowly migrating complexes can be detected in pro-B cells, T cells and weakly in B cells, while a complex with high electrophoretic mobility is seen in pre-B cells and T cells. Importantly the high mobility form is downregulated upon LPS stimulation of pre-B cells, with 50% of the protein having disappeared after approx. 12 hrs. The tissue-distribution as well as the developmental regulation of KSF, especially of the high mobility from, is thus compatible with KSF performing a function as a transcriptional repressor. It is interesting to note that this complex is seen in those cell types that express the recombinase activating genes RAG1 and 2 (i.e. pre-B cells and cells of the T lineage) but nevertheless do not rearrange the K light chain gene, raising the possibility that KSF regulates the rearrangement process. Functional studies and further biochemical characterisation of KSF are currently under way. Previously, we showed that resting, mature memory B cells specific for cytochrome c (cyt) can be tolerized in splenic fragment cultures using polymerized cyt in the absence of T cell help. I t has been technically difficult to test whether newly arising memory B cells may be even more susceptible to tolerance induction than resting memory cells. For example, the very low frequency o f cyt-specific precursor cells has prevented our ability to observe memory B cells early in the response (prior to day 10). B y modifying the immunization protocol, i.e. first priming mice with OVA, followed 3 4 weeks later with an injection of cyt-OVA, i t is now possible to observe cyt-specific memory B cells in splenic fragment cultures as early as 3 days after injection with cyt-OVA, if not even earlier. Since primary cyt-specific B cells are not readily observed and re-exposure to cyt in v i m is required for A b production, the cyt-specific B cells activated in the cultures are memory cells. The memory B cells responding in the cultures 3 days after cyt-OVA challenge secrete primary mAb as indicated by: 1) the high frequency of the I g M isotype among these m A b (78%), 2) the low &ties o f the mAb compared to mAb obtained at later times in the response, and 3) similar affinities of the mAb to mAb from hybridomas, prepared 3 days after in vivo challenge with cyt-OVA, whose VH and VL genes maintain the germline sequence. The ability to observe memory B cells early in the response without the contamination of primary cells may allow this system to be used to address a number of questions regarding the development and maturation of memory B lymphocytes, in addition to the relative tolerance susceptibility of these cells at different stages in the immune response. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) we have identified several target sites for nuclear proteins in the murine immunoglobulin 3' a enhancer. Two of these sites, denoted olip H and oligo K, were shown by several criteria, including cell distribution and stimulation experiments, EMSA cross-competition studies and proteolytic clipping bandshift assays, to bind to the same protein, identical to the transcription factor BSAP (NF-HB, Su-BP). As shown by quantitative EMSA, me of these binding motifs (oligo H) bound BSAP with higher affinity (k,= 1.8 105) and formed a stable complex with BSAP in vitro, whereas the second binding site (oligo K) showed a weaker affinity for BSAP (k,= 7.3 104). Genomic footprinting with recombinant BSAP and a labelled 3a enhancer fragment identified two protected areas between nucleotides 664-680 (TGTTGAGCCACCCAT CC) and 771-786 (CATGGACCCCCAGTCC), respectively. To assess the possible functional role of these BSAP binding sites in the 3'a enhancer, we transiently transfected a construct containing a 314bp-3a enhancer fragment upstream of a luciferase reporter gene in MOPC-315 cells, a plasmocytoma line lacking BSAP. In these cells, co-transfection with a vector expressing recombinant BSAP led to significant reduction in the activity of the 3 ' a enhancer fragment. Conversely, in the mature B lymphoma cell line CH12,LX, a cell line which expresses BSAP and has a less active 3u enhancer, selective BSAP-downregulation by an anti-sense phosphorothioate-substituted oligonucleotide overlapping the translation start site of murine BSAP was sufficient to considerably upregulate 3a enhancer activity as were mutations of both binding sites that prevented binding of BSAP to the 3 ' a enhancer. Conclusions: Our findings thus suggest that the natural loss of BSAP expression in terminally differentiated plasma cells contributes to the activation of the murine immunoglobulin 3 a enhancer. Furthermore, the lack of BSAP expression in plasma cells might mediate high-rate immunoglobulin production by those cells. In mouse and man, haematopoietic stem cells can generate differentiated progeny of all haematopoietic lineages as well as having the potential for self renewal. As stem cells begin to differentiate to lineage committed progeny. a combination of characteristic cell surface markers identify stages of this developmental process along the various lineages. The earliest committed B cell progenitors so far defined are those that express the cell surface molecule CD43, have nuclear expression of Tdt, and express 6220. We have isolated a monoclonal antibody, AB8, which reacts with a subpopulation of mouse bone marrow and other tissues. These cells wexpress Fall 3, Pgp-I, transferrin receptor as well as high levels of M169 (HSA). Of the AB8+ only a subset of the population wexpress the CD43 antigen and a very low or undetectable levels of 6220, IgM, Gr-1, or CD3. Preliminary analysis of early neonatal tissues, spleen, liver, and peritoneal cavity, suggests that the percent of AB8+ cells detected by immunofluorescence analysis is initially high and decreases with advance of age. AB8+ cells sorted from the bone marrow did not give rise to granulocyte macrophage colonies, erythroid burst colonies or pluripotent colonies in Dexter type hritrp cultures. Also AB8+ bone marrow cells transplanted into irradiated scid mice led to the appearance of donor IgM in the serum followed by donor B cells in the scid host peripheral lymphoid organs. The preliminary data suggests that contained within the AB8+ population is a more immature lymphoid precursor cell than has been previously described. In order to learn more about the function of HSA, we have disrupted the HSA gene by homologous recombination. Mice homozygous for this mutation suwive and are fertile. They possess peripheral 3 and T-cells in normal numbers suggesting that HSA is not absolutely required for lymphopoiesis. Thymocyte subpopulations also appear normal. Changes were seen however, in the bone marrow. There was a 2-3 fold reduction in B-lymphocyte precursors, particularly in pre-B cells of the B220+,BPlhi stage. Results will b e presented from experiments which examine the functionality of lymphocytes in the HSA deficient mouse. is an immunosuppressant which exerts its effect by blocking the interleukin(lL)-Z-driven proliferation of T cells. However, it has been shown that the anti-proliferative effect of RPM is not restricted to T cells/lL-2: RPM inhibits the proliferative response of cells of various lineages to a variety of growth factors. RPM is thus considered a general inhibitor of growth factor-driven cell proliferation. Among the interleukins, IL-7 plays an essential role in 6-lymphopoiesis in the bone marrow. We could show that RPM also inhibits the IL-7-driven in-vitro proliferation of a stroma cell-dependent pre-B cell line. Therefore, we expected an adverse effect on 6-lymphopoiesis after in-vivo administration of RPM. Treatment of C57B116 mice for 9 or 27 consecutive days with an immunosuppressive dose of 50mg RPM per kg per day reduced the number of 6220positive/lgM-negative (pre-B) cells in the bone marrow to about 50% of the control; the frequency of mature B cells in spleen remained unaffected. In contrast to the effect on steady-state 6-lymphopoiesis, a 9-day treatment with 50mg RPM/kg/day completely suppressed development of pre-6 cells in regenerating bone marrow following treatment with 5-fluorouracil (5-FUI. Likewise, RPM inhibited the in-virro development of 6220-positive cells in long term bone marrow cell cultures. Considering that it takes about 8 -9 days for a committed 6-lymphoid cell to develop into a mature B cell (which then leaves the bone marrow), the effect of RPM on steady-state 6-lymphopoiesis is surprisingly small. In conclusion, RPM has a different effect on B-lymphopoiesis in a steady-state situation compared to a situation, as after 5-FU treatment, where development starts with the recruitment of normally quiescent stem cells. Either RPM is not a general inhibitor of growth factor-driven proliferation, or growth factor requirements are different in steady-state lymphopoiesis. Our results indicate that, within the J-C intron, at least two regions, other than the Ep enhancer, influence transgene expression. Regl, located directly downstream of the E p enhancer, is important for upregulation of transgene expression after LPS activation of splenocytes. Reg2, located within or downstream of the Sp switch region, is required for the high levels of expression normally observed in splenocytes of heavy chain transgenic mice. Our analyses demonstrate that the Ep enhancer region is not sufficient to provide normal expression of an immunoglobulin heavy chain transgene. When mature B lymphocytes, which express IgM and IgD on their surface, are activated by antigen and receive accessory signals, they switch to express downstream heavy chain constant region (CH) genes while maintaining the same expressed variable region domain. Antibody class switching is effected by a DNA recombination event called switch recombination, which occurs within or near 2 to 10 kb switch (S) regions containing tandemly repeated sequences located 5' of each CH gene, except C6. The means by which the DNA is cut, aligned and rejoined is unknown, as are the roles of several nuclear proteins that have been shown to bind to S regions. Switch recombination appears to be effected by an error-prone DNA synthesis event since the sequences surrounding the junctions have nucleotide substitutions, deletions and insertions. and the genes and proteins involved in switch recombination, we are developing plasmids that can undergo switch recombination. Results from an extensive series of experiments using transiently transfected plasmids indicate that they do not undergo switch recombination in a cell type specific manner nor do the sites of recombination appear to correlate with sites used in vivo, unless the use of other sites are selected against. Therefore, we have constructed plasmids that integrate, and which undergo switch recombination using the tandem repeat sequences at a high frequency and which appear to have cell type specificity. Plasmids with fragments containing transcription activator elements, i.e. the p intron enhancer and lg VH promoter and/or the germline C a promoter recombine more frequently than those that do not. These plasmids recombine more frequently in a B cell line that undergoes switching (1.29~) than in the J558L myeloma line, that does not undergo switching of its endogenous genes. In order to examine the DNA sequences, cell type specificity In these TcR+/RAG-I-/-mice Tcell development is skewed towards the CDB+ phenotype, however, a small percentage of CI)rlhigh/CD810w thymocytes could be detected suggesting that a "stochastic" rather than "instructive" mode operates during positive selection in these mice. Cell. Institute of Osaka University, Suita 556, Japan Immunoglobulin (Ig) class-switching, through which biological function of Ig is altered, is believed to be exerted by deletional recombinational event between unique repeatable sequences located at 5' portion of constant exon of IgH gene (Switching region :S). In vitro studies using anti-CD40 antibody or CD40 ligand and demonstration of deletions or mutations of CD40 ligand in patients with X-linked hyper IgM syndrome, in whom serum level of IgA, IgG or IgE is extremely diminished, have indicated that signals through CD40 expressed on B cells might induce a machinery of switching recombination ( S -S recombination). Since a clinical heterogenity exists in the hyper IgM patients, we asked whether or not there might be an intrinsic defect in B cells from patients with hyper IgM. In one acquired patient, antiLCD40 induced little B cell proliferation and the stimulation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) with anti-CD40 in the presence of IL-4 or IL-I0 failed to stimulate IgA, IgG or IgE synthesis. In two patients with an aquired form and suprisingly a X-linked hyper IgM syndrome, the incubation of PBMC with anti-CD40 in the presence of IL-10 did not cause an induction of IgG and IgA whereas IgM production was found. Moreover, little IgE synthesis was induced in response to anti-CD40 plus IL-4 by the patients' PBMC. Reverse Transcription-PCR showed that the expression of germline transcript of CE gene by the latter patient's PBMC in response to anti-CD40 plus IL-4 was found but the expression of its productive transcript was not. It was found that defect of S W S E recombination was a cause of failure of IgE secretion by Digestion Circularization PCR. The addition of IL-10 could restore its IgE synthesis by IL-4 plus anti-CD40-stimulated PBMC from the latter two patients but not from the former patient. These results indicate that defects of CD40-mediated signalling may exist in some patients with hyper IgM-syndrome. mice. These B cells express either V~l l and Vn9 or V~1 2 and Vn4, and cells of both types are represented about equally in the peritoneum These cells are extraordinarily restricted in VHCDIU, indicating that they are present in mice in such large numbers because of antigen driven clonal selection Selection of V~12-expressing B cells is evident at birth. In the neonatal liver two-thirds of the productive rearrangements encode V S D R 3 s that resemble those of PtC-specific B cells of the adult. This restriction is not evident in the day 18 fetal liver. We propose that this restriction is the result of positive selection; V~12-expressing B cells with VHCDIU of a particular length and sequence receive a positive selection signal and continue differentiation, whereas V~12-expressing B cells with different VHCDIU sequences do not receive a positive selection signal and consequently die. We have now examined v~1 2 -C D R 3 diversity in the adult bone marrow, spleen, and peritoneum and find that regardless of the JH gene segment rearranged, productive V~1 2 rearrangements have VHCDIU sequences indistinguishable from PtCspecific B cells. Since splenic B cells are predominantly B-2, the restriction imposed by positive selection of V~12-expressing B cells affects both B-1 and B-2 repertoires. Sorted IgMcells from adult bone marrow show the same restriction as unsorted bone marrow suggesting that selection has occurred at the pre-B cell stage when the H chain is complexed with surrogate L chain on the cell surface. Therefore, this selection appears to be based on the structure of the H chain and suggests that there is not a common ligand responsible for pre-B cell positive selection. Although alloreactivity has been extensively studied, the tine molecular specificity of alloreactive T cells for MHC alone or for MHC-peptide complexes remains controversial. To better characterize the role of peptide in alloreactivity and to identify peptides important in these responses, we developed a model system using the antigen processingdefective mutant cell line (.I74 x CEM)T2. Mouse class I1 MHC (I-A) genes were trdnsfected into T2, its phenotypically normal counterpart, T I , and mouse L cells. Immunoprecipitation and SDS-PAGE demonstrated that, as expected, T2 transfectants expressed only SDSunstable I-A; the other cells expressed both stable and unstable I-A conformers. Limiting dilution analyses of alloantigen-triggered. IL-2 producing, CD4+ T cell activation showed that the response to cells expressing only SDS-unsrable L A was markedly lower than the response to cells with SDS-stable I-A. Priming with normal allogeneic spleen cells increased the frequencies of T cells responding to stable but not unstable class I1 MHC. Priming to T 2 transfectants, in contrast, was either ineffective or induced a small increase in the number of antiLT2-I-A alloreactive precursors. Although T 2 transfectants constitutively express only SDS-unstable I-A. the addition of peptide E a 56-72 to T2-I-Ab transfectants generated SDS-stable I-A-peptide complexes on the cell surfxe as determined by immunoprecipitation with Y-Ae, an antibody specific for this MHC-peptide complex. Peptide-loaded T2-I-Ab cells were no more effective than untreated cells in stimulating primary allo responses. However, after priming with spleen cells that constitutively express this I-Ab-Ea peptide complex, limiting dilution analysis demonstrated an increase in the frequency of T cells that respond to E a 56-72-loaded T2-I-Ab but no change in the frequencies of T cells that respond to untreated T2-I-Ab or to the same cells loaded with other peptides. These studies not only demonstrate that the SDS-stable, peptide-containii~g conformer of class I1 MHC is the relevant ligand for alloreactive T cells but importantly indicate the presence of CD4+ alloreactive T cells specific for at least one such known, common I-Apeptide complex. Peptide-loaded T2-I-Ab cells are being used to clone alloreactive T cells with unique MHC-peptide specificities. We have previously demonstrated that total lymphoid irradiation (TLI) prevents the generation of XAb in concordant monkey to baboon cardiac XT. We now report studies on the effect of TLI in a discordant swine to baboon model. Recipients received 800 rads of TLI administered over four weeks prior to XT. Preformed antiswine XAb was adsorbed by perfusion of pig spleen or liver with recipient whole blood or plasma followed by heterotopic cervical cardiac XT. XAb levels were determined by complement-dependent cytotoxicity or flow cytomeby. Preformed XAb titers in naive baboons were variable, with both IgG and IgM ranging from 154 to >1:1000. TLI had no effect on the level of preformed XAb. Adsorption lowered but did not eliminate these XAb so the induced response is model was utilized. A transient increase in serum NOZ.+NO3levels was observed on days 11-12 post GvHD induction. NO synthesis by GvHD splenocytes in response to the mitogens ConA and LPS was greatly enhanced compared to control Fl mice. In addition, peritoneal macrophages from animals with GvHD become primed for NO synthesis in response to LPS. Administration of a 1% solution of the NO synthesis inhibitor, aminoguanidine (AG), in the drinking water of mice with GvHD resulted in statistically significant inhibition of the elevation of serum NOZ-fNO3-levels noted in GvHD animals that did not receive the inhibitor. Splenocytes obtained from GvHD animals that received AG demonstrated enhanced spontaneous proliferation as well as an enhanced response to ConA compared to splenocytes from GvHD animals that did not receive AG. Phenotyping of the splenocyte population for H2 antigen expression revealed that by week 3 post-GvHD induction, animals treated with AG contained 70% host cells and 30% donor cells. In contrast, in GvHD animals that did not receive AG, 50.80% of the splenocytes typed as donor cells. These results demonstrate that administration of an NO synthesis inhibitor during GvHD does not exacerbate the disease process by promoting donor anti-host responses. Rather, inhibition o f NO synthesis during GvHD seems to promote hematopoiesis and improve immune function of the host.  We analyzed the early entering T cells in biopsies from 4 allografted human hearts by specificity, function and phenotype. Biopsies were taken once in a week or two weeks in the first 3 months after transplantation. T cells were propagated in culture medium containing IL-2 and IL-4 (bulk cultures). The donor specific cytotoxicity of the T cells correlated with rejection reactions. T cells from two bulk cultures were cloned. About 7 0 9 of the T-cell clones were cytotoxic, all of which were CD8+ and donor-specific. Two to three bulk T cell cultures from each patient and all donor specific CTL clones were analyzed for the T cell receptor VB gene family expression at mRNA level. In all bulk cultures a biased usage of TCR VB gene families was observed, whereas the VB expression in the blood from the same patients showed a normal distribution. The cloned T cells expressed a limited number of TCR VB families. Sequence analysis of these CTL clones disclosed that some clones used the same VB, .DD, JB, CB gene segments and V-D-J junction reglon, indicating that they originated from the same precursor. We studied the T cell repertoire reconstitution and T cell activation after BMT, and focused our attention on patients developing GvHD. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were obtained from the HLA matched sibling donors and the thalassaemic patients before BMT, and at day 30, 60 and 180 after BMT.-This study was performed by four colour immunofluorescence analysis, using a panel of 24 monoclonal antibodies, whose specificities were directed at the TCR and activation markers. Following treatment 3 patients had marked preferential expansion of a single Vp in the CD8+ subpopulation (Vp2 in one donor, and Vp8 in the other two). In 2 of these patients this expansion was related to the development of an acute or chronic severe Graft versus Host Disease (GvHD). In these two patients we also observed a sizable and significant increase of CD3+ CD4-CD8-ap+ T cells after BMT. After BMT nearly all the T cells, both CD4+ and CD8+, express the CD45RO isoform, other activation markers, such as CD25, CD54, CD69 and HLA-DR. presented a less consistent and homogenous profile of expression. However the most consistent increases were observed in the patients developing GvHD. These overexpressed markers may become a suitable target to control GvHD. Histocompatibility wasexamined by apposing branches of the red beard sponge. Most (1 14/116)individuals areincompatible, with rejection first evident at about two hours when ayellow line contrasting wlth the bright orange tissue becomes visible along the boundary of contact. The line represents a pus-like accumulation of "gray cells", a wandering, multigranular cell type of previously unknown function. Within 3 days an encapsulation-like reaction leads to the formation of a collagenous barrier between the incompatible tissues. Cytotoxic processes are not evident and the response occurs upon both allogeneic and xenogeneic contact. The rapid accumulation of gray cells suggests cellular recognition and activation reactions inducing the release ol'cytokine(s). Only small numbers of cells are required smce indivdudl-bprcilic qgrzg'itza, reconstituted from about 5 x 10' randomly mixed, dissociated cells including afew hundred gray cells, alsocarry out immediate rejection evidenced by gray cell accumulation. Theintimate involvement of the gray cells, one ofthe 12 or so cell types of the sponge, in the rejection procebs suggests that they may besponge immunocytes. Rapid cellular reactions which can determine individual specificity without prior sensitization raises fundamental questions concerning the conceptual basis of invertebrate immune recognition. Bui-net [NATURE (1971) Iy6, 2301 sugsested that invertebrate immune specificity was baaed on the abilit) ofimmunocytes to recognize self asselfand reject all foreign cells becaubc they do not display the self marker. How do immunocytes learn to specifically recognize only the histocompatibility marker allotypes the individual has inherited from the many polymorphic allotypes it might have inherited. The problem is Formally similar to self-restriction in Tcell biology and Isuggest that positive selection may haveevolved forself recognition in invertebrates and only later have been co-op~rd by Tcells In the mouse, genes involved in the expression of the male-specific minor H antigen, H-Y (~ya), spermatogenesis (spy), primary sex determination (sry), zinc finger containing genes (Zfy-1, Zfy-2) and a Ylinked ubiquitin activating homologue ( U h l y -1 ) , have been mapped to the short arm of the Y chromosome. In particular, Hya and Spy, Zfy-2 and Uhely-1 have be& sub-localized to a deletion interval defined by Sxr". H-Yzttimulates T cell responses and several class I and class I1 restricted T cell clones have been raised against different H-Y epitopes. chromosomal jnactivation data show that these H-Y epitopes can be expressed independently. Here, we have transfected several overlapping cosmid clones spanning a small region of the Sxr" deletion into antigen presenting cells with the appropriate MHC restriction element. We have examined Che transfectants for expression of different H-Y epitopes and have identified cosmids that appear to specifically encode one or more H-Y epitopes. Further results on the identification of specific sequences that encode H-Y epitopes will be presented. B6 T-cells primed with spleen cells from the mouse B6.C-H-Sc, congenic for a single minor H antigen from Balb.B, did not recognize any of the above mentioned fractions, but a new fraction in the Ba1b.B eluate, nr 20. This fraction was not recognized by B6 T-cells primed with Balb.B, although Ba1b.B cells apparently contain this antigen. This fraction seem to contain a peptide representing a dominated/ cryptic minor histocompatibilty antigen, which fails to elicit an immune response when other stronger antigens are present, but that is immunogenic when present alone. mechanisms for immunodominance , and also to further characterize the proteins that constitute minor histocompatibility antigens. Nikolic-Zugic, Immuno~ogy Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10021. Programed cell death (apoptosis) eliminates a large number of cells during thymocyte development. These cells are either potentially autoreactive and are therefore clonally eliminated OK die of neglect due to a lack of positive selection. During clonal elimination, TcR-generated, Ca"mediated signals lead to the activation of the Ca*dependent endogenous endonuclease and subsequent oligonucleosomal DNA fragmentation. The signaling events mediating this process are poorly understood. We investigated the reactivity of early precursor-containing thymocytes to Ca*-induced signals, and discovered a breakpoint in their sensitivity to calcium-mediated cell death (CXD) . CD25+ CD8-4-TcR-(triple-negative, TN) thymocytes stimulated with a calcium ionophore maintain their viability and precursor activity. By contrast, their immediate progeny, CD25-CD810 410TcR10 (triple-low, TL) cells react to calcium elevation by abrogation of precursor activity and apoptotic cell death. This developmental difference is specific for CMCD, since both CD25+TN and CD25-TL cells are susceptible to steroid-induced apoptosis. The presence of bcl-2 mRNA correlates directly to the resistance of CblCD -CD25+TN cells express it and CD25-TL cells do not. These experiments show that thymocytes become sensitive to Cawinduced apoptosis as soon as they begin to express molecules that mediate antigen-recognition, and suggest that a concomitant downregulation of bcl-2 may mediate this phenomenon. Further investigation of the CMCD revealed the presence of two putative signaling pathways in distinct thymocyte subsets. These pathways are differentially sensitive to cyclosporin A. At present, we are studying the mechanism of the CsA-dependent pathway in the bcl-2' thymocyte subsets. THYMOCYTES, Sofija Andjelic, Nada Jain and Janko Constitutive bcl-2 expression in T lymphocytes decreases their susceptibility to apoptosis while the absence of bcl-2 expression increases their susceptibility to apoptosis (I, 2,3) . Therefore, we decided to further investigate the regulation of bcl-2 expression in postthymic T cells and to investigate how that expression affects their susceptibility to apoptosis. Murine splenic T cells have relatively high levels of bcl-2 compared to thymocytes, and about 50% remain viable in culture for over 4 days without activation. However, over the 4 days, there is a gradual decline in cell numbers by apoptosis without any change in the overall bcl-2 levels as determined by immunoblotting. Concanavalin A (Con A) activated splenic T cells undergo IL-2 dependent proliferation. Con A alone without IL-2 results in all the cells undergoing apoptosis within 2 days. There is a direct correlation between the dose of IL-2 supplied to Con A activated T cells and the level of bcl-2. With high levels of IL-2 (100 unitdrnl) for 5 days, the bcl-2 reaches a maximum of 3 fold above pre-activation levels. However, when the 1L-2 is withdrawn from these cells, there is rapid death by apoptosis resulting in about 80% cell death by 24 hours. Again, the overall level of bc-2 remains unchanged. Therefore, the overall level of bcl-2 in post-thymic T cells does not correlate with their susceptibility to apoptosis as measured by their rate of apoptosis with time in culture. Immunostaining and flow cytomeay shows that there is a heterogeneous expression of bcl-2 at 2-4 days after Con A plus IL-2 activation. By 5 days after activation with Con A plus high 1L-2, there is a very homogeneous population of cells with high bcl-2 expression. The presence of the low bcl-2 expressing cells within the first 2-4 days after activation correlates with the presence of an apoptotic population. Therefore, within the first few days of Con A activation, there are cells with low levels of bcl-2 that undergo apoptosis spontaneously in culture even in the presence of IL-2. At all times after activation, the cells with high or low levels of bcl-2 remain susceptible to apoptosis after Il-2 withdrawal. We have analyzed the T cell response to a viral antigen h a t differs from a self peptide by a single conservative amino acid interchange. Transgenic mice that express the influenza virus A/PR/8/34 hemagglutinin (PR8 HA) as a neo-self antigen in the thymus (HA Tg mice) were immunized or infected with a mutant influenza virus 6 1 13) that contains an Arg to Lys interchange in the PR3 Th determinant site 1. The majority of the T cell hybridomas isolated from BALB/c mice in response to K113 react equally well with the native site I detemnant, and many use a characteristic VufVp gene segment combmation. In contrast. most of the hybridomas isolated from HA Tg mice in response to Kl13 show undetectable reactivity with the neo-self site 1, and the characteristic VufVp gene segment combination is not used. Indeed, many highly diverse and distinct TCRs were used by the KII3-specific hybridomas from HA Tg mice. Therefore, both the specificity and :he geneecs af me :esponse to K113 in the FIA Tg mice were altered by tolerance to the neo-self site 1 determinant. Interestingly, a few of the K113-specific hybridomas from HA Tg mice can clearly react with the neo-self site 1. in one case requiring only a 20-fold higher dose of the self antigen than K113 to achieve halfmaximal JL-3 secretion. However, these hybridomas generate nearly undetectable levels of IL-2 in response to the neo-self site 1, even though they produce IL-2 in response to K113. These T cells appear to have evaded negative selection because they received only a partial activation signal in response to self. Identification of genes induced during clonal deletion of immature T cells in the thymus , Jane-Won Choi, and Yongwon Choi, Howard Hughes Medical Instate, The Rockefeller University. 1230 York Av., New York, NY10021. During T cell development, immature T cells are clonally deleted in the thymus upon interaction with self antigen/major histocompatibility complexes. Molecular mechanisms involved in deletion process of immature T cells is not clear except that cells are going through apoptosis. To understand how T cell receptor engagement in immature T cells induce apoptosis and clonal deletion, we have isolated several cDNA clones of which expression is differentially controlled during this process. By differential display PCR, we have isolated 4 genes which are specifically induced upon TCR engagement of immature thymocytes. Two of these cDNA clones are already identified genes whose expression is controlled by either serum factors or UV. We have also identified 2 genes which are specifically down-regulated during this period. The role of these genes during T cell development is currently being investigated. The anergic state of freshly isolated MRL-Ipr (Ipr) peripheral CD4-8-T cells is manifest primarily as an inability to produce IL2 in response to antigenic or mitogenic stimulation. This stands in contrast to intact receptor-mediated early signalling events, such as IP, generation and a normal calcium flux. We therefore sought to analyze the activation state of the IL2 promoter in freshly isolated as well as stimulated Ipr CD4-8-T cells. The IL2 promoter contains several conserved regions which mediate transcriptional regulation, including AP-1, NFIL (Oct), and NF-KB sites. The NFAT and CD28RE sites appear unique to the IL2 gene and play a pivotal role in activation of the IL2 gene under conditions of physiological stimulation. The NFIL, NF-KB, and CD28RE sites appear to be regulated normally in Ipr CD4-8-T cells upon stimulation in the presence of mitogens and anti-CD28 mAb, as assessed by gel-mobility shift assays. However, AP-I expression is constitutively elevated in these cells, and cannot be induced to higher levels upon stimulation. Furthermore, nuclear extracts from freshly isolated as well as stimulated fpr CD4-8-T cells display a novel NFAT-site specific binding activity, which correlates with their anergic slate. This binding activity is not detectable in extracts from normal mouse T lymphocytes. Culturing lpr CD4-8-T cells in the presence of mitogens, anti-CD28 mAb, and an exogenous source of IL2 induces cell cycling and results in acquisition of functional capacity in ternis of ability to proliferate and produce IL2 upon repeat stimulation Analysis of nuclear extracts from cultured (i.e., functional) Ipr CD4-8-T cells reveals normal regulation of the IL2 promoter at the NFAT site. The abnormal expression of AP-1 and NFAT may therefore be secondary to thefas mutation in these mice, but appear to play a primary role in maintaining the inert state of lpr CD4-8-7' cells. with 10 or 100 pg Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B (SEB) and, at different time intervals, their thymocytes were analyzed for the V08+ and V010+ TCR distributions in the four CD4/CD8 cell subsets by three colour flow cytometry. SEB induces significant modifications only in single positive (CD4+8-and CD4-8+) V08+ thymocytes. At day 2 after SEB injection, both the percentage and absolute number of CD4-8+VB8+ cells are increased while those of CD4+8-V08+ cells are reduced, as compared to PBS-injected controls. At day 3, also the CD4-8+V08+ cells are reduced under control values. Results from overnight cultures of thymocytes from SEB-injected mice at day 2 suggest that reduction in the percent of CD4+8-VR8+ cells may be due to intrathymic death whereas the decrease in the percent of CD4-8+V08+ cells may be due to migration to the periphery. Thymocytes from SEB-injected mice were also evaluated, at different time intervals, for their ability to proliferate in vitro upon stimulation by SEB or SEA. The mitotic responses appear to be correlated with the percentages of CD4+8-and CD4-8+ cells, expressing either V08 or V010, in culture. In conclusion, the present results demonstrate, at variance with what has previously been found for peripheral I mphocytes, a different behaviour of CD4+8-V08+ and lD4-8+V08+ thymocytes in response to SEB injection. VpSi T cells are deleted intrathymically in I-E+Mtv-9+ mice, and are more highly represented in CD8+ relative to CD4+ peripheral T cells. Our previous studies have shown that CD4+Vp5+ T cells are slowly depleted in the lymphoid periphery of Mtv-6-9+I-E-(B6) nontransgenic and Vp5 transgenic mice. Prior to depletion, these CD4+ cells are activated and then rendered anergic to signals through their TCR. We have recently found that in Mtv-6+9+ I-E-(B6 x BXD15)Fl mice, both CD4+Vp5+ and CD8+Vp5+ cells are subject to peripheral deletion, such that V 5 transgenic mice bred onto this genetic background are severely jepleted of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells by 5-6 months of age. Mtv-6+9+V 5 transgenic mice possess a striking population of CDE1OWVp5YUPperipheral T cells. These CD8loW cells can be detected in the penpheral blood and spleen, but not in lymph nodes from the same animals. These cells also appear in the population of CDE+VpS+ cells in nontransgenic F1 mice, indicating that their occurrence is not transgene-dependent. Furthermore, CD8'ow cells are not present in the thymus, and are found in thymectomized FI mice, suggesting that the signal leading to the downregulation of CD8 is probably delivered in the lymphoid periphery. The CDlIowV S O W cells express uniformly high levels of the memory cell marker dD44, high levels of VLA-4, and low levels of L-selectin (MEL-l4), indicating their prior activation. However, the CD8IoW population is not enriched for blasts, as these cells are smaller than CDghigh cells from the same animals. We have assessed the functional ca abilities of CDE1oW cells by plating FACS-sorted CD81W and CD8higRcells from F1 PBL or spleen in limiting dilution to determine CTL precursor frequency. These analyses have revealed that, compared to the CD8hkh compartment, there is a severe reduction in the number of alloreactive CTL precursors present in the CDEtoW population. However, CDE1ow splenccytes freshly isolated from the FI mice do not exhibit the internucleosomal DNA fragmentation that is indicative of apoptosis. Thus, we have identified what seems to be an intermediate population of T cells targeted for peripheral deletion which, although functionally compromised, have not yet undergone programmed cell death. Thymic deletion of endogenous superantigen 1-esponsive thyinocytes is rarely a complete process, the reactive subsets (defined by TCR beta chain expression) being diminished in relative percentage of the peripheral population rather than totally eliminated. The remaining cells may express TCRs which have only low affinity for the particular vSAG and hence may simply not be subject to thymic deletion or their presence may reflect an inefficiency in the procesa of superantigen dependent deletion. In order to diTtinguish between these alternatives a TCR transgenic was produced utilising the TCR from a T cell clone derived from the non-deleted V p l 1 T cell pool present i n the vSAG-8+.-9+ CBA mouse strain. The CD8+ T cell clone C6 expresses Vp 11 and V a 8 and recognises H-Y in the context of Kk. Male CBA mice transgenic for the C6 TCR a and p chain genes exhibit very small thymi which lack the CD4, CD8 single and double positive Vp 11 positive populations. Female CBA mice showed thymic deletion of the single positive populations. In the periphery, however, substantial inumbers of V p 1 1 positive cell, are found in females. E.1 i,iw, these cells are initially unresponsive to H-Y, but on in \pin-o culture they respond well to H-Y. These results suggest the C6 T cell receptor does have reactivity to vSAG -X; 9 but apparent deletion of the single positive thymic subsets does not pi-event export to the periphery. Extrapolation to deletion of V p subsets by endogenous superaantigens suggests the iesidual peripheral pools do have reactivity but a stochastic aspect of thymic deletion operates which makes the process inefficient. By in vivo priming and in vitro restimulation with allogeneic cells it could be shown that CDB+ TCR ap+ CTL could be generated from p2m deficient (H-2b) mice. In contrast to CTL from the pgm+ littermates they were found to lack tolerance for self H-2 expressed in P*m+ cells. This additional specificity of the p2m deficient CTL was distributed also at the single cell level, since the two specificities competed for eachother in cold target competition experiments. The results could not be attributed to specific crossreactivity between H-2b and allogeneic H-2 since 1) It never observed using p2mt CTL, 2) Killing of H-2b expressing cells was performed by p2m deficient CTL generated against several different stimulators. It could be shown by modulating the H-2b expression on RMA-S cells that different ligand densities of self H-2b could modulate sensitivity to p2m deficient CTL. Furthermore, P2m deficient CTL specific could also be generated in primary MLC, i.e. without in vivo priming, but only when stimulated with H-2 syngeneic, H-2b expressing cells. We believe that these results show a general bias for self H-2b, among the CTL in the p2m deficient mice. This is consistent with model that low levels of free heavy chains in the p2m deficient mice mediate T cell selection, and that the "selection window" is shifted to fit very low densities of MHC class I, which would result in a T cell repertoire that is reactive against H-2b when expressed at normal density. The results suggest a role for MHC class I ligand density in T cell selection. clones. This has been interpreted as an indication that the delivery of one signal was sufficient to activate T cell hybrids, while an additional signal(s) was required for the activation of T cell clones (Schwartz 1990). Fixed thymic epithelial cells were tested for their capacity to present superantigens and induce the deletion of CD4'CDS' thymocytes bearing the appropriate TcR Vp elements. It was found that these fixed APCs strongly deleted CD4+CD8' thymocytes from T~R V~1 1 . 1~3 transgenic mice in the presence of Staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA). This observation suggests that no active role from the APC was needed to mediate SAG-induced thymocyte deletion. The capacity of purified MHC class I1 molecules immobilized on a solid surface to present SEA and induce the deletion of thymocytes from T~R V~l l . 1~3 transgenic mice support this notion. These data indicate that one signal might be sufficient to trigger the deletion of thymocytes with SAG. Christopher C Goodnow, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. Transgenic mice carrying a rearranged immunoglobulin (Ig) gene encoding the heavy (H) chain of a lysozyme-specific antibody were used to examine the effect of antigen binding affinity on elimination of self-reactive B cells. In H chain transgenic mice, B cells expressed surface IgM and IgD composed of lysozyme-specific H chains and many different possible light (L) chains from endogenous L chain genes. Immunofluorescent staining and flow cytometry revealed a distinct subset comprising approximately one percent of spleen B cells that bound lysozyme with a high affinity (relative Kd -10-9 M) comparable to the original lysozyme-specific antibody. Additional subsets accounting for a total of 5-6 lo of spleen B cells bound lysozyme more weakly, with the weakest exhibiting a relative Kd of approximately M. When the various B cell subpopulations were allowed to develop in animals expressing lysozyme as a membrane-bound antigen on autologous cells, both low and high affinity lysozyme-binding B cells were undetectable in peripheral lymphoid organs. These findings demonstrate the efficacy with which low affinity self-reactive B cells can be eliminated in vivo. consistent with the notion that this cellular mechanism accomts for the absence of natural IgM antibodies against self antigens on the surface of blood cells. The data also illustrate the potential use of Ig transgenic mice for analyzing and selecting novel receptor-ligand interactions. Because autoantibodies can cause and exacerbate disease, we have been analyzing the extent of self-tolerance in the B-cell compartment. Autospecific B lymphocytes are subject to negative regulation through the complementary, and, perhaps, partially overlapping mechanisms of deletion and functional inactivation. We have observed deletion of autoreactive B cells specific for class I antigens in mice transgenic for genes encoding the IgM and IgD forms of the heavy and light chains of an anti-Kk antibody, 3-83. In the absence of self antigens to which the 3-83 antibody reacts, the B-cells in these mice are virtually monoclonal, with >95% bearing the 3-83 specificity. By contrast, in the presence of H-2Kk the autoreactive clone is completely eliminated from the peripheral lymphoid tissues. To analyze the sensitivity of this self-tolerance mechanism to antigen-antibody affinity, we have screened the affinity of the 3-83 antibody for different allelic forms of H-2K and found the following hierarchy of binding: Kk (Ka -1O8)>>Kb>Kbm8>Kbm3. We then inmoduced the various allelic forms of K to our trangenic mice by breeding and analyzed the extent of B-cell deletion. Remarkably, in all cases the autoreactive B-cells were apparently completely deleted in all the mice tested. We conclude that in normal individuals self-tolerance in the B-cell compartment is remarkably sensitive, at least for cell surface autoantigens. Promoters from a-lactalbumin (a milk protein gene, KAL mice), Pglobin (KP mice) and CD2 (CD2Kb mice) genes were used to drive expression of the H-2Kb MHC class I gene in transgenic mice. By mating these mice to T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic mice we have studied the effect of limited expression of self H-2Kb molecules on selection processes in the thymus. Three different TCR transgenic mice have been used to date; two carry TCR genes from H-2Kb specific, CD8 dependent or CD8 independent CTL clones and another carries TCR genes which confer H-2Ld specificity but which are subject to H-2Kb dependent positive selection in the thymus. Our studies indicate that tolerance can be induced in the thymus even when self MHC class I expression on thymic cells is very low (KAL mice) and that deletion of self reactive (TCR+) thymocytes occurs late in thymocyte development and is not totally effective when few thymic cells express self MHC (KAL and KP mice). In contrast, thymocytes from CD2Kb are eliminated at an early developmental stage prior to differentiation into CD4+CD8+ thymocytes when thymocytes are the only cells expressing self MHC class I molecules in the thymus, although this does not prevent the accumulation of large numbers of functionally unresponsive TCR+CD4-CD8-T cells in the peripheral lymph nodes of such mice (CD2Kb mice). We have also shown that positive selection fails to take place in KAL and CD2Kb mice despite the fact that thymocytes express relatively high levels of H-2Kb in CD2Kb mice. This suggests that thymocytes are unable to affect thymocyte selection. However, positive selection does take place in KP mice. We are investigating which cell types from these mice are responsible for positive selection. We interpret this to mean that light chains which contribute to DNA binding are replaced by light chains that, with 3H9, do not bind DNA. To assess receptor editing as a mechanism of tolerance in the K locus, we are characterizing B cells from 3H9 transgenic animals which are hemizygous for a x locus deletion generated by gene targeting (Chen, J. et. al.). These x hemizygotes (3H9kdeYwt) are useful for studying K editing because clones with multiple K rearrangements must have undergone successive K rearrangement, as opposed to a non-productive rearrangement on the other K allele. A prediction of K editing is that the frequency of J K~ usage in 3H9kdeYwt hybridomas will be reduced because secondary K rearrangement requires the removal of JKI by deletional or inversional recombination to downstream JK segments. We in fact observe a reduced frequency of J K~ rearrangements, consistent with receptor editing by sequential x locus rearrangements (or with selection acting upon particular VX-JK combinations). chain transgenic mice which are homozygous for the k locus deletion (3H9kdeYkdel). Because Vhl and V U combined with the 3H9 heavy chain give rise to anti-DNA antibodies, a 3H9kdeYkdel animal is left with a very limited system in which to maintain self tolerance. The frequencies of Vhl and Vh2 rearrangement among splenic B cell hybridomas in 3H9lkdeYkdel are reduced by 75% and the fieequency of clones with rearrangements to V;lx is increased 5 tol0-fold compared to nontransgenic kdeYkdel animals. As successive rearrangements to Vlx do not inactivate Vhl or VU, the consequence of light chain editing in 3H9kdeYkdel is failed allelic exclusion at h. Therefore we are assessing the functional status of h rearrangements in 3H9kdeYkdel clones which harbor multiple h rearrangements. To assess receptor editing in the 1 locus, we are studying 3H9 heavy This pattern of expresion correlated well with further studies which showed that Vp3 cells, normally deleted by Mtv-6, were effectively deleted in organ cultures when DC were present but not in reaggregate cultures where the only MHC class IIc cells were purified epithelial cells. On the other hand, Vpl1' cells were not effectively deleted in organ cultures, perphaps refecting the absence of Mh-8/9 expression in DC. Our study suggest the influence Mtv's have on shaping the T-cell repertoire not only depend upon availability within the particular strain hut also on their tissue specific pattern of expression in relation to MHC class I1 which is necessary for the presentation of these superantigens.  When developing thymocytes bearing particular Vp elements within their T cell receptor interact with endogenous viral superantigens (vSAGs) in the thymus, they undergo negative selection. Thus, mice canying endogenous vSAGs are characterized by the absence of these reactive Vp bearing T cells in their periphery. In order to study the factors that affect the process of negative selection, we have used two strains of mice in which the mouse mammary tumor virus (Mtv)-1 or -6 genes encoding VSAG-1 or -6 are expressed singly on a BIO.BR background. While the amino acid sequences of VSAG-1 and -6 have been shown to be identical, the reactive Vp3+ thymocytes are deleted to different extents. This reflects the peripheral phenotype: BlO.BR-Mtv-1 mice have approximately 1% of their total peripheral T cells bearing the Vp3 element, while B1O.BR-Mtv-6 mice have virtually none (1.Exp.Med. (1992) 175:41) . Our studies show that the developmental stage at which Vp3+ thymocytes are deleted from B1O.BR-Mtv-6 mice is earlier than that of B1O.BR-Mtv-1 mice. In addition, the two strains have different time courses of deletion. Using RNase protection assays, we find that a distinct hierarchy of vSAG mRNA expression exists. For example, adult B1O.BR-Mtv-6 animals have a higher level of vSAG expression in thymus compared to B1O.BR-Mtv-1 mice. We therefore conclude that, in this system, a higher level of vSAG mRNA expression correlates with a more complete deletion of reactive thymocytes. Quantitative PCR will be used to delineate the cell types involved in tolerance induction to these endogenous vSAGs. Negative selection of h e T cell repertoire in the thymus reflects contact of immature thymocytes with bone marrow (BM) derived cells. Whether thymic epithelial cells (TEC) contribute to tolerance is controversial. BM ch-ieras and TG mice for MHC molecules exclusively present in the thymic epithelium accepted tolerogen expressing skin graft but mounted in vitro tolerogen specific CTL and proliferalive responses in the presence of IL2 These in vitro responses might be directed against peptides derived f?om proteins present in the peripheral APC but not in the TEC. The best way to define the tolerogenic capacity of TEC would be to study whether TG mice exprcssing a foreign protein in the thymic epithelium can mount a proliferative and a CTL response against this protein. That is why we have examined the state of tolerance toward 0-galactosidase (pal) peptides expressed p-gal in the nucleus of medullary TEC, cutaneous epithelial cells and Purkinje cells. Our results have shown that TG p-gal mice did not develop a jl-gal specific CTL response even of the presence of exogenous tL2, in contrast, they developped a weak jl-gal specific proliferative response when high doses of 8-gal were used for in vifro stimulation, this partial reactivity was completely restored in the presence of exogenous IL2 The tolerance to 8-gal was due to the B-gal' medullary TEC, TG P-gal thymus grafted nude mice failed to niount an anti-P-gal CTL response wWe they mounted a weak anti-D-gal proliferative response. These results clearly show that TEC induce a complete tolerance toward the p-gal peptides presented by M H C class I molecules and a partial tolerance toward p-gal peptides presented by MHC class I1 molecules This partial tolerance could bc explaned by the hypothesis that processing of a nuclear protein, such as the p-gal, by the endogenous pathway give rise to a number of MHC class 1Ii peptides that is su5cient to lolerize the high affinity but not the low affinity p-gal specific T helper cells. We are actually studying this hypothesis in our laboratory complexed with MHC claa I and class II molecules in a H-2 % mouse that It has been suggested that the immunosupressant cyclosporin A (CsA) interferes with T cell ontogeny as evidenced by the appearance of graft versus host (GVHD) disease and organspecific autoimmunity after cessation of CsA treatment. Previous studies have shown that thymocytes from mice treated with CsA for a short time period were made resistant to the induction of apoptosis by anti-CD3. In some model systems clonal deletion of T cells bearing VLI elements reactive to endogenous superantigens escaped clonal deletion after CsA treatment, however, other reports investigating different VR elements were unable to c o n f i i these findings. Therefore, it is still unclear as to how CsA interferes with negative selection. Using T cell receptor (TCR) transgenic mice specific for pigeon cytochrome c (PCC), we find that short term treatment with CsA did not prevent clonal deletion in the adult by administration of soluble PCC or SEA superantigen. In contrast, long term treatment with CsA deleted 80% of the CD4+CD8+ (DP) thymocytes. The remaining D P could not be deleted by soluble PCC. Surprisingly, these remaining cells that escaped clonal deletion had downregulated their transgenic TCR. Other studies have shown that TCR downmodulation may represent a reversible process. Thus, self-reactive T cells can escape clonal deletion in CsA-treated mice by TCR downmodulation and may give rise to a pool of potentially self-reactive T cells by reexpression of their TCR. We are interested in defining how self tolerance is established among developing thymocytes that recognize different determinants generated from the same self antigen. To address this issue, we have generated transgenic mice that express the influenza virus A/PR/8/34 hemagglutinin (PR8 HA) as a defined self antigen under control of the SV40 early region promoter/enhancer (HA Tg mice). These mice express the HA in the thymus (and also the spleen and kidney). Previous studies have identified eight CD4+ T cell determinants in the response of BXLB/c mice to the PR8 HA. Of these, the majority of HA-specific T cells from BALB/c mice are directed to two determinants, termed Site 1 (IEd-restricted, residues 110-119) and Site 2 (IAd-restricted, residues 126-1381, In order to evaluate how these determinants are recognized as self antigens, normal BALB/c and HA Tg mice were infected with PR8 virus and immune lymph node cells were expanded in ziitro in response to GST fusion proteins containing the Site 1 and Site 2 determinants. T cell hybridomas were generated and analyzed for their specificity for Site 1 or Site 2. Site 1-and Site 2-specific hybridomas were isolated from normal BALB/c mice (5.5+1% and 2025% of total hybridomas, respectively). In the HA Tg mice, Site 2-specific hybridomas were readily isolated, although at a lower frequency than in normal BALB/c mice (1.2+0.4% of total hybridomas). By contrast, no Site I-specific hybridomas have been isolated from HA Tg mice. These findings suggest that the HA Tg mice may differ in their level of tolerance to these major T cell determinants, such that T cells that are directed to Site 2 but not Site 1 can be induced by infection with PR8 virus. We are currently evaluating factors that could account for differences in how these two determinants are recognized as self antigens. V 509 INDUCTION OF THYMIC AND PERIPHERAL T CELL  TOLERANCE BY A COGNATE PEPTIDE IN CLASS I  RESTRICTED T CELL RECEPTOR TRANSGENIC MICE  G . Soldevila, T. Geiger and R.A. Flavell. Section of Immunobiology. Yale University School of Medicine. New Haven, CT 06510. There IS evidence that peripheral antigens can travel to the thymus and can be presented by Class I1 molecules inducing in vivo apoptosis of immature thymocytes bearing a class 11 restricted TCR specific for this antigen. However, it is not yet clear what the effect is of peripheral antigens that are presented by Class I and recognized by Class I restricted T lymphocytes. We have used a TCR transgenic mouse whose T cells recognize an antigenic peptide of SV40 large T antigen in the context of Class I molecule Kk to study in vivo the effect of peripheral antigens in the induction of T cell tolerance. A 9mer peptide of the SV40 large T antigen protein (Aa 560-568). an lamer antigenic peptide (Aa 559.576). the native SV40 large T ag, and fusion protein containing the SV40 antigenic epitope or PBS were administered intraperitoneally daily for up to 6 days. Thymocytes and peripheral lymphocytes were harvested at day 4 and 7 and total cell number was evaluated and Facscan analysis was performed after staining with CD4, CD8, Vp8 and Pgp-1 specific antibodies. We have found that only the 9mer induces a reduction of the total number of thymocytes (up to 90% of thymocytes) with a clear depletion of VpI+/CD8+ thymocytes at days 4 and 7. The percentage of V@+CDB+ reactive T cells present in PBS treated control mice is 40-60% of the total and this is reduced to 6 2 0 % in 9mer treated mice. This reduction preferentially affects these cells at the immature CD4+CD8+ stage. Furthermore, the 9mer also apparently induces a reduction of Vp8+CD8+ reactive mature T cells in the periphery which starts at day 3 and is more evident 6 days after administration of the cognate peptide. Pgp-1 staining shows that in the 9mer treated mice, peripheral CD8+VP8+ T cells have encountered the antigen by day 3 (they become Pgp-I high) and they are much decreased by day 7. The molecular mechanisms involved both in thymic and peripheral depletion as well as the kinetics of the phenomena described are currently being investigated. Provided that adult C.B-17 SCID mice are first lightly irradiated, transplantation of rat fetal liver (FL) cells leads to generation of rat -> mouse chimeras with full differentiation of rat T and B cells. Unlike chimeras prepared with allogeneic FL cells, rat FL -> mouse chimeras develop severe lethal chronic graft-vs-host disease (GVHD). The rat T cells generated in these rat -> mouse chimeras are incompletely tolerant to host mouse antigens as determined by various parameters including MLR and CTL assays in vitro, adoptive transfer of T cells to secondary SCID hosts and the lack of Vp deletion to endogenous host Mtv antigens. Interestingly, the severity of GVHD and the degree self-reactivity of the rat T cells appear to be donor rat strain dependent. Thus, chimeras generated with Lewis FL cells are more severely affected than chimeras established with Fisher 344 or Wistar Furth FL cells. The inability of newly-formed rat T cells in rat -> mouse chimeras to become fully tolerant to host mouse antigens appears to be due to depletion of host APC by irradiation. Thus, rat -> mouse chimeras generated by transplanting rat fetal liver cells into unirradiated neonatal SCID mice fail to develop GVHD, and the rat T cells display self tolerance. Since allogeneic mouse -> SCID chimeras display strong self tolerance, presumably through recognition of host antigens on thymic epithelial cells (TEC), the implication is that mouse TEC are tolerogenic only for mouse and not for rat T cells. This may reflect that the accessory molecules on TEC required for tolerance induction are poorly recognized by the complementary accessory molecules on rat T cells. The identity of the accessory molecules concerned is under investigation. Crossing these mice with a C5 expressing congenic mouse strain results in negative selection of the TcR. Interestingly, thymi of these mice are not drastically reduced in cellularity and the CD4+CD8+ compartment is virtually unaffected. This is consistent with a delayed presentation for negative selection due to the failure of thymic macrophages and epithelial cells to present C5.Antigen presentation requirements for negative selection of circulating self protein which requires internalization and processing before it is presented with class I1 is currently under investigation. However, negative selection by deletion is not complete in these mice. Mature T cells in the periphery make substantial amount of IL-2 and yIFN upon stimulation in vitro. Experiments to test their functional behaviour in vivo are in progress. Little is known about the nature of molecules that regulate cytotoxic activity or cytokine production in IL-2 activated NK cells. We here report that, in addition to CD16, cross-linking of CD45 can stimulate IFN-yproduction in IL-2 activated NK cells. We first tested the ability of a panel of antibodies to directly stimulate or co-stimulate NK cells. Only anti-CD16 and anti-CD45 mAbs could directly stimulate IFN-y production. Northern blot analysis revealed that these antibodies increased the levels of mRNA for both IFN-y and TNI-a. Phenotypic analysis revealed that fresh peripheral NK cells express the CD45RA, but IL-2 activated NK cells express the CD45RO. Antibodies directed at CD45RO could also stimulate IFN-y production, but anti-CD45RA antibodies did not. The ability of CD45 to directly stimulated cytokine production in NK cells was unexpected since cross-linking of CD45 has never been reported to directly stimulate T cells. We next performed experiments to determine whether engagement of CD16-Fc receptor was necessary for the stimulatory activity of CD45. First, we used CD45 antibodies of the IgCl isotype to stimulate NK cells, since CD16 reportedly does not bind IgG1. Second, the combination of CD16 and CD45 mAbs were not more stimulatory. and in some experiments were less stimulatory, than individual antibodies alone. Third, F(ab)z of CD45 could stimulate IFN-yproduction (although not as efficiently as intact CD45). Finally, cross-linking of CD45 induced tyrosine phosphorylation of endogenous substrates that were qualitatively non-identical to CD16 cross-linking. The kinetics tyrosine phosphorylation induced by CD16 and CD45 mAbs were also different; CD16 induced maximum phosphorylation at 5 mins whereas CD45 induced maximum phosphorylation at 15 mins. Collectively, the data suggests that the stimulatory activity of CD45 is independent of CD16. These observations lead us to speculate that CD45 (or CD45RO) on IL-2 activated NK cells associates either directly or indirectly with tyrosine kinases; the cross-linking CD45 induces the activation of tyrosine kinases which then initiates a signaling cascade that results in transcription of IFN-y and TNF-a. Studies are on-going to defme molecules involved in this CD45-triggered signaling. Some HLA-C alleles have been shown to exert a specific protective effect preventing target cells from lysis by groups of NK clones displaying a defined specificity. In this study we analyzed whether class I mediated protection is a more general phenomenon involving all NK cells. First. we utilized two anti-class I mAbs (6A4 of lgG1 isotype and A6-136 of IgM isotype), which had been shown to induce lysis of protected target cells by "group 1" and "group 2" NK clones. In contrast to normal (i.e. P2m +/-or p2m +/+) mice, P2m -1-mice are unable reject Plm -1and allogeneic bone marrow grafts. NK cells from P2m deficient mice are also unable to kill Pam 4-Con A blasts in vitro, although the latter are killed by NK cells from normal mice. This suggested that P2m 4-NK cells are regulated to maintain nonresponsiveness toward their own self (or rather "missing self") phenotype. We show here that NK cells from P2m -/-mice can distinguish between class I expressing and deficient cells in two lymphoma models: the TAP-2 mutant RMA-S (sensitive) and its control RMA (resistant), as well as the P2m deficient C4.4-25-mutant (sensitive) and its Pzm expressing control EL-4 (resistant). One explanation to account for the sensitivity of Pzm deficient C4.4-25-cells versus the resistance of p2m 4-Con A blasts is that the blasts but not the tumor cells express readily detectable levels of free MHC class I heavy chains at the cell surface. We propose that NK cells developing in Pam deficient mice are calibrated to recognize such low levels of free class I heavy chains as a self-associated turn off signal. The reason that P2m 4tumor cells but not the Pam 4-Con A blasts are killed would thus be because the tumor cells fail to express such free heavy chains at adequate levels. Sabine Johann, Christine Zoller, Gunther Bliimel and Sylvia Haas, Institut fur Experimentelle Chirurgie der TUM, Miinchen, FRG Glucosaminoglycanes (GAGs) are used as protective drugs in humans against pre-and postoperative thromboembolic processes. Despite its common clinical use little is known about the influence of GAGs on human immune competent cells. The present study shows alteration of natural killer cell (NK) activity in vitro by four different GAGs: two naturally derived GAGs (unfractionated heparin, low molecular weight heparin), half synthetic GAG (Pentosan-Polysulphate, PPS) and one synthetic GAG. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of healthy donors were separated from whole blood and were cocultured for 4 hrs with K562 human erythroleukemic cells at target:effector ratios ranging from 1:6.25 to 1:25. GAGs were added at clinically relevant concentrations and natural killer cell activity was analysed. PPS led to a significant decrease of NK-activity at all cell ratios and at all concentration tested. NK-activity was reduced to 72%, to 30% or to 10% of control at concentrations of 0.01, 0.1, and 1 mg/d, respectively. Unfractionated heparin depressed NK-activity at concentrations used clinically for acute thromboemholic therapy whereas low molecular weight heparin and synthetic GAG reduced NK-activity at concentrations only reached in extra corporal circulations. Our results show that GAGs depress NK-activity in viiro at concentrations clinically used for thromboemholic prophylaxis and therapy. Further studies must be done to investigate whether GAGs bind directly to NK cells or induce suppression via cytokine release. However, it seems that GAGs have profound influence on immune competent cells as further studies at our laboratory demonstrate that these substances also dramatically increase the oxidative burst in polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Natural killer (Nti) l!mphoc!tes do not rearrange or express T cell reccptor or iinmunoglobulin genes and represent 5-15% of peripheral blood niononuclcar cclls (PBMC) Nti cells kill allogeneic cells. tumor cells and some \irall! infected cells \\ithout prior iinniunizatioii NK-mediated killing is often iilhihitcd b! target ccll HLA class I inoleciiles It has been proposcd. that mutations in thc HLA class I pcptide binding groo\c can rj\crsc HLA protection from ?;ti-mediated killing We introduced single point iiiutations in aiid around the HLA-B7 pcptide binding groo\e HLA-8 7 barianrs are expressed in HLA class I negative 721 221 I!mphoblasts at similar Ic\zls Thcse cclls are used as targets for bulk PBMC NK cells. NK lines and P;K clones. generated from 7 health! huinan donors Bulk PBMC shou distinct patterns of killins \;hlch arc large!) independent of thc donor HLA t!pe Seieii ofclc\en peptide binding groove mutations alloncd sigiiificantl! incrcascd N ti mediated killiiig. as compared to the uiunutated HLA-B7 Similiarl!. four iiiutations at residues oriented tovards the T cell receptor also allowed sigiiigficantl! increased NK mediated lulling These data suygest that pcptidc bound to HLA class I as uell as surface residues are important for N t i rccogiiition The rccogiiition oithe HLA class 1 h? Nti cclls ma! be similar to Tccll recognition nith regard to the importance of peptide binding groote and surface HLA class I residues Thesc patterns of recognitioii arc not entirel? reproduced b! Nti lmes and clones from thc same donors Our data suggest that although the spccifict! of NK cclls ma! bc broad. clonal distribution of specificities ma! be sclccted for in vitro and ma! depend 011 the iiiodc of stimulation Additionall:. certain specificities ina! predoniiiiatc in bulk PBhZC per MNC caused a significant augmentation of NK activity. An initial rise in NK activity was observed after 5-6 hours of contact with the rnycoplasmas, and optimal increased NK Icctivity was obtained within 24 hours. Imrnunofluorescent analysis revealed that, after a minimum of four hours of incubation with MNC, M . pneumoniue colonies specifically bound to a subset of cells that were morphologically large and granular. l h e majority of these MNC were CD14+. HLA-DR was also expressed on a significant portion of the tnycoplasma-bound large, granular MNC. susceptibility Alternatively these differences may be inconsequential and increased NK susceptibility may result from intracellular changes due to the EIA oncogene. recognition structure has not been established To study target structures in NK mediated cytolysis, we examined membrane proteins from an NK susceptible cell line (KS62) that bind to T lymphocytes and NK cells utilizing a direct adsorption method Membrane proteins of surface biotinylated tumor cells were adsorbed to freshly isolated lymphocytes, solubilized and identified on western blots by streptavidin alkaline phosphatase reaction Immunomagnetic bead fractionated CD 3 16' cells bound a 38 5KD K562 protein while CDS'16 did not adsorb this protein Purified p38 5 membrane protein retained selective binding property to CD 3 16' and exhibited concentration dependent inhibition of cytolysis of K562 cells Further, purified p38 5 conjugated to sepharose 4B preferentially bound a 72 KD membrane protein from CD3 16' cells (but not from CD3'16 cells) To determine the expression of p38 5 on various tumor cell lines we developed an affinity purified antibody obtained by repeated immunization of rabbits with wet gel slices of protein from preparative SDS PAGE Anti-p38 5 reacted with the surface of NK susceptible cell lines K562, Molt-4, and Jurkat as compared to NK resistant cell lines Raji and A549 by flow cytometry and western blot analysis These data suggest that p38 5 from the K562 plasma membrane preferentially binds to NK cell enriched preparations in contrast to T cell enriched lymphocyte fractions and is selectively expressed on the plasma membranes of NK susceptible tumors compared to NK resistant tumors These properties are consistent with those expected for a NK cell specific tumor recognition structure, and the involvement of a unique pair of receptor-ligand proteins in NK cell mediated cytotoxicity Different specificities of lysis by NK clones were observed, in that some clones were not blocked by any class I allele expressed by the hansfected cells, some clones were specifically blocked by a given class I allele, and other clones were blocked by several class I alleles. These results clearly demonstrate a clonal heterogeneity in the specificity of NK clones with regard to recognition of individual class I alleles. The potential role of peptides bound to class I molecules in the protection from NK lysis has been analyzed with synthetic peptides known to hind to particular class I alleles, and with target cells hansfected with mutated class I molecules. (H-2b) mice has been shown to be inhibited by the expression of H-2 Dd on tumor cells. It has also been suggested that the Ly-49+ NK subset is deleted or not allowed to develop in mice expressing H-2 Dd. We have investigated the expression of Ly-49 on NK cells from inbred and transgenic mice which express H-2 Dd. Our data indicate the percentage of NK cells which express Ly-49 in these mice is similar to that of mice which do not express H-2 Dd, however, the NK cells express 30 to 50% less Ly-49 than C57B116 mice. This reduced expression may be functionally important for adequate performance of Ly-49+ cells in an environment expressing H-2 Dd. This study has examined the requirement of protein kinase C (PKC) and protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) in the generation of IL-2induced LAK cells and aCD3-induced CD3-AK cells. For the generation of proliferative response, PTK but not PKC is required for both the LAK cells and CD3-AK cells. This is shown by the inhibition by PTK inhibitors herbimycin A or genistein of the proliferation of both LAK and CD3-AK cells, and PKC inhibitor calphostin had little effect on their proliferation. PTK inhibitors are found to inhibit the aCD3induced IL-2 production and thus addition of exogenous IL-2 restores the CD3-AK proliferative response. For the generation of cytotoxic response, the results are quite different. Herbimycin A and genistein inhibit the generation of cytolytic LAK cells but calphostin had no effect on the LAK cytolytic activity. In contrast, PKC inhibitors staurosporine or calphostin abrogates the generation of cytolytic CD3-AK cells but herbimycin A or genistein have no effect on their cytolytic activity when exogenous IL-2 is supplemented. These findings indicate that PTK but not PKC is essential for the generation of cytolytic LAK, and the opposite is true for CD3-AK cells. The inhibitory effect of staurosporine or calphostin on the generation of CD3-AK cells is reversed by IL-4, indicating that IL-4 mediates an PKC independent pathway for CD3-AK generation. In tyrosine phosphorylation study, pretreatment of activated killer cells with genistein causes reduced phosphorlyation of 100-kDa protein which is enhanced by IL-2, and reduced phosphorylation of 40-kDa protein which is enhanced by uCD3 stimulation, Our results show that PTK is essential for the initial activation of both LAK and CD3-AK cells to induce proliferation. However, in the later stage of differentiaiton into killer cells, PTK is required for LAK cells but PKC is required for CD3-AK cells. There is increasing evidence that the protein tyrosine kinase p561ck plays a key role in signal transduction during T cell activation. p56Ick contains an SH2 domain found in a number of proteins involved in intracellular signaling including the src family of tyrosine kinases. This domain mediates protein-protein interaction by specifically recognizing phosphorylated tyrosines in a particular sequence context on target proteins. To evaluate further the function of p561ck and, in particular, to identify its potential substrates, we used a recombinant p56Ick SH2 domain to analyze the SH2-binding proteins from lysates of Jurkat cells before and after activation. In non-activated Jurkat, we detected two t rosine phosphorylated proteins which hound specifically to seven additional tyrosine phosphorylated SH2-binding proteins were found. We identified the c-associated tyrosine kinase ZAP-70 as one of the proteins capable of specifically binding to the p56Ick SH2 domain after CD3 stimulation. The significance of this interaction was further investigated in vivo. In agreement with the in virro findings, p56Ick could be coprecipitated with the GAP-70 complex and conversely, ZAP-70 was detected in p56lck immunoprecipitates in activated Jurkat cells. In addition to ZAP-70, anotber tyrosine phosphorylated protein of 74 kDa was found in vivo to co-precipitate with p56Ick following Jurkat activation. Studies are in progress to identify this p56Ick -associated protein. The T-cell antigen receptor complex (TCR) couples to intracellular signalling pathways a s a result of increased phosphorylation in Tyr residues found in the Antigen Receptor Activation Motifs present in the TCR i, E , 6 and y chains. The role of the CD45 phosphotyrosine phosphatase in regulating this process was investigated using a novel CDB+veCD4+veCD8+ve T-leukaemia cell-line (CB1) established from a patient with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia. The primary transformed cells of this patient were found to comprise CD45-ve and CD45+ve cell populations and permanent cell-lines were established which maintained these two phenotypes. The CD45-ve and CD45+ve sub-clones were shown to be clonal in origin by analysing TCR-p chain rearrangements. A novel technique was established for measuring the activities of the specific pools of tyrosine kinase associated with CD4/CD8 or TCR molecules located at the plasma membrane. Using this technique it was shown that t h e CD4-p56-lck and TCR-associated tyrosine kinase activities were markedly increased in the CD45+ve cells compared to the CD45-ve cells. Analysis of t h e components phosphorylated in TCR immunoprecipitates from CD45+ve cells following in vitro kinase analysis revealed that t h e major substrates were the TCR c, E and y chains, which were phosphorylated in Tyr residues. N o phosphorylation of these components was detected in TCR immunoprecipitates from CD45-ve cells. These results indicate that CD45 plays a critical role in regulating the Tyr phosphorylation of the TCR chains that couple the receptor to intracellular events. Supported Stimulation of T cells through the T cell receptor induces rapid activation of p 2 l r a , which is essential for lymphocyte activation. We have used transgenic mice expressing a dominant-negative ras (rasN17) under the control of the lck proximal promoter to examine the downstream biochemical events regulated by ras during T cell activation. Our results show that rasN17 completely abrogates MAPK and p90S6K activation induced with anti-CD3 mAbs. In contrast, MAPK activation induced with phorbol esters was not affected, either in SP or in total thymocytes, despite an over twenty fold overexpression of rasN17. Since phorbol esters are also able to activate ras in a PKC dependent way, we tested the effects of PKC inhibitors (staurosporine) on phorbol ester-induced MAPK activation. Surprisingly staurosporine was also unable to block phorbol ester induced MAPK activation at concentrations able to inhibit other PKC-mediated events. Therefore phorbol ester mediated activation of MAPK in thymocytes seems to be independent of PKC activation and not inhibitable by a dominant negative ras, indicating that there exists an alternative mechanism whereby phorbol esters can stimulate the MAP kinase cascade. c-fos, c-jun. and c-myc mRNAs were not transcribed. However, although bulk phospborylation was inhibited, early tyrosine phosphorylation as well as calcium ion influx were normally induced. Protein phosphatase inhibitors did not reverse this inhibition, ruling out an enhanced activation of these enzymes for the inhibition observed. Cell surface expression of the early protein kinase C activation marker CD69 was also inhibited. Phorbol esters that directly activate protein kinase C prevented inhibition. Thus, like LFA-I molecules, class I molecules are implicated in signal transduction involved at an early stage in T cell activation and conaibute to the regulation of protein kinase C activity. Inhibition induced by class Iand LFA-I-specific mAbs was dependent on the stimulus that activated T cells: inhibition was observed when activation was induced by CD3-specific mAb in soluble but not in immobilized form, in primary but not secondary MLR or by mAbs directed against some epitopes of human CD2 (uansgenic mice) or Thy-1 molecules. This suggested the existence of at least two activation pathways, one dependent on and another independent of a cestimulatory signal implicating class I molecules. In agreement with this, class Inegative T cells from p2 microglobulin knock-out mice were able to be stimulated, although to a lesser extent than class I-positive T cells. This stimulation was inhibited by LFA-I-but not class I-specific mAbs. Thus, in the same way that the LFA-I molecule binds to ICAM-1 and -2 ligands, we propose that in normal situation, class I molecules could bind to a ligand other than CD8 since stimulation of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells was inhibited and because class I a 3 domain-specific mAbs did not inhibit activation. Experiments in progress are designed to establish whether or not class I molecules would be part of either the TCWCD3 or the CD28B7-BBI activation modules or of an independent one. Thy-1 and CD26 surface glycoproteins are both capable of delivering proliferative signals to T cells upon cross-linking with appropriate antibodies. The tyrosine phosphatase CD45 is a key regulator of T cell proliferatio as it controls the activity of src family kinases ~56'"' and ~5 9 '~" . Associations of Thy-1 with CD45, and of CD26 with CD45 have been reported after chemical cross-linking of intact cells and it is likely that such associations constitute part of the structural basis for the T-cell stimulating capacity of Thy-1 and CD26 accessory molecules. We have developed an extraction protocol to isolate multimolecular complexes of membrane proteins by centrifugation through a sucrose gradient containing TX-100 and define the nature of molecules associated with immunoprecipitated surface glycoproteins. Thy-1, CD26 and CD45 are specifically cross-linked at the cell-surface and form multimolecular complexes with a 78 kDa protein that is recognized by an anli-fiP (Grp78) antibody. The 78 kDa protein is labelled with I as well as biotin esters and forms oligomers in the plasma membrane. In vitro kinase assays on anti-Thy-1 and anti-CD45 immunoprecipitated molecules show the presence of kinase activity due to p561Ck and p5gfYn. The t w o src family kinases are selectively associated with Thy-1 and CD45 contained in multimolecular complexes. The multimolecular structure we describe could represent a transducing unit that incorporates surface receptors and regulators of tyrosine phosphorylation that are stabilized through interactions with an oligomeric scaffold of membrane proteins. appears crucial for satisfactory signaling from the TCR. We have previously described the generation of transgenic animals overexpressing p59fY" and of fynnull mice, produced by gene targeting. These animal models have permitted a partial dissection of TCR signaling processes. The overexpression of p59fYn under the control of the Ick proximal promoter results in the production of thymocytes that are acutely sensitive to stimulation through the TCR. In comparison, thymocytes from mice which lack p59fY" as a consequence of gene targeting are refractile to TCR stimulation. The availability of embryos derived fromfynnull mice has permitted examination of the functions of the discrete domains within p59fY". Using a direct reconstitution approach, these studies demonstrate that features of both the kinase catalytic domain and of other suuctures are required to confer upon p59fYn its unique function in thymocyte signaling. The present study demonstrated that the apy heterotrimer complexes of IL-2 receptor reconstituted on human T cell line have the ability to transduce IL-2-mediated signals for activation of tyrosine kinase, for induction of c-myc, c-fos and c-jun expression and for 3H-thymidine uptake. A mutant of the y chain which has deletion of carboxy terminal 68 amino acid residues showed loss of such signal transducing ability of the IL-2 receptor complexes. Another mutant carrying carboxy terminal 30 amino acids deletion retained the ability to activate a tyrosine kinase, to induce c-myc expression and to promote 3H-thymidine uptake, but lost the ability to induce c-fos and c-jun expression. Moreover, the mutant with src homology 2 (SH2) subdomain deletion fails to induce such signal transduction. On the other hand, a mutant constructed by substitution of the SH2 like subdomains for the equivalent SH2 subdomains of p56' ' k showed the uptake of 3H-thymidine in an IL-2 dose dependent manner. These results suggest that at least two distinct signals, one for c-myc induction, which parallels tyrosine kinase activation, and the other for c-fos and c-jun induction can be uansduced from the IL-2 receptor complexes; in particular the SH2 subdomains should have a pivotal role for signal transduction from IL-2 receptor complex. ACTIVATION PROBE FOR PRIMED HUMAN T LYMPHOCYTES. Bruce Babbitt, Joseph Goodwin, Jenny Zhang and Barry Caplan. Cellcor, Inc., Newton, MA 02159. An in vitro assay that measures the activation level of ex-vivo activated (EVA) T cells currently being used in the adoptive immunotherapy of metastatic renal cell carcinoma has been developed. This assay is based on the ability of activated, but not resting, T cells to proliferate and produce cytokines in response to the protein kinase C activator phorbol myristate acetate (PMA). Although phorbol esters have previously been used with mitogens or calcium ionophores to costimulate resting T lymphocytes, we have instead utilized PMA by itself as an "intracellular activation probe" to quantitate the functional activation level of previously activated or "primed" cells. EVA cells, generated by stimulating human PBMC with OKT3 and autologous cytokines, had greatly enhanced capacity to proliferate and produce cytokines in response to further in vitro stimulation with 1 ng/ml PMA. Intrapatient, but not interpatient, there was a linear correlation between the magnitude of the PMA response and the degree of activation as measured by the percentage of cells that expressed CD25. The EVA cells proliferating in response to PMA were predominantly polyclonally activated T lymphocytes including both CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets as well as both CD45RO+ "memory" and CD45RA+ "naive" T cells. The enhanced responsiveness of EVA cells to PMA was inhibited by culturing the cells in the presence of staurosporin, a protein kinase C inhibitor. PMA responsiveness was maintained in cells that had been frozen and stored for greater than 6 months in liquid nitrogen suggesting that distinct and stable biochemical changes had occurred in the cells as a result of their prior activation. These results suggest that EVA cells may possess lowered activation thresholds in vivo as a result of their effective priming in vitro and that the degree of activation can be quantitated by responsiveness to PMA. A phenomenon has been described in which analog peptides, created by amino acid substitutions in antigenic peptides, antagonize the response of a T cell clone to its antigenic peptide. This antigen specific antagonism is believed to be mediated through interaction with the T cell receptor rather than competition for binding to the MHC molecule. Evavold et al. (Science,1991 (Science, ,252:1308 showed that analog peptides inhibit proliferation, but not cytokine production suggesting inadequate signalling through the T cell receptor. De Magistris et.al. (Cell, 1992, 68:625) found that analog peptides inhibit proliferation, IL-2 production, and early T cell activation events suggesting a lack of signalling through the T cell receptor. We have found two analog peptides that inhibit the proliferation of an Ea peptide specific T cell clone. In preliminary experiments, coincubation with anti-CD28 monoclonal antibody (mAb), previously shown to induce costimulation, prevents this inhibition of proliferation. Furthermore, the agonist peptide, at high concenuations, inhibits proliferation of the T cell clone. Again, anti-CD28 mAb prevented inhibition of proliferation normally induced by high concentrations of the antigenic peptide. One possible explanation is that high doses of peptide stimulate killing of the antigen presenting cells before they can provide adequate costimulation needed to induce proliferation of the T cells. Anti-CD28 mAb may provide this costimulation, thus restoring the proliferative response. We are also investigating two possible mechanisms of the inhibition induced by the analog peptides. The analog peptides may 1) stimulate T cell killing of the antigen presenting cells and/or 2) aberrantly signal through the T cell receptor. The TCR is constituted of either alp or yl6 disulphide-linked heterodimers which are non-covalently associated with the y, 6 and E subunits of the CD3 complex and the unrelated chain. These TCR-associated polypeptides play an important role in both TCR cell-surface expression and transmembrane signalling after binding of the TCR with its ligand. In order to generate TCRs with altered signalling properties, we constructed chimeric TCR a chains by replacing the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains of C a with homologous sequences from the TCR S chain. Similar chimeras were made for the TCR p chain using donor sequences from the Cy. The chimeric TCR chains were introduced into a TCRnegative T cell hybridoma and analysed for responsiveness to allo-antigen (I-Abm12), superantigen (SEB), and to anti-TCR mAbs. A single combination of chimeric TCR chains produced a TCR which responded normally to anti-TCR antibodies but was markedly deficient in its response to allo and superantigens. The response of this chimeric TCR to superantigen could be restored by increasing the amount of SEB presented by >lo00 fold. Thus, we have generated a mutant TCR with altered recognition or signal transduction properties. In XLA patients completely lacking BTK activity, B cell development is arrested a t the pre-B stage in the bone marrow. Interestingly, TSK and BTK are about 60% identical in amino acid sequence, and in particular, share very strong homology in the amino terminal pleckstrin homology region found to be the site of the xid mutation. Together with the expression data, the homology t o BTK strongly suggests a role for TSK in T cell development. To test this, we are currently generating a knockout of the TSK gene in mice. In addition, together with Nancy Jenkins a t NCI/Frederick and David Housman a t MIT, we have mapped the mouse TSK gene t o chromosome 11, closely linked t o a cluster of lymphokine genes, and the human gene t o chromosome 5q. Cross-linking of the B cell antigen receptor complex (BCR) by mitogenic amounts of anti-lgM leads to cell cycle progression and mitosis. In order to understand the molecular mechanisms underlying BCR-dependent cell cycle entry, the role of specific cell cycle regulatory proteins were investigated. The level of cyclin-dependent kinase 2, Cdk2, expression was found to be restricted to specific cell cycle phases in primary murine B cells insomuch that Go or G1 phase B cells, or cells arrested at or near the G1/S boundary contained no detectable Cdk2 or associated histone H1 kinase activity. In contrast, B cell entry and progression through S phase was accompanied by the de novo synthesis of Cdk2. Cyclin A was found to associate in a cell cycle-dependent manner with Cdk2 and resulted in the catalytic activation of Cdk2specific histone H1 kinase activity during S phase. These results suggest that, in addition to cyclindependent regulation of Cdk2, an additional level of regulation exists in primary B cells that tightly couples the availability of Cdk2 to S phase. Further, the identification of active Cdk2 suggests that the BCR may stimulate S phase progression by assembling active Cdk2/cyclin A complexes. Present studies are directed at ascertaining whether Cdk2 functions to stimulate entry into-and/or maintain S phase progression. The specificity of antibody responses depends on focusing helper T lymphocyte signals to suitable B lymphocytes capable of binding foreign antigens, and away from nonspecific or self-reactive B cells. To investigate the molecular mechanisms which prevent the activation of self-reactive B lymphocytes, the activation requirements of B cells specific for the antigen hen egg lysozyme (HEL) obtained from immunoglobulin (Ig) transgenic mice were compared with those of functionally tolerant B cells isolated from Ig transgenic mice which also express soluble HEL. Nontolerant Igtransgenic B cells required both allogeneic helper T cells and binding of soluble HEL for efficient activation and antibody production. By contrast, tolerant self-reactive B cells responded poorly to the same combination of allogeneic T cells and soluble HEL. Tolerant B cells responded normally to stimulation with IL-4 and anti-CD40 antibodies in vitro, suggesting that they retained the capacity to respond to mediators of T cell help. However, the tolerant B cells exhibited a proximal block in the sIg signaling pathway which prevented activation of receptor-associated tyrosine kinases in response to the binding of soluble HEL. The functional significance of this sIg signaling defect was confirmed by using a more potent membranebound form of HEL capable of triggering sIg signaling in tolerant B cells, which markedly restored their ability to collaborate with allogeneic helper T cells and produce antibody. These findings indicate that antigen-specific B cells require two signals for mounting a T cell dependent antibody response and identify regulation of sIg signaling as a mechanism for controlling self-reactive B cells. Sci. 90:6295, 1993) . After stimulation of cells with UCHT-1. TG, or CCh, we observed by means of Indo-1 fluorescence a hiphasic Ca2+ response, with an initial peak representing stores release followed by a sustained plateau representing CaZ+ influx. Indo-1 loaded Jurkat T cells pretreated with genestein (25pM) had no influx or sustained plateau. The whole-cell patch clamp recordings also showed that pretreatment with genestein abrogated Ca*+ current activation by UCHT 1, TG, or CCh. Furthermore, Ca2+ current previously activated by UCHT-1, TG, or CCh was inhibited by Lavendustin A (~QIM), a structurally dissimilar tyrosine kinase inhibitor over a ten minute period (CCh: 92% f 5.7, mean & S.D.. n=6: TG: 60% UCHT-1: 95% f 3.0, n=7). By contrast, Lavendustin B (ZOpM), an inactive structural analog of Lavendustin A, did not inhibit previously activated CaZ+ current. Redox reagents including diamide (thiol-oxidizing reagent) and N-ethylmaleimide (sulthydryl reagent), as well as the tyrosine phosphakse inhibitor orthovanadate, increase tyrosine kinase phosphorylation in lymphocytes. We found that these reagents activated CaZ+ current in whole-cell patch clamp recordings. Thus, tyrosine kinase(s) may play a role in Ca2+ current activation. Activation of resting T lymphocytes by ligands to the T cell antigen receptorCD3 complex is initiated by rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular proteins. Protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) of the src family are known to be important, hut the mechanism of their recruitment and their interactions with PTKs of other families are incompletely understood. We have found that a member of another family of PTKs, the p72'Jk kinase, is constitutively bound to the TCWCD3 complex and becomes tyrosine phosphorylated and activated within 1 min after TCWCD3 stimulation. This activation did not depend on the presence of ~5 6~~~ in T cells and in transfected COS cells p72Vk was active and tyrosine phobphorylated in the absence of co-transfected src-family PTKs. In both cases, however, the phosphorylation of cellular substrates was augmented by src-family PTKs. We propose that p72.yJk may act as an immediate receptor-activated kinase up-stream of the related p70W PTK and the src-family PTKs p561Ck and p59hn in T cells, and that these src-family FTKs act as signal amplifiers. This notion is supported by our findings that p56lCk binds, via its SH2 domain, to phosphorylated p72SYk and that p7ZSIk phosphorylated ~5 6~~~ at Tyr-192 in the SH2 domain and activated p56lCk. Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines by subtractive hybridization has all structural features common to the superfamily of G-protein-coupled receptors, including seven hydrophobic putative membrane spanning domains. It is the first member of this receptor family expressed in lymphocytes showing a differentiation-specific expression pattern; BLRl is expressed in mature B cells but not in pre Bxells or plasma cells. To further characterize structure and function of the receptor protein BLRl was epitope-tagged and expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 cells. Flow cytometry was used to determine the efficiency of transient transfections and to establish 293 cell clones showing stable high level expression of BLRI. Analysis of permeabilized versus oon. permeabilized 293 cells transfected either with an amino-terminally or a carboxyl-terminally tagged receptor demonstrated that BLRl is an integrai plasma membrane protein, topologically orientated therein as predicted for other members of this class of seven pass membrane receptors. By the use of stably BLRl expressing cell lines we have generated a monoclonal antibody against BLRl which recognizes a protein of about 60 kDa on transfected 293 cells. FACS analysis of leukocytes revealed that BLRl is expressed on recirculating mature B cells and additionally on a certain subpopulation of T cells. BLRl shows significant homologies to receptors with peptide ligands including those for chemokines (lL-8; MIP-la) and neuropeptides (Angiotensin 10. The heterologous overexpression of BLRl in 293 cells and its easily assayable expression by the use of mAbs provides a suitable system to investigate the binding affiities of potential peptide ligands to BLRl and offers an efficient screening tool for the identification of unknown ligands and receptor-associated proteins. We were abpe to detect cADPr in neutralized perchloric acid extracts from human T-lymphocytes (Jurkat cell h e ) by a newly developed 2-step HPLC procedure. In the hrst step SAX-HPLC em loyin a TFA gradient was used (Fig.lA) . Material co-eluting w i J stan 8 ard cADPr was collected and further chromatographed on reverse-phase/ion-pair HF' LC (Fig.lB) . A single peak coeluting with standard cADPr in this system was collected and analyzed for functional identitity in Ca'+-release experiments. Standard cADPr or material purified as described above induced a dose-dependent Ca'+-release (Fi 2) in permeabilized Jurkat T cells in the presence of Fura2/8ee acid. Therefore, cADPr a pears to be a novel, potent intracellular messenger involved in Upon unspecific stimulation by the phorbolester TPA, the transcript is quickly and heavily induced. As the induction is not suppressed, but even increased by cycloheximide, this type of regulation resembles that of early lymphocyte activation genes. STP-C protein levels reflect the transcriptional induction. 6 0 6 3 7 . upon interaction of the IL-2 receptor with its ligand, there is rapid phosphorylation of several protein substrates on tyrosine residues. Although the identity of the responsible kinase(s) is currently unknown, protein tyrosine kinase ~5 9~ has been implicated in signal transduction through the IL-2 receptor in lymphoid cells. In this study we examine IL-2 signal transduction in a panel of T cell clones lacking normal expression of ~5 9~. These OVA-s ecific clones that we derived from provided by Drs. P. Stein and P. Soriano) were shown to proliferate and produce normal levels of lymphokine in response to antigen (Qian, et al., these proceedings). Furthermore, we found that these cells proliferated in response to IL-2 comparably to the wild type clones, suggesting that Fyn is not required for normal functional responsiveness to IL-2 in T cells. When IL-2-induced tyrosine phosphorylation patterns were assessed, we found no significant differences from wild type clones. Similarly, IL-2-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Shc and IL-2 receptor p were found to be no different from wild type. Thus, ~5 9~ is not required for phosphorylation of these substrates in response to IL-2 stimulation. Tyrosine phosphorylation of other substrates is currently being studied and the results will be presented. The B cell antigen receptor (BCR) is a multimeric protein complex consisting of the ligand binding immunoglobulin molecule and the Ig-a/p heterodimer that mediates intracellular signalling by coupling the receptor t o protein tyrosine kinases (PTK). Transfection of the 19-a deficient myeloma cell line J 5 5 8 L~m with expression vectors coding for mutated Ig-a allowed us t o test the function of the tyrosines in the cytoplasmic region of 19-a in the context of the BCR. Furthermore we expressed 19-a mutations as chimeric CD8Ag-a molecules on K46 B lymphoma cells and tested their signalling capacity in terms of PTK activation and release of calcium. We show here that the conserved tyrosine residues in the cytoplasmic portion of 19-a have a dual role. Firstly they are required for efficient activation of PTKs during signal induction and secondly one of them is subject to phosphorylation by activated src-related PTKs. We present data suggesting that Ig-a and Ig-p interact with each other and that 19-p can restore activity of mutated 19-a. Phosphorylation on tyrosine in the cytoplasmic portion of 19-a may be a mechanism t o couple the BCR t o SH2 domain-carrying molecules. The events that follow T cell receptor (TCR) engagement of antigen and couple the mansmission of the activation signal from the cell surface, leading to cell proliferation and lymphokine secretion, remain unknown. The cytoskeleton, a complex network of various filamentous systems, may, by virtue of acting as a physical linker between the plasma membrane and the nucleus, be the underlying substrate which connects the early and late events of cellular activation. Indeed, our preliminary evidence shows that as a consequence of TCR ligation. developmenrally mature T cells translocate TCR-c chain to the detergent insoluble cell fraction, the cell fraction containing the cytoskeleton. This association appears to be specific, as other components of the TCR, such as the aPTCR chains, are not involved. In immature murine T cells, which are unable to respond to TCR stimulation b ividing and producing lymphokines, the translocation of TCR-I i i t h ;he cytoskeleton is abrogated, suggesting that the cytoskeletal interaction is developmentally regulated and correlated with the ability of T cells to respond to activation. Because tyrosine phosphorylated TCR-c is a predominant form of the 6 chain associated with the cytoskeleton, phosphorylation of TCR-c by a s ecific tyrosine kinase may he the regulatory mechanism by which TCR-& becomes cytoskeleton-associated after cell activation. Using cell lines with engineered TCR-c chains, we have attempted to define the molecular site involved in the cytoskeletal interaction. Preliminary evidence suggests that at least one of the ARH-1 signaling motifs is necessary for this cytoskeletal interaction. Standard methods of immunocytochemistry and biochemistry are currently being used to identify the cytoskeletal protein(s) that mediates TCR-c translocation. Biochemical reconstitution of this TCR-c-cytoskeleton interaction, in vitro, will then be perfomied to dissect the processes involved in TCR-ccytoskeleton interaction and consequently the activation cascade leading to cellular differentiation. p561Ck. These proteins return to normal levels of expression after successful treatment with FAA and rhIL-2. Our current findings show that normal mice given FAA plus rhIL-2 also have significant reductions in and p561Ck in their T cells, similar to those generated in Rencabearing mice. However, unlike Renca-bearing mice, the T-cell alterations in FAA plus rhIL-2 treated mice are only transient and return to normal levels by 2 weeks. Moreover, if FAA alone is given to normal mice, levels are reduced, absent and re-expressed by 8 , 2 4 and 72 hours, respectively. Based on Northern blot analysis, these changes are not regulated at the RNA level. Thus, induction of these alterations is not unique to tumor presence, but are also induced in normal mice by BRM and may represent a mechanism by which T-cell responses are regulated. We previously demonstrated that pS9fY" associates with chimeric proteins which contain the cytoplasmic domain of several T cell receptor proteins, each of which contains at least one copy of a signalling motif known as the tyrosine activation motif (TAM). Here we demonstrate that p 5 9 h specifically requires the TAM sequences of the CD3 E cytoplasmic domain for association. To determine if E TAM residues that are critical for T cell signalling are critical for p59fYn binding, we generated 21 chimeric E mutants whose cytoplasmic portions were previously tested for the ability to signal in T cells. All mutants which were capable of signalling in T cells retained the ability to bind p59fYn. Surprisingly, only mutants containing a substitution of the second tyrosine of the TAM lost the ability to bind pS9fYn. These results suggest that p59fY" may specifically recognize a structural feature of the TAM. This hypothesis will be tested by additional mutagenesis of TAM sequences and by analysis of these mutants for the ability to bind p59fYn. IL-2, one of the best characterized growth factors, has a central role in regulation of antigen induced T cell proliferation. We have identified a novel cytokine with similar T cell stimulatory activity to IL-2, which we have designated IL-15. The 14-15 kDa glycoprotein was purified from cultures of a simian kidney epithelial line, cloned based on protein sequence and expressed in yeast. The purified recombinant protein was radiolabeled and retained activity in a CTLL assay. Specific binding of 125-1 IL-15 to receptors on a variety of T cell lines and clones as well as some non-lymphoid cells such as fibroblasts and endothelial cells was detected. On human PHA activated PBT for example, between 100-500 high affinity binding sites (Ka of 1.2-3.5 ~1 0 1 0 M ) were estimated by Scatchard analysis. Although IL-15 shares some biological activities and receptor distribution with IL-2, we found that some cells which have functional IL-2 receptors, neither bind nor respond to IL-15. There is no significant sequence homology between IL-2 and IL-15, but IL-15 appears to belong structurally, like IL-2 and IL-4, to the four helix bundle family of cytokines. ; and tBCDP, PRI/DynCorp, NCI-FCRDC, Frederick, MD 21702. Impaired immune system function has been documented in cancer patients and in tumor-bearing mice. One of the reasons for this immune impairment may be due to the suppressed T-cell function. It has recently been demonstrated that T cells from tumor-bearing animals may have abnormalities in their signal transduction molecules, Since a critical outcome of signal transduction is activation of specific genes under the influence of particular transcription factors, we examined the expression of NFnB/Rel family proteins in murine tumor models, as these transcription factors play a crucial role in transcription o f genes involved in immune and inflammatory responses. When we examined the splenic T cells from mice bearing Renca, a renal carcinoma, T cells had undetectable levels of nuclear c-Rel, NFnB p65, and NFnB p50: however, two shorter forms of p50 (p48 and p46). truncated at the Nterminus, were present exclusively in the nucleus. These T cells have altered DNA-protein interactions, demonstrated by gel shift analysis with a nB site. When Renca-bearing mice are treated with flavone-&acetic acid plus rhIL-2, 80% of mice experience long-term, disease-free survival. In successfully treated mice, the T cells expressed normal levels of all NFnB/Rel family members. These results suggest that alterations in transcription factors may accompany changes in signal transduction molecules in T cells from tumor-bearing animals; however, the abnormalities are reversed with successful treatment. been demonstrated to be a control elcnient tighily regulated in its temporal and spatial activity during Blymphocyte diffcrentiation. Analysis of transgenic micc bearing 3 P-globin reporter gene driven by tlic IgH 3' enhancer has revealed that the enhanccr i z tissue specific in it5 activity, bcing active i n s p l c n i~ and peritoneal cclls and that the enhancer i \ active only i n large, activated splenic cclls and not in resting R-cell5 Thc mechanism by which the cnlianccr I< aL,tivatLd ha\ not bcen discerned. We found that i t i\ pos>iblc to activate the IgH 3' enhancer5 expression in a transformed B-cell line using thc mitogzns ionomyzln and phorbal ester (TPA) or via crosslinking thc immunoglobulin surface receptor. We h a v e identified a lymphoid specific DNA binding complex. called KFAB (Nuclear Factor of Activated R-cells), which can be activated using such stimulation and which i s sufficient to confer activated transcription on a reporter gene construct. Thc components of the NFAR coniplcx and its relative importance in the Igll 3' enhanceri activation will bc presented. Lymphocytes, like other hemopoietic cells, require vitamin A (retinol) as an essential growth factor. #en omitted from medium, resting cells cannot be activated, nor can cycling cells continue to proliferate. To determine the intracellular mediators of this growth-promoting effect, we have analyzed the retinol metabolites of lymphocytes. Two of these are of interest: 14-hydroxy-retro-retinol (14HRR) andanhydroretinol (AR) Both belong to the class of retro retinoids that for the first time has been linked to biological function. Despite structural similarities, their effects on lymphocyte physiology are strikingly different. While 14HRR can support activation and growth of lymphocytes and therefore can be regarded as an agonist, AR strongly suppresses lymphocyte activation. The pharmacological relationships (i.e., reversible inhibition) can best be explained by assuming competition for binding to a common receptor site, possibly a nuclear receptor. In Summary, retinol can be regarded as a prohormone, that is converted in lymphocytes to an agonistically acting mediator, 14HRR, as well as to an antagonist, AR. This pair of mediators is involved in the regulation, yin-yang fashion, of lymphocyte proliferation. Increased intracellular Ca" is a critical component of the activation response in T lymphocytes. Although the influx of extracellular Ca2+ is responsible for a large part of this increase, the mechanism of Ca2+ entry is unknown. Using the perforated patch variant of the patch clamp technique, we have examined some of the properties of two Ca2' currents in Jurkat T lymphocytes, one voltage gated (VG) and the other non-voltage gated (NVG). Both currents are inhibited by 1mM NiC1,. The two Ca2+ currents displayed different sensitivities to MnCI,, however, with the NVG current completely blocked by 30pM Mn2+ and the VG current only moderately inhibited by 1mM Mn2+. Because the receptor-linked CaZ' entry pathway in T cells is permeable to Mn", these results suggest that the NVG current is not primarily responsible for Ca2+ influx during T cell activation and support a role for the voltage gated Ca2+ current in T cells. One current hypothesis for the initiation of Ca" entry into nonelectrically excitable cells proposes that Ca2+ entry is linked to the state of filling of intracellular Ca2+ stores. In the human T lymphocyte cell line Jurkat, stimulation of the antigen receptor leads to release of Ca2' from internal stores and influx of extracellular Ca2+. Similarly, treatment of Jurkat cells with the tumor promoter thapsigargin induced release of Ca2' from internal stores and also resulted in influx of extracellular Caz+. Initiation of CaZ+ entry by thapsigargin was blocked by chelation of Ca" released from the internal storage pool. The Ca2' entry pathway could also be initiated by an increase in the intracellular concentration of Ca" following photolysis of the Ca'+-cage, nitr-5. Thus, three separate treatments that caused an increase in the intracellular concentration of Ca" initiated Ca2+ influx in Jurkat cells. In all cases, Ca2+-initiated Ca" influx was blocked by treatment with any of three phenothiazines or W-7 suggesting that it is mediated by calmodulin. These data suggest that release of Ca2' from internal stores is not linked capacitatively to Ca2' entry, but that initiation is linked instead by Ca2' itself, perhaps via calmodulin. To assess if the above discrepancies may have resulted from the use of different recipient T cells, we transfected a j/q-deficlent variant of 2B4.11 (MA5.8) with the very same truncated < cDNA we previously used in BW5147. Consistent with our initial observations in BW5147, the cytoplasmic tail of the < polypeptide was found dispensable for antigenic responsiveness. However, a difference between the two recipient T cells was detected when cells were challenged via the Thy-1 and Ly-6 molecules. Once expressed in MA5.8, but not in BW5147, TCR complexes devoid of functional 6 subunits were able to sustain activation initiated via Thy-1 and Ly-6 molecules. Stimulation of T-and B-lymphocytes through their respective antigen receptors results in the activation of protein tyrosine kinases and the phosphorylation of cellular substrates on tyrosine residues. In this report, we describe a novel tyrosine kinase substrate fakB, a homologue of the focal adhesion kinase ~~1 2 5~~~. Rapid tyrosine phosphorylation of fakB was observed in both Tand B-cells after antigen receptor cross-linking with antibody, whereas ~p 1 2 5~A~ was not affected by these stimuli. Costimulatory activation of the T-cell receptor complex (TCRKD3) with the accessory receptors CD2 and CD4 induced synergistic tyrosine phosphorylation of fakB in normal T-cells. Furthermore, TCRICD3 engagement with antibody induced the stable association of fakB with ZAP-70, the TCRICD3 zeta-chain associated tyrosine kinase involved in antigen receptor-induced lymphocyte signaling. Both inducible and pre-formed complexes of fakL3IZAP-70 were observed in T-cells associated with the TCR/CD3 zeta-chain. Taken together, these results indicate that fakB is a new type of focal adhesion kinase-related protein that is differentially regulated from that of pp125FAK, and may play a role in Tand Blymphocyte signaling through the antigen receptors. Common subunits are known to be shared among receptors; a p chain is shared in receptors for IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF, and gp130 functions as a common subunit of receptors for IL-6, OSM, CNTF and LIF. We have demonstrated that a monoclonal antibody specific for the IL-2Rychain completely inhibited cell growth not only induced by IL-2 but also induced by IL-4 and 1L-7, suggesting that the y chain is possibly shared among IL-2R, IL-4R and 1L-7R. The GPI-linked cell surface molecule Thy-1 has been implicated in the differentiation and functional activation of T cells and can function as an accessory molecule in the activation of some T cell clones. The mechanisms by which these signaling events are coupled to functional responsesare incompletely understood. In this study, we examine the requirement for protein tyrosine kinase ~5 9~" expression in signaling through Thy-1 using a panel of antigen-specific T cell clones that we derived from rj/n" mutant mice (kindly provided by Drs. P. Stein and P. Soriano). These clones do not express normal Fyn protein as determined by immune-complex kinase reaction using anti-Fyn antibody. Stimulation through the TCR for antigen, either by APC bearing antigen or by anti-CDBE monoclonal antibody (mAb), resulted in comparable levels of proliferation, lymphokine production, and cytolysis by clones from both normal and fyn" mice (Qian et al., these proceedings). In contrast, stimulation through Thy-1, using soluble (or cross-linked) anti-Thy-1 mAbs, was deficient in these Fyn-clones as measured by these responses. Thy-1 expression on the Fyn. clones, as determined by flow cytometry, was comparable to that observed on normal clones. Thus, ~5 9~' ' appears to be selectively required for the activation of these T cell clones through Thy-1. We are currently investigating the early signaling events in these Fyn-T cell clones. V 576 TYROSINE KINASE LYN AND SYK REGULATE THE B   MOBILIZATION THROUGH THE DISTINCT B cell antigen receptors (BCR) are multi-component complexes consisting of the surface immunoglobulin (slg) and accessory molecules with associating protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs). A spleen tyrosine kinase. Syk, in porcine B cells and a 72 kDa PTK, PTK72. in murine B cells associate with the BCR. We have isolated a full length cDNA encoding the human homologue of Syk. This cDNA predicted a polypeptide consisting of two N-terminal SH2 domains and a C-terminal tyrosine kinase domain. Syk is highly conserved between human and swine and is homologous to the T cell-associated PTK ZAP-70. Both Syk mRNA and protein were detected in cells derived from multiple hematopoietic lineages. Within the B cell compartment, Syk was expressed from early B lineage cells to plasma cells, suggesting that Syk may participate in signaling cascades other than that of the BCR. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Syk associating with the BCR complex in human was rapidly augmented subsequent to slgM cross-linking. lmmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that in human B cells Syk can associate with the Src-family kinase Lyn and additional phosphoproteins of 76 and 120 kDa in size. GST fusion proteins consisting of the SH2 domains of human Syk were generated to examine the interaction of Syk with the BCR. We detected phospho-tyrosine-dependent binding to components of the BCR with a fusion protein with both SH2 domains, but not fusion proteins with only one SH2 domain. We have also identified EBV-transformed B lymphoblastoid cell lines that could not generate any increase in intracellular free Ca2+ upon slgM cross-linking. The potential role of Syk in this BCR signaling defect will be discussed. An early consequence of T cell activation is an increase in intracellular calcium concentration. This is usually studied using a population of cells and the changes observed represent an average of that population. Recent advances in video laser microscopic techniques enable the examination of individual cells over time following stimulation. Using a wide variety of cell types it has been shown that cclls do not simply increase intracellular calcium but often have characteristic oscillations in calcium concentration which can vary in amplitude and frequency. These observations suggest the hypothesis that different patterns of calcium flux may be associated with different late events in cell activation, such as proliferation or apoptosis, or may corizldte with a specific pattern of lymphokine secretion. Experiments were done using normal mouse CD4t T cells (including CD45RBhi and CD15RBlo subsets), mouse Thl and Th2 clones, as well as various mutant BW5147 cell lines which have been transfected with different individual isoforms of CD45, or a GPI-linked form of CD45 which lacks the cytoplasmic tyrosine phosphatase domains. Following cross-linking o l CD3 (using soluble anti-CD3 followed by a second antibody crosslinker, or using plate hound anti-CD3) normal mouse T cells, Thclones, and CD45-transfected BW cells flux calcium in a similar manner. However. BW cells which do not express CD45, or express the GPIlinked form of CD45 do not increase intracellular Ca following CD3 cross-linking. These cells do, however, secrete IL-2. When normal CD3t T cells are separated into CD45RBhi and CD45RBlo cells the frequency of responding cells is higher in the CD45RBhi subset although the pattern of C a t + flux is not significantly different. When anti-CD4 and anti-CD3 are simultaneously added, followed by secondary antibody to crosslink CD4 and CD3 together the calcium flux in individual T cells is quite prolonged with an extended plateau phase as compared lo crosslinking with antiLCD3 alone which generally consists of a single calcium spike of relatively short duration. This occurs in both CD45RBhi and RBIo subsets. Further work is being done using Th clones and T cell receptor transgenic mice and antigen presenting cells to simultaneously exaniine cell-cell contact and early activation events using antigen-pulsed antigen presenting cells and allogeneic stimulator cells. To define the role of proliferation on GL y l transcription, the effect of DNA synthesis inhibitors was tested. Incubation of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus IL-4 activated B cells with hydroxyurea reduced the amount of GL y l RNA. Activated B cells were separated according to cell cycle phase by elutriation. In these experiments GL y l RNA was much reduced in cells in G 1 phase, as compared to S phase. We have also tested wether this S phase restriction is mediated by induction of factors binding to to the GL yl promoter. Although numerous efforts have been made to develop alternative methods, the standard 'Chromium (51Cr) release assay is still most commonly used to measure cell-mediated cytotoxicity, despite obvious disadvantages such as handling of radioisotopes and extended processing time for counting large numbers of samples. Here we describe the CARE-LASS system, that is closely related to the conventional "Cr release assay but takes advantage of a fluorescent target cell label. CARE-LASS is a highly sensitive, fast, simple and safe fluorometric micro assay. Using automated fluorescence scanners the processing time is reduced to one second per sample. We tested the CARE-LASS system using various target cell lines, different effector to target (E:T) ratios and by titration of antigen. The CARE-LASS system provides a reliable and sensitive method to measure cell-mediated cytotoxicity. Blk, Lyn and Fyn(T) are tyrosine kinases of the Src family that have been implicated in signalling through the B cell antigen receptor (sIg). Using an h assay for phosphoprotein binding to GST-SH2 fusion proteins, we found that the SH2 domains of Blk, Lyn and Fyn(T), when tested under conditions that favor highaffinity interactions, preferentially bind distinct sets of phosphoproteins from B cells. A subset of the proteins recovered from a Blk SH2 affinity matrix are substrates for sIg-activated tyrosine kmase(s). [Malek, S. N. and Desiderio, S. (1993 ) J. Biol. Chem. m:22557-22565] By SH2 affinity chromatography, we have obtained sufficient amounts of selected Blk SH2 binding proteins for isolation of peptides and determination of amino acid sequence. We have isolated molecular clones for two of these phosphoproteins, pp90 and pp76. (1) An oligonucleotide based on peptide sequence from pp90, which preferentially hinds the Blk SH2 domain, was used to isolate a partial cDNA from spleen, which then served as a probe to clone full-length pp90. As the larger cDNA encodes several other peptides obtained from pp90, it appears to represent the pp90 transcript. The predicted sequence of 535 amino acid residues is very acidic (PI= 4.4 ) and has no known homologues. (2) Degenerate, synthetic oligonucleotides, based on peptide sequences from pp76, were used to amplify a partial cDNA. This probe was used to isolate a cDNA clone containing an open reading frame of 749 codons; by sequence, this clone appears to encode a serinehhreonine kinase. The translation product of this cDNA clone migrates anomalously slowly on SDS-PAGE gels. Antibodies against this putative kinase detect a major species with an apparent size of 130 kDa and a minor species with an apparent size of 76 kDa in B cell lysates and among proteins eluted from the Blk SH2 affinity matrix, suggesting that the kinase interacts, directly or indirectly, with the Blk SH2 domain. Monoclonal antibody LR-2 defines a cell-surface signaling molecule expressed on murine B cells. We have previously shown that the LR-2 molecule associates with slg on the B cell surface and that its ligation with mAb inhibits the growth of cells of the WEHI-231 but not the CH31 or CH33 lymphoma lines. The proliferation of normal B cells driven by LPS or anti-Ig + 1L-4 i s also inhibited in the presence of mAb. Resting B cells are LR-2 -ye, but expression of the molecule is induced following activation with LPS. Levels of LR-2 expression have been investigated under various conditions of stimulation and found not to correlate with changes in sIg or class I1 expression. Here we report on the biochemical characterisation of the LR-2 molecule and on the nature of the molecules with which it associates in the B cell membrane. The effects of LR-2 ligation on B cell differentiation have been analysed and our findings suggest that inhibitory signals are delivered to virgin but not memory B cells. Our studies also indicate that the signals transduced after LR-2 ligation differ from those which follow the cross-linking of slg. The implications of these findings for the regulation of B cell proliferation and the induction of tolerance will be discussed. During the development of thymocytes, certain signals through T cell receptor (TCR) induce apoptotic cell death to eliminate autoreactive clones. Activation of T cell hybridoma also induces cell death. Growth arrest at G1 phase of the cell cycle precedes the cell death. Activation of mature T cells through TCR also induces growth arrest and subsequent cell death if these cells have been preactivated. In order to study cell cycle regulation by the signal through TCR and the link between the growth arrest and the induction of cell death, the regulation of G1 cyclins, cdk2 and cdc2 genes upon activation of T cells were studied. The expression of cyclin D3, E and cdk2 reduced immediately after stimulation while cyclin D2 increased. The expression of cdc2 reduced gradually. The induction of growth arrest at G I phase and subsequent cell death were observed with cloned T cell lines upon the activation through TCR when these cells were proliferating in the presence of IL2. The down-regulation of cyclin D3, E and cdk2 and up-regulation of cyclin D2 were also detected. In an attempt to study the role of down-regulated genes to the cell cycle, transfectants of T cell hybridomas expressing high levels of cyclinD3, E or cdk2 were established. Overexpression of cyclinD3 or E made cells less sensitive to the signal that induces growth arrest while the overexpression of cdk2 had no effect, indicating that cyclinD3 and E play a crucial role for the growth arrest induced by the activation of T cells. The critical role of both receptor and src-family non-receptor tyrosine kinases in cellular signal transduction and cell growth regulation is now well documented. Regulation of the activity of src kinases is thought to occur, in part, through the phosphorylation of highly conserved carboxyl-terminal tyrosine residues. Although the src-family includes several molecules with tissue or cell type restricted expression, the only kinase implicated in the regulatory phosphotylation of these enzymes is p50CSk. Here we report t e structure and expression of the first le kocyte specific p50c'-related kinase, Isk. Similar to p5OCs' , the deduced protein sequence of Isk includes a single tyrosine kinase catalytic domain, SH2 and SH3 domains, a short amino terminus, and no autophosphorylation or carboxylterminal tyrosine residues (src Y416 and Y527, respectively). In addition, neither Isk or p50CSk contain the amino-terminal myristylation site characteristic of the src-family kinases. Unlike csk, which is ubiquitously expressed, lsk mRNA is expressed constitutively only in brain and natural killer cells. Significant Isk expression can be induced in peripheral T cells and monocytes with mitogens and cytokines, respectively. Polyclonal antisera reactive with the predicted C-terminus of Isk specifically recognizes a 55 kDa polypeptide in immunoblots of NK but not T-cell lysate In agreement with the mRNA expression pattern, p5JSk is induced upon ctivation. The discovery of a putative kinase such as p55"' raises the possibility of tissue specific src-regulatory pathways. Recently, several new members of the syclin-dependent kinase (cdk) family of proteins have been identified and postulated to be important for cell cycle progression Our goals are to define the events that control growth and proliferation of normal T cells, particularly those signals that render these cells competent and those that control progression or passage through the Restriction (R) point. Competent T cells are those that exit Go, but stop their passage through the cell cycle at a defined point before ently into S phase (i e., before the R point). These cells have been termed competent due to the fact that the addition of a second signal such as interleukin-2 (L-2) will allow the cells to progress into S phase and undergo cell division Our data show that expression of cdk4, but not of cdk2, was induced in competent T cells independent of an IL-2-dependent signal. A further increase in cdk4 mRNA expression was seen upon stimulation of competent T cells by L-2. IL-2 also induced the expression of cdk2 mRNA in these cells. Thus cdk4 may be necessary, but not sufficient for progression through G,. Furthermore, the absence of cdk2 expression may be responsible, at least in part, for the growth arrest seen in competent T cells. An alternative possibility is that cdk2 expression is blocked in these cells due to the growth-arrest occurring prior to the transcriptional activation of the cdk2 gene. Src-family protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) play an essential role in antigen-receptor initiated lymphocyte activation. Their activity is largely regulated by a negative regulatory tyrosine which is a substrate for the activating action of the CD45 phosphotyrosine phosphatase (PTPase) or, conversely, the suppressing action of the cytosolic p50CSk PTK. We have found that CD45 is phosphorylated by p50c"k in virro on two tyrosine residues, one of them identified as Tyr-1193. This residue was not phosphorylated by the T cell PTKs, p561rk or p59Ih. Tyr-1193 was phosphorylated in intact T cells, and phosphorylation increased upon treatment with PTPase inhibitors, indicating that this tyrosine is a target for a constitutively active PTK. Co-transfection of CD45 and p50c"k into COS cells also lead to tyrosine phosphorylation of CD45 in vivo. through the SH2 domain of the kinase and p50csk-mediated phosphorylatlon of CD45 caused a several-fold increase in its PTPase activity. We have also found that p5OcSk is activated in Jurkat T cells within I min after stimulation of the cells with antiLCD3 mAbs. In parallel with this activation, p50c'k formed a stable complex with one major 72 kDa tyrosine phosphorylated protein and minor polypeptides at 90 and 110 kDa. The isolated SH2 domain of p50CSk specifically bound the 72 kDa protein in lysates from activated, but not resting, T or B cells. By several criteria, the associated proteins were not tyrosine kinases themselves and they did not react with antibodies to a panel of known proteins. Our results suggest that p5OrJk ic activated and engaged via its SH2 domain during T cell activation and may also have CD45 as a physiological target. T cell receptor-mediated Gal+ influx, depending on the presence of costimulation, can lead either to activation via calcineurin or to a prolowed state of interleukin-2 (IL-2) non-responsi\,eness via unknown signallTng mechanisms. Ca?+-mediated negative regulation of IL-2 transcription can be induced in Jurkat T cells by pretreatment with a Ca2+ ionophore causing a significant and specific block of inducible IL-2 transcription. Calcineurin does not appear to mediate this block as transfection of constitutive calcineurin in the absence of costimulation potentiates rather than diminishes later IL-2 activation. Multifunctional Ca'+lcalmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaM kinase) is a mediator of calcium signals in diverse sionalling pathways. Because of its potential involvement in T lymphocytc &nal transduction, we have cloned and characterized an isofonn of CaM kinase from human T cells (Nghiem, et a1 JBC 2fS2.5471). Lymphocyte CaM kinase displayed two phases of autophosphorylation characteristic of CaM kinases. including the phase which converts it to a partially C&+-independent species. By following conversion of CaM kinase to a calcium-independent enzyme we found that T cell receptor signalling potently activates endogenous multifunctional CaM kinase. Transfection of a partially constitutive mutant of the T lymphocyte CaM kinase blocks 90%, of PMA + ionomycin-inducible 1L2 reporter gene activity. Presence of the constitutive CaM kinase did not however affect basal transcription from a 6-actin promoter or PMA-stimulated c-fin transcription. Moreover. in the same cells in which IL-2 is blocked and two endogenous promoters are unaffected. an RSV promoter is activated 300% by constitutive CaM kinase. Analysis of the critical transcriptional regulatory sites in the IL-2 enhancer revealed that CaM kinase exerts effects at several sites. partially blocking stimulated transcriptional activity from multimen of NFAT (69% block). AP-I ( 3 7 4 ) . and NFIL-2A (53%) DNA elements linked to reporter genes. Constitutive CaM kinase also attenuates IL-2 activation via constitutive calcineurin plus PMA. These findings suggest that these two Ca?+/calmodulin responsive enzymes. CaM kinase and calcineurin, could mediate the divergent effects of Ca2+ signals in T lymphocyte regulation. V591 REGULATION OF ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC T CELL   PROLIFERATION BY MICROTUBULE FUNCTION AND T  CELL SURFACE-EXPRESSED MHC CLASS 11, QUOC V. Nguyen, Rebecca L. King. Department of Pediatrics, SUNY Health Science Center, Syracuse, NY 13210. We have characterized the regulation of antigen oresentation by microtubule function and by T helper surfacelexpressed MHC class I1 molecules in a tetanus toxoid (TT)-specific, class 11-restricted antigen presentation system. We have used nocodazole (ND), and tax01 (TX), to treat either antigen presenting cells (APC) or T clones, and pre-incubation Of T cells with whole or Fab of 9.3F10, an anticlass I1 monoclonal antibody (*), before T cells proliferation assay. When APC's were treated with microtubule disrupters during TT pulse, T clones' proliferation was markedly reduced compared to parallel untreated experiments. Both drugs also decreased T clones' proliferation when only T cells were pre-treated. The inhibitory effect of ND was partially reversible while TX's action was irreversible. When T helper cells were preincubated with 9.3F10 mAb (both for 1 hr on ice, or by overnight incubation at 3 7 ' C then washed) before incubation with TT-pulsed irradiated APC, there was a reduction of T clones' proliferation. Similar decrease in T cell proliferation was obtained with in papaindigested incubation Fab of 9.3F10. Since MHC class I1 processing and transport were independent of microtubule function (at least on B cells), we are testing the hypothesis that the disruption of microtubule function and ligand binding to surface-expressed MHC class I1 on T cells both inhibit transduction of secondary messenger signals crucial for T cell activation and proliferation. To examine the role of src-family kinases in T cell activation, we overexpressed p561CL. p59fYn and p6WrC in a murine, ovalbuminspecific, CD4+, class I1 -resmcted T cell hybridoma. Clones overexpressing wild-type and constitutively active forms of p59fvn exhibited increased peptide-dependent interleukin-2 (IL-2) release. Control cells or cells expressing p60src were unaffected. Clones overexpressing wild-type and constitutively active forms p561ck released IL-2 in a peptide-independent major histocompatability (MHC)-restricted fashion. Moreover, clones expressing a p56kk mutant which is incapable of associating with CD4 expressed a similar phenotype. The p561ck overexpressing clones were also distinct biochemically in that they could be stimulated to release IL-2 through activation of protein kinase C alone. These data extend the overall evidence supporting a positive role for p59fyn in T cell activation and demonstrate that p59fYn and p56'C' have distinct roles in T cell activation. In addition, these studies demonstrate a CD4-independent mechanism of p561ck signalling and link p561ck to a Ca++-dependent pathway of signal transduction. Protein tyrosine phosphorylation has been demonstrated to be essential for signal transduction by the T-cell receptor. Anergic Tcells are unable to signal through the T-cell receptor after an initial anergizing event. Signalling through the T-cell receptor without a co-stimulatory signal is thought to induce anergy. Anergic cells undergo a number of activation events, but fail to produce IL-2 or proliferate when re-challenged with APC and antigen. Protein tyrosine phosphorylation in anergic mouse cells (in vivo and in vitro)has been shown to be impaired(Bhandoola, A. The Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) immortalizes human primary B-cells in vitro. The Latent Membrane Protein 1 (LMPl) is one of 10 EBV genes expressed in immortalized B cells. LMPI is made of six transmembrane domains, a cytoplasmic 25aa amino-terminal tail and a 200aa carboxylterminal cytoplasmic tail. LMPI forms discrete patches (0.2-1 Krn diameter) on the plasma membrane and associates with the cytoskeleton and thus makes a bridge between the plasma membrane and the cytoskeleton. We have transfected the LMPI gene, together with a truncated rat CD2 gene as co-transfection sortable marker, in human primary B-cells and made the following observations (within 48 hours of transfection): 1) Transient LMPI gene expression results in normal LMPl protein distribution, i.e. formation of discrete patches on the plasma membrane: 2) LMPI induces dramatic cell size increase, and upregulation of the surface activation markers CAM-1, LFA-1, CD21, CD23 and CD71 (the transferrin receptor; a marker of readiness for S-phase); 3) LMPl transient expression induces transient DNA synthesis (peak at around 48 hours post-transfection); 4) The induction of CD71 by LMPl is inhibited by co-transfection of the Rb gene (showing that LMPl does not bypass this G l / S transition check-point); 5) LMPl induces bcl-2 expression. We conclude that LMPI expression is sufficient to reconstitute the essential early events of B-cell immortalization by EBV. Elucidating the precise biochemical activity of the LMPl protein, which shares no sequence homology with any known protein, should reveal key aspects of B-cell growth regulation. Allen J Norin Departments of Medicine, Surgery, and Anatomy & Cell Biology, SUNY Health Science Center, Brooklyn, NY 11203 Evidence for three mechanisms of lymphocyte mediated destruction of tumor cells have been demonstrated involving; DNA breakdown, granule exocytosis and osmotic shock The latter process undoubtedly requires energy to transport extracellular H+ across the plasma membrane. It is possible that the subunit of H+ transporting ATPase (found on the surface of tumor cells) may provide this source of energy by hydrolysis of extracellular ATP. Previous studies suggested the utilization of alternate cytolytic pathways by a human lymphoid tumor cell line (YT) YT destruction of the EBV transformed tumor line (Raji) was inhibited by low doses of antibody directed against the ATP binding region of 8-H+ ATPase (anti$). Cytolytic activity of YT was, in fact, elevated by high concentrations of anti-p though similar concentrations of this antibody blocked LAK and NK cytotoxicity by 75% to 100%, respectively Since ! 3 H' ATPase is expressed on YT as well as the target cells, high antibody concentrations may serve to crosslink these cells resulting in P-H+ATPase independent destruction To examine this hypothesis we studied cytotoxic killing of PMA treated YT cells in the presence of high concentrations of anti-p. Pretreatment of YT cells with PMA exhausts PKC activity required for granule exocytosis (. TI 143 2 120,1989). We reasoned, therefore, that under this latter condition, elevated cytolytic activity would not be observed with high doses of anti-! 3 if crosslinking of effector-target cells utilized the granule exocytosis pathway PMA treatment alone inhibited YT cytotoxicity by 50%. Antip treatment of YT increased cytotoxicity by 50%. Cytolytic activity of PMA treated YT cells was not enhanced by incubation with high concentrations of anti+ (ie. stimulation of cytotoxicity by anti-p is prevented by preincubation with PMA). We conclude that anti-p augmented killing of YT is due to a PKC dependent cytolytic pathway (eg granule exocytosis) It is not clear, whether the PKC dependent pathway and the ATP dependent pathway function simultaneously. The c!totoxic quinolone CP-115,953 specifically excerts its inhibitory effect upm eukaryotic topoisomerase 11. CP-115,953 stimulates DNA cleavage mediated by topoisomerase I1 wjith a potency approximately 600 times greater than ciproflonacin, a quinolone antibacterial agent that currentlq is in clinical use. Since ciprofloxacin has been reported to strongly enhance interleukin-? (IL-2) production, we considered it important t o study the effect of CP-115.953 (6.15 and 25 pM) on 1L-2 and interferon-., (IFN-U) mRNA and protein expression in mitogen stimulated human penpheral blood lymphocytes. Furthermore, IL-2 gene transcription was investigated by transfection of the human T-cell lymphoma cell line Jurkat with CAT-reporter gene constructs. CP-115,953 enhanced IL-2 mRNA levels up to 8-fold and IFN-u mRNA concenirations up to 6.5-fold. In contmt, ciprofloxacin strongly induced mRNA\ for IL-2 (20-fold) and IFNU (7.8-fold). However, CP-115,953 showed a more prolonged kinetics of IFNr mRNA when compared to ciprofloucin. I L-2 transcription (I L-2-CAT-expression) w'as increased by both CP-115.953 (1.8-fold) and ciprofloxacin (4.5-fold) Ciproflouacin was a greater inducer of IL-2 production, but pelrormed an equal11 low stimulatory action as CP-l15,953 on IFN-V synthesis. mRNA lei els for the oncogenes c-Jun and c-fos were unchanged in the presence of CP-I 15,953 suggesting a topoisomerase II inhibition and not an act!\ ation pathway resembltng the DNA damaging response reported in the prcscnce of cytostatic drugs or x-ray irradiation. The promising stimulativc elfect of T cell cytokines in combination with a cell inhibiting activity by CP-I 15,953 warrants further investigations. The amino acid sequence has 9 3 . 5 % identity with the previously characterized porcine syk. SH2 domains, syk has sequence identity of 62% and 55% respectively with ZAP-70. This sequence identity is generally around 30.40% for other PTK. Based on the known structures of the SH2 domains of src and abl, as well as the modeling program "profile", we generated model structures of the N and C terminal SH2 domains of syk. For each SH2 domain, there is a predicted well conserved phospho-tyrosine binding pocket and a less well conserved hydrophobic specificity pocket. However, the surface of the regions bridging these two pockets is significantly different from each other and from src and abl suggesting different substrate specificities. Using these predicted structures as well as predicted regulatory regions in the kinase domain, we targeted mutations that are likely to effect functions specific to syk. In conjunction with domain specific antibodies, these transfectants are being used to elucidate the role of syk in BCR-mediated signaling. We have previously described the isolation of a collagen type II (Cll) specific human autoreactive T-cell clone. To establish a stable read-out system for investigating the structural requirements for CII-recognition, we have transfected chimeric TCR a-and p-chains, consisting of human variable regions and mouse constant parts, into a mouse T-cell hybridoma devoid of endogenous TCR-chains but expressing transfected human CD4. This cell line can be stimulated for IL-2 production by cocrosslinking of anti-TCR with anti-CD4 antibodies as well as by the specific antigen and antigen derived-peptides. Cocrosslinking but not crosslinking of either anti-TCR or anti-CD4 alone resulted in tyrosin phosphorylation of several intracellular proteins. Surprisingly, activation of the transfectant with TCRligands does not lead to an increase of cytosolic Ca2+concentration. It was interesting to note, that the transfected Tcell hybridoma is not undergoing apoptosis after TCWCDC triggering. In conclusion, early activation steps may exist, that are able to circumvent the IP3/Ca2+-pathway in TCR-mediated stimulation of IL-2 transcription. 23: 168, 1993) . In addition, previous work by one of us @S) indicated that an&@ crosslinking of IgM receptors on a subset of murine B-cell lymphomas led to growth arrest at G1:S border and subsequent apoptosis. Recent data indicate that growth arrest and apoptosis in these lymphomas can be prevented by treatment with antisense oligonucleotides against c-myc. This approach was based on the fac: that antiy causes levels of c-myc message and protein to transiently rise and then disappear; antisense oligos interfere with growth arrest and apoptosis by preventing the loss of c-myc message (G. Fischer, et al. J . Exp. Med., in press,  1994) . In the current studies, we tested the effect of antisense for cmyc on the induction of apoptosis in transgenic and normal B cells. Interestingly, high concentrations of polyclonal anti-w were able to induce apoptosis within 24-32 hours in both adult normal and transgenic B cells in vitro. Antisense for c-myc prevented both spontaneous and anti-p-induced apoptosis. The implications of this result on the ability of anti-p to signal for B-cell deletion in the presence or absence of co-stimulation will be discussed. (Supported by NIH AD9691 and The Max-Planck Gesellschaft). PROTEIN TYROSINE KINASE FYN AND SERINEITHREONINE  KINASE (PKC a) ,Gabriella Sarmay, Israel Pecht and Janos Gergely, Lab. of Immunoregulation, Vienna Int. Res. Coop. Center at SFI, Vienna, Austria; Dept. of Chemical Immunology, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel; and Dept. of Immunol. of L. Eotvos Univ. God, Hungary. We have reported that FcyRII are one of those proteins that undergo serlne phosphorylation shortly after B-cell activation. Upon affinity isolation of FcyRlI, several molecular entities are co-isolated from the lysates of BL41 Burkitt lymphoma line and tonsil B-cells which undergo "in vitro" phosphorylation in the immune complexassociated kinase assay. The majorlty of thls phosphorylation occurred on ser/thr residues. Furthermore, several of the proteins co-isolated with FcyRII from the lysates of BL41 cells activated by sIgM cross-linking undergo phosphorylation on tyr residues in the intact cells. One of these, correspondxg to the 59 kDa co-precipitated component, is identified as the protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) fyn, further two molecules were found to co-migrate with ras GAP and PLC y, respectively. Clustering the surface IgM molecules on BL41 cells enhanced the in vitro phosphorylation of all molecules coprecipitated with FcyRII as well as that of the exogenously added PTK substrate, enolase. Kinase renaturation assays suggest that at least two major renaturable protein kinases associate with FcYRII. While the 59 kDa component co-migrate to the PTK fyn, the 85 kDa one corresponds to the protein kinase C a. Activation of PKC induces an immediate desensitization of FcyRII, possibly as a consequence of its phosphorylation on ser residue. activation of phospholipase C and the subsequent hydrolysis of phosphotidy inositols yielding IP3 and DAG. These second messengers, in tum, are responsible for the mobilization and activation of intracellular calcium stores and PKC respectively. Of the PLC isoforms expressed in T cells, only y is known to be activated via tyrosine phosphorylation, an early event following TCR engagement, while the p isofoms are activated by association with the a subunit of the heterotrimeric class of GTP-binding proteins comprising the Gq family. Perturbation of purified plasma memhrmes from the Jurkat T cell line with anti-TCR monoclonal antibodies, results in enhanced binding of 32P-GTP to several membrane associated proteins. The apparent molecular weights of the proteins that bind GTP, the specificity of nucleotide binding and the ability of an antibody directed against the common GTP-binding motif to block enhanced binding, suggest that the responding proteins of approximately 50,40 and 30 kDa represent a subunits of the heterotrimeric class of G proteins. An additional protein displaying enhanced GTP binding upon anti-TCWCD? triggering appears to be the chain of the CD3 complex. Pretreatment of membranes with the protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein or incubation in the presence of a noncleavable analog of ATP, significantly reduces or abolishes the enhanced 32P-GTP binding observed upon antibody stimulation. exchange bound GDP for GTP as a result of engagement of the TCFUCD3 complex and that this exchange is regulated by tyrorine kinase activity. This represents a novel mechanism by which tyrosine kinases and G proteins may operate in concert to effectively initiate a T cell response. Taken together, these data suggest that G proteins are induced to Activation of T lymphocytes is a complex process requiring recognition of antigen by the T cell antigen receptor as well as concomitant signals from antigen presenting cells. These events lead to the activation of second messenger pathways such as tyrosine kinases and protein kinase C and to an increase in intracellular Ca". These signals finally initiate a sequencial activation of a group of genes that in tum give rise to proliferation and immunologic function. Detail mechanisms of these events, however, are still unclear. In order to investigate the regulation of early phase gene exp-ession of T lymphocytes, we have constructed luciferase reporter plasmids for Recent reports suggest that the breakdown of inositol phosphate glycan (gly-PI) and the induction of the lipid second messenger molecules myristylated diaglycerol (mDAG) and possibly myristylated phosphatidic acid (mPA) are involved in the signal transduction events mediated by IL2. We show here that CR576, representative of a novel class of synthetic small molecule compounds, inhibits the IL2 induced breakdown of gly-PI and the subsequent generation of mDAG and mPA in an IL2 dependent cytotoxic T-cell clone, CT6. (32576 inhibits IL2 induced proliferation in CT6 cells as well as the proliferation of anti-CD3-activated thymocytes or anti-CD3-activated thymocytes or splenic T-cells in response to IL2 (IC-50s 200-850nM). Flow cytometric analysis reveals that CT-2576 does not inhibit CD3-mediated upregulation of the p55 IL2 receptor (CD25). In ConA-activated thymocytes CT2576 has no effect on IL2 release, but markedly inhibits release of interferon-y and IL-4. CT2576 can induce antigen-specific Tcell anergy in a primary mixed tumor-lymphocyte culture using responding C57BU6 spenocytes (H-2b) and 2PK3 B-cell tumor cells (H2d). Following a five day co-culture with CT2576 and antigen, splenocytes were unable to respond to a rechallenge with the primary antigen but could respond normally to anti-CD3 stimulation. Preliminary data using lysates from IL2 stimulated CT6 cells shows that (32576 has no effect on the IL2-induced MAP kinase activity, nor does it inhihit IL-2 induced c-myc expression. CT2576 also showed little effect on p70S6 kinase activity. These data suggest that the mechanism of immunosuppression of CT2576 is distinct from that of rapamycin as well as the calcineurin inhibitors cyclosporin A and FK506. CT2576 may have significant utility in unraveling the mechanisms of IL2 signaling, and more importantly, may be representative of a new class of immunosuppressive compounds. i response required for T cell proliferation following ionomycin stimulation could be much higher than following stimulation with UCHTl because one type of [CaZ+li response is oscillating (after UCHT1) whereas the other is not (after ionomycin). Various experiments (namely, using low thapsigargin concentrations to elicit ICa2+1, oscillations) show that this hypothesis is incorrect. The alternative explanation is that, in combination with other metabolic pathways activated by UCHTl, Ca2+ requirements become very low. Their nature remains to be determined. A puzzling observation is that with very low concentrations of UCHTl (1 /50.000), tyrosine phosphorylations are almost undetectable.  The tyrosine protein kinase p60fYn is involved in signaling through the T-cell antigen receptor (TcR). However, the interactions of p60fY n with other proteins participating in TcRsignaling remain to be understood. W e previously demonstrated that p6OfY became enzymatically activated following TcRtriggering and that this activation was accompanied by tyrosine phosphorylation of two proteins coprecipitating with p60fY ", p82 and p116. Now we demonstrate that this association is mediated by the src-homology domains 2 and 3 of p60fY". It appears that the 82-kDa protein binds SH2 as well as SH3, whereas binding of p116 is strictly SH2-specific. Neither p561Ck nor p62C-Yes were able to coprecipitate these proteins in significant quantities from cell lysates. However in vitro, following kinase assay in the p60fYn immune complexes. p82 and p116 could be reprecipitated by GSTfusion proteins containing sequences of p60fYn or p62C-Yes. but not lhat of p561Ck. The SH2 domains of all three T-cell src-related kinases bound p116 and p82, and the SH3 domains bound p82, thus demonstrating a low selectivity of binding. It has been shown that phosphorylation of the p60fY"-associated proteins occurs in various kinds of T cells and several other hematopoietic cell lines. The p116 protein has been shown to become tyrosine phosphorylated in vivo Following ligation of the TcR. Stable association of p116 and p82 with p60fYn as well as the wide distribution of 115-120-kDa p6OfYn-associated proteins in hematopoietic cells may suggest that p116 and p82 play a role as physiological substrates and/or regulators of p60fY n . The antigen receptors on B and T cells transmit their activation signals to the cell interior by associating with and activation of specific nonreceptor tyrosine kinases. Most of these intracellular kinases contain at least one of the noncatalytical src homology region 2 (SH2) domains. By binding tyrosine phosphorylated proteins SH2 domains connect different cytoplasmic components of the signal transduction cascade. To test the binding specificity of SH2 domains, Glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins were produced encompassing SH2 domains of src-related tyrosine kinases, of the ZAP-70 tyrosine kinase and of the GTPase-activating protein GAP. The GST-fusions were used in a Western Blot assay to probe antiphosphotyrosine precipitates from non-stimulated and stimulated B and T cell lines. From each cell type only subsets of antigen receptor-regulated phosphoproteins were detected. In this assay the phosphoproteins are presented to the SH2 domains in a denatured form. To test for direct proteinprotein interaction the GST-fusions were used for affinity purification. Most of the GST-fusions precipitated a set of stimulation-dependent phosphoproteins similar to that obtained with anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies. The GST-fusion containing the C-and N-terminal SH2 domains of ZAP-70 bound only components of the T cell receptor. Structurally, the results show that the three-dimensional conformation of an SH2 ligand contributes to the binding specificity of SH2 domains. Functionally, the restricted binding capacity of the SH2 domains from ZAP-70 suggest a model of how the ZAP-70 kinase is recruited specifically to the activated antigen receptor. In this study, cngagemcnt of MHC class I and class I1 molecules with specific mAh was shown to also generate signals that could result in inhihition of lymphocyte homotypic adhesion. Two mAh reactive with class I1 Ag, HAB-2 and HAB-3, and one mAh reactive with class I Ag. HAB-4, were developed that inhibited homotypic adhesion of B and T cell lines induced through class 11, CD19. CD20. CD39. CD40, and Leu-13 as well as through phorhol esters. In addition, the spontaneous adhesion exhibited by som 11 lines was also ahrogatcd by hinding of these mAh. The HAB-2 and HAB-4 mAh wcre inhibitory at concentrations as low as 0.1 pg/ml. Crosshlocking expcrimcnts demonstrated that anti-class I mAh that either induce, hlock or have n o effect on adhesion hind to distinct epitopes. Similar experiments with the anti-class I1 mAh revealed recognition olepitopes that are either distinct or overlap in part. MAh hinding to mutant class I molecules lacktng most of the cytoplasmic domain transfected into class I negative B cell lines wcrc ahle to generate thc appropriate signals that either induced o r inhibited homotypic adhesion. In contrast. mAh hinding to a chimeric rnoleculc in which the traiismcmhraiie and cytoplasmic domains of class I wcre exchanged with those of the HB 15 molecule did licit induce (11-inhibit homotypic adhesion. Thus. engagement of distinct cpitopes 011 class I or class I1 molecules generated diflerent signals which either upregulated 01inhihited homotypic adhesion. The signal transduction through class I molecules required the transmemhranc domain. hut not the cytoplasmic domain. In addition to demonstrating complexity in the signal transduction pathways activatcd, these results suggcst that MHC class I and class I1 molecules as signalling molecules may he involved in the regulation 01 adhesive event$ during lymphocyte activation. The results also suggest that src-kinase family members interact with IL-ZRj3 between amino acid residues 323 and 350. Despite activation of these kinases the cells were not able to proliferate in response to IL2. To study the role of IL-ZRy, we have employed a series of cell lines derived from patients with X-linked SCID. We have characterized signaling defects in these cells, and shown that there are several proteins absent from the IL-ZR signaling complex following IL-2 treatment. Studies are in progress to reconstitute IL-2 dependent signaling in these cells by gene transfer, and to identify the molecules that are associated with the renewed presence of IL-ZRy. recognised by more than one Ets protein, discrimination between binding sites probably occurs at the level of specific protein-protein interactions. We have used a modified yeast two hybrid system to identify and study cofactors interacting with the members of the Ets family expressed in T cells. The activation of lymphocytes by antigens is heavily de endent on nutritional status. Failure t o react t o deyayed hypersensitivity skin testing (DHST) with recall antigens i s common i n older people and has been associated with an increased incidence of infectious diseases and with greater mortality from a l l causes. There is evidence t h a t compromised micronutrient nutrition may be one factor that results in depressed cellular immune functions in older people. A placebo-controlled, double-blind t r i a l of the e f f e c t s of daily micronutrient supplements on blood micronutrient concentrations and DHST responses t o a panel o f 7 recall antigens was conducted. The over-the-counter micronutrient supplement used contained low t o moderate doses o f 13 vitamins and 9 minerals. Subjects, aged 59-85. where randomly assigned t o placebo or micronutrient treatment groups. DHST and circulating concentrations of 9 micronutrients were measured before and a f t e r 6 and 12 months o f placebo or micronutrient ingestion. For the micronutrient group (n=29), there were s t a t i s t i c a l l y significant increases a t 6 and/or 12 months in serum concentrations of ascorbate, beta-carotene, f o l a t e , vitamin 86. and a1 ha tocopherol; these changes were not found i n the placego group (~2 7 ) . These data suggest good compliance with the study protocol. DHST responses (induration and the number of positive responses) were significantly increased a t 12 months i n the micronutrient group b u t not the placebo group. Most of the increase in DHST responses for male subjects in the micronutrient grou occurred by 6 months. but was delayed t o the 6-12 montR period in the women. The results demonstrate that daily supplementation with low doses of micronutrients can improve OHST responses i n older adults and that the timing of t h i s effect d i f f e r s i n men and women. (Supported by grants from Hoffmann-La Roche. Inc) We have tested the hypothesis that calcineurin ( C N ) , a calcium and calmodulin dependent serine/threonine protein phosphatase, plays a role in T cell activation a n d in mediating the immunosuppressive effects of CsA and FK506. We generated These findings show that distinct signals are required for T cell proliferation and lymphokine production, and that calcineurin is required for TCR/CD3 mediated T cell proliferation, but not for IL-2, IL-2 receptor, or IL-4 expression. The data also suggest that PMA plus ionomycin and ConA can stimulate T cell proliferation via alternative signaling pathways that are CN independent. Furthermore, when compared with normal T cells, C N I -T cells remained sensitive to CsA and FK506 with respect to proliferation and lymphokine production. Whether calcineurin itself is a physiological target for these drugs remained uncertain. We conclude that there are other physiological targets for CsA and FK506 in T cells. Extravasation from hlood to lymph is necessary for continuous lymphocyte recirculation and presumably for localization of antigen-responsive lymphocytes in lymph nodes draining sites of antigen-exposure. Previous studies have shown that lymphocytes treated with antibody to L-sclectin in viva no longer circulate to lymph nodes in vivo, indicating the dependence upon L-selectin for migration into lymph nodes. Among murine CD4 T cells, naive but not memory cells express L-selectin and appear to recirculate primarily, if not exclusively by w'ay of lymph node high endothelial venules (HEV). In contrast, memory CD4 T cells may utilize alternative adhesion receptors to migrate from the blood to lymph nodes either directly by HEV or alternatively, may first migrate to the tissues by normal or inflamed endothelium then into the lymph nodes by way of the afferent lymph. To funher examine the role of L-selectin in the T cell migration, we examined the in vivo effects of antibody to L-selectin (MEL-14) on the development of primary and memory CD4 T cell responses. Systemic exposure to MEL-14 resulted in marked depletion of naive CD4 T cells expressing high levels of CD45RB and low levels of CD44 from lymph nodes but not from spleen. Residual lym h node CD4 T cells were prrdominately memory phenotype (CD45RBP0, CD44h'). MEL-14 treatment one day prior to subcutaneous immunization with keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH) prevented priming of naive CD4 T cells for proliferation and cytokine production (IL-2, IL-4, IFN-y) in lymph nodes draining the site of injection, but not in the spleen. Primary humoral responses in vivo, as measured by serum IgM and IgGl antibody specific for KLH. were delayed following MEL-14 treatment by 3 to 5 days. The results suggest that naive cells were not depleted, but rather diverted to other sites where priming occurred. Memory CD4 responses. measured 2 months after priming, were normal in MEL-14 treated mice. In addition, in viva exposure to MEL-14 did not block the homing of memory CD4 T cells to lymph nodes. The results demonstrate that MEL-14 is exclusively utilized by naive CD4 T cells for recirculation to lymph nodes, and that such access is crucial for the development of local responses. The data suppoit the hypothesis that memory CD4 T cells utilize alternative adhesion molecules to migrate to sites of antigen exposure. A. et al., BBRC, in press) by using 5,5',6,6'tetrachloro-l,1',3,3 '-tetraethylbenzimidazolca~o~anine iodide (JC-I), a lipophilic cationic probe whose monomer emits at 527 nm after excitation at 490 nm. Depending on the membrane potential, JC-I is able of forming J-aggregates that are associated with a large shiff in emission (590 nm). The color of the dye changes reversibly from green to greenish orange as the mitochondrial membrane becomes more polarized. In two human cell lines (K562 and U937), we have studied by flow cytometry the changes in MMP provoked by the K+ ionophor valinomycin, a drug known to affect mitochondrial membrane potential, while the K+/H+ ionophor nigericin. known to affect intracellular pH but not MMP, was used as control. The incubation with valinomycin for 10 min. at 37% in a low K+ medium provoked a marked and dosedependent reduction in JC-1 greenish orange fluorescence, while nigericin had no effect. The same approach was used to analyze MMP variations in human lymphocytes during proliferation and apoptosis. A dramatic MMP decrease was present in preapoptotic and apoptotic cells but not in proliferating cells which presented higher green and orange fluorescences, thus suggesting that mitochondrial alterations play an important role in the onset of apoptosis. On the whole, the data suggest that it is possible to assess the functional status of mitochondria in intact lymphocytes in a variety of physiopathological conditions. Our results with such cells indicated that KLH-primed CD4+ T cells are similar to naive CD4+ T cells in that production of IL-4 required T cell differentiation, which was blocked by irradiation or mitomycin C pretreatment. However, in contrast to naive T cells, KLH-primed CD4+ T cells did not require the presence of 1L-4 in order to produce IL-4. Thus, addition of exogenous rlL-4 did not enhance optimal 1L-4 production, and culture of KLH primed CD4+ T cells with anti-IL-4 antibody did not ablate IL-4 production. Both high density (resting) as well as low density (partially activated) KLH-primed T cells could produce IL-4 in the absence of IL-4, supporting the idea that resting memory T cells are qualitatively different from naive resting T cells in their requirement for the induction of IL-4 synthesis. As expected high density KLH-primed CD4+ T cells required more time in vitro before IL-4 synthesis was observed compared to low density T cells. Although IL-4 production by high density T cells did not require the presence of 1L-4, the presence of IL-2 was absolutely required, since IL-4 synthesis was ablated in the presence of anti-IL-2 mAb. Addition of exogenous rIL-2 to these cultures also accelerated IL-4 production as measured either by IL4 mRNA transcripts or IL-4 in supernatants. In contrast, low density T cells produced IL-4 in the presence of any T cell growth factor, either IL-2 or IL-4. T cells differs from that in naive T cells, and suggest that therapies with anti-IL-4 mAb or with soluble IL-4 receptors designed to control IL-4 synthesis in memory T cells will be unsuccessful. These results indicate that IL-4 synthesis in memory CD4+ CD38 is a 46KDa surface glycoprotein displaying several features of co-receptors: it transduces activation signals, it is physically and functionally associated with surface receptors, such as CD3, sIg, and CD16, and it has sequence homologies with the Aplysiu ADP ribosyl cyclase, which catalyzes production of a potent second messenger in the cytoplasm. CD38 functions are probably not only related to cell activation, since CD38 is highly expressed by mature plasma cells, which are terminally activated cells. In this work, we found that CD38 is expressed by peripheral blood CD4+CD45RA+ (restinglnaive) cells, and not by CD4+CD45RO+ (activatedlmemory) cells. Since naive cells respond poorly in virro to stimuli acting via the CD3lTCR and display unique migration pathways in vivo, we investigated the role played by CD38 in their activation and interaction with endothelium. CD38 engagement by mAb did not induce proliferation of naive CD4+ cells by itself and did not potentiate activation induced by other stimuli, but it inhibited their binding to human vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). The same inhibition was detected on the (human x mouse) hybrid cell line CP410.Al0, which expresses human CD38, but not on its CD38subclone CP14. AntiLCD38 mAb did not inhibit the conventional binding assay between HUVEC and human CD38+ T and B tumor cell lines. However, binding inhibition was apparent when the assay was performed at 4C on a plate lying on an rocking shelf, conditions that minimized integrin function. These data suggest that CD38 mediates a weak cell binding to endothelium, which is also effective in dynamic conditions. These features are reminiscent of those exerted by selectins, that account for leukocyte rolling on endothelial cells and play an important role in lymphocyte homing. The possibility that inhibition was due to negative signaling by CD38, that inhibits the adhesive function of other molecules seems unlikely, because anti-CD38 mAb inhibited binding under conditions minimizing signal transduction (e.g. low temperature and use of Fab fragments of anti-CD38 mAb). Previous studies have established the relative facility of memory CD4+ T cell activation through TCR/CD3 stimulation as compared to naive CD4+ T cell activation, which requires more extensive TCWCD3 crosslinking and antigen-presenting cell (APC)-derived costimulatory activity. I n studies comparing activation requirements of mouse memory and naive CD4+ T cells, we observed a paradoxical finding that memory CD4+ T cells (CD45RBlo) are hyporesponsive to crosslinking of TCR/CD3 by soluble antiLCD3 presented by T-depleted splenocytes -a stimulus that fully activates naive CD4+T cells (CD4SRBhi). Extensive characterization of this phenonmenon revealed that MHC class I1 on the APC surface inhibits memory cell activation. Thus, in the presence of anti-CD3, FcyR+MHC class II+ APC provided as T-depleted splenocytes or FcyR+/ MHC class II+ L cell aansfectants failed to activate CD45RBlo cells, whereas FcyR+MHC class 11-APC provided as Tdepleted splenocytes from MHC class I1 knockout mice (RHAPo/o), or FcyR+/MHC class 11-L cell aansfectants vigorously stimulated memory cells to proliferate and produce L -4 and IFN-7. The differential negative effect induced by class II+ APC on CD4SRBlo CD4+ T cells but not CD45RBhi CD4+ T cells, could be reproduced by CD4 ligation in the presence of anti-CD3 + class 11-APC , establishing that ne ative signals are specifically transferred through CD4 on CD45RBf0 cells. To determine whether the negative effect exerted by MHC class 11+ APC was dominant or irreversible, we endeavored to rescue memory cell function by adding costimulatory agents. We found that the lack of memory cell stimulation observed with anti-CD3 + MHC class II+ APC could be overcome either in the presence of IL-2, antibodies directed against the costimulatory receptor, CD28, or LPS-activated APC. Memory cell hyporesponsiveness, as presented here, suggests that memory cells are more smngently regulated than their naive counterpans, most likely to bar spurious activation of these potent immune effectors in the absence of cognate antigen. The induction of proliferation and cytokine production by T cells requires both TCR engagement and costimulation caused by the interaction of accessory molecules present on T cells and APC. The binding of B7 on APC to CD28 o n T cells represents an important costimulatory interaction leading to T cell activation. The ability of T cells to respond to a number of stimuli is altered in healthy, aged individuals. We have previously reported a general decrease in CD28induced proliferation in T cells isolated from aged mice. In this study, resting T cells were isolated from the spleens of healthy young (2 months of age) and aged (21 months of age) CS7BL/6J mice and stimulated with immobilized anti-CD3 E chain (345-2C11) mAb in the presence or absence of soluble anti-CD28 (37.51) mAb. The levels of IL-2 and IFN-y in culture supernatants were measured. Following 24 hours of culture, there was no difference in the levels of IL-2 produced by T cells isolated from young and aged mice when stimulated with anti-CD3 E chain mAb alone. The addition of anti-CD2R mAb to these cultures resulted in a significant increase (p<0.05) in IL-2 production by T cells isolated from both young and aged mice; however, IL-2 production by T cells isolated from young mice was significantly greater (p<0.05). Conversely, T cells isolated from aged mice produced significantly more (~4 . 0 5 ) EN-y than T cells isolated from young mice when stimulated with anti-CD3 E chain mAb alone. The addition of anti-CD28 mAb to these cultures resulted in significantly enhanced (p<0.05) production of IFN-y by T cells isolated from aged mice, but not by T cells isolated from young mice. These differences in cytokine production were also observed at the mRNA level. The results suggest that T cells from aged mice have a different cytokine response to costimulation mediated by CD28 than T cells from young mice. These differences may contribute to altered T cell responses associated with aging. Supported in part by NM AG10207. The ability of peptidic antigen to induce a variety of functionally distinct peripheral immune responses, depending on the dose and route of administration, suggests that factors other than TCR binding to peptide-MHC complexes are crucial in determining the outcome of an encounter with antigen in the periphery. We have set up a TCR transgenic model in which the frequency of T cells reponding to peptide or protein antigen is artificially high, thus making it possible to follow the earliest events in the primary immune response at both a phenotypic and functional level. Our data suggest that tolerogenic encounters with antigen are characterised by an extremely short-lived early response, involving secretion of L 2 , IL3 and IFNy but not IL4, followed by rapid proliferation and disappearance of the activated cells from the peripheral lymphoid compartment. The total number of antigen-reactive T cells of both naive and "memory" phenotype is markedly decreased several weeks after antigen administration, leading to tolerance at the level of the whole animal. Immunogenic responses, such as those resulting from subcutaneous administration of antigen, are characterised by far more prolonged production of L 2 , IL3, IL4 and IFNy, the ThllTh2 balance being affected by the dose of antigen and initial degree of T cell activation. Higher doses of antigen bias the response in favour of IL4 production whilst depressing 1L2 and IFNy production. consistent with a dominant role for IL4 positive feedback in control of ThllIhZ ratios. Although the total numbers of antigen-specific T cells return to baseline in the weeks following immunisation, there is a marked shift in the ratio of naivememory cells, consistent with the generation of T cell memory in vivo. Thus generation of memory in this model is the result of phenotypic shift rather than an increase in precursor frequency. We are determining whether APC type or activation state is crucial in regulating these immune responses and, in particular, which APC is responsible for peripheral deletion. Other investigators have suggested that naive B cells in particular are tolerogenic for naive T cells. We have therefore set up a model of B cell antigen presentation using a hybrid antigen (hen egg lysozyme linked to cytochrome C) to allow specific presentation by immunoglobulin transgenic B cells to TCR transgenic T cells. Lipp, Institut fur Biochemie, Lud~,ig-Maxlmilians-Universitat Mhnchen, Am Klopferspitz 18a, 82152 Martinsried, FRG and *Hamatologikum der GSF, Marchioninistr.25. 81377 Munchen, FRG The G-protein-coupled receptor BLRI which shows significant relationship to receptors for chemokines (MIP-la, IL-8) and neuropeptides has been the first member of this gene family with a lymphocyte specific expression pattern. A high affinity monoclonal antibody was raised against this receptor and used to investigate expression of BLRl on lymphatic cells. Analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes by three colour flow cytonletry demonstrated that BLRl expression is limited to B cells and to subpopulations of CD4' (14'10) and CD8+ (2%) lymphocytes. Interestingly, studies of T cells originating from secondary lymphatic tissue (spleen or tonsil) revealed that BLRI is present on the majority (65.80%) of CD4+ cells. To investigate the onset of BLRl expression during T cell development thymocytes were investigated. 8% of the CD4+CDX-cells and 1% of the CD4-CD8' cells coexpressed BLRI, but immature CD4+CDXf cella do not show any detectable expression levels of this receptor. Analysis of cord blood lymphocytes, which are considered to be naive, laid open that < 1% of both CD4+-and CDX' cells were associated with BLRI. In addition, more than 95% of T cells expressing BLRl were positive for CD45RO but less than 12% were associated with the CD45RA isoform. Interesstingly, BLRl+ cells independently of their origin did express high levels of CD44 but low Icvek of L-selectin. Taken together our results strongly suggests that the G-protem-coupled receptor BLRl is a marker for memory T helper cells which being involved in cell migration, cell activation and T cell dependent B cell help. The study of T cell repertoire has a great importance both from the physiology and pathology of the immune system, as precious informations can be useful for understanding the basis of the susceptibility to infectious and autoimmune diseases, among others. By using a large panel of mAbs to different VR families (studied on CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes). molecular biology techniques (RT-PCR with 22 primers and relative controls) and stimulation with superantigens (S. aureus enterotoxins), we have analyzed the VR-T cell repertoire in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) of 12 healthy centenarians and of a group of donors 19-50 years old. PBL capability to proliferate after different stimuli (PHA, anti-CD3 etc.) has also been evaluated by 3H-TdR incorporation and cytofluorimetric analysis (short pulses with BrdU and staining with propidium iodide and FITCconjugated anti-BrdU mAbs). The main results can be summarized as follows: i) centenarians do not present gross alterations of their VR-T cell repertoire, which is intact both from a phenotypic and functional point of view; ii) in comparison with controls, no significative differences were observed as far as the distribution of the different VR families among CD4+ and CD8c T cells was concerned; iii) PBL proliferative capability was well preserved, but cells had a different kinetics of growth, with a delay of 48 hrs. in comparison with younger donors. In conclusion, our data suggest that centenarians have a very well preserved immune system, which likely plays a fundamental role in reaching with success such an advanced age. Activated T cells upregulate CD44 (Pgp-1) and downregulate L-selectin (MEL-14) , two of the molecules that are thought to guide lymphocyte trafficking. Also, activated T cells are known to home to non-lymphoid tissues rather than lymph nodes (LN). Here we have tested whether long term CD4' memory T cells retain these characteristics of activated lymphocytes in vivo or whether they revert to a resting state in which they reacquire the phenotype (L-Selectin'CD44'"Y and the LN seeking homing pattern of naive lymphocytes. Up to 4 months after immunization with the prototype antigen hen egg lysozyme (HEL), HEL-specific T cells were detected in 14-19fold higherfrequencies in non-lymphoid tissues (lungs, peritoneal cavity) and the spleen than in LN, consistent with a disseminated, non-LN seeking migration by memory cells. Furthermore, such long-term CD4' memory T cells did not express L-selectin, the "LN homing receptor" (4). CD4'Lselectin-memory cells occurred in a CD44"lgh and a CD44"" subpopulation, the former being dominant in the spleen, the latter prevailing in LN. The differential distribution of naive (CD4+L-selectin+) and memory (CD4'L-Selectin) lymphocytes as well as that of the memory subpopulations (CD4+L-selectin-CDUhIgh and CD4+L-~electin'CD44'~~) was also confirmed by flow cytometry analysis. Our data provide both functional and phenotypic evidence for differential distribution of naive and memory CD4'cells in the mouse. Additionally, the data suggest that the majority of long term CD4' memory cells, the CD44h'gh subpopulation, is tissue resident and non-circulating, and only a minor proportion is recirculating: the L-sele~tin~CD44'~" subset. Only ten percent of the human genome encodes protein. The remaining 90% comprises many families of repetitive elements, including several families which share high homology with retroviruses. The RTVL-H family of endogenous retrovirus like elements is the largest human family known, there are 1000 full length elements and a further 1000 solitary LTRs per cell. Using an RTVL-H LTR probe we have detected the presence of a 6kb transcript by Northern analysis which is highly induced in normal peripheral T cells after treatment with phytohemagglutinin (PHA). This 6 kb RTVL-H containing transcript is only seen in cells of the hemopoietic lineage. We also detected it in primary niyelocytic and lymphocytic leukemia cells, but not in any leukemic cell lines. The expression is increased within 3-4 hours after treatment with PHA or with phorbol ester, reaches a maximum after 8 hairs and then declines to low levels within 24 hours after treatment. Its expresaion is inhibited totally by Cycloheximide and by the immunosuppressant Cyclosporin A. Using probes specific for the U3 and US regions of the RTVL-H LTR, in combination with internal RTVL-H probes, we showed that the 6 kb transcript is polyadenylated from an RTVL-H LTR, but that the majority of the mRNA comprises non RTVL-H sequence. We constructed a cDNA library from T cells which had been treated with PHA for 8 hours and isolated a 1.7kb clone using the RTVL-H probe. The insert, by sequence analysis, contains a novel array of retroposon elements, two endogenous retroviral LTRs and a minisatellite like sequence. Because of its high expression level, its sharply defined transcription kinetics and its novel composition, we hypothesise that the transcript may play a biological role during T cell activation. The P-element of the human IL-4 gene, located at -50 to -64 from th_e cap site, appears to play an important role in transcription of the IL-4 gene in T cells. We have previously shown that only about 3-51 of polyclonally activated adult T cells express IL-4 mRNA, and that these cells are contained within the putative memorylin vivo-primed, CD45RCP subset. IL-4 mRNA expression following activation is low in freshlyisolated adult T cells and is undetectable in antigenically-naive ("unprimed") neonatal T cells. However, priming in vitro of these cell types with Con A and exogenous IL-2 markedly increases their capacity to express IL-4 mRNA upon reactivation. To determine if the expression of nuclear proteins binding to the P-element correlated with an increased capacity for IL-4 mRNA expression by T cells, nuclear extracts were prepared from T cells after polyclonal activation for 2 hrs and used in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) with a human IL-4 gene P-element oligonucleotide. A specific EMSA complex was found using nuclear extracts from activated in vifro-primed adult T cells. This complex and IL-4 mRNA levels were absent or barely detectable in unstimulated primed T cells or when these cells were preincubated with cyclosporin or cycloheximide prior to activation. Only low amounts of the complex were found using extracts from activated freshly-isolated adult T cells. In extracts from activated freshly-isolated neonatal T cells a specific EMSA complex was observed with a markedly faster mobility than that observed in in vitro-primed adult T cells, UV-crosslinking analysis showed that the major protein binding to the P-element from extracts of in vifro-primed adult T cells was larger than that found in neonatal T cell extracts, suggesting that they were different proteins. Thus, we found a striking correlation between the abundance of nuclear proteins that bound to the Pelement in virro and the amount of IL-4 gene expression by normal human T cells. Further characterization of these proteins may provide insight into how IL-4 gene expression is upregulated by T cell priming in vitro and in vivo. The mounting of most immune responses involves a complex interplay between B and T lymphocytes and antigen presenting cells. Studying the response of specific lymphocytes in vivo has been particularly difficult due to the very small number of cells with specificity for any one antigen. even in repeatedly immunized anlmals. Using sixparameter flow cytometry we have been able to Identify and characterize a population of helper T cells in draming lymph nodes that become activated and expand exponentially in response to antigen, based on their usage of a specific TCR VaVP pair. We also simultaneously quantitate the antigen-dependent development of antibody-secreting and memory B cells as an estimate of effective T cell help in VIVO. Similar analyses of the secondary response revealed that despite there being no overall increase in responsive cell number, the emergence of an antigen-activated helper T cell population was significantly accelerated. reaching its peak only 4 days after injection. Antibody-secreting cells emerge more rapidly and to a greater extent following secondary challenge while further memory B cell development is ongoing with similar kinetics to the primary response. These data provide direct evidence for the existence of a distinct memory T cell compartment and outline the dynamics of the primary and memory B cell response to the same antigen. demonstrated that hybridoma cultures from mice immunized just once prior t o fusion were less stable than were their secondary counterparts. We showed that this instability can be overcome by their g r o w t h in interleukin-containing supernatants. More recently, we have shown that primary hybridomas are also unstable with respect to the secretion of antigen-specific IgM antibodies, a finding currently under exploration. We have also sequenced 32 heavy and 7 light chains and developed assignments for V, gene use for each of the heavy chains. A high percentage of fluorescein-specific antibodies utilize genes derived from the 7183 and J558 gene families, in both primary and secondary antibody-producing hybridomas. However, expression of Q52VH gene segments appears t o be limited t o primary fluorescein-specific B cells. All four JH segments a r e used, b u t JH1 is used a t a lower frequency than the other three. Analysis of pairs of hybridomas demonstrates that the same variable region can be used with two different J regions and the same VH:JH p a i r has been used with t w o different DH regions t o generate t w o distinct fluoresceinspecific antibodies. W e conclude that, in spite of previous observations by other laboratories of a n idiotypically-diverse, fluoresceinspecific antibody repertoire, our data imply t h e use of a relatively limited set of VH region gene segments i n the construction of IgM anti-fluorescein antibodies. The association of CD45RA and CD45RO molecules with virgin and memory T cells respectively was based on the observations that CD45RO+ T cells respond to recall antigen in vitro, while CD45RA+ T cells do not; and also that CD45RA+ T cells differentiate into CD45RO+ cells following stimulation. However, CD45RA+ T cells are hyporesponsive to many stimuli in vitro. Potent accessory cells, such as dendritic cells, are required for activating CD4+ CD45RA+ T cells, but purification of such cells is difficult. We have used anti-CD28 antibody to overcome this problem, when using peripheral blood adherent cells for antigen presentation. CD4+ CD45RA+ and C D 4 f CD45ROf T cells were stimulated with tetanus toxoid (10pgiml) in the presence or absence of CD28 antibody. CD28 co-stimulation did not increase the proliferation of CD4+ CD45RO+ T cell subset to tetanus toxoid. However a potent increase in the response to tetanus toxoid was observed in CD4+ CD45RA+ T cells when CD28 antibody was present. This effect was dose dependent and optimal at 100 ngiml CD28 antibody. Subjects whose CD45ROf T cells were unresponsive to tetanus toxoid in vitro, showed a raised response in both CD4+ T cell subsets, when co-stimulated with CD28 antibody. These results suggest that much of the difference between recall antigen responses in CD45RAf and CD45RO+ T cells may reflect an inadequate in vitro signal, rather than a difference in precursor frequencies of cclls specific for the target antigen. Recent studies have suggested that T cell memory for recall antigens resides in clones of primed T cells with a short inter-mitotic half life In humans such cells express an isoform of the leukocyte common antigen termed CD45RO Nevertheless, little is known of the fate of these primed T cells after initial activation, since no markers are available to distinguish recently primed cells from long established clones We have studied the relationship between expression of all CD45 isoforms in peripheral blood by flow cytometry and computer modelling, and also the change in isoform expression during long term in vitro culture. We identified a spectrum of primed CD4' T cells characterised by an inverse relationship between the expression of two CD45 epitopes. CD45RB and CD45RO. We show that primed CD4' T cells progress throu h many cycles of division from a CD45R13briBhtOdd1 to a CD45RBdUfObrkht state, resulting in a highly skewed distribution of TCR variable region usage within this particular population The progressive differentiation defined by the shift from CD45RBbright to CD45RBdUII is paralleled by the gradual loss of bcl-2 and gain of Fas expression, two features associated with an increased propensity for apoptosis. At the same time, the highly differentiated CD45RBdu1I cells selectively lose the capacity to synthesise 1L-2, a cytokine which is particularly effective in preventing T cell apoptosis, although they produce high levels of IL-4 The inability to produce adequate levels of IL-2 leads to the apoptosis of primed CD4SRBdU11 cells, when they are stimulated in the absence of exogenous IL-2. These observations show the crucial dependence of highly differentiated T cells on the availability of exogenous 1L-2, and suggest both a major constraint for the persistence of T cell memory, and an important mechanism contributing to the maintenance of T cell homeostasis r// i w u V632 Importantly, co-transfer of the CD45RBloW population w i t h the CD45RBhigh population prevented the wasting disease a n d colitis. Colitis appeared to be due to the development of a pathogenic Thl response a s the inflamed colons contained elevated levels of IFN-.( and TNF-a mRN.4 a n d the disease w a s inhibited by administration of anti-IFN-y m A b . These d a t a indicate that CD4f T cells f r o m normal mice have the capacity to i n d u c e a lethal inflammatory response in the colon but that u n d e r normal circumstances this response is inhibited by a phenotypically distinct subpopulation of CD4+ T cells. The role of the Th2 cytokines, IL-4 a n d IL-10, i n the suppression of colitis will also be discussed. Interferon-y (IFN-y) is restricted in expression to primcd or memory T cells and to the TH1 subset of CD4' T cells. This pattern differs from other TH I cyokines, such as IL-2, which are expressed in virgin T cells. To explore thc basis for this we have first analyzed the 5' flank of the human I N -y gene, using P-galactosidasc reporter constructs that were transfected into lurkat T cells. Constructs containing 538 bp of 5' flank gave optimal expression, comparable to constructs driven by the IL-2 promoter. Expression nearly as great was observed with 108 bp of 5' flank. Expression of these constructs mirrored the endogenous geneboth PMA and Ionomycin were required for induction, \vhich cyclosporin A blocked, and expression was not observed in macrophage cell lines. Internal deletions that removed the region between -108 and -40 bp abrogated activlty Within the region between -108 and -40, deletion of either of two elements. which are conscrvcd in the mouse and rat genes, reduced expression by -70%. In mice containing genomic IFN-y transgenes with amounts of 5' flank similar to the human -538 constructs, expression of the transgene paralleled and was similar to that of the endogenous IFN-y gene. Using gel mobility shift assays, multiple specific complexes were observed with the two conserved regulatory elcments defined in the transfection analysis. The distal element binds GATA-3 and other protcins which are competed for by an AP-I oligonucleotide Houever. the motif in this element shares closer homology with one in the GM-CSF and MIP-1 genes, than with prototypical AP-1 The proximal element shares homology with the NF-IL2A element of the 1L-2 promoter. Proteins binding to this element are competed for by NF-IL2A and AP-1 oligonucleotides; unlike NF-ILZA, the proximal elemcnt of the IFN-y gene does not bind Oct-I. The proximal elemcnt of the IFN-y gene contains a CpG dinucleotide. which is methylated in TH2 T cell lines but not in THI T cell lines, and methylation of this clement inhibitcd binding of factors from T cell extracts. However, differcnces in the abundance of proteins binding to this element were also observed between T cells that do or do not express IFN-y. These results suggest that differences in the regulatory elcments between the IFN-y genc and their methylation, and in the abundance of proteins binding to thcsc regulator) elements, contribute to the unique pattern ofexpression ofthis Iymphokinc The external signals that influence the fate of Th effectors, either keeping them in an activated state, leading them to the quiescent state or inducing or allowing their death are unclear. We showed previously that, in contrast to IL4 and IFNy, TGFp caused Th precursors to develop into effector populations with a more memory phenotype (CD45RB low, CD44 high). To further study the effect of TGFp on Th development, w e generated effectors in vitro by stimulation of naive CD4 T cells from transgenic mice. We then determined the effects of TGFp and IL2 on effectors restimulated with antigen (Ag)/ APC or APC alone. When effectors were stimulated with Ag/APC, the combination of TGFp and IL2 promoted increased expressing bcl-2 protein, decreased DNA fragmentation, and a much greater cell recovery. Effctors remained highly activated and retained their patern of cytokine secretion. When effectors were cultured without Ag (APC only), TGFp and IL2 had similar effects on increasing bcI-2 expression and decreasing apoptosis, but TGFp alone promoted development of a more resting/memory phenotype (CD45RB low and ILZR low) and the population cultured without Ag also became higher producers of IL2. The results suggested that availability of Ag and cytokmes IL2 and TGFB may help to determine the fate of effector populations. The identity of cells mediating thymic selection events was investigated by co-culturing non-selected immature (CD3loCD4+CDX+) normal or up-TCR transgenic embryonic thymocytes from mice with a nonselecting MHC background, with freshly purified thymic stromal cell subsets from selecting or non-selecting MHC-bearing mice. When incubated alone the precursors remained as homogeneous CD3IoCD4+CDX+ cells or died. Thymic nurse cells (TNC) preferentially induced CD3hiCD4+CDR-cells including those restricted to MHC class I, and to a lesser extent CD3hiCD4-CDX+ cells: this also involved induction of CD69. Usage of the TCR transgenic mice demonstrated an inherent bias of thymocytes to the CD4 expression pathway. Accordingly TNC-enclosed lymphocytes in,jected into syngeneic SCID mice reconstituted the spleen with apTCR+CD4+ CDXcells and limited CD3+CD4-CDX+ cells. The role of T cells in shaping the thymic microenvironment was examined in a series of TCR genedeleted mice: a-'-(CD4+CDX+ up-TCR thymocytes, normal US TCR cells): p-' -(no ap-TCR lineage cells. normal yS-cells): 6-1-(normal ap-TCR cells, no +TCR cells); pb-l-(no mature upor 6 T C R cells); Rag-I-/-mice aansgenic or not for TCR p -chain. The initial development of the thymic epithelium was not dependent on T cells (post CD3-CD4-CDX-), however, the maturation, organisation and growth of the medulla requires either upor yS-TCR mature T cells. With excessive development of CD3-CD4+CDX+ cells in the absence of mature T cells, the medullary rudimentary pockets are greatly reduced. Similarly, the lack of CD4+CDX+ cells results in a poorly defined cortex. Clearly thymopoiesis is an integrated process involving complex bi-directional interactions between developing thymocytes and the stroma. Pediatric AIDS is a devastating disease that is increasing exponentially worldwide. The importance of in-vivo thymic infection with HIV-1 in pediatric AIDS is exacerbated by the fact that the thymus is the site of T lymphocyte ontcgeny during fetal and neonatal development. Analysis of thymic infection by HIV-1 was conducted on both fresh thymic tissue isolated from infected neonates, and human thymic organ culture infected ex-vivo. The sites of viral replication were first examined via insitu hybridization for the presence and distribution of viral RNA. Viral RNA was detected in focal cortical caps of the thymus in both thymocytes and macrophages. Infected tissue was also subjected to fluorescent antibody staining for HIV-1 viral proteins, which were again found to be present in thymocytes and cortical macrophages. Neonatal thymic organ culture was next used as a model for thymic infection, to further characterize the thymotropism of various HIV-1 isolates. Infection of thymic organ culture explants reflected the macrophage tropism of the particular HIV-1 isolate. Strains of HIV-1 that are lymphocyte tropic replicated poorly, or were unable to cause infection of the thymic explants. In contrast, macrophage tropic strains showed a high level of HIV replication and induced profound thymocyte mortality. Thymic macrophages were isolated from normal neonatal thymus and shown to be capable of supporting ex-vivo HIV-1 infection with minimal cytopathology. These studies identify thymic macrophages and immature thymocytes as primary targets of HIV-1 infection. The role of HIV-1 infection of thymocytes and thymic macrophages in the pathogenesis of pediatric AIDS may be linked to disruption of the normal developmental sequence of thymocyte maturation. To study the early intermediate developmental stages of thymusindependent intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL), and to compare that to T development within the thymus, we have used immature T cell precursors obtained from the spleen of donor athymic mice to repopulate the thymus, spleen and gut lymphoid compartment. In Thy-l congenic mice, T cell repopulation of those compartments from donor precursors occurred first in the gut, then the thymus, and several weeks later in the spleen, indicating that murine IEL and thymocytes are derived from a similar though possibly distinct prethymic T cell pool within the spleen. Reconstituted mice were healthy for at least 60 days post-cell transfer and all major phenotypic subsets of the gut and thymus were generated, including TCR-an, TCR-76, and CDSala or CDSalB IEL, as well double-negative, single-positive, and double-positive T cell subsets within the thymus. The phenotype of the precursor cell responsible for repopulation was HSA' (possibly Thy-I"), CDT, CD3-, CD4-, CD5-, CDS-, C D Z , CD44-, Ly6', TSA-, TCR-. Repopulation could be achieved with spleen cells from euthymic mice but was considerably more efficient, kinetically, using spleen cells from athymic mice, indicating that the spleen of athymic mice is enriched for T cell precursors. However, lymphoid repopulation was achieved in splenectomized mice reconstituted with bone marrow, indicating that the spleen is not the only site for intermediate T cell differentiation. T cell repopulation of irradiated mice did not occur using either adult thymocytes, lymph node lymphocytes, or IEL from euthymic mice (mice died 8-10 days post-imdiation and cell transfer), demonstrating that repopulation was not merely due to clonal expansion of mature or developing T cells. Repopulation of the gut and thymus proceeded normally in irradiated splenectomized mice injected with spleen-derived T cell precursors, implying that precursors present within the spleen home directly to final sites of terminal differentiation within those tissues. These findings locate a pathway for pre-thymic and preintestinal T cell development which now is amenable to further studies those two diverging T cell populations. The localization of peptidergic nerves and receptors for neuropeptides in Peyer's patches of the cat ileum was determined immunohistochemically using biotinylated rabbit antibodies and the streptavidin-biotin (SAB) method. Numerous vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)-, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)-and substance P (SP)-immunoreactive nerve fibers were distributed throughout the lamina propria of the crypts and villi. lmmunoreactive nerve fibers also ran around the margin of Peyer's patch lymphoid follicles, but only a few such fibers were seen in the subepithelial layer of follicles. These fibers occasionally extended into the margin of follicles. Compared with crypts and villi, Peyer's patches were sparsely innervated. Nerve fibers were found mainly around lymphatics and high endothelial venules (HEV) at the edges of follicles. Specific receptors for VIP were present in the crypts and T-cells particularly in the margins of follicles and in interfollicular areas. Receptor binding sites for VIP were numerous on these cells, within or around HEV and lymphatic vessels. VIP staining was also noted in the vicinity of on "Pan B cells" but was sparse and confined to interfollicular regions. By contrast, specific receptor binding sites for SP were idntified on T-and "Pan B cells" but only at the margins of follicles. VIP-and SP-receptors were absent from B subset. An important finding of this study is the demonstration that there are specific receptors for VIP which may modulalte the homing of some type of T-cells from the blood into Peyer's patch and/or vice versa. It is postulated that this effect may be mediated by T-cell specific binding of regional neuropeptides, that results in their increased adherence to the HEV of these lymphoid follicles. Using rat monoclonal antibodies directed against surface antigens of fetal mouse thymocytes different aggregates of"1ymphoid cells" could be detected in cryosections of fetuses as early as GD 16. Several such aggregates are gut-associated, others are found lining the aorta and the mesenterial arteries, or ,,node-like" at branching points of peripheral arteries. There is evidence that Peyer's patches will develop in the areas of these prenatal "lymphoid cell cluster": Similar "lymphoid aggregates" are seen prenatally also in fetuses of n d n u mice and in SCID mice. In SCID mice these gut-associated cell aggregates seem to persist throughout life and increasing in number. "Node-like clusters of lymphoid cells'' are also seen at the branching of large cervical or inguinal arteries. Again most of these cells are "early thymocytemarker"-positive. CD3-and TCR-negative; Anti-Thy 1 stains these cells and a capsula around the cells. As seen already in the gut-associated areas, many cells are CD4-positive and/or MHC class 11-positive. Similar clusters are also seen in nu/nu fetuses and in SCID fetuses. Their anatomical location would suggest that postnatallyprobably by immigration of a new' and more mature wave of lymphocyteslymph nodes will develop from these early clusters. Activation of mature T and B cells is a prerequisite for immune effector function. This activation is primarily induced by the interaction of antigen with its specific receptor; T cell receptor or immunoglobulin respectively. However, other co-stimulatory molecules also play a significant role in this activation process. One of the first such molecules to be described in the T cell system was CD2 which in conjunction with sub-optimal doses of anti-CD3 could co-stimulate T cell proliferation. Other molecules have subsequently been found to have similar actions: Thy-1, LFA-1, CD28 and Ly6. In B cells similar molecules have also been found; CD19 and CD45. In some cases a lack of this second signal may lead to anergy or a block in the activation process eg. anti-B7 or CTLA-4 More recently, novel co-&imulatory/activation molecules have been described. These include CD69, CD27, CD30,4-1BB, CD40 and its ligand gp 39. These molecules have special interest as they are induced early after activation and one of them, CD40, is also expressed on thymic epithelium. Here we describe a mAb, MTS 23, originally classified as detecting a subpopulation of medullary epithelium. This mAb was extensively studied for its expression and function in the immune system as it also detected an antigen expressed on both splenic and thymic dendritic cells, B cells and transformed foetal thymocytes. It was therefore hypothesised that it may play a role in lymphoid activation. Functional studies revealed that MTS 23 inhibited the response of T cells to anti-CD3 and antigen specific stimulation. Immunoprecipitation of a cell line expressing the antigen detected by MTS 23 (23A) demonstrated that it was a single chain molecule of approximately 12OkD. Given the tissue distribution, apparent molecular weight and functional attributes of 23A it is postulated that it belongs to a group of molecules associated with T cell activation. It appears that 23A may be a novel adhesion or costirnulatory molecule One of the mechanisms of generating diversity in the antigen binding pocket of immunoglobulin (lg) genes is somatic hypermutation. Current work to determine the presence or absence of mutations in rearranged lg genes or transgenes requires that the gene be cloned and sequenced to detect mutations. An emphasis of our lab has been to find a mutable substrate in which mutations are detected without sequencing. A 105 base fragment was created that contains alternating EcoRV and Pvull restriction enzyme sites. This fragment was cloned into the variable region of a kappa light chain transgene that has been shown previously to be a target for somatic hypermutation. Mice containing this transgene (EPS) were immunized and hybridomas were made from splenic B cells. DNA from the hybridomas is amplified by PCR using primers specific to the variable region flanking the restriction site fragment. The amplified product is then digested with EcoRV or Pvull and subsequently tun on a high percentage acrylamide gel. In the absence of mutations a ladder of small fragments appears. With a mutation in one of the restriction sites, the enzyme no longer cuts and a larger fragment appears on the gel. The restriction enzyme sites account for approximately 73% of the fragment. Currently we are assessing the level of sensitivity of this assay system and confirming possible mutations. Supported by NIH grants GM38649 and HD23089. EK is supported by NIH predoctoral training grant GM07183. reduction in the cellularity of the lymph nodes, thymus and spleen, with minimal effects on bone marrow cellularity. Defects in the thymic developmental pathways were noted and will be. presented. Furthermore, the percentage of T cells in the spleen of the II-7R-/-mice was reduced by 2-fold, although the ratio of CD4 : CD8 : B220 cells were unaffected. Lymphoid cells from these mice fail to bind JL-7 with high affinity and do not respond to II-7. There was no significant difference in the levels of CD3, CD4, CD8, CD18 expression in T cells from either IL-7R-I-or normal mice. However, both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from IL-7R-/-mice, cultured with IL-2 at limiting dilution or at low cell density, were 5-10-fold less responsive to immobilized anti-CD3 alone or in combination with anti-CD18 and anti-CD4 or anti-CD8. CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from the IL-7R-I-mice were also hyporesponsive to stimuli such as PMA and Ionomycin as well as to challenge with allo-antigen. Interestingly, flow cytomemc analysis of T cells from the IL-7R-/-mice revealed an activated cell phenotype based on CD44 and CD45Rb expression. Cytokine production of T cell cultures stimulated with anti-receptor antibodies or PMA and Ionomycin was assessed by PCR and/or bioassay. JL-7 was not detected in the culture supernatant in either the IL-7Ror control T cells. Cytolyitc activity of cD8+ T cells was also examined. Analysis of the B cell compartment revealed a defect in the "early pro" B cell stage which normally proliferates in response to IL-7. As a result, subsequent stages of early B cell development were also affected. The findings thus far implicate IL-7 as an important regulator of lymphoid expansion. lntraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) of the mouse small intestine have been suggested to be of extrathymic origin. However, results from studies of nude mice do not agree with those from thymectomized irradiated bone marrow chimeras (ATXBM). Nude mice contain low numbers of TcryB IEL and few Tcrap IEL, while ATXBM mice are reported to contain a normal complement of T c r d and Tcryd IEL. To determine the reason for this discrepancy we analyzed IEL from neonatally thymectomized (nTx) mice. IELfrom nTx mice contained few TcryB IEL indicating that these cells either originated in the postnatal thymus or that thymic-derived factors or cells were necessary for efficient yd IEL production. Tcrap IEL from nTx mice were composed of a minor corn onent of apparently mature IEL and a large subset of CDaEW Tcr'OW cells. Moreover, a subset of CD8' Tcr-IEL were present in nTx intestine. These results suggest that Tcrap IEL precursors migrate to the gut prior to birth where they mature under the influence of the thymus. To determine if IEL originate in the thymus, fetal and neonatal thymus was grafted onto nTx mice. Fetal thymus grafts produced all Tcrap subsets, including the C D V subset, but did not produce TcryB IEL. However, neonatal thymus grafts generated Tcryd as well as Tcrap IEL. Thus, at least some IEL, regardless of Tcr expression, undergo a novel two-stage process of development: one step occurring within the thymus and the second occurring outside the thymus but under the influence of thymic factors. One of the mechanisms of diversification of the immunoglobulin repertoire is the process of somatic mutation. Somatic mutation is defined as point mutations which accumulate only in the variable region and the surrounding flanks in rearranged immunoglobulin genes at a rate of 10-3 base pairs per cell per generation. To learn more about the mechanism of somatic mutation a construct was made to identify the cis targeting sequences of the mutation mechanism. The construct is based upon the rearranged light chain gene kappa 167, which has been shown in this lab to mutate as a transgene. Transgenic mice were made with a test gene containing approximately four kilobases of the upstream region, beginning from the leader-variable region intron and including the leader intron and the promoter, cloned upstream of the constant region. If the cis targeting sequences lie upstream of the variable region then mutations should be targeted to the constant region in this construct. The variable region acts as an internal positive control since it has not been altered. The internal control was included to make sure that the construct could mutate at the site of integration. The transgenes will be screened for mutations using the denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis method (DGGE), and the mutated copies will be cloned and sequenced. Two additional modified constructs were made: in one, adjoining intronic MAR and enhancer were removed and placed downstream of the constant region: in the other, the variable and constant regions were exchanged. Preliminary data suggest the presence of mutations in several hybridomas produced from spleens of these transgenic mice. Commencing at the onset of puberty in the mouse and human there is a dramatic thymic involution that continues with ageing. This thymic atrophy (which is associated with an increase in the incidence of autoimmuiie diseases,) is characterised by a decrease in thymic inass associated with histological changes. Castration has been shown to reverse these changes, and to prevent thymic atrophy in pre-pubertal mice. A regulatory role of sex hormones on thymic weight has thus been established. To understand the changes occuring during ageing. and the mechanisms involved in thymic regeneration post castration, aged mice (6-12 months) have been castrated and compared to age matched and sham operated animals. Thymus, lymph nodes and spleen were analysed by flow cytometry and immunohistology at 2, 4 and 6 days and 1, 2, 4, 8 and 12 weeks post castration; blood was also examined by flow cytometry. Regeneration begins almost immediately post-operation. the thymus being increased in cellularity within the first 6-9 days post castration and at least as large if not larger than a normal young adult thymus by 2 weeks. A remarkable feature was the synchronous increase in all intrathymic precursors and ap.yS-CD4.CD8 defined T cell subsets i n conjunction with a homeostatic increase i n the thymic stroinal elements. Iininunoliistological staining using a panel of mAbs to the strornal elements revealed major upregulation of antigens secreted by the stromal components of the blood-thymus barrier. In addition, there were medullary epithelial pockets within the cortex of castrate thymuses, and mAb MTS 16 expression has revealed an inci-ea\e in the thymic extracellular matrix. Currently we are investigating tlie functional role of the post-castration upregulated stromal molecules in normal thymopoiesis, through addition of tlie relevant mAbs to FTOC and to castrated mice. MTS 35, a rat mAh, detecta the phosphotidyl inositol membrane linked molecule TSA-I, (Thymic Shared Antigen-1). Cloning and sequencing of TSA-1, has shown it to be a unique marker of immature thymocytes and isolated medullary epithelial cells. It is also expressed on dendritic cells. To examine the functional significance of TSA-1 in thymopoiesis, MTS 35 (as purified Ig) has been added to both normal fetal thymic orgall cultwe (FTOC), and 2-deoxyguanosine FTOC reconstituted with fetal liver cella. In both instances MTS 35 downregulated TSA-1 expression. niai-kedly reduced total cell yield and inhibited CD3. CD4 and CDX-thymocyte differentiation post CD3-CD4-CD8-triple negatives, particularly with regards to the up-TcR+ lineage and CD4+ thymocyte subsets. Such inhibition was also seen when day 15 fetal thymocytes were prevented from "spontaneously differentiating" into CD4+CD8+ thymocytes overnifht. Examination of triple negative thymocytes with respect to the marhers CD44 and CD2.5. revealed that CD44+CD25-and CD44-CD25+ suhrets proportionally increased whereas CD44-CD25-decreased. All aub.;t'th however decreased in number. In conclusion CD44-CD25-cells appear to be inhibited from differentiating, a result which might be due to MTS 35 preventing TcR p rearrangement/ expression. Thus TSA-1 appear\ to be ;in essential molecule for immature triple negative thymocyte differentiation to its previously reported specificity for T cells bearing Vg's 5, 11, and 12. This contrasts with vSAG9, another member of the same, Mlsffamily. vSAGs 14, 17, and 30 have no effect on the T cell repertoire, and are thought not to be expressed. According to the affinity hypothesis of positive selection, as it would be expected that a superantigen which had a high affinity for a certain Vg would have a low affinity for other, homologous Vg's. and T cells bearing these Vg's would be positively selected, and increase in frequency. Little evidence of positive selection by any vSAGs on T cells bearing any Vg tested was seen, despite an extensive search for such effects, and despite published reports to the contrary. This result argues against a simple version of the affinity hypothesis. Expression of endogenous peptide:MHC class II complexes in B cells, macrophagcs. dendritic and epithelial cells from spleen and thymus, as well as in various cell lines, including processing deficient mutant cell line T2 transfected with IAb, was studied using monoclonal antihodies recognizing naturally occurring peptide:MHC class I1 complexes. FACS analysis. immunohistochcmical and hiochemical studies of complexes formed by IAh and a peptide derived from mouse Ea or human DRa chain (Ea52-68 or DRa52-68). as well as IAb and peptides derived from human and mouse invariant chain (Ii81-104 or Ii85-99) in different cell types revealed significant differences in ahility tn generate these complexes. Analysis of T2IAh cells demonstrated that approximately 5 0 6 of mature surface IAh molecules in this cell line are occupied by li-derived peptidcs. Normal antigen-presenting cells demonstrate a suhstantially lower level of Ii peptide:IAh expression with highcr density of these complexes on macrophages than on B cells. The ratio of toral 1Ab molecules to li chain expressed in these cells was not different. The relative Icvd of expression of another complex. Ea peptide:IAh. in macrophages and B cells w& comparahle. However, we found that the concentration of the this complex per total IAh molecules in thymic epithelial cells IS 10-20-fold lower than in hone marrow derived antigen-presenting cells. Our data suggest that, in addition to tissue-specific protein expression, differences in processing machinery in distinct types of antigen-presenting cells are responsible for the differential expression of peptide:MHC class II complexes. Immature thymocytes lacking CD3, CD4 and CD8 surface expression undergo a series of interactions with non-T cells present within the thymic microenvironment to become phenotypically and functionally mature. This maturational process by which CD3-4-8-thymocytes become CD4+8+ includes cell division; rearrangement of T cell receptor genes; expression of low to medium levels of TCR; and expression of both MHC class-I1 coreceptor CD4 and MHC class-I coreceptor CD8 molecules. The ap TCR+CD4+8+ cells that recognize self-MHC molecules are signaled to mature into CD4+ or CD8+ T cells by positive selection, while auto-reactive thymocytes recognizing self-antigen/MHC complex are negatively selected and deleted. We have shown that short-term heterogeneous thymic stromal cultures VitTO permit the maturation of a!l thymic T cell subsets beginning with CD3-4-8-immature thymocytes . The objective of the current study is to determine whether defined thymic epithelial cell subsets, when added to the culture of purified CD3-4-8-thymocytes on thymic stroma, will induce positive and negative selective events. In the present study, we demonstrate that the genotype of the thymic stroma determines the pattern of positive and negative selection of T cell receptor subsets, irrespective of the strain of origin of the thymocytes. When a thymic stroma (from C57BLKa mice) that supports maturation but does not mediate particular positive or negative selection events is used as a baseline culture, the addition of freshly isolated and purified populations of thymic epithelial cells taken from W sources permit positive and negative selective events, depending on the thymic stromal donor genotype. The role of thymic cortical and medullary epithelial cell subsets in inducing positive and negative selection of particular VP-TCR bearing thymocytes in the differentiation model will be discussed. Occupancy of the T cell receptor (TCR) is a potent means of inducing progranuned cell death (PCD) in thymocytes. Similarly, gliicocorticoids induce thymocyre PCD. Work from our lab and others hJs demonstrated that glucocorticoids antagonize induction of TCl?-mediated PCD in T cell hybridomas and thymocytes in oifro While exposure to either stimulus alone induces PCD, simultaneous stiniukition with both allows the cells to survive (mutual antagonism) and h.is led to the proposal that exposure of thymocyres to both of these stiinuli during thytnocyte differentiation may be a basis for positi\.e selection. Whereas high avidity TCWligand interactions may induce a signal too potent to be antagonized, low-nioderate avidity TCIVIipnd interactions may transduce a weakcr signal that can be antagon~ied by glucocorticoid/GR interactions and allow positive se!cction to occui-. For this to be a viable model, there necessarily iiiust he exposui-e of thymocytes to glucocorticoids during thyrnocyre dcvelopnient. Because the thymus has been reporred to have cntlocinne propertics, we investigated whether the thymus can produce steroids. Inununohistocheiilical analysis of the thymus reveaicd that enzymes required for glucocorticoid synthesis are present in ;I subset of thyinic cells resulting in the synthesis of tierecr.rble levels of steroids iiz u t m Furthermore, deprivation of nthesized 111 feral thyinic organ culture resulted in more 1 thyniocyte deletion. These results iologically significant levels of steroids are mus and can participate in detei-nlining the fire of thyiniqres during selection v 659 ~I P u I~U S Several studies have reported that murine intestinal intraepithelial !ymphocytes @EL) can be differentiated according to markers of thymus-independent' (Thy-1-, CD5-, C D 8 d a + , and TCR-y6+) and 'thymusdependent' (Thy-1+, CD5+, CD8dE+, TCR-a/l?+) IEL. Yet no studies have examined ath mic mice using all markers. In multicolor flow cytometric analyses orIEL from euthymic mice and athymic radiation chimeras, we find only minor differences in the expression of those markers in either animal despite 99% reduction in T cells in the periphery of athymic mice. Thus, Thy-1, CD5, CD8, and TCR do not accurately differentiate developmental lineages of IEL in athymic chimeras. Similar experiments are currently under way in nude and neonatally thymectomized mice. The bcl-2 gene product can prevent apoptotic death. After activation in vivo and in vitro, T cells acquire CD45RO reactivity concomittantly with a loss in bcl-2 expression. This predisposes these cells to apoptosis and is one mechanism which enables cellular homeostasis to be achieved after an immune challenge. We found that factors such as 1L-2 may keep the activated T cells in cycle, increase their bcl-2 expression and prevent their apoptosis. On the other hand, coculture with fibroblasts prolonged the survival of activated T cells but in a non-cycling state. These may be ways in which specifically primed T cells may persist in vivo. We have now investigated the ability of 'fibroblast-rested' CD4' T cells to be reactivated in v i m . These cells are < 1 % Ki67+ indicating that they are not cycling. If they are removed from fibroblasts they rapidly apoptose. The addition of IL-2, however, significantly increases their bcl-2 expression, induces a large proportion of the cells to cycle (40% after 48 hours) and prevents apoptosis. CD3 stimulation of these cells in the absence of antigen presenting cells also leads to rapid death. If these cells are costimulated with CD3 and CD28, however, bcl-2 is once again increased, >70% of the cells are in cycle and apoptosis is largely abrogated. These results suggest that stroinal factors may induce activated T cells to enter a resting (non-cycling) but primed (rapid response to IL-2) state for extended periods in vivo but these cells may be reactivated by appropriate stimulation. This may be important for the rapid deployment of these cells in response to antigenic rechallenge in vivo. We provide evidence to show that both PKC activation and cAMP dependent signaling pathways lead to B7 induction. Whether or not a cell uses one pathway or the other is controlled by the state of activation of the cell. Resting B cells are induced to express B7 in response to PMA/ionomycin and not CAMP. PMA/ionomycin activated murine splenic and human tonsillar B cells are responsive to cAMP treatment leading to enhanced B7 expression. M12 B lymphoma cells behave like activated B cells with respect to B7 induction. We also show that T cell contact dependent B7 induction is dependent on the binding of CD40 ligand on the T cell with CD40 on the B cell. This interaction can be blocked with antibodies to the CD40 ligand which ablates T cell contact mediated B7 induction on B lymphoma cells. This suggests that signals generated through the CD40 receptor account for the induction of B7 on B lymphoma cells. Since dbcAMP treatment of these cells also induces B7, this raises the possibility that the CD40 receptor may have a cAMP component linked to its signaling cascade or that B7 induction on actively cycling cells becomes responsive to cAMP dependent signaling mechansims. Our recent studies have shown that a rat mAb, 2D10, recognizes a 60-KDa protein (2D10-A) on the surface of activated B cells, and 2D10-A delivers a potent costimulatory signal to T cells during auto-and alloantigen presentation. To further examine the role of 2D10-A in T cell activation, purified mouse splenic CD4 T cells were stimulated with anti-CD3 for 48h in the presence of syngeneic resting or LPS-stimulated B cells as the source of costimulatory signals. The activation of CD4 T cells was measured by 'H-TdR uptake of the cells in the last 6h of the culture. The results showed that LPS-stimulated but not resting B cells provided potent costimulatory signals to CD4 T cells primed with anti-CD3. The CD4 T cell proliferation was partially (20-40%) blocked by anti-mB7 or 2DlO mAbs. However, combination of the two mAbs at > 5 pg/ml abrogated T cell proliferation by 9 5 % . Isotype-matched control rat IgG or mAb against B220 did not show any inhibitory effects. Next, CD4 T cells were primed with anti-CD3 in the presence of LPS blasts with or without blocking antibodies for 60h. Viable T cells were then harvested, washed, and re-stimulated with anti-CD3 and fresh LPS-B cells. The results revealed that blocking of B7 and 2D10-A by the specific mAbs, during T cell priming with anti-CD3, suppressed the response of the T cells to the subsequent re-stimulation with anti-CD3 by 95% as compared to the control. Furthermore, the unresponsiveness i n T cells was directly correlated with lower levels of IL-2, IL-3, and IFN-gamma mRNA, which were detected in these cells by semiquantitative RT-PCR. Taken together, our data indicate that 87 and 2D10-A are two major costimulatory molecules for CD4 T cells. Collaboration between the two molecules is required for maximum T cell activation. Blocking of both B7 and 2D10-A pathways induces anergy in CD4 T cells. Tumour cells are antigenic but not immunogenic possibly because they lack co-stimulatory signals for T-cell activation. We have selected 8 7 and ICAM-1 as prototypic co-stimulatory molecules, and transfected them in different combinations into 6 poorly immunogenic mouse tumours. In this way, we could define the co-expression of 8 7 and ICAM-1, and not of each single molecule, as the minimal co-stimulatory signal capable of priming an efficient anti tumour CTL response. In order to bypass tumour transfection, we have generated soluble, chimeric B7-Ig and ICAM-1-Ig molecules, and we are now trying to target them in vivo onto the tumour cells. Preliminary data show that the chimeric B7-Ig can induce the rejection of the ICAM-l+ J558L plasmocytoma, together with long lasting memory. We have previously shown that naive CD4+ T cells respond to antigen presented only by highly costimulatory antigen presenting cells (APC) such as dendritic cells and activated B cells but not by resting B cells. In order to study the costimulatory molecules involved in Naive T cells were able to produce IL-2 and to proliferate in response to PCCF presented by either ICAM+,B7' or ICAM-,B7+ cells. However, when ICAM and B7 were both expressed on the cell surface, T cells produced much more IL-2 and proliferated more efficiently. In order to rule out effects of other costimulatory molecules present on the cell surface, CTLA-41g which is an efficient inhibitor of the CD28/B7 interaction was added in the culture. In the presence of CTLA-4Ig, ICAM-,B7+ cells could not activate naive T cells, whereas ICAM+,B7+ cells were still competent a s APC and resulted in IL-2 production and T cell proliferation a t a level comparable to the response obtained with ICAM+,B7-cells. These results suggest that: 1) the presence of either ICAM-1 or B7 alone on APC is sufficient to activate naive CD4+ T cells. 2) when ICAM-1 and B7 are both present on APC, optimal IL-2 production and proliferation is obtained. The role of CDZR-mediated signalling in the in vifro induction of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) has been Investigated. CD28 was found to provide a costimulatory signal necessary for the generation of measurable lytic capacity in allogeneic MHC class I-specific mixed lymphocyte cultures. CD28-mediated cosignalling directly provoked the release of IL-2 from CD8+ precursors. which was found to be a necessary component for the generation of measurable lytic capacity in the cultures. Further investigation revealed that CD28/B7 interactions are not necessary for the induction of lytic activity by naive CD8+ T cells using both antigen-specific and redirected cytotoxicity assays. Antigenspecific naive T cell cytotoxicity was exammed usmg F5 transgenic mice, which express a T cell receptor (TCR) specific for peptide representmg amino acids number 366-374 of influenza nucleoprotem presented by Db. High density CD8+, CD44I0, CD45hi, IL-ZR-, CD69-T cells were isolated from lymph nodes and spleens of either F5 transgenic or C57B1/6 mice, then immediately placed into assays with 51Cr labelled targets. Peptide antigen-pulsed or anti-CD3 mAb-redirected targets were specifically lysed by 12 hours regardless of B7 expression. Lytic activity of naive CD8+ T cells was not dependent on IL-2 release, however, 137 expression by antigen-specific target cells did correlate with secretion of IL-2 and 7-IFN. These data suggest that CD28 cosignalling serves to enrich mixed lymphocyte cultures for antigenspecific CTLs by promoting their proliferation, and that naive CD8+ CTL precursors are not dependent on a CD28/B7 interaction for completion of differentiation to lytic competence. In order to study the elements responsible for antigen-specific T cell activation in vivo, we have created transgenic mice (inbred strain Harlan FVB/N) expressing mouse B7, a ligand for the CD28 receptor, on pancreatic beta cells. We followed B7 transgenic mice from birth to 52 weeks of age but observed neither insulitis nor diabetes: moreover, islet architecture was normal. We postulated that the absent immune response was due to immune "indifference", i.e. an inadequate density of endogenous beta cell antigens to provide a signal sufficient to activate beta cell antigen specific T lymphocytes. Immune indifference was tested by crossing B7 transgenic mice with mice that express both LCMV glycoprotein (GP) via MHC class I on pancreatic beta cells, and transgenic T cells specific for the GP in the context of H-ZDb. Several triple transgenic mice were bred and by 14 weeks all (14/14) developed diabetes, one as early as 5 weeks Pancreatic histopathology from the diabetic triple transgenic mice revealed lymphocytic islet infiltration by B cells and both CD4 and CD8 T cell subsets. The immune destruction within the islets was limited to beta cells, islet alpha cells were left intact. We studied pancreatic histopathology from one triple transgenic mouse killed at four weeks of age (not yet diabetic) and observed profound insulitis. but with some residual beta cell function (cellular staining for insulin). Mice transgenic for any two of the three transgenes studied, i.e. GP plus B7, B7 plus the GP specific T cells, and GP plus the GP specific T cells, never spontaneously developed diabetes. Moreover, pancreatic sections from these double transgenic mice revealed normal islet architecture. normal cellular staining for insulin, and no lymphocytic infiltrates. The present results support the general hypothesis that aberrant expression of B7 (or other related T cell costimulatory pathway activating molecules) may play a pathophysiologic role in autoimmunity Lymphocyte Activation We previouly found that an anergic response, which is associated with reduced IL-2 and IL-4 secretion after TCR crosslinking, occurs in a large proportion of thymic and peripheral T cells from nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice. Exogenous IL-4 reverses this anergy in virru and prevents the onset of diabetes in NOD mice. We now show that CD4+ thymic T cells from NOD mice express higher levels of CD2 than CD4+ thymic T cells from control BALBlc mice. This subpopulation of NOD CD4+CDZhkh thymic T cells may mediate this anergy. Levels of CD28 surface expression are comparable on quiescent and activated NOD and BALBlc T cells. Costimulation by anti-CD28 mAb reverses the anergic response of NOD CD4+CD2high and CD8f T cells but not of CD4+CD210W T cells. Similar results were obtained upon T cell stimulation by exogenous IL-4. Potentiation of IL-2 secretion by CD-28 costimulation is comparable in BALB/c and NOD T cells. In contrast, CD28 costimulation restores IL-4 secretion by NOD T cells to noimal but is without effect on IL-4 secretion by BALB/c T cells. Anti-IL-2 mAb significantly blocks costimulation through CD28 in both NOD and BALB/c T cells (48% and 45% inhibition, respectively). In contrast, while anti-IL-4 mAb diminishes CD28 costimulation in NOD T cells (27% inhibition) it does not significantly alter CD28 costimulation in BALBk T cells. These data demonstrate that (i) NOD thymic T cell anergy is manifested mainly by the CD4+CD2h1Sh subset, and (ii) this anergy is overcome by CD28 costimulation and is mediated by an IL-4-dependent increase in IL-2 production. (Supported by Juvenile Diabetes Foundation International and Canadian Diabetes Association). The reduced number and unresponsiveness of T cells (lymphopenia) in the diabetic BB rat may be caused by deficient antigen presenting cells. Since antigen processing and presentation by MHC molecules appear to be normal, we have focused on the accessory molecules involved in the stimulation of T cells. Several cell surface molecules on antigen presenting cells are known to be required for proper stimulation of T cells. One of these, the B cell activation antigen B7, expressed on activated B cells, INF-)I, induced monocytes and dendritic cells, has been shown to produce an important co-stimulatory signal upon interaction with its ligand, CD28, present on T cells. Theoretically, the lymphopenia in the BB rat could be explained by an abnormal B7 function. From a cDNA library of MHC I1 positive thymic cells the rat homologue of the murine B7 was cloned and sequenced. The predicted protein of 294 amino acids was 76% identical to the murine B7 protein. A high homology was found in the Ig-C and Ig-V domains, while in the transmembrane and cytoplasmatic regions very little homology was found. Preliminary results suggest that the level of B7 transcript in lymphoid tissues does not differ in the BB and Brown Norway rat. Furthermore, we intend to map the B7 gene in the rat. The T-cell antigen CD28 provides a co-stimulatory signal that is required for T-cell proliferation. TcRUCD3 engagement without CD28 ligation leads to a state of non-responsivenessergy, thereby implicating CD28 in the control of peripheral tolerance to foreign antigens or tumors. A key unresolved question has concerned the mechanism by which CD28 generates intracellular signals. Phosphatidylinositol3-kinax (PI 3-kinase) is a lipid kinase with SH2 domain(s) that binds to the PDGF-R, an interaction that is essential for signaling by growth factor. In this study, we demonstrate that CD28 binds to PI 3-kinast: by means of a pYMXM motif within its cytoplasmic tail. CD28 associated PI 3-kinase was detected by lipid kinase and HPLC analysis as well as by reconstitution experiments using baculoviral expressed p85 subunit of PI 3-kinase. CD28 hound directly to the p85 subunit, without the need for the associated pl10 subunit. Site-directed mutagenesis and peptidc competition analysis using pYMXM containing peptides showed that PI 3-kinase bound to a pYMXM motif within the CD28 cytoplacmic tail (residues 191-194) . Mutation of the Y-191 within the motif resulted in a complete loss of binding, while mutation of M-194 caused partial loss of binding. Binding analysis showed that the N-terminal SH2 domain bound CD28 with an affinity as great as the PDGF-R. In terms of signaling, CD28 ligation induced a dramatic increase in the recruitment and association of PI 3-kinast: with the receptor. We previously defined a tyrosine phosphorylation independent interaction of Ick and fyn-SH3 domain with PI 3-kinase. CD28 recruits 15 to 30 percent of the intracellular PI 3-kinase. many fold greater than bound to CD4-lck or TcRUCD3-fyn. CD28 is likely to employ PI 3-kinax. as the second signal leading to T-cell proliferation, an event with implications for anergy and peripheral T-cell tolerance. Ag-specific activation of T cells requires both the engagement of the TcR and the provision of other non-specific costimulatory signals by APC. Previous studies have shown that IL-10 inhibits APC-dependent murine T cell proliferation and T h l cytokine production by downregulating the costimulatory function of certain accessory cells. IL-10 inhibits numerous aspects of monocytehnacrophage function, including LPSinduced expression of the costimulatory molecule, 87. and production of cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, TNFa. and IL-12. Using a large panel of Th clones, we examined the role of IL-10 and IL-12 in the Ag-specific proliferation of both Thl and Th2 clones. Proliferation of Thl, but not Th2, clones in response to Ag presented by syngeneic splenocytes was significantly inhibited by either IL-10 or anti-IL-12. The inhibitory effect of IL-10 on the Ag-specific proliferation of Thl clones was completely reversed in the presence of 2 0.3 nglml of IL-12. In contrast, the inhibitory effect of IL-10 was not reversed by a variety of other cytokines (IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IFN-y, IL-la, and IL-1p) used at concentrations up to 50 nglml. Thus, IL-10 most likely exerts its inhibitory effects on Thl cell proliferation via downregulation of IL-12 production by the APC. In addition, we show that the ability of Thl clones to respond to IL-4 is dependent upon a costimulatory signal provided by IL-12. T h l clones preincubated with antiLCD3 and IL-12 developed competence to respond to IL-4 in a secondaty culture, whereas Thl clones preincubated with anti-CD3 or IL-12 alone did not respond or responded suboptimally to IL-4. Surprisingly, resting T h l clones, which proliferated weakly or not at all to either IL-4 or IL-12 alone, proliferated vigorously to the combination of IL-4 and IL-12. In contrast, IL-4 and IL-12 did not have a synergistic effect on the proliferation of Th2 clones. The results indicate that IL-12 is an important costimulator for Ag-specific activation and growh of Thl , but not Th2, clones. Changes in T cell helper function were analysed when anti-CD3 activated T cells were costimulated with monoclonal antibodies to the CD28 receptor (anti-CD28). T cell-dependent B cell growth and differentiation were consistently augmented if anti-CD3 stimulated T cells were simultaneously activated with anti-CD28. Although anti-CD28 enhanced 11-2 and IL-4 production. it did not increase B cell responses solely by augmenting production of soluble lymphokines. Anti-CD28 costimulation also induced increases on T cells of CD40 ligand and membrane TNF-u expression, two molecules known to promote B cell proliferation and lg secretion. Since anti-CD28 , promoted T cell helper functions and expression of CD4OL. we examined the dependence for CD40L during Tdependent B cell responses. Although soluble CD40 fusion proteins only partially inhibited Ti dependent B cell activation, we found a strict requirement for CD40L expression at initiating B cell responses. Both CD40L expression and T cell help were blocked by cyclosporin A after T cell receptor crosslinking, and unlike 11-2 production. both remained cyclospobin A sensitive during CD28 costimulation. In addition, anti-CDP8 could not compensate for the T cell helper deficiency of hyper IgM syndrome patients who lack functional CD40L. Thus, anti-CD28 induced T qell help is delivered via a CD40L-dependent process. The fact that BALB/c mice were immunized i.p. on day 0 with SRBC and received i.p. injections with a gp39-specific hamster antibody, MRl, on days 0, 2 and 4. Control animals received SRBC and normal hamster immunoglobulin. Serum and spleens were isolated on day 9 and 11. ELISA showed absence of SRBC-specific antibodies in the serum of anti-gp39 treated mice, but not controls, confirming earlier observations. Immunocytochemistry was performed on frozen spleen sections. Staining with PNA, a lectin specifically binding to germinal center B-cells, which are memory B-cells showed large germinal centers in conml animals. No germinal centers were found in mice which received a n t i -~3 9 , although thread-like structural elements showed PNA-binding. Frozen sections were also stained with an antibody against IgD which is present on follicular resting B-cells and which is lost upon transition to germinal center B-cells expressing IgM or I&. This staining revealed that half of the follicles in spleens of control animals were undergoing transition to become germinal centers, showing rings of intensely stained IgD-positive cells smounding large bright patches of IgD-negative cells. In contrast, in anti-gp39 weated animals, only by exception did follicles show a limited degree of wansition, with small patches of IgD-negative cells. Functional data supporting these findings were obtained in the congenic BALBbCB17 system. CB17 mice were immunized with TNP-BSA and treated with anti-gp39. After four weeks, B-cells were adoptively transferred to KLH-primed Balb/C. Subsequently, animals were challenged with TNP-KLH, and donor-specific antibodies were detected using TNP-specific ELISA. Treatment with anti-gp39 resulted in a 90% decrease in anti-TNP titer, as compared to the controls. These data demonstrate that the gp39-CD40 interaction is not only critical in the generation of the antibody response, but also in the generation of Bcell memory. Molecules of the TNF-R family have been shown to be essential in the regulation of lymphocyte growth and differentiation. The TNF-R family member CD27 binds to a type II transmembrane molecule belonging to the TNF gene family (CD27L) that, as we recently demonstrated, is identical to the lymphocyte activation antigen CDw70. Using transfected muse fibroblasts expressing human CD27L, it was shown that interaction of CD27 with its ligand provides a potent second signal for cytokine production, activatiooantigen expression and proliferation in unprimed, CD45RA' and to a lesser extent in primed, CD45RO+ peripheral blood T cells. In contrast to costirnulatory signals delivered via the CD28-ligand B7, CD27L was found to induce low IL-2 and IL4 but relatively high TNF-a secretion. Markedly, proliferation of CD4SRA+, but not of CD45RO' T cells was found to be independent of IL-2. As we demonstrated that antis7 and anti-CD27L mAb synergize in the inhibition of alloresponses induced by B-LCL, cooperation of both molecules appears to be essential for optimal T e l l stimulation by certain types of APC. Our results indicate that the interaction between CD27 and its ligand CDw70 might he of particular importance in the recruitment of T cells from the unprimed T cell population. Moreover, as CDw70 expression in viw is confined to activated B and T lymphocytes only a limited set of APC are able to generate this specific second signal for T-cell expansion. Functionally, while anti-B7 mAb and hCTLA4Ig Were able to inhibit T cell proliferation to antigen expressed on B7-transfected antigenpresentingcells (APCs), onlyhCTLA4Ig and anti-B7-2 mAbs were able to block T cell responses to natural APCs. Moreover, B cells expressing only 87-2 and no detectable B7-l(B7) were able to co-stimulate T cell proliferation and IL-2 production. This response was inhibited by Fab fragments of anti-CD28 mAbs, implying B7-2 co-sthulates T cells by interacting with the CD28 molecule. Further evidence of the predominant co-stimulatory role for B7-2 has come from i n vivo studies. Allogeneic islet transplants Were performed in the presence of hCTLA4Ig, anti-B7, anti-B7-2 or control mAbs. Islet cells grafted into control mice or anti-B7-l treated mice had a graft survival of 15 days. In Contrast, animals treated with hCTLA4Ig or anti-B7-2 mAbs maintained their grafts from between 25 to at least 42 days. These results demonstrate that in this model, B7-2 plays the major role in co-stimulating T cell responses. CD28 costimulation synergizes with TCR signals for the production of interleukin 2 (IL-2) and T cell proliferation. It has been suggested that CD28 costimulation does this by enhancing IL-2 mRNA stability. A TCR-inducible RNA binding factor specific for AU rich elements (ARE) in the 3' untranslated region of lymphokine mRNAs was described in normal T cells. This 32 Kd protein (AU-B) may target lymphokine mRNAs f o r degradation. We investigated whether CD28 signaling interferes with AU-B activity resulting in increased mRNA stability. A synthetic RNA oligonucleotide spanning the ARE of the 3'-UTR IL-2 mRNA was used in electrophoretic mobility-shift and UV cross-linking experiments. Anti-CD3 stimulation of a T cell hybridoma resulted in the appearance of a protein that bound to the IL-2 RNA oligonucleotide. Surprisingly, this protein had an apparent molecular weight of 100 Kd and thus appeared to be distinct from AU-B. The 100 kd complex was specifically shifted by ARE containing probes, but not by ARE lacking probes. When cytoplasmic extracts of cells stimulated with anti-CD28 antibodies were analyzed, inhibition of the CD3-induced RNA binding activity was detected. Parallel Northern blot analysis revealed that costimulation with anti-CD28 antibodies increased the amount of mRNA for IL-2 in the hybridoma above the level observed with anti-CD3 alone. Our results suggest that CD28 signaling inhibits the formation of an RNA-protein complex that could target IL-2 mRNA to rapid degradation. This would account for the increase in IL2 mRNA accumulation that is observed following CD28 costimulation. Institute, Gentofte, Denmark The reduced number and unresponsiveness of T cells (lymphopenia) in the diabetic BB rat may be caused by deficient antigen presenting cells. Since antigen processing and presentation by MHC molecules appear to be normal, we have focused on the accessory molecules involved in the stimulation of T cells. Several cell surface molecules on antigen presenting cells are known to be required for proper stimulation of T cells. One of these, the B cell activation antigen B7, expressed on activated B cells, INF-y, induced monocytes and dendritic cells, has been shown to produce an important co-stimulatory signal upon interaction with its ligand, CD28, present on T cells. Theoretically, the lymphopenia in the BB rat could be explained by an abnormal B7 function. From a cDNA library of MHC I1 positive thymic cells the rat bomologue of the murine B7 was cloned and sequenced. The predicted protein of 294 amino acids was 76% identical to the murine B7 protein. A high homology was found in the Ig-C and Ig-V domains, while in the transmembrane and cytoplasmatic regions very little homology was found. Preliminary results suggest that the level of B7 transcript in lymphoid tissues does not differ in the BB and Brown Norway rat. Furthermore, we intend to map the B7 gene in the rat. We now show that FcR+ L cells transfected with B7 stimulate minimal proliferation of Thl clones in response to anti-CD3 antibodies, in contrast to induction of significant proliferation of naive T cells. However, addition of IL-12 to cultures of Thl cells stimulated with anti-CD3 and FcRf B7 transfectants resulted in very pronounced increase in proliferation and IFN-yproduction. Exogenous IL-12 did not affect the B7-induced proliferation of naive T cells. Thus, whereas costimulatory signals delivered via B7-CD28 interaction are sufficient to induce significant proliferation of naive T cells activated through occupancy of the TCR, Thl T cell clones require cooperative costimulation by B7 and IL-12. This costimulation for proliferation and IFN-y production was inhibited using chimeric soluble Cl'LA4-Ig and anti-IL-12 antibodies. Furthermore, the significant antigen specific proliferation and IFN-7 production by Thl clones observed using splenic APC was almost completely abrogated using CnA4-Ig and anti-IL-12 antibodies. Thus two costimulatory signals, B7 and IL-12, account for the ability of splenic AFC to induce maximal stimulation of Thl clones. IL-10 down-regulates the expression of IL-12 by IFN-ystimulated macrophages and !his may account for the ability of IL-10 to inhibit APC function of splenic and macrophage APC for the induction of Thl cell proliferation and IFN-y production. Indeed we show that IL-12 can overcome the inhibitory effect of IL-10 for the APCdependent induction of proliferation and IFNy production by Thl clones. Thus proliferation of terminallydifferentiated Thl clones, in contrast to naive T cells, requires stimulation via membrane-bound B7 and a cytokine, IL-12. These signals may result in the activation of unresponsive T cells during an inflammatory response. IL-10 by its role in regulating such innate inflammatory responses may thus help to maintain these T cells in an unresponsive state. The interaction of CD40 on B cells and its ligand on T cells is one of the most important B celliT cell interactions. Signaling through CD40 has been shown to be vital for immunoglobulin class switching as welt as for B cell proliferation. It has also been shown to be critical in germinal centers where signaling through CD40 can inhibit apoptosis of germinal center B cells. It has been assumed therefore that since the CD40/ligand interaction is such a large component of T cell help that i t would also augment the differentiation of B cells into antibody secreting cells. Here we show that the interaction of a B cell lymphoma, CH12, with L cells expressing the CD40 ligand inhibits the differentiative response. CHI2 cells can be induced to secrete IgM with a variety of stimuli such as LPS, IL-5 or IL-6. However, when CHI? cells were co-cultured with lymphokines and CD40 ligand expressing L cells (CD40Ia8 L cells), antibody secretion was decreased 20 fold. Antibody secretion could not be recovered by the addition of anti-p or IL-4. The CHI2 cells were fully viable after culture on either L cells or CD40"g L cells. No class switching was detectable at the level of secreted antibody. The block in IgM secretion can be fully explained by a decrease in immunoglobulin transcription since mRNA levels were decreased in cells cultured on CD40"p L cells about 20 fold as well. Curiously, antibodies to CD40 do not have the same effect as CD40"E L cells. CD40 antibodies that have profound effects on the proliferation of normal B cells did not affect secretion of IgM from CH12 cells. These antibodies could induce a modest proliferative response, similar to that observed with the transfected L cells. Similar results were obtained when the antibodies were presented to the B cells in a crosslinked form on beads or on Fc receptor expressing L cells. These results suggest that either the CD40iligand interaction is fundamentally different than the stimulation with antibodies or that CD40 ligand can interact with a different molecule on the surface of B cells. Furthermore, the fact that Ig secretion is inhibited by CD40 suggests that although CD40 may be instrumental in B cell activation and in the initial proliferative phases of the B cell response, other interactions are required for the final differentiation of B cells. increase i n 1L-2 mRNA stabiliry. T o assess t h e cbntribution of IL-2 t o costimulation via CD28, mseparated or purified CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from 11-2 deficient mice (-/-) were culrured in t h e presence or absence of ligands for CDZR a n d several submitogenic stimuli. CD4+(-/-) cells were costimulated by anti CD28 rdAB or B7+ cells as efficiently a s were cells f r o m wildtype controls. Neither anti IL-4 n o r soluble 1L-4 r e c e p t o r inhibited costimulation by a n t i CD28, suggesting that lymphokines other t h a n IL-4 or direct cell/cell signalling mediate the effect. CD8+ (-I-) cells on t h e other hand failed to respond both with respect to proliferation a n d induction of cytotoxicity. Both defects *re overcome by t h e addition IL-2. In both CD4+ and Cb8+ cells from IL-2 deficient mice anti CD2S failed to boost CD25 expression beyond rhat obtained with anti CD3 alone, while cells from wildtype controls reponded Hath a dramatic increase in IL-2R The data suggest that upregulation of IL-2 may be an important aspect in coscimualrion of CDS+ cells by CD28 likation but only one of several mechanisms operative in cw+ cells Understanding of the signals required for the activation of T cells is of critical importance in immunology and the study of autoimmune disease. Current models suggest that both engagement of the TCR and the delivery of costimulatory signals are required for activation. In the absence of such costimulatory signals, clonal anergy or apoptosis may result. It has emerged that T cell proliferation is highly costimulation-dependent and evidence suggests that the T cell molecule CD28 transduces such a signal. We have investigated the ability of various transfectants expressing B7IBBl and LFA-3, to provide costimulatory signals for resting T cells, previously activated human T cell blasts and CD28 positive Jurkat cell lines. Using resting T cells purified from peripheral blood we have demonstrated that neither B7 nor LFA-3 alone is capable of inducing proliferation. However in combination both ligands provide a potent synergy which results in T cell proliferation. Interestingly this synergy is dependent on both ligands being present on the same cell and cannot be achieved when the ligands are provided by separate transfectants. In contrast, B7 alone is capable of providing signals to previously activated T cell blasts which further enhances proliferation. These data suggests that signalling via CD28 might be controlled by interactions with other signalling molecules. Given these data we have begun to relate the signalling ability of CD28 to the activity of Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase(P13K) which we have previously shown to be activated by CD28. In the T cell line Jurkat, B7 alone is capable of stimulating PI3K activity, an effect which is enhanced by the presence of LFA-3. In addition data from immunoprecipitates of CD28 demonstrate a direct association with PI3K during B7 stimulated CD28 engagement suggesting a model of CD28 signalling which requires phosphorylation of the CD28 cytoplasmic domain. Thus the requirement for CD2/CD28 co-association in our system may reflect an interaction between a CD2-associated kinase and the CD28 cytoplasmic domain. CD40-Ligand is an important component of the membrane-bound help activity that is expressed on the surface of activated TH cells. We sought to determine whether some or all of the effects we observed with activated TH cells were attributable to CD40-L expression. We measured the induction of cmyc RNA in small resting B cells at 2hr as an assay for the receipt of very early helper signals, and B cell proliferation at 72hr as an assay for late helper signals. We have found that both soluble CD40 (CD40Ig) and anti-CD40L antibody (MR-1) can inhibit c-myc induction in small B cells when T cells preactivated on anti-CD3 are used. These reagents do not inhibit antigen-dependent induction of c-myc by resting T cells. We obtained similar results when we measured the inhibition of B cell proliferation. We are now using soluble CD40-Ligand to assay direct effects on B cell c-myc RNA. In addition, when we added cyclosporin A at different times during a 12hr activation of TH cells on anti-CD3, and then measured CD40L expression and the ability to induce B cell proliferation, we found these two parameters to correlate perfectly. We plan to use this system to compare CD40-L expression and the ability to induce c-myc RNA. Titration experiments involving stably transfected, antigen-specific T hybridomas that express varying levels of CD40-L are also in progress. T cell receptor stimulation without costimulation is insufficient for the induction of an optimal immune response. It is thought that engagement of [ t i t CD28 molecule with its ligand R7 provides an essential costimulatory signal without which full activation of T cells cannot occur. A mouse strain with a defective CD2X genc was established. Development of T and B cells in the CD28-deficient mice appeared normd. However, T lymphocytes derived from CD28-I-mutant mice had impaired responses to lectins. kctin stimulation did not trigger interleukin-2 (IL-2) production, IL-2 receptor a expression was significantly decreased, and exogenous IL-2 only partially rescued the CD28 defect. Basal immunoglobulin (Ig) concentrations in CD2X-deficient mice were about one-fifth of those found in wild-type controls, with low titers of IgGl and IgG2b but an increase in IgG2a. In addition, activity of T helper cells in CD2X-/-mice was reduced and immunoglobulin class switching was diminished after infection with vesicular stomatitis virus. However, cytotoxic T cells could still be induced and the mice showed delayed-type hypersensitivity after infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. Thus, CD2X is not required for all T cell responses in vivo, suggesting that alternative costimulatory pathways may exist. IL-4 has been shown to be involved in the early stages of B cell maturation. Changes induced by IL-4 include cell enlargement, increased viability, and increased MHC class I 1 expression. However IL-4 alone does not induce B cell activation as defined by proliferation, lyrnphokine production, or immunoglobin class switching. In this study, we demonstrate that preincubation with IL-4 enhances the ability of murine small splenic B cells, normally poor stimulators of murine Thl clones, to stimulate lymphokine production and proliferation by Thl clones. Moreover, small resting B cells induce anergy, while IL-4-treated B cells do not. IL-4-treated B cells were found to express both B 7 (B7-1) and a second ligand for CTLA4Ig ( B 7 -2 ) . Although IL-4 induces both B7-1 and B7-2, the kinetics of expression of these molecules is different: B7-2 is detected by 12 hours, wheras B7-1 is not significantly expressed until 48 hours. However, only CTLA4Ig fully blocks IL-4 induced costimulatory activity; a mAb to B 7 does not. Thus, these results suggest that IL-4 may function indirectly as a costimulatory factor by inducing costimulatory molecules on resting B cells. Additionally, these findings support the hypothesis that an alternative ligand for CD28 and CTLA4 may be important in providing costimulation. The induction o f lymphokine and IL-2Ra gene expression by CD28 costimulation is mediated by both transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms. We have chosen to study the mechanisms underlying the CD28-mediated activation of IL-2 gene transcription. Previously, a conserved sequence motif present in several lymphokine gene promoters was identified as the CD28 response element (CDZXRE), and an induced protein complex (CD28RC) was previously ident.ified in human T cells activated by CD28 costimulation. We previously showed that the proto-oncogene product c-Re1 binds to CD28RE and activates the CDEBRE-driven CAT expression in transient transfection assays (PNAS 9 0 : 1 6 9 6 -1 7 0 0 , 1 9 9 3 ) . c-Re1 belongs to the Rel/NF-rB family of transcription factors that share Activation of IL-2 gene transcription via the T cell accessory molecule CD28 has been shown to be mediated through a NF-kB like sequence, called CD28RE. Mutation of the CD28RE sequence in the IL-2 promoter abrogates the mitogen induced transcriptional activity. We were able to demonstrate binding of the recombinant NF-kB family members c-rel, p65 and c-rel/p50 heterodimer to CD28RE. In contrast to the HIV-1 NFkB binding sequence the NF-kB p50 homodimer did not recognize CD28RE. Nuclear expression of CD28RE binding proteins requires mitogenic stimulation of T cells. We characterized the nuclear proteins that constitute the T cell derived CD28RE-protein complex by W-crosslinking analysis. Two major proteins bands with apparent molecular mass of approximately 35 kD and 70-80 kD were found to bind CD28RE. The nuclear appearance of these proteins is believed to be crucial in the transmission of mitogenic signals that lead to transcriptional activation of the IL-2 gene. The 70-80 kD protein is likely to represent C-re1 and/or p65. At present it is not clear whether the 35 kD protein corresponds to a known transcription factor. Further identification of these proteins is in progress. We have quantitatively assessed the effects of CD28 costimulation on IL-2 mRNA expression at the levels of transcription initiation and mRNA stability in mouse T cell clones. Using crosslinked anti-TCR and soluble anti-CD28 antibody we find that the addition of anti-CD28 antibodies costimulates the cells to make 30-to100-fold more IL-2 than cells triggered through th-TCR alone. In this system the accumulation of IL-2 mRNA over the first 6-8 hours closely matches the rate of accumulation of secreted IL-2 protein. Using a quantitative reverse transcriptase-mediated PCR reaction we find a marked difference in the rates of decay of IL-2 mRNA in the presence versus the absence of the CD28 signalling. This difference can explain the majority of the effect of CD28 on L -2 mRNA accumulation. After 8 hours of stimulation IL-2 mRNA rapidly disappears even in cultures with the anti-CD28 antibody. The mechanism of this decay is unknown. Utilizing transcription reporter assays we do not find a specific effect of CD28 signalling on IL-2 enhancer driven transcription. This is true for either a 353 bp or a 1.8 kb enhancer, over a broad range of kinetics and TCR signal strength and with several TCR signal mimics. Bluestone, Committee on Immunology and the Ben May Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637 CD28 has been defined as a major co-stimulatory molecule on T cells. Another molecule, CTLA-4, is highly homologous to CD28 and found to be expressed at the mRNA level in activated murine T cells. Interestingly, a soluble form of CTLA-4, CTLALIg, interacts with high avidity to B7 and the newly described B7-2 molecule. However, the functional role of CTLA-4 expression in immune regulation remains to be clarified. We have developed monoclonal antibodies against murine CTLA-4 in order to elucidate the structural and functional characteristics of the molecule. While CTLA-4 is not expressed on resting CD4' or CDEt cells, a variety of stimuli induce CTLA-4 within 48 hours, including anti-CD3 mAh, concanavalin A, staphylococcal enterotoxin B, or co-stimulation with anti-CD28. Biochemical analysis of the molecule on activated T cells demonstrated that CTLA-4 is expressed predominantly as a glycosylated, disulfidelinked dimer of approximately 70 kD, and that the molecule may exist in differentially glycosylated forms which form homodimers. In a series of experiments, CTLA-4 expression was found to be both TCR/CD3-and CDZE-dependent. First, CTLA-4 upregulation following anti-CD3 mAb was inhibited by Fab fragments of anti-CD28 mAb or CTLA4Ig fusion protein. The requirement for co-stimulation could be bypassed by the addition of exogenous IL-2. In addition, T cells from CD28-deficient mice only expressed CTLA-4 following T cell activation with a combination of anti-CD3 and IL-2. These results are consistent with the role of CD28 ligation in IL-2 production. However, the addition of cyclosporin A to cultures containing anti-CD3 mAb also blocked CTLA-4 expression, and this expression could not be reconstituted with IL-2. These results suggest that both TCR signalling and IL-2 production are critical to the expression of CTLA-4. Finally, the functional effects of anti-CTLA-4 mAb on T cells activation will he discussed. T lymphocyte activation requires 2 signals. Binding of a peptide/MHC complex to the T cell receptor constitutes signal 1 and other costimulatory signals provided by the antigen presenting cell constitute signal 2. CD28 is now widely recognized as a major receptor for delivery of costimulatory signals to T cells. CD28 binds to B7, an Ig supergene family member found on dendritic cells and activated B cells. B7 binds with higher affinity to a second receptor on T cells, CTLA4. A soluble form of CLTA-4, CTLA4Ig, produced by Linsley and collaborators has been used by a number of groups to block the costimulatory activity of B7. We have shown that dibutyryl-CAMP treatment induces B7 expression on M12 B lymphomas or activated B cells from mouse spleen or human tonsil. For resting B cells, PMA and ionomycin but not db-cAMP treatment induces B7. In examining other B lymphomas for B7 inducibility, we found that K461 B lymphoma cells do not express B7 (as measured by CTLA4Ig binding) and are not inducible for B7 by PMA/ionomycin or dibutyryl-CAMP treatment. We report here that despite the apparent absence of B7, the Balbk lymphoma K46J can costimulate with immobilized anti-CD3 to drive proliferation and IL-2 production by purified Balb/c splenic T cells. This costimulatory activity was not blocked by CTLA4Ig, by anti-ICAM-I, by anti-heat stable antigen or by anti-MHC 11. Furthermore, paraformaldehyde fixation of the APC did not block the activity. These data suggest that K46J constitutively expresses an alternate costimulatory molecule, that does not bind to CTLA4. The CD40 ligand (CD40L) is a type II membrane glycoprotein expressed on activated T cells that induces B cell proliferation, immunoglobulin isotype switch and secretion. The importance of CD40L has been recently underscored by the demonstration that a number of mutations in this molecule are responsible for X-linked hyper-lgM syndrome (HIM) in humans. To study the role of CD40L and to derive an animal model for HIM, we used gene targeting to create a null mutation in the CD40L locus. Homologous recombination events were identified by Southern blot analysis. Three independent male embryonic stem cell lines (from mouse strain 129) bearing the mutation at the CD40L locus were-obtained. ES-derived peripheral white blood cells from chimeric mice express no detectable CD4OL, whereas control cells express CD4OL. The functional consequences of this CD4OL defeciency will be discussed. stimulate proliferation, cytolysis, and lymphokine secretion. The primary signal to stimulate the T cell results from an interaction between TCR and MHC/peptide complexes. A second interaction, termed costimulation, is generated from the interaction between specific accessory molecules on APCs and their ligands on the T cell. Many accessory molecules have been implicated in providing a costimulatory signal under a variety of conditions. However, it is not known if these interactions are functionally redundent or independent. We are primarily interested in two areas. First, do certain subsets of T cells respond preferentially when supplied with specific costimulatory molecules on the surface of APCs? Secondly, how do specific costimulatory molecules effect subsequent T cell activation and IL-2 Fene transcription? We have generated a model system in which B7-I, B7-2 (:iltern.?tive ligand), HSA, ICAM, and Ii are expressed with MHC class II on a panel of recipient cells. We examined both CD4+ and CDX+ cells in primary mixed lymphocyte responses. Surprisingly, we observed that some APCs lacking these accessory molecules can still stimulate a dramatic allogeneic response for CD8+ T cells. This observation suggests that certain T cell subsets may not utilize known cos~iniulatory molecules for some types of primary stimulation and/or effector functions. For primary CD4+ responses, however, we have observed a dramatic enhancement of proliferation with the presence of B7 or the condroitin sulfate form of invariant chain, Ii-CS on the APC. I n examining the requirements of Thl T cell clones, we observed that only the presence of B7 on the surface of APCs f. c i~i l i t ;~t e~ .' livcii though the Thl clones are LFA-I and ICAM positive, other :iccc\holy molecules tested, HSA, Ii-CS, ICAM, fail to protect against anergy and do not stimulate proliferation or IL-2 secretion. Based on this observation, we are examining B7/CD28 interactions in IL-2 gene transcription at the molecular level. We hope to be able to correlate the presence of B7 on the surface of APCs with the presence of specific ~lanscription factors necessary for IL-2 gene transcription. T cells require cognate interaction with antigen presenting cells to proliferation. IL-2 secretion, and protection against anergy. This maturation of the B cell response occurs by increasing affinity for antigen, presenting additional processed antigen on a greater number of MHC class I 1 molecules and becoming more receptive to cognate T cell signals by more efficiently coupling accessory molecules to its signaling pathways or using altogether new ones. B cells held in the GC would thus compete with each other to be selected on such criteria, and this selection would be mediated by interactions with antigen, follicular dendritic cells and T cells. The mechanisms that give GC B cells the tools to compete in the selection process are the focus of these studies, namely, the characteristic changes in their phenotype. We have established that treatment in vifro with interleukin 4 (IL4) or a Th2 helper line can generate many essential components of the GC phenotype on some normal B cells as well as B cell lines. The minimal requirements for the acquisition of this GC-like phenotype are addressed by determining the stage at which B cells can enter this differentiative pathway, and by examining the molecular mechanisms used in inducing these elements of the GC phenotype. mRNAs of a single B cell participating in a defined anti-hapten immune response. Splenic B cells from A/J mice immunized with pazophenylarsonate (An) were stained with an antibody directed against the major Ars-associated idiotype and sorted by flow cytomeny 13 days after immunization. Single sorted cells were isolated using phase contrast microscopy. To confirm that they were memory progenitors expressing the major idiotype, the chromosomal copies of heavy and light chain V genes from isolated cells were individually amplified by a nested Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and directly sequenced without cloning. From one cell, 37 VK cDNAs were individually amplified and sequenced without cloning. Sequence analysis revealed 6 single nucleotide substitutions and 1 single base deletion distributed within 4 mRNAs. One of these mRNAs contained two point mutations and a single base deletion. An additional base substitution at position 310 was found to be shared by all the mRNAs sequenced and presumably fixed within the VK gene of the cell. Most interestingly, 2 of these mRNAs were aberrantly spliced, excising parts of the coding sequences. These aberrant splices apparently occurred at cryptic splice sites, in some cases newly created by mutations. Thus, these mutations are unlikely the result of Taq polymerase or RTase errors through our method, but are rather the result of a biological process then subject to transcriptional splicing in the cell. This interpretation is supported by the low frequency of mutations in mRNAs sequenced from single Bhybridoma cells. These data reveal the presence of somatic mutations in mRKA transcripts. Whether they are specific products of the somatic hypermutation mechanism that operates on V genes is under investigation. This research was supported by The Council for Tobacco Research (Grant #2419A) and the NIH (ROlAI33613). AHL is supported by a research award from the Arthritis Foundation. PKJ is supported by NIH an Training Grant (#T32AI07405). We are analyzing the expressed VH gene repertoire of three murine B cell lineages (see Ann Rev Imm 11: 501): conventional B cells which develop late and are replenished throughout life from progenitors in adult bone marrow; B-la cells (Ly-llCD5 B cells), which develop early and maintain their numbers by self-replenishment; and B-lb cells, which share many of the properties of B-la cells, including self-replenishment and feedback regulation of development, but can also readily develop from progenitors in adult bone marrow. Several studies indicate that the expressed repertoire of mature B-la and conventional B cells differ, hut there is no information on B-lh cells. Earlier methods of repertoire analysis, which include generation of hybridomas, in situ hybridization, and amplification of cDNA from polyclonal cells, are not necessarily representative of the populations studied. We have developed a method for making cDNA from individual, unstimulated, FACS-sorted B cells that permits the recovery and amplification of up to 90% of the cells. B-la, Blb and conventional B cells from the adult Balhlc peritoneum were sorted based on size, viability and the expression IgM, IgD, and Ly-I. Initial analysis (>75 transcripts) has focused on the CDR3 region. The distribution of CDR3 lengths are statistically the same for each of the three populations. However, B-la cells differ from both B-lh and B-2 cells in the use of non-coded N-region nucleotides. There is a significantly larger proportion of B-la transcripts which have no (or few) N bases at both the V-D and D-J junctions, About 60% of the junctions from B-la cells have 0 or 1 N nucleotide compared with -25% for B-lh and conventional B cells. The B-la cells present in the adult which contain nolfew N-region nucleotides most likely arose earliest in ontogeny, when terminal deoxy transferase (TdT) activity is low, and survived via self-replenishment into adulthood. TdT activity, however, does not define B-la cells. Identification of transcripts with significant amounts of N-region addition, together with our feedback regulation data, suggests that B-la cell\ are still being produced through the first weeks of life. Clonal deletion via apoptosis can be induced during at least two stages in B cell development and differentiation: in immature B cells as a mechanism of self-tolerance induction, and in proliferating, Ig-secreting B cells as a mechanism of eliminating cells that have lost antigen-specificity during somatic hypermutation of their surface Ig. In contrast, mature naive B cells do not normally undergo apoptosis upon antigen encounter, but instead generate a primary humoral response. In the present study, we report that in an vitro culture system, resistance to apoptosis in mature naive murine splenic B cells is mediated in part by a protective mechanism that can prevent induction of apoptosis in these cells. Cyclosporin A (CsA), but not FK506, inhibits the protective mechanism and facilitates induction of apoptosis by the calcium ionophore A23187. T helper cellderived cytokines, particularly IL-4, prevent induction of B cell apoptosis by A23187 plus CsA, suggesting that apoptosis may be activated when B cells are stimulated in the absence of T cell help. We are currently investigating the role of the "anti-apoptotic" protein, bcl-2. in the regulation of B cell apoptosis by A23187, CsA and IL-4. We are using immunofluorescence and flow cytometry to examine bcl-2 protein expression levels in B cells induced to undergo apoptosis by A23187 plus CsA, and in B cells protected from apoptosis by IL-4. Our preliminary results indicate that bcl-2 protein levels are modulated only very modestly in response to these stimuli, suggesting that the regulation of apoptosis in this cell system may reflect a bcl-2-independent apoptosis pathway. The role of physiological cell death (apoptosis) in the regulation of B lymphocyte responses is incompletely understood. We tested whether resting human B cells isolated from peripheral blood undergo apoptosis in vitro. We found that TGFRl and the CAMP-inducing agent forskolin potently enhanced apoptosis spontaneously occuring in medium, as demonstrated by morphological and biochemical criterid (DNA fragmentation). The effects were dose-dependent with maximal cell death occuring at doses of 10 n g / d (TGFR1) and 100 micromolar (forskolin). On the other hand, various activationstimuli including polyclonal anti-IgM antibodies, IL 4, a n d TPA countered to a variable degree spontaneous apoptosis. Anti-IgM antibodies and IL 4 also consistently inhibited TGFR1-and forskolin-induced death. In conclusion, our studies show that well known modulators of B cell growth also regulate apoptosis of the same cells, and underline the role of apoptosis in determining the outcome of the B lymphocyte response. We are currently investigating the expression of bd-2 in this setting, a proto-oncogene that is known to inhibit apoptosis. The first fundamental event in selection of antigen-specific B lymphocytes involves Ag:mIg interactions on the B cell surface. Here we repolr on calcium responses of B cells expressing Ag receptors which in soluble Ig form have shown undetectable Ag-binding activity. Rearranged VDJ from anti-PC(Proreus morganii) antibodies were cloned in heavy chain expression vectors and co-transfected with an identical unmutated light chain vector into the Ig-B lymphoma M12.4. resulting in stable wnsfectants of d g M + , d g D + , and mfgM+D+ phenotypes. One series expresses mIg that in Ab form was of such low affinity that no PC(PM) ELISA binding is detected. A second series expresses receptors identical but for a single Asn to His somatic mutation in CDR2 of VH known to confer Ag binding by soluble Ab. A third and fourth series of mIg+ B cells contain the His mutation plus others with less impact on Ab affinity for Ag. When stimulated with as little as 10e-7 dilution of the PC(PM) immunogen, intracellular calcium fluxes were observed in transfectmts with the His mutation. Significantly, slow and weak hapten-inhibitable fluxes were detected in the low affinity series (predicted as the precursor of His-containing clones) but only at much h!gher [Ag] . In this case. studying interactions with Ag:mIg receptors on the B cell surface may be more revealing about activation or affinity maturation than studies with soluble Ah. The mIgM+. mIgD+, and mIgM+D+ lines showed qualitatively similar calcium responses to Ag stimulation. Two mIgD+ low affinity B cell lines differing by fourfold in receptor number revealed ability to mobilize calcium only by the line with greater number of receptors. Perhaps the normal function of IgD is to increase total surface Ag receptor density to allow for initiation of B cell clonal selection which can then undergo affinity maturation. This project seeks to explore the molecular and cellular basis of immunologic tolerance in adult mice. Intra-peritoneal injections of soluble form of the antigen (4-hydroxy-3nitrophenyl) acetyl (NP) conjugated to buman serum albumin (HSA), causes a profound tolerance to subsequent immunisation with alum adsorbed NP-HSA .The tolerance occurs even when the soluble antigen is given as late as six days into the response. There is a dramatic and sustained drop in the number of clonable, IgGl anti-NP-secreting cells in culture. This drop appears to be mediated through a lack of T cell help. Phenotypic analysis of the spleens using multi-parameter flow cytometry has shown that NP-specific B cells of germinal center origin (NP+;IgGl+;PNA hi cells) fail to develop in the tolerant mice. In vitro culture of the NP+;PNA hi cells indicate that they are greatly enriched for higher affinity, anti-NP antibody producing cells. However there is little difference in the numbers of PNA lo cells in the immune and tolerant mice. Preliminary immunohistology shows a significant drop in the number of antigen specific germinal centers in tolerant mice. When murine B lymphocytes are cultured together with lipopolysaccharide (LPS), homotypic cell adhesion is activated. This is at least in part due to upregulation of intercellular adhesion molecule (1CAM)-1 on the B cells. ICAM-1 probably interacts with lymphocyte functional antigen (LFA)-1, since adhesion can be blocked by antibodies to either of these structures. The T cell produced cytokine interleukin (IL) 4 also induces homotypic aggregation among B cells, which is independent of LFA-l/ICAM-1. Instead, aggregation occurs via CD2. CD2 is expressed equally in normal and IL 4-activated B cells. The mechanism for its involvement in IL 4-induced adhesion is unknown. When B cells are stimulated by LPS and 1L 4 together, they form huge round aggregates. The LPS + IL 4 induced aggregation depends on the above mentioned adhesion molecules, in addition to other, so far umdentified, ligands. Our hypothesis is that the formation of these aggregates resembles that of germinal centers in vivo. IL 4 induces motility in a subpopulation of B cells as tested by migration into collagen gels. The migration is inhibited by antibodies to 01 integrin, indicating involvement of Very Late Antigens (VLA). The importance of these findings for in v i~o activation of B cells will be discussed Cologne 50931, Germany Germinal centers are histologically distinct structures that form within the draining lymphoid tissues following immunization with T cell-dependent antigens (Ag). To approach an understanding of the molecular events which govern B cell differentiation in the germinal center, we sought to isolate germinal center B cell-specific genes using subtractive cDNA libraries prepared from FACS-sorted (CD45R+, IgD-, Thyl.2-) lymph node B cells of immunized mice. A novel gene, designated M17, was isolated from this library and found to be transcribed in spleen and, to a lesser extent, in bone marrow. Strikingly, only PNAc (germinal center) B cells, but not PNA-splenic B cells expressed M17 mRNA. Germinal center specific expression of M17 was confirmed by staining of histological sections from spleen with an antiserum raised against a GST-MI7 fusion protein. The M17 gene is comprised of four exons spanning 13.2 kb, and encodes a 25 kD cytoplasmic protein of 159 amino acids. Analysis of the primary amino acid sequence revealed a possible lipid binding domain and multiple potential phosphorylation sites, including an antigen receptor signalling motif. To assess the function of this molecule, we have undertaken a gene targeting approach to generate M17 deficient mice. Thus far, mutant embryonic stem cells bearing an inactivated M17 allele have been generated by homologous recombination. Subsequent studies will involve the analysis of B cell differentiation and signalling in derived M17-deficient mice. Furthermore, there were no viable cells remaining in the cultures stimulated with PHA and PWM. In contrast, cultures of T-depleted preparations stimulated with PMA contained significant numbers of viable cells throughout the entire culture period. Cell viability in mitogen-stimulated and unstimulated cultures could be restored by supplementing the CD5+ B cells with purified allogeneic T cells. Analysis by immunofluorescence indicated that the enhanced viability was a result of an increase in the number of viable B cells and was not due to long-lived, viable T cells. However, culture supernatants generated from allogeneic T cells, and co-cultures of CD5+ B and allogeneic T cells, preactivated with PHA or PWM were not capable of enhancing the viability of cultured CD5+ B cells to the same extent as intact T cells. Interestingly, supernatants generated from co-cultures of CD5+ B and allogeneic T cells, preactivated with PMA, contained a soluble factor that significantly enhanced the viability of mitogenstimulated and unstimulated CD5+ B cells in a dose-dependent manner. Thus. depending on the mode of activation, malignant CD5+ B cells appear to require either a cell contact signal delivered from co-cultured T cells or a soluble factor secreted following PMA-stimulation for the maintenance of B cell viability in virro. Imiquimod, previously known as R-837, has been identified as a potent antiviral and antitumor agent in animal models. Much of the biological activity of imiquimod can be attributed to the induction of cytokines including interferon-alpha (IFN), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), interleukin 1 (IL-I), IL-6 and IL-8. The monocyte/ macrophage is the predominant cell producing these cytokines in response to imiquimod. This study was undertaken to evaluate the effects of imiqnimod and an analog S-27609 on B lymphocytes. We demonstrate that imiquimod and S-27609 are potent inducers of proliferation in cultures of mouse spleen and lymph node cells hut not cultures of mouse thymus cells. Proliferative responses were similar to those observed using lipopolysaccharide (LPS) as a stimulus. Unlike LPS, S-27609 was capable of stimulating proliferation in splenic cultures of LPS-hyporesponsive C3HIHe.l mice indicating that the proliferation was not due to LPS contamination. In addition, human peripheral blood mononuclear cells were capable of proliferating in response to imiquimod and S-27609, whereas, LPS was ineffective at inducing proliferation. Flow cytometric analysis indicated that like LPS, S-27609 was stimulating proliferation of B but not T cells. Proliferation of mouse spleen cells was probably due to direct activation of the B cells since nonadherent populations also proliferated in response to S-27609. Further studies indicated that not only was S-27609 stimulating proliferation of B cells hut it was also polyclonally activating B cells to produce antibody. Thus, imiquimod and its analog S-27609 not only stimulate monocytes to secrete cytokines but also activate B lymphocytes to divide and produce antibody. Opinions on the average lifespan of mature B cells vary greatly. In addition, the rate at which newly generated B cells are exported from the bone marrow and incorporated into the peripheral pool is unknown. We have assessed the turnover of murine B cell subsets by examining the surface phenotype of cells incorporating bromodeoxyuridine !BrdU) in vivo. In accordance with previous findings, the turnover of bulk populations of B cells in 8 6 and BALB/c mice is quite slow with less than 10% of lymph node B cells and 10-20% of splenic B cells incorporating BrdU over a 10 day period. However, w e have observed that a minor population of B cells expressing high levels of the heat stable antigen (HSAhi) has a rapid rate of turnover; 40-70% of these cells become BrdU+ in 10 days. In addition, sIgD-B cells have a higher rate of BrdU incorporation than s1gD' cells. In order to discriminate between BrdUlabelled mature B cells and B cells that have recently emigrated from the bone marrow, w e have studied the turnover of B cells following transfer to SCID mice. We have also examined B cell turnover in nude mice, which lack germinal centres. Data o n the turnover of HSAhi and HSAlo B cells in these two situations will be discussed. showed that the BCMA gene is not expressed in the pro-B stage, while BCMA mRNA is present i n t h e pre-B, B mature a n d plasma cells. Its amount increases along with the stage of maturation a n d reaches its maximum i n plasma cells. Biochemical studies using rabbit antisera raised against BCMA protein allowed to demonstrate the presence of BCMA protein in mature B cells. Furthermore w e d e m o n s t r a t e d t h a t BCMA is a glycosylated transmembrane protein, with a lumenal aminoterminus a n d a c y t o p l a s m i c c a r b o x y l t e r m i n u s . Immunofluorescence studies using either optical a n d / o r confocal microscopic approach showed that the BCMA protein is located in the cis compartment of the Golgi apparatus. The antibodies secreted by these cells are characterized as being of low affinity and lacking somatic mutations. Prima5 immunization with T-dependent antigens results in the generation of two functionally distinct populations of B cells, antibdy-secreting cells (ASC) and memory cells. High affinity memory cells appear to be generated in the germinal centers (GC) of peripheral lymphoid organs. The respective roles of conventional and B-1 cells in this tbpe of response have not been clearly defined. Using B lineage chimeric mice, in which B-1 and conventional B cells can be easily identilied, we examined the relative contributions of these two populations to the ASC and GC B cells found in naive mice; and also in mice follow in& pnmary immunization with PC-KLH. ASCs and GC B cells were identified by cell surface binding to syndecan and peanut agglutinin (PNA), respectively by immunofluorescent staining of frozen sections and flow cytometry. In naive mice, a significant proportion of IgM ASCs were derived from B-1 cells, however, GC B-1 cells were virtually undetectable. In contrast, although conventional B cells were responsible for a lower proportion of IgM ASCs, virtually all of the GC B cells were derived from this population. Five days following immunization Hith PC-KLH, the PC-specific ASCs were virtually all T I 5 idiotype-positi\e (T15id+) and denved from B-1 cells. Although after 10 to 12 days lollowing immunization well-developed GCs were detected by histolog), no T15id staining was present in these GCs. Furthermore, FACS analysis revealed that all of the T15idc B-1 cells were PNA-negative. These results show that although B-1 cells can produce antibodies in primary TD immune responses, they are not found in germinal centers. This suggests that B-1 and conventional B cells may follow different pathways of differentiation following antigen challenge. In both man and mouse the membrane-bound immunoglobulin (Ig) receptor i s associated with an invariant heterodimer of glycoproteins, the Ig-a and Ig-p. In the present work we have studied the expression of Iga and Ig-p like proteins on chicken B cells by crossreacting mAb. The mAb HM57 and B291123 used in this study were raised against synthetic peptides, GTYQDVGSLNIADVQ and GEVKWSVGEHPGQE representing conserved amino acids in the cytoplasmic region of Ig-a and Ig-p, respectively. Both mAb stained in flowcytometry more than 90% of bursa1 B cells after permeabilization with buffered formol acetone. During embryonic development the increase in number of HM57-positive cells correlated well with that of mIg-positive cells. From peripheral blood and spleen HM57 stained about 10% of lymphocytes corresponding to the number of dg-positive cells. B291123 did not react well with embryonic bursa, neither with peripheral B cells. Histochemically HM57 stained both cortical and medullary bursa cells, more intensely medullary cells and scattered cells in the spleen that histologically appeared as plasma cells. Both HM57 and B29/123 reacted with permeabilized virally transformed B cell line RP13 but not with several T cell lines, indicating that mIg on RP13 is associated with Ig-a and Ig-p like proteins. Biochemically anti-p heavy chain specific mAb coprecipitated from digitonin-lysed surface-labeled bursa cells an Ig-associated heterodimer with relative molecular mass M , of about 44 kDa and 48 kDa. Taken together our data obtained by crossreactive mAb demonstrate that chicken B cell antigen receptor also consists of mIg asrociated with a heterodimenc protein complex similar to Ig-a and Ig-p. They also suggest that the gross structure of the B cell receptor in avian and mammalian species has been conserved during the 200 million years of divergent evolution. We have shown that glutathione (GSH), the major intracellular antioxidant, is decreased in all T cells from HIV infected individuals. We postulate that this decrease in GSH causes increased susceptibility to oxidants and inflammatory stimulations, and leads to anergy. As a model for the effects of decreased GSH levels on in vivo lymphocyte function, we treat peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) and human T cell lines with buthionine sulfoximine (BSO), an inhibitor of GSH synthesis. Treatment with BSO to lower GSH results in increased inflammatory cytokine signaling but decreased T cell receptor (TCR) signaling. TNF stimulation of the Jurkat cell line leads to tyrosine phosphorylation of many cellular substrates. Pretreatment of Jurkat with BSO markedly increases the levels of TNF-stimulated protein tyrosine phosphorylation. This reflects the redox sensitivity of the tyrosine kinases and phosphatases which control the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation. We also show that NF-kB activation, a major component of inflammatory signaling, requires a tyrosine phosphorylation event. NF-kF3 activation by PMA, H202 and TNF is blocked by the tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Herbimycin A. The augmentation of TNF-triggered signals by decreased intracellular GSH may potentiate both W-kB activation and NF-kB directed gene expression (eg,HIV). Anti-CD3 stimulation of T cells leads to signal transduction events which include a rise in intracellular calcium. The TCRstimulated calcium flux is an essential signal for proliferation of lymphocytes and production of IL-2. Treatment of either PBL or Jurkat cells with BSO results in inhibition of the anti-CD3 induced calcium flux. In fact, intracellular GSH levels are inversely correlated with the induced calcium flux; a significant signal inhibition is attained with a loss of 10% of the GSH in PBL. These results may account for the observations in HIV infected individuals of increased inflammatory stress and decreased antigen induced proliferation (anergy) of T cells. Thus, GSH replenishment with N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) or oxothiazolidine carboxylic acid (OTC) (both cysteine pro-drugs) may slow the progression of HIV disease and maintain CD4 andlor CDX T cell function in AIDS. W e are studying acquired tolerance to foreign protein antigens to gain an understanding of the mechanisms of self tolerance. Our hypothesis is that small resting B cells are the tolerizing antigen presenting cells (APC) in acquired tolerance due to their specific antigen receptors and constitutively high levels of class I1 MHC expression. In low zone tolerance, C57BL/6 mice are given 10 pg of hen egg lysozyme (HEL) intravenously 3 times a week for 3 weeks and then challenged one week later with 100 pg of HEL emulsified in complete freunds adjuvant. W e have found that this protocol induces tolerance in the T cell compartment to HEL as measured by a T cell proliferation assay. Using B cell deficient mice, we have also demonstrated that B cells are not required to prime T cells for a proliferative response to whole HEL. To directly examine the role of the B cell as the tolerizing APC, we are comparing low zone tolerance induction in normal C57BL/6 mice to B cell deficient mice. If w e demonstrate a difference in tolerance induction between C57BL/6 mice and B cell deficient mice, w e will transfuse B cells into the deficient mice prior to tolerizing and see whether this will restore t o l e r a n c e . V 764 CD4+ TS CELLS INHIBIT THE EARLY SIGNAL  TRANSDUCTION OF TH CELLS, Yoshihiro  Asano and Tomio Tada, Department of Immunology,  Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113,  Japan The activated CD4 Ts cells could inhibit the increase of intracellular Ca2+ of Th clones induced by antigen-pulsed antigen-presenting cells (APC). The identity of MHC restriction specificities was required for the instant suppression of Ca2+ influx of Th clones, while a longer period of activation of Ts clones was needed to suppress the reponse of Th clones having different MHC restrictions. A strict selectivity was found in the suppressive activity of Ts clones in that Ts clones could suppress the Ca2+ responses of Thl and Th2 clones b u t not of other CD4 Ts clones. Ts clones could suppress the activation of Th clones induced only by antigen or anti-TCR antibody b u t not by Con A. Ts clones released soluble immunosuppressive factors upon stimulation with immobilized anti-CD3 antibody. The factor released from CD4 Ts clones could inhibit the Th cell-dependent antibody formation and the IL-production. The factor could inhibit neither proliferation of Th nor expression of IL2R, CD28 or CD69 of anti-TCR-activated Th cells. The actor is different from any known cytokines including IL10, IFNy, T N F a P , and TGFP. These results indicate that Ts clones inhibit the early signal transduction of Th cells and thus suppressing specific immune responses. T cells from TCR VpS.1 transgenic mice inoculated as adults with cells bearing the superantigen MIS-la exhibit profound unresponsiveness to subsequent restimulation in uitro. The mechanism of unresponsiveness involves both anergy and deletion of Mls-la reactive CD4+ and CDS+ T cells in the periphery of inoculated mice, which represent the vast majority of T cells in TCR VpS.1 transgenic mice. We demonstrate that in addition to unresponsiveness to restimulation with Mls-la spleen cells and anti-CD3 antibodies, T cells from Mlsla inoculated transgenic mice make a poor response to allogeneic spleen cells. We have therefore used these mice to ask whether peripherally induced unresponsiveness to superantigens has a functional in uivo correlate by assessing transplantation tolerance. We show that Mls-la inoculated TCR Vp8.l transgenic mice reject fully allogeneic skin more slowly than control uninoculated transgenic mice. In the course of these studies, we have discovered that unmanipulated TCR Vp8.l transgenic mice have an impairment in the allograft response to minor alloantigenic differences. The results provide insight into the mechanisms by which self tolerance to extrathymic antigens IS normally acquired. The role of lymphotoxin (TNF-p) is poorly characterized mainly due to the lack of specific mAbs and recombinant protein to study function in the mouse. Recently, our lab defined the gene for a second human LTlike gene (called LT-p ) that forms a complex with LT (LT-a) on the cell surface. In view of the lack of progress in the mouse system, we have undertaken a characterization of the mouse LT-p gene. The mouse LT-p protein as inferred from the cDNA sequence shares 72% amino acid sequence identity with the human counterpart. As expected, characterization of a genomic fragment spanning the region 3' of the TNF gene showed that the murine LT-13 gene w a s located in a position in the MHC TNF locus i d e n t i c a l t o t h a t i n t h e h u m a n . Interestingly, due to a mutation in the donor splice site, intron 3 in the mouse is not Autoimmune disorders are characterized by the activation of T and B lymphocytes reactive to self antigens to which the individual is usually tolerant. The mechanisms by which tolerance is initially broken in the development of autoimmunity remain incompletely understood. In a model system using induced autoreactivity to murine cytochrome c, activated crossreactive B cells can resurrect anergic, autoreactive T cells. Either immunization with a foreign cyt c, or with a cryptic cyt c peptide (the C-terminal amino acids 81-104), can cause this loss of tolerance to the intact self protein. In the present study, mice immunized with the murine cyt c peptide 90-104 (a-90-104; ERADLIAYLKKATNE) showed no response by the B or T cell compartments. However, immunization with the isoaspartyl form of this peptide (P-90-104), where the linkage of Asp93 to Leu94 occurs through the P-carboxyl group, resulted in a strong T cell response. These T cells were not cross-reactive with the a-linked isoform. On the other hand, antibodies elicited by immunization with either P-90-104 or cyt c 81-104 did bind both the a-and P-linked forms of 90-104. Isoaspartyl linkages can occur physiologically, through the non-enzymatic cyclization and hydrolysis of asparaginyl (and possibly aspartyl) residues, and are observed in aging or stressed cells. Our finding that isoaspartyl linkages can render self proteins immunogenic and elicit cross-reactive antibodies suggests a novel mechanism by which self antigens could induce autoimmunity in susceptible hosts. HIV infects T lymphocytes, monocytes and macrophages by binding to its principal receptor, the CD4 molecule which is essential for binding HIV particles to target permissive cells but not by itself sufficient for efficient viral entry and infection. Here we show that the coreceptor which may interact with the third hypervariable domain (the V3 loop) in the surface glycoprotein of HIV, is dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP IV) also referred to as the CD26 antigen. This serine protease characterized by a catalytic activity specific to proline residues, cleaves synthetic peptides with motifs GP, W, KP, AP, EP, DP. In the V3 loop, the RP motif is 94 to 100 % conserved for HIV-1, HIV-2 and related simian isolates whereas the GP motif is more than 90 % conserved among HIV-1 isolates. Consequently, entry of HIV-1 into T lymphoblastoid and monocytoid cell lines, is 80-90 % inhibited, either by a specific monoclonal antibody against DPP-IV or a specific peptide inhibitor of this protease. Other peptides containing the GP, RP or KP motif also inhibited both viral entry and enzyme activity. Finally, coexpression of human CD4 and CD26 in murine NIH 3T3 cells rendered them permissive to infection by HIV-I, thus confirming that CD26 is an essential coreceptor of CD4 for HIV entry. Interestingly, these inhibitory agents that suppressed HIV-1 infection also blocked infection of cells by HIV-2 which is completely unrelated to HIV-1 LAI, indicating that the requirement of DPP IV for viral entry is a general phenomenon for different isolates and types of HIV. These observations provide the basis for developing new, simple but specific potent inhibitors of HIV infection. During an immune response, specific antibodies and B cells that are infrequently represented in the immune repertoire become amplified to abundance. Potentially novel T cell epitopes are also created through the physiologic process of somatic hypermutation in antibody genes. This presents a challenge for T cell self tolerance since many potential epitopes are either rare or nonexistent during the maturation of the T cell repertoire in the thymus. To explore the potential for T cell recognition of antibodies, we have immunized A/J mice with somatically mutated mAbs generated from the same strain. We have produced 10 T cell hybridomas to mAb36-71 and 3 T cell hybridomas to mAb45-49. All of the hybridomas specific for mAb36-71 are restricted to I-Ak while all of the hybridomas specific for mAb 45-49 are restricted to I-Ek. Processing is required since glutaraldehyde-fixed APC can present tryptic digests of the immunogen but not the native form of the antibody. We found that each of the T cell hybridomas responded exclusively to somatically mutated portions of either framework or CDR regions. The hybridomas responded to peptides (aal-18 of the mAb36-71 light chain or to aa42-57 of the mAb45-49 light chain respectively) which each include two somatic mutations but not to the corresponding germline peptides. We therefore hypothesized that the T cell repertoire is tolerant of germline antibody V regions. This is supported by the finding that repeated fusions from mice immunized with an unmutated mAb did not yield immunogenspecific T cell hybridomas. Our results show that T cells are able to recognize isologous mutated antibody variable regions in a conventional class I1 MHCrestricted manner. Whether tolerance to autologous somatically mutated V regions is achieved during antigen-driven stages of B cell differentiation is unknown. This work was supported by an American Heart Association Grant in Aid, Council for Tobacco Research Grant 2419A and by NIH Grant ROlAI33613. Cao, Brenda A. Myers-Powell, and T h o m a s J. Braciale, T h e Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology Research a n d t h e Departments of Microbiology a n d Pathology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, Charlottesville, VA 22908 There are two immunogenic sites on the type A influenza A/Japan/57 (H2N2) hemagglutinin (HA) which can b e recognized by class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) H-2Kd-restricted cyiolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs). O n e of t h e s e sites e n c o m p a s s e s two distinct partially overlapping epitopes, which s p a n HA residues 204-212 a n d 210-219. During the analysis of the fine specificity of CTL clones directed to the HA 210-219 epitope. we found that one clone 40-2 also recognized myeloma P3x63-Ag8 but not SPUO. P3x63-Ag8 is derived from MOPC 21 myeloma and they express the same immunoglobulin (lg) heavy chain variable region (VH) gene, which is a member of the murine 7183 VH gene family. Recognition was specific for t h e endogenously p r o c e s s e d MOPC 21 heavy chain in association with the Kd molecules, since SP2/0 is a variant of P3x63-Ag8 which cannot make its own lg heavy chains. T h e VH epitope recognized could b e mapped to a ten amino acid peptide spanning MOPC 21 VH residues 49-58. Crossreactivity for t h e VH g e n e product was also demonstrable in some heterogeneous populations of CTL generated in response to influenza virus infection. T h e s e results represent t h e first demonstration of crossreactivity for an endogenously processed product of a self lg by CTL directed to a foreign antigen a n d raise the possibility that lg VH expression may regulate the CD8+ T cell response to foreign antigens. Cytokines produced by activated CD4+ helper T cells play a major role in the regulation of the IgE response: recombinant (r) IL-4 and rlL-13 have been shown to specifically induce the synthesis of IgE, whereas rlFN-y, rlFNa and rlL-10 have inhibitory effects on the IL-411L-13 induced IgE synthesis. In addition, CD4+ T cells provide a costimulatory signal, in which CD40-CD40L interactions play an important role. We have investigated whether we could modulate the function of allergen-specific CD4+ T cells with respect to their cytokine production profile and their ability to provide B cell help in induction of IgE synthesis. T cell clones, specific for Derpl. a major allergen in house dust mite were generated and five T cell activation inducing epitopes on the Der pl molecule were mapped, which were all recognized in the context of different MHC Class II molecules. All T cell clones expressed a ThP-like pattern of cytokine production following activation with peptides. representing the specific Derpl epitopes. In addition, activated Derpl-specific T cell clones could induce polyclonal IgE synthesis by purified B cells, in the absence of exogenous rlL-4 or rlL-13. Incubation of the Der pl-specific T cell clones with supraoptimal concentrations of the relevant Der pl-derived peptides induced a state of anergy, during which the cells did no longer respond to antigen-specific stimuli, as measured by cytokine production and proliferation. This anergic state could be maintained for at least 3 weeks. Although anergized T cell clones express CD40L, they were no longer able to provide B cell help in the induction of IgE synthesis, even when rlL-4 was added to the cultures. However, cytokine production, and their IgE inducing capacity was restored by exogenous IL-2. Anergized T cell clones expressed strongly reduced levels of the TCR/CD3 complex, whereas CD25 expression was enhanced. No, or very low Ca2+ fluxes could be induced in anergized T cell clones following TCR triggering. These results suggest that down regulation of TCR/CD3 complexes may account for the observed T cell non responsiveness. Administration of antigen under non-inflammatory conditions (e.g., in incomplete Freunds adjuvant (FA)) induces a form of tolerance in which T cells fail to respond to priming with antigen in complete Freunds adjuvant (CFA). The mechanism by which these cells are rendered unresponsive is not understood, in part because of the difficulties associated with physically identifying small numbers of antigen-specific T cells in vivo in normal individuals. To address this, T cells from ovalbuminfl-Ad-specific TCR transgenic mice were adoptively transferred into syngeneic normal mice and tracked with a monoclonal antibody Wl-26) specific for the transgenic TCR, following priming and tolerizing regimens. Transgenic T cells were transferred such that a low, but detectable level of CD4+ KJ1-26+ cells were found later in the lymph nodes of unprimed nomial mice. Priming of these mice with ovalbumin peptide in CFA resulted in increased numbers of KJ1-26+ cells in the draining lymph nodes that were highly responsive to ovalbumin upon restimulation in v i m 7 days later. Three days after priming with peptide in CFA, many of the KJ1-26+ cells were in the S, G2, or M stages of the cell cycle. Tolerance was induced in recipient mice by injecting ovalbumin peptide in F A eight days prior to priming with ovalbumin peptide in CFA. The number of KJl-26+ cells in the lymph rtcdes of the animals injected with peptide in F A increased marginally after 3 days and fell to a lower level 8 days after injection. Interestingly, at the 3 day time point the KJ1-26c cells were blasts but were not progressing past the G1 stage of the cell cycle. This population expanded only marginally in vivo following the peptide/CFA injection on day 8 and was unresponsive at the level of T cell proliferation and IL-2 production to in v i m restimulation with antigen 7 days later. Together these results demonstrate that functional unresponsiveness is responsible, at least in pan, for this form of tolerance which is induced in vivo by antiezn-presentation that does not result in subsequent T cell proliferation. The number of T cells in the peripheral pool i s controlled by processes that include output from the thymus, proliferation of T cells in response to antigen stimulation, and apoptosis of post-activation T cells. Introduction of cells that express the superantigen vSAG-7 (mlsla) into mice that do not express the superantigen induces a T cell response leading to peripheral tolerance to vSAG-7. During the course of this T cell response , vSAG-7 reactive T cells first undergo proliferation, which is followed by a partlal deletion. By a detailed study of the TCR expression on host T cells, we have been able to identify a population of TCRa/&negative T cells first appearing at the time when vSAG-7 reactive T cells starts to disappear, suggesting the initial "deletion" of vSAG-7 reactive T cells is actually a result of TCRa@ downregulation. TCRalBnegative cells can be observed in both CD4+ and CD8+ cells, but their prognosis appears different. The CD4+TCRa/fJnegative cells are preferentially undergoing apoptasis, suggesting the c e receptors are involved in the signaling leading to apoptosis and clonal deletion. Using a line of bcl-2 transgenic mice, we have also shown that bcl-2 has no effect on TCRdfJ downregulation, but it inhibits peripheral deletion of vSAG-7 reactive T cells, suggesting the intracellular mechanisms for these two processes are different. Our result also suggests that the mechanism of peripheral T cell deletlon driven by antigen is different from that of intrathymic T cell deletion, which has shown by other investigators to be unaffected by bcl-2 . Crosslinking of surface lg (slg) on B cells with a F(ab')2 anti-slg fragment gives rise to a prolonged increase in [Ca2+]i. Cocrosslinking slg with Fcy RII gives rise to a much more transient increase. In the murine B cell line, A20, stimulation with F(ab')2 antislg gives rise to the production of high levels of 11-2 while stimulation with intact anti-slg does not. No differences in the protein tyrosine phosphorylation in response to stimulation of the cells with either Ab was found. Studies carried out in the absence of extracellular calcium or in the presence Ni2+, indicated that both extracellular and intracellular stores of calcium contributed to the overall elevation of [Can+]i induced by F(ab')p anti-slg. Furthermore, the prolonged elevation of [Cg+]i was maintained by the influx of extracellular calcium. Inhibition of this influx significantly reduced F(ab')2 anti-lgG induced 11-2 production. Under similar conditions, activation of the B cells with intact anti-slg mobilized calcium from intracellular stores but did not stimulate the influx of extracellular calcium or the production of IL-2. IL-2 production could be restored by the addition of A23187 to the cultures. Activation of the cells in the presence of manganese indicated that F(ab')2 anti-lgG stimulated the opening of the plasma membane calcium channel whereas intact anti-lgG did not. Treatment of cells pre-activated by F(ab')p anti-lgG with intact anti-slg rapidly reduced the prolonged elevated levels of [CaP+]i. Even 2 to 4 hr after stimulation of the cells with F(ab')2 anti-lgG, both intact anti-slg and EGTA could inhibit IL-2 production. These results indicate that cocrosslinking slg with FcyRll gives rise to an inhibitory signal in the cell that can both prevent the opening and actively close a plasma membrane calcium channel. A CD4-POSITIVE T SUPPRESSOR CELL CLONE INDUCING SPECIFIC UNRESPONSIVENESS, Eckehart Kolsch, Christian Becker, Abdo Konur, Andre Rademaekers, Vitam Kodelja, Andrea Partenheimer and Hans-Gerd Pauels, Institute of Immunology, University of Munster, 481 29 Munster, Germany. The CDCpositive bovine serum albumin (BSA)-specific Ts cell clone BV1/5 from a CBA/J mouse tolerized by low doses of BSA induces specific unresponsiveness in the respective T helper (Th) cell population. Tolerance induction can be measured in vitro in proliferation assays using specific Th cell clones or antigen-primed lymphnode cells (LNC) and determined in vivo by the failure to produce hapten-specific antibodies. Using the BSA-specific Th cell clone 8311 as a target one observes in addition 5'Cr-release in a 16 h longterm assay but finds no effect in a typical 6 h T cell cytotoxicity test. BVl15 Ts cells do not produce interleukin-2 but otherwise express a T h l profile. The suppression of proliferation of 8311 Th cells is partly due to interferon-y (IFN-y). But lysis of 83/1 Th cells as well as suppression of BSA-specific LNC proliferation needs direct cell contact between BV115 Ts cells and their targets. Cell lysis and suppression of LNC cannot be simulated neither by IFNy, the combination of IFN-y and TNF nor by BV1/5 supernatants. Thus soluble mediators cannot account for specific suppression by BV115 Ts cells of in vitro responses from LNC and are probably not responsible for the induction of in vivo unresponsiveness. Macrophages have been excluded as targets. Instead the data suggest a direct effectornh target cell interaction. BVl15 Ts cells induce apoptosis-like DNA fragmentation in cloned BSA-specific 8311 Th cells and in a fraction of LNC from BSA-primed mice. Apoptosis can also be visualized as chromatin condensation in the LNC population. It can further be demonstrated that BV115 Ts cells express perforin and granzyrne A upon activation. Thus they are equipped with the effector molecules for target cell destruction. If the BV115 Ts cell clone is a representative for regulatory Ts cells inducing specific unresponsiveness in peripheral lymphoid organs, then it is well equipped for this function because of the use of an I-E'-restricted specific TCR (imposing antigen-specificity) and the endogeneous expression of class II MHC molecules (serving as a focussing device for Th cells). T-lymphocytes can be rendered anergic if exposed to MHC associated antigenic peptides in the absence of an essential secondary signal. Here we report that rat T cell line lymphocytes become specifically anergic when exposed to antigen in the absence of APC. Line cells specific toward an 11-mer peptide derived from the sequence of the interphotoreceptor retinoid-binding protein were used. Incubation of these T cells with the peptide for 20 hours reduced their response to a subsequent stimulus with the peptide in the presence of APC by approximately 90%. Induction of anergy was accompanied by increased turnover of phosphatidyl inositol, suggesting an active metabolic process. Induction of anergy was also highly specific: alaninesubstituted analogs of the native peptide produced anergy only when the analog was recognized by lymphocytes sensitized against the native peptide. Anergy induction was inhibited by antibodies against adhesion molecules (LFA-1 and ICAM-I), indicating the need for cell-cell interaction in the process. Unlike human lymphocytes, (J.M. LaSalle et al., J. Immunol. 151:649, 1993), the rat line cells, however, did not stain with antibodies against MHC class I1 molecules (OX-3 or OX-6). and these antibodies did not inhibit anergy induction. In contrast, these antibodies stained approximately 30% of spleen cells and strongly inhibited lymphocyte proliferation in the presence of APC. Although they cannot be detected with currently available antibodies, MHC class I1 molecules on the rat T cells are believed to be involved in anergy induction. We propose that, in a process similar to that in the well established human T-cell system, induction of anergy in the rat system is initiated by antigen presentation on T-lymphocytes that are unable to provide a co-stimulatory signal. This study provides the first demonstration of anergy induction in vitro with non-human lymphocytes. & TcR a-/B-. Kinetic studies on in uitro T cell reactivity i n aerosol-exposed animals demonstrated biphasic CD4+ T h 2 responses which terminated, together with IgE antibody production and coincident with the appearance of MHC class I-restricted OVA-specific INF-y-producing CD8+ T cells. However, t h e latter were not autonomous in vttro a n d required a source of exogenous IL2 for initial activation, which could be provided by OVA-specific CD4+ T cells. I t i s suggested that this form of acquired immune deviation r e p r e s e n t s a novel control mechanism for protection a g a i n s t development of CD4+-Th2-mediated allergic reactivity to inhaled non-replicating antigens. In the present study, we administered hen eggwhite lysozyme (HEL) to C3H.HeJ and BALB/c mice by oral feeding. Feeding HEL 7 to 14 days prior to footpad immunization with HEL-CFA suppressed the lymph node T cell proliferative response to HEL about 80%. On the other hand the hurnoral response in these same animals was not abrogated. lgGl was the main isotype produced in both groups of animals, and feeding by a single intubation (gavage) with 1 mg of HEL without parenteral immunization) was not enough to produce an antibody response as measured by serum ELlSA (total lg) up to 20 days after feeding. In a second set of experiments t h e levels of lgGl anti-HEL Ab were significantly increased in the HEL-fed group, 7 days after immunization (either with HEL-CFA or HEL-IFA), but after 11 days there was no significant difference between fed and non-fed groups. In other experiments, two different protocols were followed: 1)feeding mice by gavage (1 mg per gavage) on days zero, 7 and 20; or 2) feeding mice for 15 consecutive days either by gavage or by adding HEL to their drinking water (approximately 0.5 mg HEL ingested per day). The lymph node T cell proliferative response of these animals after immunization with HEL-CFA was as before reduced about 80%. In contrast, animals given repeated doses of HEL by gavage or in their drinking water and without any parenteral immunization produced a significant amount of lgGl Ab. In the presumed Thl population, studies performed with peptide-induced oral tolerance in the HEL system have been designed to ask whether dominant determinants induce peripheral anergy or suppression, and these results will be presented. Oral administration of myelin antigens has been shown to reduce the incidence and severity of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) in rats and mice and to decrease the frequency of MBP-reactive cells and the incidence of attacks in some patients with multiple sclerosis. Oral tolerance has k e n shown to he mediated by Thz type regulatory cells that secrete TGFp and IU/ILlO. Adjuvants and cytokines may modulate oral tolerance. Thus, LPS enhances oral tolerance and yIFN has been shown to abrogate oral tolerance. The addition of pIFN to the experimental regimen in the animal models, either injected or orally, enhances the suppressive effects of oral myelin basic protein (MBP) and proteolipid protein (PLP). Myelin antigens were fed in amounts sub optimal to suppress EAE. SJL mice were fed three times with 0.25 mg of MBP or PLP with and without concomitant IP (69,000 units) or oral (5000 units) of pIFN and immunized with bovine PLP in complete Freund's adjuvant on days 0 & 7. Lewis rats were fed twice with 1 mg MBP with or without concomitant IP (I50,oOO units n i p IFN). In animals either fed or injected with interferon, there was a decrease in disease seventy as compared to animals fed MBP alone or given interferon alone. In a representative experiment in Lewis rats, data for fed animals follow These studies are further enhanced by the in vitro production of cytokines by lymphocytes from fed animals in response to specific antigen in culture, showing that the synergistic effect may he related to enhanced production of TGFp and ILWIL10. pIFN thus acts as a synergist to enhance oral tolerance to EAE. These observations have important implications in view of the use of pIFN for the treatment of early relapsing remitting multiple sclerosis and the potential combined use of thesc immunomodulatory therapies to treat MS. The BM5 mixture of replication competent and defective retroviruses causes a dramatic and fatal immunodeficiency disease (MAIDS) in susceptible strains of mice. The disease is characterized by lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly including a n early increase in CD4 T cell number, but loss of CD4 T cell function. CD4 T cells from BM5 infected mice fail to proliferate or synthesize cytokines in response to Con A, anti-CD3 with or without PMA, superantigens and antigens in uitro. Instead, Anergic CD4 T cells undergo programmed cell death upon in uitro restimulation. When CD4 T cells from MAIDS mice encounter TCR mediated signals, apoptosis is induced as early as 4 hrs post stimulation. Within 18 hrs of in uitro restimulation, a majority of CD4 T cells from BM5 infected mice undergo programmed cell death in response to Con A and anti-CD3. To further understand the regulation of apoptotic pathway(s) of anergic CD4 T cells, a s opposed to cytokine synthesis pathway(s) of control CD4 T cells, we evaluated the expression of bcl-2 among the CD4 T cells of uninfected and BM5 infected mice. At 12 weeks of infection, the expression of bcl-2 was lower among CD4 T cells of BM5 infected mice and further decreased once CD4 T cells were restimulated in uitro. These results suggest that the progression of CD4 T cells to anergic state involves the turn on of a program of activation induced cell death as well as uncoupling of pathways leading to eytokine synthesis. The cytokine, IL-12, stimulates proliferation and IFNY production in activated T cells, and plays an important role in the preferential development of Thl -type responses. Furthermore, murine Thl, but not Th2 clones proliferate in response to IL-12 following activation. We considered the possibility that production of IL-12 during infection in vivo might be a mechanism to reverse tolerance and promote autoimmunity. Although tolerant T cells, anergic for IL-2 production, cannot undergo autocrine-mediated proliferation, they may still be subject to IL-12-mediated expansion. This question was first addressed using an in vitro system to induce anergy. Anergic murine Thl clones were then restimulated with Ag:APC and tested for responses to murine rIL-12. In comparison with control cells, anergic Thl cells were highly resistant for proliferation to IL-12, demonstrating a novel defect in anergic Thl clones. To extend these findings to T cells tolerized in vivo, anergy was induced in peripheral CD4+ cells of mls-lb, Vp8.1 TCR transgenic mice by the i.v. injection of mls-la spleen cells. T cells isolated at two weeks post-injection were anergic for IL-2 production when restimulated with mls-1' in virro, as expected, and were also found to be resistant for proliferation in response to IL-12, as seen with the Thl clones. Thus, anergy induction in vitro or in vivo prevents both autocrine-mediated proliferation and proliferation to the cytokine, IL-12, suggesting that tolerance is maintained in CD4+ cells by severely restricting clonal expansion in vivo, even when 1L-12 is present. Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a protoytypic immune complex, or antibody mediated disease with multiple autoantibodies to nuclear antigens. Since there is clearly a defect in tolerance to self antigens in patients and niurine models of SLE we have examined genetic crosses between immunoglobulin transgenic murine lines and autoimmune prone mice for evidence of defects in central or peripheral deletion in the presence of membrane bound antigen. Using mice transgenic for IgM and IgD anti-MHC class I genes (3-83 transgenic line) which recognizes H-2K molecules of all allelic form tested except for d and f, and extensively backcrossing these mice to autoimmune prone MRL/lpr (H-ZKk/k) and NZB/W f l (H-2Kd/z) we found complete bone marrow deletion of autoreactive transgenic B lymphocytes similar to immunologically normal mice. We have now extended our observations examining genetic crosses between mice which contain the same immunoglobulin transgene as above and a transgene for the MHC class I molecle H-Kb under control of the metallothionein promoter, which exhibits expression primarily in the liver (double transgenics), and autoimmune prone mice which do not express the antigen, (MRL/lpr (H-2Kd/d) and NZB (H-ZKd/d)), to reveal any defects in peripheral tolerance. Our initial results are again similar to immunologically normal mice in which a large population of immunoglobulin transgenic B lymphocytes are present in the bone marrow, a smaller percentage in the spleen and a complete absence of transgenic B lymphocytes in the lymph nodes of these animals. These data suggest that when a B lyniphccyte encounters membrane antigen in the periphery there is clonal elimination of self-reactive B lymphocytes even in lupus-prone mice. We are currently examining more extensive backcrosses of our "double transgenics" and autoimmune prone mice, as well as examining the mechanisms of peripheral tolerance. Department of Microbiology h Immunology, London, Ontario and Department of Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, CANADA It has recently been shown that peptides eluted from MHC Class I1 molecules are predominantly fragments of self MHC and non-MHC proteins. These naturally processed self peptides are expected to be present in ontogeny. Therefore immune responses to these peptides in syngeneic host may be of physiological importance in modulating self-reactivity particularly i n autoimmune diseases. According to our current understanding T cells reactive to such self antigens are expected to be deleted or clonally anergized in ontogeny. W e have therefore investigated immunogenicity of a number of self peptides in mice that express MHC Class I1 molecules from which these peptides were eluted. Mice were immunized with appropriate synthetic peptides. Antibody and T c e l l proliferative responses were measured. We were surprised to find that many of these self MHC and non-MHC peptides were highly immunogenic in normal mice. T cells from such mice were restricted to syngeneic MHC Class I1 and were blocked by anti-CD4 antibody. Antibody response was detected t o these peptides only at a high antigen dose. T cells reactive to these self peptides generally produce IFN-y but not IL-4 therefore suggesting that are of TH1 phenotype. Despite the presence of such cells in the peptide primed mice, we could not detect any response t o these peptides in T cells derived from unprimed normal mice. These result suggest that potential auto-reactive T cells are not clonally deleted but tolerance to auto-antigens is maintained by other mechanisms in vivo. We have examined the expression of various cell surface markers and cytokine production from splenocytes of mice bearing i.p. ascitic B cell hybridomas compared to normal littermate controls. We find significant loss of expression of the IgE Fc receptor (CD23) on 8 cells from tumor-bearing mice. In mice bearing IgE secreting tumors, however, this decrease is not observed to the same extent, which confirms that the presence of IgE may stabilize the CD23 molecule on B cells (Lee, W.T. et al, J. Immunol, 1987) . Upon in vitro stimulation with ConA, splenocytes from mice with tumors display a much smaller increase in IL-2 receptor expression compared to controls. In vitro stimulation of the tumorbearing mouse splenocytes with ConA results in significantly decreased production of IL-2 and IFNy compared to normal mice. In contrast, IL-4 production does not appear to differ, which suggests that the tumors may suppress general Thllike responses, but d o not affect Th2-like responses. Preliminary results have also demonstrated that the decreases in cytokine production are apparent within four days following tumor injection, even though the mice do not succumb to the tumor until eight to eleven days following tumor injection. CD23 expression on B cells , however, is not affected at early time points, but is only observed at later stages of tumor growth. These results suggest that ascitic B cell tumors interact with the host immune system in a manner that renders splenocytes unresponsive to normal activation signals. Supported by NIH/NIAID grants A131662 and AI07313. Simultaneous study of the T-cell proliferative (Tp) and T-helper (Th) responses to peptides in neonatal tolerance has not been reported. To address this, and its possible implications in antibody-mediated autoimmunity, we induced tolerance to a foreign (HEL 106-1 16) and a self Ig-derived peptide (A6H 58-69) in a lupus-prone autoimmune strain (NZBxNZW F1 [BWFI] ), in H-2-matched normal mice (BALBlcxNZW FI) as well as normal BALBic mice. We demonstrate that administration of peptides in a "tolerogenic" regimen itself induces strong IgG peptide-specific antibody response. Neonatally tolerired mice of all 3 strains, on subsequent immunization displayed a peptide-specific Tp unresponsiveness in vitro, but an increase in serum peptide-reactive IgG antibodies. Intriguingly, tolerance in TI11 cells (defined by decreased Tp and IL-2 and IFN-7 production) did not correlate with the in vivo anti-peptide antibody response of Th-dependent IgG isotypes: IgG2a, IgG2b and IgG3 peptide-specific antibodies were markedly elevated. Resistance of TI12 cells to tolerance was also evident; IL-4 and IL-5 production were increased or unaffected, and IgG 1 anti-peptide antibodies were made. Thus, we suggest that in neonates, the peptide tolerogen itself induces TI1 responses i n vivo. Thl cells undergo a form of functional split tolerance, in wliicli Tp and cytokine production are suppressed, but TI1 function for IgG antibody responses is primed. Autoimmune BWFl inlice do not appear to have a defect in neonatal tolerance induction to either foreign or self-peptides. BWFl mice neonatally tolerired with A6H 58-69 had increased IgG anti-dsDNA production and an exacerbation of lupus nephritis. Thus, antibodymediated autoimmunity in lupus-susceptible strains may actually reflect a split tolerance to autoantigenic deterninants of pathogenic relevance. Normal Adults In this report we demonstrate clonal anergy in Th2 cells as a consequence of incomplete T cell activation by two different methods. 2.102, a Th2 clone, recognizes the murine hemoglobin B chain peptide, Hbp(64-76), in the context of I-EL. Presentation of this peptide by chemically fixed spleen cell APC does not stimulate clonal expansion of 2.102, while activating production of the cytokines IL-4 and IL-3. More interesting, and in contrast to the observations of others, this interaction causes a profound inability to proliferate upon restimulation of the Th2 cells with antigen and functional APC. This unresponsive state is long-lasting, tested up to 13 days after the initial stimulation with fixed APC and antigen. In contrast, T cells which had been preincubated with untreated spleen cells and antigen proliferated as well as freshly isolated T cells at this timepoint. The induction of this Th2 cell anergy can be inhibited by cyclosporine A, implicating involvement of a calcineurin-dependent pathway. However, addition of exogenous IL-I, IL-2 or IL-4 with peptide and fixed APC do not prevent 2.102 from subsequently becoming anergic. We further demonstrate that stimulation of the 2.102 cells with live APC and altered peptide ligand, which activates cytokine production but not proliferation, also results in an anergic phenotype upon restimulation with the immunogenic peptide. This extends our earlier observations with Thl clones to also include Th2 clones. In summary, we demonstrate that Th2 clones can be made anergic in vitro by prior stimulation with immunogenic peptide and chemically fixed APC. Further, these Th2 cells can also be induced into this unresponsive state by partial activation with altered peptide ligand and live APC. Previous work suggests that manipulation of T cell receptor and costimulatory signals can induce a state of nonresponsiveness in T cell clones, which have been subjected lo extensive in vitro selection. In order to study the relevance of this in vifro observation to T cell function in vivo, we have developed systems to study the induction 01 nonresponsiveness in freshly prepared T cells. Using mice transgenic for an MHC Class I-restricted TcR (F5) and mice transgenic for an MHC class Il-restricted TcR (AND) as sources of cells, we have used defined antigen presenting cells and specili blocking reagents to study the role of the CD28/B7 interaction in primary responses in vifro, as well as in secondary and tertiary restimulalions. In some experiments, after primary stimulation under defined conditions in vitro. cells were parked in athymic nude mice before testing responsiveness to secondary stimulation. Preliminary results suggest that non-responsiveness cannot be induced in naive MHC class Il-restricted T cells, but may be induced in MHC class I-restricted T cells under some condiims. Non-responsiveness may be inducible in primed cells, but the requirements for this induction are substantially different from the requirements for the induction of nonresponsiveness in T cell clones. The mechanism of tolerance induction in vivo is also being studied by injecting tolerizing doses of peptide +/-anti-CD28 antibody into these transgenic mice, or into mice in which smaller numbers of transgenic T cells had been parked. Immunodeficiency secondary to B and T cell defects is a major problem in long-term bone marrow transplant (BMT) survivors To better understand the mechanism(s) of T cell deficiency we assessed the phenotype of circulating T cells in 10 patients at 1 year and 4 patients at 5 years post-BMT and in 8 adult and 7 cord blood controls by 3-color flow cytometry (See the following table for the results ) * Mean * 1 Standard Deviation The abundance of T cells expressing high levels of activation antigens (CDl la, CD29) with the diminished occurrence of CD28+ T cells and the historical data showing that post-BMT T cells do nor readily repond to antigens and polyclonal stimuli suggest the T cells had been activated but subsequently rendered anergic. (CD28 is downregulated on T cells rendered anergic) Cord blood T cells expressed only low levels of activation antigens probably because, in contrast to the post-BMT patients, fetuses are not exposed to multiple infectious agents V 794 The monoclonal antibody 984D4.6 (mcAb 984) is capable of recognizing a very limited subset of murine T-cells. It has been determined that mcAb 984 will bind to T-cell lines of the antigenspecific suppressor cell type, selected T-cell leukemias, and WEHI-3. It will not bind to T-helper cell clones, B e l l lines, cytolytic T-cell clones, or monocytic cell lines. Studies demonstrated that the epitope recognized by mcAb 984 contained sialic acid (neuriminidase sensitive) and protein (pronase sensitive). Further studies showed that the 984 epitope was variably sensitive to several inhibitors of glycosylation andlor protein synthesis, sensitive to periodate oxidation, and stable to heat, leading to the conclusion that it consisted of a carbohydrate linked to a polypeptide. It was determined that the only carbohydrate structure recognized by mcAb 984 was NeuNAca2-6Galpl-4GlcNAcfl1-3Galfl1-4Glc also known as LS Tetrasaccharide-C, originally identified in human human milk. Analysis of structures related to LST-C indicates that mcAB 984 recognizes NeuNAcu2-6GalB1-4GlcNAc. We term this carbohydrate, 984. By differential extraction using the detergent, CHAPS and SDS-PAGE and Western blotting it was determined that the cell surface protein that bears the 984 epitope is 200 kD. Differences in the sensitivity to a variety of enzymes and inhibitors of glycosylation andlor protein synthesis indicate that the 200 kD protein is not CD45, Class I or CD43. The nature of the 200 kD protein remains to be determined. The expression of 984 in the mouse is extremely limited and it is therefore a useful reagent for detecting a unique subpopulation of activated regulatory murine T-suppressor cells and can clearly differentiate these cells from T helper cells and cytotoxic T lymphocytes.  Daniel M. Altmann. Katalin Takacs, and James I. Elliott, Transplantation Bioloey Section, Clinical Research Centre, Harrow HA1 3UJ, UK The use of HLA transgenic mice in models of immunity and disease assumes that human hlHC molecules are able to contribute toward the positive selection of the mouse T cell receptor repertoire. As an initial step towards analysis of this question we compared the relative ability of DRa/Ep or Ea/Ep complexes to induce T cell receptor (TcR) positive selection in H-2Ea and HLA-DRA transgenic mice lacking endogenous Ea. W e and others have previously reported Mtv-mediated negative selection in single chain HLA class I1 transgenic mice expressing hybrid mousehuman class I1 heterodimers. In these studies the mixed heterodimers largel! mimic borru fide H-2E pairs. This lack of fastidiousness is perhaps not surprising when one considers that superantigen binding shows little MHC class I1 allele preference in the mouse and appears not to involve the peptide-binding groove. By this token one might predict that positive selection, which is thought to involve presentation of peptide and where polymorphic residues in the peptide binding groove are consequently likely to be more critical, would be less faithfully reproduced in HLA class I1 transgenic mice. The results show that. like Ea/Ep, hybrid DRa/Ep complexes can mediate positive selection of Vp2+, Vp6+, and VplO+ cells. However differences were found between the effects of the two transgenes. Thus, while Vp6+ cells were efficiently selected in both H-2Ea and DRA transgenic mice, positi\C selection of VplO+ cells was less apparent in the DRA transgenic mice. Variation between Eu and DRA transgenic mice is consistent with the notion that this process is dependent on differential binding of endogenous peptides to the E a E p and DRa,Ep complexes. Furthermore, contrary to expectations, in neither set of mice was positive selection limited solely to the CD4+ subset. Thus, examples were found in which V p specific positive selection was confined to either the CD4+ 01-CD8+ subsets, and others in which both subpopulations were concomitantly increased. In the case of Vp2 positive selection, H -X u transgenic mice showed expansion of these cells in both CD4+ and CD8+ subpopulations while in DRA transgenic mice this occurred predominantly in the CD8+ subpopulation. V 797 CORECEPTORS AND POSITIVE SELECTION, Susan Chan, Agnes Baron,# Christophe Benoist and Diane Mathis, Laboratoire de Gtnetique Moltculaire des Eucaryotes, 11 rue Humann, 67085 Strasbourg, France, #Basel Institute of Immunology, Basel, Switzerland Immature T cells face a crucial decision of whether to become a CD4 helper or CD8 cytotoxic lymphocyte. The mechanisms involved in implementing this decision remain unclear. Two models have been elaborated: one based on instruction, the other on selection. Our studies of MHC class I-, class 11-, and double-deficient mice provided data supporting the selective model. There exists a significant population of CD4+CDWTCRh' cells in class 11-deficient mice that is intermediate in maturity between CD4+CD8+ and end-stage CD4+CD8-thymocytes and is selected on class I molecules. These findings were consistent with a selective model that entails two TCR-MHC molecule engagements: the first provokes a stochastic down-modulation of either CD4 or CD8 and a degree of differentiation; the second, requiring participation of the appropriate coreceptor, permits end-stage differentiation. It is now evident that both engagements require the appropriate coreceptor. Analyses of class I1 and CD8 double-deficient mice reveal that the generation of the CD4+CD8'0 intermediate population is obstructed in t h e absence of CD8. If this intermediate population is forced to express CD8 (using transgeneencoded CD8a and p chains), end-stage differentiation occurs and mature CD4+(CDStgf) cells emerge into the periphery. The ability of these peripheral CD4+(CDStg+) cells to respond to class I-restricted antigens and their helper versus effector phenotype will be discussed. The T cell precursor differentiation is a highly regulated phenomenon that can be monitored by the appearence of numerous cell surface molecules, among which is the antigenic T cell receptor (TCR). However, before being expressed, the TCR genes have to be rearranged by a sitespecific recombinase, in order to bring together the different segments participating in the formation of the exons coding for the TCR a and p chains variable regions. This gene assembly is itself highly regulated, both temporally and in a tissue-specific manner. Different experiments have suggested that transcription of unrearranged genes increases their likelihood to be rearranged. T o determine whether such a relation between transcription and rearrangement exists in vivo during the development of T cell precursors, we studied by PCR the germline transcription of different TCR gene segments during the murine ontogeny. The results presented here show that the germline transcription of TCR Vp genes is restricted to cells of the T lymphocyte lineage. It is an early event during the T cell development, as it happens in the fetal thymus prior to the TCR p genes rearrangement. It is also transiently detected in the fetal liver, indicating that it may be one of the earliest events of T cell precursors differentiation. The antigen specificity and function of T cells expressing the on the expression of the coreceptors CD4 and CD8. CD4+ T cells recugnize peptide in the context of class II MHC molecules and generally display the helper phenotype, whereas CD8+ T cells recognize peptide plus class I MHC molecules and display a cytotoxic phenotype. In order to understand how peptide/MHC specificity is linked to T cell function, we are examining the properties of T cells isolated from transgenic mice in which class IIspecific thymocytes can differentiate into either CD4+ or CD8+ mature T cells. The phenotype of these cells after activation by various combinations of peptide and MHC or by crosslinking of the TCR with CD4 or CD8 will be presented. Questions of interest include when is p rearranged? and when is productively rearranged p needed? Using an approach that we have recently developed, we have initiated an analysis of DN subsets, using CD44 and CD25 to distinguish stages of development. Analysis of the rearrangement status of p was conducted for several populations. Data demonstrating the stages of rearrangement and requirement for productively rearranged p will be presented, as will a model for the The TCR-aand TCR-8 loci are located on the same chromosome, but m independently rearranged and expressed during T cell ontogeny. The 8Rec-YJa rearrangement, which is preceded by the germline transcription of the YJa region (TEA transcript), leads to the site-specific deletion of the TCR-8 locus. GRec SRec-Yja rearrangemen! dJa The TEA transcript may be responsible for the opening of the chromatin in the Ja cluster. We analyzed the regulation of the TEA transcript as a model for the regulation of DNA accessibility in this region. Several motifs are present in the TEA promoter which are conserved between man and mouse. These include TCFl, Etsl, and GATA3 putative binding sites as well as other yet non-discribed sequences. Gel-shift experiments using nuclear extracts from the TEAexpressing pre-T cell P30 demonsuated the interaction of DNA-binding proteins to these sites. The use of recombinant proteins demonstrated the binding of TCFl (and Sox4) and GATA3 to their cognate target but the absence of binding of either Etsl or Elfl. Functional analysis of the TEA promoter showed a tissue-specificity for the alp-expressing Jurkat T cell and not for the y/&expressing Peer T cell line. Introduction of mutations within the DNA-binding sites defined several positive regulatory elements needed for promoter activity. Altogether these results suggest that the TEA upstream sequences could participate in the regulation of the Ja-cluster accessibility to the recombinase machinery. One means could be the binding of one or several regulatory proteins (transcription factors), leading to the TEA transcription. A point mutation in the a3 domain of the Db class I major histocompatibility (MHC) molecule (227 asp cf lys) is known to abrogate CD8 binding. Using mice doubly transgenic for the HY-T cell receptor (TCR) and for a mutated Db molecule (Db lys), we have previously shown that coordinate binding of the HY-TCR and CD8 to the same MHC molecule bearing a positive selecting ligand is required for the efficient positive selection of this TCR. Recently, a model of positive selection has been proposed whereby CD4+CD8+ thymocytes are induced to express high levels of TCR through a TCR-MHC interaction that is followed by a stochastic down-regulation of either CD4 or CD8, and the rescue of only thymocytes with appropriately matched TCRs and coreceptors. Using the doubly transgenic mice for the HY-TCR and Db lys or Db wild type (wt) on an H2d background, we now show that TCRhi expression in CD4+CD8+ HY-TCR+ thymocytes is induced only in mice expressing a Db molecule which allows a coordinate TCR and CD8 interaction with the MHC (Db wt). Thus, for the HY-TCR, the CD8 coreceptor is required for the initial TCR upregulation in CD4+CD8+ thymocytes. We further show that the mutation in the Db molecule which eliminates CD8 binding is unlikely to alter the ability of this MHC to bind antigenic peptides as acid extracts from male spleen cells and affinity-purified MHC molecules of both the wild type Db and the Db lys but not H2d contain peptidic material recognised by a male-specific cytotoxic T cell clone (PM-1) when added to RMAS cells. Previous studies in our laboratory have shown that the positive and negative selection of CD4-8+ thymocytes expressing a TCR specific for the male (H-Y) antigen presented by the H-2Db class I molecule is influenced by the amount of the protein tyrosine kinase, p561ck, that is associated with the CD8 coreceptor molecule. To further evaluate the effect of p561ck on the positive and negative selection of CD4-8+ T cells we mated transgenic mice that express this TCR with transgenic mice that constitutively overexpress an activated form of p56lCk (Y505 + F505; Abraham et al, J. Exp. Med. 173, 1421, 1991). In doubly transgenic female mice, positive selection of the transgenic H-Y TCR was impaired. Impairment of positive selection was associated with a seven-fold decrease in the H-Y TCR level in doubly transgenic mice. However, the level of the transgenic TCR expressed by CD4+8+ doubly transgenic mice was still 2 to 3-fold higher than that of a normal H-2b mouse. Thymocytes from doubly transgenic mice were also less efficient in mobilizing intracellular calcium following TCR cross-linking when compared to single TCR transgenic mice. The reduction in TCR levels was also observed in doubly transgenic mice of the H-2d haplotype, thus indicating that this effect of the lck transgene was independent of TCR-ligand interactions. However, negative selection still occurs efficiently in doubly transgenic male H-2b mice. We also found that the expression of TCR can be partially restored by culturing doubly transgenic thymocytes with a PTK inhibitor, Herbimycin A. The level of the heat stable antigen on thymocytes was unaffected by treatment with Herbimycin A. We have analyzed the T-cell subset populations in thymuses of transgenic mice expressing rearranged genes encoding a TCR specific for myelin basic protein. The levels of expression of CD4 and CD8 on these thymocytes indicate preferential maturation of CD4+ thymocytes, a pattern indicative of positive selection. Most thymocytes express high levels of TCR. We used both fetal thymic organ culture and thymocyte suspension culture of the transgenic thymocytes to examine the susceptibility of these cells to clonal deletion following exposure to MBP peptide in vitro. As expected, the CD4+CD8+ population decreased with increasing concentration of antigen, indicating that clonal deletion occurs at this stage of development. In contrast, the CD4+CD8-thymocytes appeared to be stimulated by antigen to proliferate. The number of T cell blasts in this population and the expression the early activation marker, CD69, increased with antigen concentration. The CD4-CD8-population in these transgenic mice is elevated with respect to nontransgenic animals and most of these CD4-CD8-thymocytes express the transgenic TCR. Nevertheless, the CD4-CD8-thymocytes were not susceptible to deletion, as has been previously observed in other transgenic systems. Interestingly, this population also appeared to be stimulated by antigen in a dosedependent fashion analogous to the CD4+CD8-thymocytes. A significant blasting population appeared in the CD4-CD8-subset that also expressed CD69. Despite this ability to respond to antigen, all of the CD4-CD8-thymocytes were HSA+, generally a marker for immature T cells that do respond to antigen. These thymocytes may represent a novel population of thymocytes that arises from premature expression of the a-chain transgene. Recombination within T-cell receptor (TCR) variable region genes (V, D and J) is involved in the generation of the receptor diversity during T-cell differentiation. We have studied the role of TCRa (Ea) and TCRP (EP) trancriptional enhancer elements in the regulation of V(D)J recombination. Lines of transgenic mice were produced containing a TCRP gene mini-locus comprised of germ line V, D, and J gene segments associated to either E a or ED. Analysis of transgene rearrangements in these mice demonstrated that rearrangements of EPversus Ea-containing transgenes began at different stages of T cell differentiation in embryonic and adult thymus, with a pattern superimposable onto TCRP or TCRa gene expression, respectively. These results strongly suggested that sequences within EP and E a are involved in the control of the early rearrangement events at the TCRP and a gene loci and are responsible for the ordered expression of the TCRP and a genes during Pla T cell differentiation. In addition, Ea-and EPcontaining transgenic miniloci seem to be susceptible to the control mechanisms active for allelic exclusion in T cells. To further verify the role of enhancers in V(D)J recombination, homologous recombination technology has been applied to specifically mutate these sequences within the endogenous loci. Analysis of mice deprived of TCR P/a gene enhancers will additionally test the importance of these regulatory elements in the control of V@)J recombination and T-cell differentiation. The activity of most src-family protein-tyrosine kinases is critically dependent on phosphorylation of a regulatory tyrosine residue located at the carboxy-terminus; phosphorylation of this site results in 10-to 20-fold reductions in catalytic activity. A unique protein tyrosine kinase, encoded by the csk gene, has been identified which can mediate this phosphorylation event. expression in mice corresponds to that of srcfamily tyrosine kinases in general; it is expressed at high levels in the fetal brain and in other fetal tissues, but has restricted expression in the adult where it is found at high levels in cells of hematopoetic origin. Homozygous mutant embryos lacking the csk gene fail to develop past embryonic day 9.5-10.5, and exhibit a complex phenotype including neural tube defects. In order to further evaluate the function of csk in the developing mouse and specifically its role in the hematopoetic cell compartment, we have produced homozygous csknu11 embryonic stem cells. Analysis of chimeric mice made using the csknUl1 ES cells reveals that csk expression is not essential for development of most cell lineages, but may be required for normal lymphopoiesis. IL-4, suggesting t h a t as yet unidentified molecules are involved i n thymocyte selection. In a n attempt to identify these CsA-sensitive molecules, RNA from normal murine thymus and CsA-treated thymus has been used to generate a subtracted cDNA library. Of the several subtracted clones identified, one clone, #19 has its expression down regulated approximately &fold i n CsA-treated thymus RNA compared with normal thymus RNA. Clone #19 has been fully sequenced and is homologous to a partially sequenced molecule whose expression is regulated during murine brain development. The complete cDNA sequence of #19 is 700 bp in length and contains a single long open reading frame. Translation of this sequence predicts a protein of 133 amino acids with a PI of 9.9. The predicted amino acid sequence contains a novel lysine-rich domain (KKLNKNKKLVKKLAKK) which may have nucleotide binding properties. Preliminary studies have shown that #19 mRNA is expressed more abundantly i n lymphoid than i n non-lymphoid tissues. #19 mRNA was also abundant in a variety of murine haematopoietic cell lines, with the exception of P815 (mast cell line). Polyclonal and monoclonal antipeptide antibodies have been generated and are currently being used in Western blots to determine the physio-chemical properties of the protein. The apTCR+ CD4-CDX-(DN) thymocytes represent an independent T cell lineage and are characterized hy the overexpression of Vp8.2 and the production of large aniounta of IL1. IFN-y and TNFa upon stimulation with anti-CD3. These thymoc!x\ :iIso express CD38, a marker which in the mouse thymus is maiiily aasociated with apTCR+ DN thymocyte subset\. IL4 production does not correlate with Vp8.2 expression hut does corre1;ite w i t h CD38 expression hince only the CD3X+ aPTCR+ DN tliyii>ocytes produce IL4. To further characterize anti-CD? stimul;ited r@TCR+ DN thymocytes for other cytokines and gene product\ the) Express, two cDNA libraries were constructed: one from m R N A o f \timuleted apTCR+ DN thyniocytes and one from mRNA of tiii\iiindated aPTCR+ DN thymocytes. A cDNA library subti-iicttw procedure was used to generate a library enriched for factors that are \pecifically produced by activated apTCR+ DN thymocyte\. Northern. PCR and DNA sequencing techniques can he used to itieiitify tlieae factors. These studies have established that T cell receptor beta and gamma chain genes itre rearranged a s CD25+T N thymocytes downregulate CD44. This observation suggests that CD44+CD25+TN thyrnocytes represent pre-T cells and are targets for sign;tls that induce TCR gene rearrangement. Also. we have observed that these cells produce high titers of Interleukin-2 upon activation with calcium ionophore. pliorbol ester and Interleukin-1. A cDNA library has been generated from activated CD44+25+ TN cells, arid was probed for the presence G r a n u 1 oc y t e Macro p h age -C ol on y S t i m u I it t i n g Fact or, Interferongamma, and the P40 chsiti o i Interleukin-12 were detected. Other clones did not hybridize to cDNA probes of known cytokines, and are currently under further analysis. These results indicate thnt pre-T cells have significant cytokine producing potential. of c y t ok i n e s . I n t e r I e u k i n -2. Cells entering the thymus from the bone marrow have the potential to become yS or ap lineage cells. At some uncharacterized point in development a pre-T cell will decide to enter either the yS or ap lineage. This lineage decision is mediated by an unknown mechanism. In order to explore t h e role of the T cell receptor in this lineage determination, we have constructed mice that utilize rearranged gamma and delta T cell receptor genes. The transgenes are made so that expression of the rearranged gamma and delta genes occurs in the ap T cell lineage. We established a transgenic mouse. model to study V-D-J rearrangement of a human TCR 8 gene minilocus. The minilocus is composed of V, D, J and C segments, but cannot encode a functional TCR protein. We first studied minilocus rearrangement under the control of E, within the J-C intron. Rearrangement occurs stepwise, first V to D, and then V-D to J. Minilocus V-D rearrangement mimics a unique feature of the endogenous TCR 8 locus. V-D-J rearrangement is T cell-specific, but occurs equivalently in a0 and y6 T cells. We deleted E, from the minilocus and found that although V-D rearrangement occurs normally, V-D to J rearrangement is specifically impaired. Thus, E, controls access to J segments, but does not control access to V and D segments. The minilocus is apparently divided into two regulatory domains, only one of which is controlled by Es. Additional elements must control V and D segment accessibility. We propose that an insulator is located between D and J segments, and demarcates the boundary between regulatory domains. In the endogenous TCR 6 locus, this may represent the 5' end of the chromatin domain that is opened by E, during T cell development. We have now substituted E. in place of E, in the minilocus. Under the control of E,, minilocus V-D rearrangement remains enhancerindependent and is equivalent in a0 and y6 T cells. However, minilocus V-D-J rearrangement occurs specifically in a0 T cells. Thus, E, is activated and directs TCR gene rearrangement in the precursors of both a8 and y6 T cells, whereas E, is activated and directs TCR gene rearrangement only in the precursors of aP T cells. Using extracts prepared from murine thymus, we have identified a tissue-specific protein complex (designated T2) that binds to the decamer, a conserved promoter element in TCR V, genes. T2 has been implicated in the initiation of TCR gene rearrangement: (1) The T2 decamer binding proteins are developmentally regulated and are absent in SCID mice; (2) The activity of T2 is diminished by the presence of functionally rearranged TCR a and p transgenes and (3) The T2 activity is upregulated in thymocytes by crosslinking CD4 and C D 8 surface proteins. The T2-decamer binding factors require phosphorylation for activity; at least one of the components is related to CREE and can be competed with the negative regulatory protein, CREB-2. In order to clone the genes that encode T2 binding proteins, a human thymus cDNA expression library was screened with the decamer insert. Of the 5 unique cDNAs obtained, 3 were members of the CREE family and 2 were unique. The CREE-like cDNAs were expressed ubiquitously; of these, one was the negative regulator CREES, one was the positive transcriptional factor CRE-BP1, and the other was a novel differentially processed form of CRE-BP1, Also, we have used competitive mobility shift analysis to map the cis element required in vivo for T2 binding; Dr. Dennis Loh provided us with oligonucleotides that contained the decamer and approximately 30 base pairs of 5' and 3' flanking information. In addition to the wild-type template, he provided several in which 10 base pairs, either the decamer or one of the flanking regions, had been mutated. The wild-type template was able to compete for T2 binding, but mutants lacking the decamer sequence were not. Interestingly, mutants altered in the flanking regions were also less effective competitors suggesting a role for DNA secondary structure, possibly involving the 5' and 3' sequences. The antigen receptor genes of B and T cells are assembled during lymphocyte development by a series of site-specific DNA rearrangements; the products of the recombination activator genes RAG-1 and RAG-2 are essential for this process. We have observed an association between phosphorylation of RAG-2 by cyclin-dependent kinase(s) and degradation of RAG-2 protein (Science m:953-959). This, and the observation that rearrangement of immunoglobulin and T cell receptor genes occurs in expanding populations of lymphoid progenitor cells, suggested that expression of RAG-2 is regulated in the cell cycle. To test this, we analyzed expression of RAG proteins as a function of cell cycle stage in lymphoid cells or in wansfected fibroblasts. In a B progenitor cell line and in normal thymocytes, expression of RAG-2 protein is restricted to the GO/Gl phases of the cell cycle, despite the presence of RAG-2 RNA at all cell cycle phases. In contrast, levels of RAG-1 protein show little or no variation during the cell cycle. Expression of RAG-2 protein in transfected fibroblasts showed similar cell cycle dependence; as observed in lymphoid cells, RAG-I protein did not vary appreciably during cell cycle. These observations imply that V(D)J recombination is resmcted to the GO/Gl phases of the cell cycle by posttranscriptional control of RAG-2 expression; we suggest that failure to restrict recombination within the cell cycle may result in inappropriate and deleterious rearrangements. The mechanism responsible for posttranscriptional control of RAG-2 expression and the biological significance of this control are now under study. The T cell repertoire is considered to be mainly controlled by the thymus. The process of thymic education is so far not well characterized in man, due to the outbred nature of the human population and the obvious impossibility to perform experiments a s described in animal models. An unique opportunity to study this process is provided by Bone Marrow Transplantation (BMT). We have analyzed t h e variable region distribution in 7 patients and their relative HLA matched siblings marrow donor before BMT treatment. We then followed the reconstitution of the T cell repertoire in the recipients 30, 60 and 180 days after BMT. A panel of 14 anti TCR monoclonal antibodies was used to define the distribution in different subpopulations by 4 four colours FACS ana1ysis.h t h e majority of the cases the repertoire profile, in CD4+ T cells, was highly comparable between recipient and HLA matched sibling donor prior to BMT. However discrete but significant differences were observed for some variable regions. After BMT we focused our attention on the distribution of the variable regions which differed between donor and recipient prior treatment, to monitor whether a donor or recipient profile, was observed in the reconstituted recipient. In most, but not all, of the cases a donor's imprinting persisted during reconstitution. Thus our results provides direct evidence that the process of thymic selection in man IS taking place in man. The development of ap T cells is driven by the interplay of a small set of surface molecules among which the TCR-CD3 complex play a determining role. Recently, several groups, including ours have shown that the intracytoplasmic tails of the CD3 subunits may be organized in at least two autonomous transduction modules made of y6& and 5 chains, respectively. To study the in vivo function of CD3 5 and CD3 E we inactivated the corresponding genes using the technique of homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells. The analysis of thymocyte populations revealed that the products of the c D 3 -u~ gene appear needed for the efficient generation and/or survival of CD4+CD8+ thymocytes. Despite the near total absence of mature single positive thymocytes, the 6iq-llymph nodes were unexpectedly found to contain CD3-CD44+ single positive T cells. In contrast to the situation observed in the thymus, the thymo-independent gut intraepithelial lymphocytes present in C,h-/-mice do express TCR complexes on their surface and these are associated with FceRIy homodimers. These results establish an essential role for the C D 3 -5 1~ gene products during T cell differentiation and further emphasize the difference between conventional T cells and thymus-independent gut intraepithelial lymphocytes. We will present results on the complementation of the homozygous <iq-/-mutant with various CD3-5 constructs containing point mutation in the different transduction motifs and their effect on thymocyte development. The analysis of thymocyte development in CD3-& -1mice will also be presented. Paul E Love", Elizabeth W Shores2, Eric J Lee',Alexander Grinberg', Terry I Munitz', Heiner Westphal' and Alfred Singer.2 'Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and 2Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MI) 20892. The <-family dimers (<, q and FccRIy) are a group of structurally and functionally related proteins that are expressed in developing thymocytes and play a central role both in receptor surface expression and in signal transduction. Conserved sequences (termed Tyrosine-based activation motifs, TAMS) w~thin the cytoplasmic domains of these proteins are required for signal transducing actiwty To examine the role of TAMmediated signaling in thymocyte development we generated transgenic mice that expressed. (i) full length (FL) c-chain , (ii) q-chain, a naturally occurring variant of derived from alternative splicing, or (iri) truncated c-chain (CTIOS), all under the control of the human CD2 promoter and regulatory elements. The transgene encoded proteins therefore contained 3, 2 or 1 TAM functional elements, respectively. Overexpression of FL c-chain, but not q or CT108, in fetal CD4 CDBTCR. thymocytes activated a signaling pathway that terminated RAG-I and RAG-2 expression, prevented productive rearrangement of the TCRa and TCRP genes and blocked entry of thymocytes into the CD4ICD8 developmental pathway. These results identify an early signaling pathway in precursor TCR-thymocytes that can regulate RAG-I and RAG-2 expression and is differentially responsive to individual members of the c-family dimers. We have studied the differentiation and repertoire selection during the maturation of CD4+CDX+ (DP) thymocytcs into CD4+CDX-(CD4SP) and CDX+CD4-(CDXSP) T cells, in normal mice. mice transgenic for nP-TcRs restricted by either class I or class I1 MHC, and in mice dcricicnt in class I or class I1 MHC cxpression. Our data suggest that CD4 and CDX mature T cells derive from diffcrent pathways of T cell differentiation in tlie thymus. Thus, interaction of DP with MHC Class I1 leads to the immediate dowiiregulation of CDX, which occurs simultaneously with an increase i n TcR expression: DPTcRloHSAhi thymocytes mature into a CD4+CDXl(l TcRhiHSAhi intermediate population. This cell population generates CD4SP thymocytes. the majority of which arc still HSAI'i. In contrast, interaction with MHC Class I induces tlie up-regulation of TcR, which precedes the down-regulation of CD4; DPTcRIo gencrate DPTcRhi thymocytes. the majoiity of which arc the coinniittcd precursors of CDXSP cells. Further differentiation results in CD4 down-regulation and the transition from DPTcRhi into CD8+CD4lC1 TcRhiHSAl" and CDXSPTcRhiHSA-T cells. Since down-rcgulation of CD4 and CDX occtii-s at diflerent stages of thymocyte differentiation, our results do not support a stochastic/ selcctivc model oflincagc commitment in the thymus. Mutant mouse strains lacking MHC class 1 or class 11 expression fail to generate normal CD8 or CD4 T cell populations, respectively, and provide model systems for reconstitution experiments. Aiming to better define the requirements for T cell maturation, we have constructed in vitro chimeras between normal and MHC deficient thymi. Unexpectedly in the light of previous data, the generation of phenotypically mature single positive thymocytes was proportional to the fraction of wild type (i.e. MHC expressing) stroina over a wide range of chimerism. Similar results were obtained for the development of TCR transgenic thyniocytes in graded chimeras expressing selecting and non-selecting MHC alleles. suggesting that in positive selection, thymocytes may not distinguish between the complete lack of class I1 and the presence of a 'wrong' class I1 allele. In contrast to negative selection. therefore, positive selection i h inefficient when only a minority of the relevant stromal cells express selecting ligands. T cell maturation may be limited not only by the candidate TCR repertoire available for selection, but also by the abundance of competent stromal cells. These findings are best explained if positive selection involves a rate-limiting step at which each thymocyte interacts with only one stromal cell niche. CD4-(double positive, DP), the cell type that expresses the highest levels of Fas. This expression develops late in the fetal ontageny since we found only 2 5 1 Fas c e l l s among Fd (feral day) 16 DP thymocytes. By Fd 17 the proportion of FasL cells is enlarged such that 80% of DP c'ells are Fa&. The adult pattern of Fas expression is only achieved after birth. After reaching the peak of its expression on UP cells, Fas is gradually downregulated on both fetal and adult CD8+ or CDL+ (single positive, SP) thymocytes in parallel to their maturation. Resting peripheral T cells express no O K very little of Fas; it is thus possible that Fas downregulation is completed as the cells exit the thy-nus. Strong Fas expression thus characterizes cells subject to intrathymic selection, but the function of Fas in the thymus is unclear at present. Another difference bet.xeen fetal and adult thyrnocytes concerns the Fas expression on yS+ DN cells. Namely, up to 90% of these cells in the fetal thymus are Fas+, in contrast with very few adult y6+ Fas+ cells (7%). The functional significance of this observation is not clear, but it is possible that a particular wave of fetal yE cells has a unique property of high Fas expression. Regulation of commitment to lymphoid cells from lymphoid progenitors remains poorly understood. The earliest event that occur in lymphocyte development is V-D-J gene rearrangement of lg or TCR genes. Recently lymphoid specific genes named RAG-I and RAG-2 were identifed as playing a crucial role in the recombination process. We have studied the effect of various recombinant cytokines and the bone marrow-derived stromal cells on the expression of RAG-1 mRNA in lymphoid progenitor-like cell lines which had been established from human fetal liver at 8 weeks of gestation. These lines retained Ig and TCR genes in their germ line configuration and expressed a T cell marker(CD2) as well as a B cell marker(CD19). These lines did not express the detectable RAG mRNA when analyzed a PCR-based assay or Northern blot method. The induction of RAG mRNA expression, however, was observed in these cells when co-cultured with PA-6, a mouse bone marrow stromal cell line, in the presence of the recombinant cytokines ( a mixture of SCF, GM-CSF, IL-3, IL-4, IL-6, and IL-7). The kinetic study revealed that the RAG expression was induced at 12 hr after the initiation of co-culture. Before the expression of RAG transcripts, the progenitor cells were engulfed and laid beneath the stromal cells. Co-culture of the progenitors with a human bone-marrow derived cell line ( RASV 5-5 ), which sustains the growth of the murine B progenitors, also induced the RAG mRNA expression in these cells. Furthermore, we obtained the 5' flanking region and characterized the cis elements of the human RAG-I gene in order to clarify the mechanism of its lymphoid specific expression. This system will be useful for the delineation of potential regulatory factors or signals from stromal cells acting on RAG transcription as well as the further understanding the control and regulation of the early steps in human lymphocyte development. huClJ4 sighalled an increase in, intracytoplasmic calcium 2nd huCD4 mediated positive selection when murine CD4 (mCD4) was blocked by specific antibod (mAb). A central uestion of % cell develo ment is whether uositive selection cells sDedfic for self-MHPoccurs at a double the constitutive1 ex ressed huCD4. Indeed huCD4 mediated maturation of mcD8q T cells in CI-mice. In f mph nodes of C1mice, mCD8f cells were onl 0 2 + 0 04% burincreased to 2.5 + 0.8% ( < 01) in huCD4 TG x b'myce: When mCD4 w a s blocked b m.8b,.mCD8+ cells increased from 0.7 t 0.2% for CI-mice to 1y.5 + 2.7%. for huCD4 TG x CI-mice (p<.OOl). mCD8f T cells in Class I+ mice were 35.1 + 3.9%. An increase in mCD8+4-mature thymocytes was also detected: increasing from 0.3 t 0.1% in CImice or 0.5 + 0.1% .in anti-mCD4 mAb treated-CI-mice. to 0.7 k Lymphocyte Activation We have studied T cell development and helper-function in CD4deficient mice. These mice have a normal number of T cells and B cells. The CD8+ T cells in the periphery have expanded to apparently occupy the compartment previously occupied by the CD4+ T cells but they also possess a significant population of CD4d-Tc&p+ T cells. These cells are present at a low level in the thymus and lymph nodes of normal mice but the significance of these cells in immune development and function iis not known. Surprisingly, mice lacking CD4 show in vivo immunoglobulin isotype class switching from IgM to IgG in response to vesicular stomatitis virus. In this study we have depleted various sub-population of T cells in vivo and shown that the population of CD4-8-TcRap+ T cells is responsible for providing "help" in the antibody response of CD4deficient mice to vesicular stomatitis virus infection. We have used the antigen-specific proliferation assay and blocking studies with class I and II MHC specific purified antibodies to show that these cells are class II-MHC restricted in responses against the T celldependent antigen keyhole-limpet haemocyanin (KLH). These results indicate that CD4 is not absolutely necessary for positive selection or effector function of class II MHC-restricted helperTcells. Mouse mutants deficient for IL-2 (1) and IL-4 (2) were recently derived. Despite of some predictions that both IL-2 and IL-4 are indispensable for development of mature thymocytes, thymus and T-cell subsets develop normaly in both types of deficient mice. Furthermore, young IL-2-1-mice generated only partially reduced in vivo CTL responses and helper dependent and independent T-cell responses when challenged with various viruses (3). The observed high levels of lgGl and IgE isotypes in sera of IL-2-1-animals indicated a preferential use of the IL-4-directed switch and suggested that the lack of IL-2 might be compensated by IL-4. We report that in mice made deficient for both IL-2 and IL-4 all major T-cell subsets and B-cells were normal, indicating that IL-2 and IL-4 are not essential for development of the immune system. Paradoxically, proliferation of T-cells was increased in both IL-2-1-and in IL-2-1-IL-4-1-mice. The deregulation of the immune system manifests later with complex pathological changes very similar to that described for IL-2.'-mice (4). The polyclonal activation and proliferation of T-and B-cells is an early indicator of this process that triggers the autoimmune disease. Thus, previous studies have reported that I L -2 R a expression does not occur on immature T cells including the immature C D 4 -8 + subset and the major c o r t i c a l CD4+8 + thymocyte subset. Murine thymic l y m p h o m a s induced b y t h e carcinogen N-methyl-Nnitrosourea (MNU) correspond phenotypically to immature C D 4 + 8 + and CD4-8+ thymocyte subsets. We recently found that the majority of these lymphomas express IL-2Ra as d e t e c t e d b y i n d i r e c t i m m u n o f l u o r e s c e n c e a n d immunoprecipitation analyses. In addition, Northern blot analysis demonstrated the presence of IL-2Ra mRNA in IL-2 R + , hut not in IL-2R-lymphomas. The functional activity of the cell surface IL-2Rs was demonstrated on several lymphomas by IL-2 mediated stimulation of k t h y m i d i n e uptake in short term culture. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts from IL-2R+ and IL-2Rlymphomas were carried out as a first step in investigating transcriptional conrol of I L -2 R a gene expression. The pattern of NF-KB binding proteins in IL-2R+ and IL-2Klymphomas suggests that this family of transcriptional activators is not solely responsible for deregulated transcription of the I L -2 R a gene in these 1 y m p h o m a s . Functional assays are underway to extend these findings. -Eqxrimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, liethesda, ND 20892; *Syites Institute of Immunology, Niihari, 300-41. Japan. I n the present stud), we have attempted to understand the basis for the coordinated increases betn.een TCK and CD5 expression during th! mocJ'te de\ elopment. We have found that TCR signals to dc\ eloping T cells including CD-WDW thymocytcs up-regulate the cell surface expression of CDS. Such an increase in CD5 cvprcsbion was rcgulated at a traiiscriptional level. Interestingl>., Cl)4+Cl>8+ th!,mocytes from TCllap -transgenic mice undergoing positi\ e selection expressed higher CD5 le\& than non-\electing CIN+CD8+ thymocq tes expressing thc same trnn\genic 'I'CR. These results indicate that the upregulation of Cll.5 c\pression le\ cls during thynocytc dc\dopmcnt can result from thc TCll signals that inducc clonal selection. NF-AT, a T cell specific transcription factor complex, is critical for IL-2 gene expression during activation. The NF-AT complex contains an inducable nuclear component (which can be provided by various fosijun family members) and a pre-existing cytoplasmic component, NF-ATc, which translocates to the nucleus and is transcriptionally further upregulated in response to T cell stimulation. Translocation is regulated by the phosphatase calcineurin, and can be inhibited by blocking calcineurin's activity with Cyclosporin A or FK506; which also prevents the increase of NF-ATc transcripts. Cyclosporin A and FK506 have also been reported to inhibit the induction of T cell anergy invitro, and to impair both positive and negative thymic selection in-vivo and in fetal thymic organ cultures, although not negative selection in more recently developed in-vitro thymocyte culture systems. ATc in the regulation of T cell development, and we present data describing the constitutive and induced pattern of expression of NF-ATc through major hematapoietic lineages and thymic subsets in the mouse; as well as changes in it's expression levels and subcellular localization during thymic selection. We found that a homogenous CD4-ICD8-T cell bearing invariant TCR encoded by Val4Ja281 with a one-base N-region is highly dominated in the periphery (2-3% in spleen). Surprisingly the high expression of the homogenous V a l 4 TCR is a general phenomenon in all laboratory strains irrespective of MHC haplotypes and in some wild mouse subspecies. The majority of V a l 4 f TCR are associated with J a other than Ja281 at the neonatal stage and then the frequency of invariant V a l 4Ja281 TCR expression increases with time and reached a maximum at around 5-8 weeks after birth. The dominant expression of Va14Ja281 TCR is found both in euthymic and athymic mice. These results indicate that homogenous Va14Ja281 T cells are positively selected in the periphery without thymic influence and that their VJ junction is important for the positive selection. We also demonstrate that V a l 4f TCR gene rearrangements take place in extrathymic sites, such as bone marrow, liver, and intestine, since frequent nonproductive V a l 4 TCR products and Val4-Ja281 gene mediated signal sequences of the circular DNA are detected as a result of TCR rearrangements in extrathymic tissues rather than the thymus, indicating the extrathymic development of Va14Ja281 T cells. No circular DNA generated by V a l .1-Ja281 which is known to be thymus-dependent was detected in extrathymic tissues of athymic mice. Moreover, the decrease in the invariant Vu14 TCR expression was tightly correlated with the development of autoimmune diseases. This suggests the crucial role of the invariant Va14Ju.281 T cells in the regulation of anti-self responses. MHC class I molecules present short peptides, mainly derived from cytosolic proteins, to CD8+ T cells. The heterodimeric TAP complex (Transporters associated with Antigen Presentation) translocates these peptides (or precursors thereof) from the cytosol to the ER. These peptides are essential for the proper assembly of class 1 complexes, and only correctly folded complexes are efficiently transported to the cell surface. In cells and mice mutant for one or both of the TAP subunits, most of the class I molecules are arrested in the ER due to the lack of stabilizing peptides, and cell surface expression of class I molecules is therefore markedly reduced. The low level of class I expression in TAP1 mutant mice impairs positive selection of CD8+ T cells and the number of CD8+ T cells in the peripheral lymphoid organs is reduced by -20 fold. We crossed TAP1 mutant mice with mice double-transgenic for either HLA-A2 and human(h)P2m or HLA-B27 and hP2m. The numhcr of CD8+T cells in the TAPl mutant/HLAhP2m Tg mice is -6 fold higher than in TAPl mutant mice. While human MHC class 1 complexes are hardly (HLA-A2). or not (HLA-B27), detected at the cell surl'ace. cell surface expression of the murine class I complexes (Kh and Dh) in both types of mice is -5 fold higher than in TAPl mutant mice. The murine class I heavy chains preferentially associate with hP2m. and thcse complexes are transported more efficiently to the cell surface. We propose that this increase in class I expression is responsible for the partial rescue of the CD8+ T cell pool. We are currently characterizing the functional properties and specificity of this population of T cells. A NOVEL SURFACE MOLECULE ON  IMMATURE THYMOCYTES AND THEIR PROLIFERA-TION INHIBITION BY A MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY SPECIF-IC TO THE MOLECULE, Hiroshi YAMAMOTO, Hiroo  TAMURA, Hiroyuki KUZUHARA and Tamotsu TAKEUCHI, Department of Immunology, National Institute of Neuroscience, NCNP, Kodaira, Tokyo 187, Japan. We previously described that the nude mousederived splenic T cell clone N-9F exhibits a proliferative response when cultured o n thymic stromal cells (TSC). This N-9F proliferation is mediated by direct cell-to-cell interactions between T and TSC. A thymic epithelial cell clone, SL10.3, also supports N-9F growth. In order to identify the molecule involved in T cell development in the thymus, we established monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) specific to the N-9F clone. Among these MoAb, one, QR6.6, was found to inhibit the N-9F proliferative response on SL10.3. QR6.6 positive cells were detected in thymus but not in other lymphoid organs such as bone marrow, lymph nodes or spleen. QR6.6 positive cells accounted for 3-5% of the cells in adult thymuses with higher percentages found in neonatal (10-20%) and fetal thymuses (70% at E l 7 and 10-20% at E15). The positive cells were primarily CD4-8-thymocytes in fetuses and CD4-8-to CD4'8' thymocytes in adults. The QR6.6 MoAb precipitates a lOOkD molecule from the N-9F clone. The addition of the MoAb to fetal thymus organ culture reduces the recovery of cells at day 4. It was also found that the MoAb inhibits fetal thymocyte proliferation on the SL10.3 thymic epithelial cell line. These results suggest that the lOOkD molecule detected by the QR6.6 MoAb may play a crucial role in the early stage of thymocyte development. We have now studied the TCR p and y gens configuration of these subsets. While the CD4'" have their TCR genes in germline configuration, the CD44+CDZj+TN also exhibit a germline pattern while the CD44-CD25+TN have rearranged TCR p and y gsne loci. This was inconsistent with previous reports where TCR gene rearrangements were found in CD44+CD25-TN. Consequently, we separated CD4JfCD25-TN by c-kit expression and analyzed their TCR gene,. CDW+CD25-ckit+TN exhibit a germline pattern at their TCR p and y genes whde CD44+CD25xkit-TN have these loci rearranged. The c-kit+ cells i n these populations have T cell precursor activity. The CD44+CD1_5-ckit+TN population also expresses low levels of CDJ, making these cells indistinguishable from the CD4lo earliest precurhors. Taken togerher, these results support the following revised pathway: CD4'ockit++CD44+CD?5+ckit+TN+CD44-CD25+ckitloWTN+ CDJJ-CD25~ckir-"TN"~ CD4+CD8+ thymocytes. Thus, c-kit expression define5 early prs-T cells that have not yet rearranged their TCR genes. TCR B and y sene rearrangements occur as CD44+CD25+ckir+TN downregulxe CD44 and c-kit. These results imply that the latest point In the pathway whet-e the y6 T cells can split (from the main a p pathway) is the CD44-CD25+cliit-TN stage. During the process of positive selection, developing thymocytes mature into CD4+ or CD8+ cells based on the MHC recognition specificities of their TCRs. Although several lines of evidence suggest that co-receptor-MHC interactions are required for maturation, the precise roles of CD4 and CD8 in the lineage instruction of thymocytes are still unclear. We are currently investigating the importance of the CD4-class I1 MHC interaction during the development of thymocytes expressing the class 11-restricted 2B4 TCR. We have tested a panel of mutant class I1 molecules for their ability to bind CD4. Our results suggest the existence of a novel CD4 binding site in the pl domain of I-Ek. Mutations in this site do not appear to alter the ability of I-Ek to bind peptides or to engage the 2B4 TCR. We are currently creating a line of transgenic mice expressing this mutant class I1 molecule; the degree to which development can proceed in these mice will clarify the role of CD4 during thymic maturation. THE CD4-CLASS I1 MHC INTERACTION: WHAT IS THE  
