178e6a5efc125e7cce4321f454ec6ed499a027c5




| 3 of 53 VARMA et Al. Digital health is an umbrella term to describe the use of digital information, data, and communication technologies to collect, share, and analyze health information in order to improve patient health, education, and healthcare delivery (https://www.fcc.gov/gener al/ five-quest ions-you-can-ask-your-docto r-about -digit al-healt h#ab) (Turakhia 2016) . This concept encompasses telehealth, electronic health records, implantable device monitoring, wearable sensor data, analytics and artificial intelligence (AI), behavioral health, and personalized medicine. Among these, mobile health-or "mHealth" is a component of digital health, defined by the World Health Organization-as "medical and public health practice supported by mobile devices, such as mobile phones, patient monitoring devices, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and other wireless devices" (https://www.who.int/goe/publi catio ns/goe_mheal th_web.pdf) (https://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/ pdf_files/ WHA71/ A71_20-en. pdf?ua=1). Utilization of these devices has proliferated among health-conscious consumers in recent years and is likely to continue rapid expansion and integration into more formalized medical settings. mHealth flows intuitively to health professionals in the field of arrhythmia management from experience gained through remote monitoring of cardiovascular implantable electronic devices (CIEDs), such as pacemakers and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) . A wealth of data garnered from many studies over the last 10-15 years have confirmed the benefits of remote technology-assisted follow-up and established it as standard of care (Varma 2013; Slotwiner 2015) . However, results of remote monitoring of CIEDs may not be immediately generalizable to mHealth. For instance, the former is restricted to those with cardiac disease (largely arrhythmias and heart failure (HF)), that is, a group already defined as patients. The care pathways for CIED remote monitoring are also well defined, with billing and reimbursement in place in the United States and many other parts of the world. In comparison, mHealth differs: It is widely available in the form of consumer products that penetrate most sectors of society, including individuals without formal medical diagnoses; it may be applied to a wider group of medical conditions; data can be self-monitored rather than assessed by healthcare professionals (HCPs); and reimbursement models are not mature. Indeed, some heart rhythm tracking capabilities may be indirectly acquired in products purchased for different goals and then subsequently used for self-monitoring. Conversely, in the medical space, applications are largely not prescribed by HCPs, often lack validation for disease management use cases, and care pathways remain varied or poorly defined. Nevertheless, if properly implemented, the intersection of these two communities opens up a broad spectrum of opportunities, extending from population F I G U R E L E G E N D : mHealth tools for the individual. Sensors can be embedded in a variety of wearables. (IoT: Internet of thingsconnects from any location to hospital or cloud; See Table 1 ). Similarly, actions taken based on the monitored information should be transparent to all stakeholders. For example, for a patient who records and transmits an irregular heart rhythm via a wearable device, a designated decision process should be followed to confirm eg whether the rhythm is atrial fibrillation (AF) or not, whether confirmation by another diagnostic test is required, how that is arranged, and finally what therapy should be implemented and in what reasonable time frame? Clearly, there are risks of increasing cost from medical testing and provoking anxiety in consumers-who by virtue of seeking a medical verification become patients. Again, CIED experience sets a precedent. Studies that have shown improved outcome with telemonitoring succeeded when integrated into a clear logistical framework for a specific use case of disease management (e.g., IN-TIME for remote monitoring in patients receiving cardiac resynchronization therapy, CardioMEMS) (Abraham 2011 , Hindricks 2014 , Varma 2013 . Replicating this with mHealth creates challenges for healthcare providers and goes far beyond the technological capabilities of the monitoring and transmission equipment. Implementation will require defined aims and fundamental changes to existing workflows and responsibilities. Such changes are always difficult. Apart from the organizational issues required to achieve such changes, reimbursement may drive or hinder such changes in the workplace. Awareness of these factors has been heightened by the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, during which telemedicine solutions have been advocated to reduce patient contact with healthcare providers yet continue healthcare delivery . In view of the rapid technological development and popularity of wearable and other mobile devices, and the need for analysis and planning of the mHealth infrastructure, ISHNE (International Society for Holter and Noninvasive Electrocardiology), HRS (Heart Rhythm Society), EHRA (European Heart Rhythm Association), and APHRS (Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society), recognized the need for this collaborative statement. The aim of this document is to define stateof-the-art mHealth technologies and their application in arrhythmia management and explore future directions for clinical application. As such, the scope of the document encompasses discussion of the different mHealth technologies currently available or in development; the acquisition of health-related data; the applications of such data, including disease identification and management; clinical trials; the patient perspective; and the issues that must be addressed in the future to permit useful application of mHealth technologies. Addtionally, discussion is extended to mHealth facilitation of those comorbidities increasingly recognized to influence arrhythmia management (e.g., obesity and sleep apnea) that are becoming the responsibility of heart rhythm professionals (Chung 2020) . Abraham palpitations, syncope) are present and how often they occur ( Figure 2 ). Since the XXI century has become the era of the AF epidemic, the emphasis has shifted to screen for asymptomatic patients at high risk of developing AF or in those with cryptogenic stroke, to enable early treatment with the hope of preventing stroke and other serious complications. Novel tools expand the time window in which information can be gathered and overcome existing limitations with traditional methods, that is, intermittent physical examination or ECG for the detection of a largely asymptomatic arrhythmia. • Conventional ambulatory ECG devices with "continuous" or "intermittent" recording abilities (e.g., Holter, mobile cardiac telemetry (MCT)) increase the diagnostic yield for suspected arrhythmias, but limitations such as inadequate duration of monitoring, insufficient sensitivity or specificity for AF detection, cost, and patient discomfort and inconvenience remain important implementation barriers. Further details on these conventional systems are available in a prior expert consensus statement . • Implantable loop recorders (ILRs) continuously monitor cardiac rhythm, similar to traditional external loop recorders, but only record an ECG shortly before and after activation by either the patient or by an automated algorithm. The total monitoring period is limited only by battery longevity (ca. 2-5 years). Newer devices have dedicated algorithms resulting in increased interest in their use for AF detection, especially after cryptogenic stroke. Several approved ILR devices are available (Musat 2018 , Sakhi 2019 , Tomson 2015 , and several studies have been performed to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of these devices (Ciconte 2017, Hindricks 2010 , Mittal 2016 , Nolker 2016 , Sanders 2016 . Since ILRs are invasive and costly, some functions may shift to mHealth. These can be divided into technologies that: • Record ECG tracings (single or multilead, in intermittent or continuous format, of various durations). • use non-ECG techniques such as pulse photoplethysmography (PPG). mHealth tools permit indefinite monitoring and widen application to a range of conditions and patient populations. There has been rapid development and integration of diagnostic sensors into consumer devices such as smartwatches, fitness bands, and smartphones. However, validation of their notified data (or underlying algorithms) and mechanisms for professional review (as established for CIEDs and MCTs) are scant, if at all (See Section 7). This is open to risks of not detecting significant events and/or overtreating-for example, false-positive episodes of AF-if not confirmed by expert physicians. F I G U R E 2 mHealth devices for arrhythmia monitoring according to indications. Traditional wearable monitors are used for defined, short periods of time. Advantages are continuous monitoring and ability to use multiple leads that may be important for arrhythmia differentiation. These have been used historically for evaluation of palpitations, syncope, and defining QRS morphology. mHealth extends monitoring time indefinitely, to be defined by the user, and to the possibility of monitoring other parameters simultaneously with the ECG and linking to machine learning. Typically, mHealth utilizes single-channel ECG or derived heart rate, and discontinuous monitoring. AF-atrial fibrillation, BP-blood pressure, BrS-Brugada syndrome, HF-heart failure, HR-heart rate, ILR-implantable loop recorder, LQT-long QT. identify AF in an at-risk patient population has been examined by urakhia and colleagues (2015) . It has also been used successfully to determine the prevalence of subclinical AF in the general population (Rooney 2019) . Newer patch-based systems add near-real-time analytics and by transmitting data continuously to the cloud. This may facilitate more rapid data collection and diagnosis. Multiparametric monitoring may be enabled with a patch worn for up to 3 months (Stehlik 2020). Textile-based systems for ECG monitoring were initially designed to ensure patients' comfort during daily activities and address the needs of active patients. These vests and elastic bands adapt easily to patients' movements that is particularly important for those performing physical activities that might be limited by the presence of wires. (Chan 2016 , Desteghe 2017 , Lowres 2014 , Tarakji 2015 , and the device has been tested as a screening tool in at-risk populations , Lowres 2014 . In Apple watch, the algorithm is effective when the heart rate is between 50 and 150 bpm, there are no or very few abnormal beats, and the shape, timing, and duration of each beat is considered normal for the patient (Figure 4 ). Sensitivity and specificity depend on the software (which can be calibrated to higher sensitivity or higher specificity), the population studied (e.g., elderly have more tremor and/or difficulty in holding the device leading to more unreadable tracings), and the prevalence of AF in the population. It indicates that use of such device always requires proper evaluation for every intended use case. There is also an accessory band for a smartwatch to allow ECG recording. The single-lead ECG with automatic AF detection is recorded by touching the band's integrated sensors that transmit data to a watch application. Recently, a new 6-lead case has been developed, allowing for 30 second recording of all 6 limb leads by touching each of the three electrodes. Also the QT interval may be derived from this (https:// cardi acrhy thmne ws.com/kardi amobi le-6l-can-be-used-to-measu re-qt-durat ion-in-covid -19-patie nts/ (Chung 2015 , Garabelli 2016 (Conroy 2017 , McManus 2013 ). An automated algorithm can subsequently analyze the generated pulse waveform to detect AF. can be passively and opportunistically measured. This technology has been applied for use with smartphones using the phone's camera to measure a fingertip pulse waveform. Rapid irregularly conducted AF may produce variable pulse pressures that challenge detection (Choi 2017 care may be expected to change substantially and drive a radical departure from relying on an office or ambulatory ECG for ascertainment of AF. Blood pressure (BP) measurements can be erratic when the pulse is irregular. This characteristic is utilized by automatic oscillometric BP monitors that derive heart rhythm regularity algorithmically . Automated BP monitors have been used for opportunistic AF detection. Studies have shown that six devices from two manufacturers were reliable with sensitivities and specificities greater than 85% (Kane 2016) . These studies suggested that BP devices with embedded algorithms for detecting arrhythmias show promise as screening tools for AF, comparing favorably with manual pulse palpation. Such capability could be added to continuous BP recording devices (Kario 2016) . One device identifies possible AF when at least two of three consecutive measurements show pulse irregularity. Several studies addressed the diagnostic accuracy , Gandolfo 2015 , Kearley 2014 , Marazzi 2012 , Stergiou 2009 , Wiesel 2009 , Wiesel 2014 ) and the feasibility of this device as a screening tool , Omboni 2016 , Wiesel 2017 ). The following have undergone preliminary study: Mechanocardiography uses accelerometers and gyroscopes to sense the mechanical activity of the heart. The accuracy of this technology to detect AF using a smartphone's built-in accelerometer and gyroscope sensors was assessed in a proof of concept study (Jaakkola 2018) . A smartwatch (Sony Experia) was placed on the chest in supine patients to detect micro movements of the chest. Possibly, carrying this device in a pocket may have utility but is likely to be confounded by movement (e.g., walking) artifacts. Noncontact video monitoring of respiration and heart rate have been developed less than 15 years ago (Takano 2007 , Verkruysse 2008 . In 2014, a pioneering article described the concept of contactless videobased detection of AF (Couderc 2015) . Deep learning of a video of a person's face can identify AF by examining irregularity of pulsatile facial perfusion (Yan 2018) . It is a monitoring technique extracting the photoplethysmographic-like signals from a standard digital RGB video recording of the human skin and specifically of an individual's face. The videoplethysmographic signal describes the absorption peak of ambient light by the hemoglobin from the facial skin. Several studies have been performed to develop a method that is sensitive enough to detect each cardiac pulse and provide insights into variability on pulse on a beat-to-beat basis. The HealthKam works using HUE color space from video cameras (Dautov 2018 , Tsouri 2015 and can easily be integrated to any portable computer device with a camera (smartphone, tablet, etc.). By using mobile devices with cameras, the deployment of the technology is easy and scalable since it does not require the use and distribution of any physical devices. Such a system may change the approach to AF screening, which currently is only 1 patient at a time. High-throughput AF detection from multiple patients concurrently using a single digital camera and a pretrained deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) was feasible in a pilot study . One requirement for these technologies is steady focus: Thus moving subjects present a challenge. It is important to avoid recording, sending, or communicating any video of the patient thus protecting privacy and dignity. Video-based technologies in telemedicine have raised a new set of societal and ethical concerns that are being continuously re-evaluated such as during the COVID-19 pandemic. Issues regarding privacy, confidentiality, and legal and ethical obligation to treat are crucial factors to be considered when these technologies are deployed at larger scale (Turakhia 2019). There are preliminary reports on using commodity smart devices to identify agonal breathing . Identification of abnormal heart rate patterns may be made possible by converting smart speakers into a sonar device with emission of in-audible frequencies sound waves and receiving them to detect motion. These are not in consumer domain but potentially have wide scalability. 2.1. hcare/ doc/site/apple watch arrhy thmia detec tion https://cardi acrhy thmne ws.com/kardi amobi le-6l-can-be-used-tomeasu re-qt-durat ion-in-covid -19 https://cardi acrhy thmne ws.com/ kardi amobi le-6l-can-be-used-to-measu re-qt-durat ion-in-covid -19- Typically, most patients with palpitations and dizziness are evaluated using the various technologies reviewed in Section 2.1 . Devices capable of recording at least one ECG lead allow the interpreting clinician to distinguish between wide-and narrow-complex rhythms, bradycardia, and tachycardia, and thus distinguish between the various causative rhythms. Smart devices may be useful in pediatric patients (Gropler 2018) . The disease is often intermittent and asymptomatic, which may  Classical epidemiological data point to the notion that early identification of AF has the potential to improve morbidity and possibly mortality. (1) AF is associated with a 5-fold increased risk of stroke (Wolf 1991) and doubled mortality ; (2) The prevalence of undiagnosed AF is at least 1.5% for patients > 65 years (Orchard, 2018) ; (3) (Tables 2 and 3 ), but these may require gold-standard ECG confirmation.  The positive predictive value of an AF event will differ according to pretest probability of AF in a given population (e.g., those with an established diagnosis or one or more risk factors). This is especially relevant to "healthy consumers." Many technologies to identify AF are readily available directly to those without defined disease and are not deployed as individual or public health interventions. Rather, consumers who possess these technologies, such as smartwatches or smartphone-connected ECG recorders, opt into the use of these technologies. Therefore, consumer-driven AF identification is not the same as healthcare-initiated AF screening. AF identification by these devices requires confirmation, since these AF screening tools have variable specificity (Table 2) , raising the potential of a high falsepositive rate in a low prevalence population, and risks of unnecessary treatment. There have been almost 500 studies assessing accuracy of mHealth devices for AF detection, as described in recent systematic reviews (Giebel 2019, Lowres 2019 , O'Sullivan 2020 . Their capabilities varied according to technologies utilized, settings, and study populations. Two large-scale screening trials were reported recently (See Section 6). No large outcome trial of screen detected AF and hard endpoints of stroke and death has been conducted as yet. Although an incidental diagnosis of AF seems to be associated with increased risk of stroke and protection by OAC therapy This effort addresses the concern that AF detected by screening may identify inherently lower-risk patients so that efficacy of anticoagulation (and its risk/benefit ratio) requires recalibration. This is necessary prior to issuance of any recommendations. (Currently, no consensus exists yet on how to treat these arrhythmias, even in those with high CHA 2 DS 2 -VASc scores). The European and American guidelines do recommend opportunistic screening for early identification of undiagnosed AF in patients aged ≥65 years (Freedman 2017, January 2019, ). On the other hand, the U. S. Preventive Services Task Force has presently given an "insufficient" recommendation for systematic screening for AF with electrocardiograms (Jonas 2018). Cryptogenic stroke/TIA Up to one-third of ischemic strokes is attributed to AF mediated embolism to the brain (Hannon 2010) . Further, the risk of recurrent thromboembolism is high if AF is left undetected and untreated (Furie 2012 , Kolominsky-Rabas 2001 . Hence, prolonged monitoring for AF poststroke has been recommended in recent guidelines (January 2019, , Schnabel 2019 . Detection of AF poststroke depends not only on the monitoring device used and the duration of the monitoring period, but also on stroke type and patient selection; thus, the results of AF detection have been heterogenous (Kishore 2014 Sanna 2014 Zungsontiporn 2018 . A meta-analysis showed that a stepwise approach to AF detection in poststroke patients led to AF detection in 23.7% of patients (Sposato 2015) , while a combined analysis of two randomized and two observational studies showed a 55% reduction in recurrent stroke following prolonged cardiac monitoring (Tsivgoulis 2019) . However, the optimal AF duration threshold for initiating anticoagulation is currently unknown and may be lower in a poststroke population compared to those with fewer cardiovascular risk factors . The risk of undiagnosed AF and other sources of thrombi has been considered high in embolic strokes of unknown source (ESUS), prompting studies that evaluated whether empiric NOAC therapy is more effective than antiplatelet therapy without a requirement of AF detection. Two of these studies, NAVIGATE ESUS (Hart 2018) and RESPECT-ESUS (Diener 2018) , have not shown a reduction in recurrent stroke in patients receiving NOACs. It should be emphasized that the mere detection of AF after ESUS is not necessarily proof of positive causation. A third study is ongoing, including patients with suggested atrial myopathy (enlarged atria, increased levels of NT-proBNP, or enlarged P waves) (Kamel 2019) . These findings underscore the need for AF detection prior to initiation of OAC therapy in patients with cryptogenic stroke, ESUS, or ischemic stroke of known origin, and mHealth devices can ease the process of detection (Zungsontiporn 2018) . The threshold of AF burden may very well differ in patients who have had a suspected cardioembolic event and those who have not . The key to making AF identification feasible, efficient and clinically valuable is the selection of patients with an increased likelihood of harboring undiagnosed AF, rather than general screening in unselected populations. mHealth ECG recorders can facilitate frequent brief (e.g., 30 seconds) recordings over prolonged periods of time by the very ubiquity of devices (including smartphone-based apps or watches). These devices are particularly well suited to capture intermittent or nonpersistent arrhythmias; F I G U R E 5 mHealth and AF. Applications include screening for AF in general or high-risk populations, managing comorbidities and lifestyles important for prevention and control, as well as managing treatment of known AF. AF-atrial fibrillation, DM-diabetes, HTNhypertension, NSR-normal sinus rhythm. however, it is likely that frequent sampling would be necessary to capture infrequent paroxysmal AF and even daily "snapshot" ECG monitoring may miss half of AF episodes (Charitos 2012, Yano 2016) . AF burden, increasingly recognized as a powerful independent predictor of stroke , though accurately measured by implanted devices , cannot be readily calculated from intermittent ECG data. The use of smartwatches with passive intermittent surveillance using PPG monitoring plus ECG confirmation may be a more effective screening tool and is currently being evaluated (Heartline study https://www.heart line.com). Formal screening with mHealth ECG recordings has yielded meaningful incidences of newly diagnosed AF, statistically greater than if diagnosis relied only on the office ECG (  level meta-nalysis found that new AF detection rate increased progressively with age from 0.34% for <60 years to 2.73% ≥85 years. Importantly, the number of subjects needed to screen to discover AF meeting indications for anticoagulation was 1089 for subjects <60 years but 83 ≥65 years. mHealth has important implications for the care of those already diagnosed with AF. Several key characteristics of AF can be measured with long-term continuous or near-continuous monitoring, and the information gained may provide valuable information for patient management. Furthermore, while several studies succeeded in establishing the sensitivity and specificity of novel devices for the detection of AF, no study to date has yet evaluated the utility of an mHealth intervention in affecting clinical outcomes. The iPhone Helping Evaluate Atrial Fibrillation Rhythm through Technology (iHEART), a single-center, prospective, randomized controlled trial, and the Heartline study seek to accomplish this goal (Caceres 2019 , Hickey 2016 , https:// www.heart line.com). Current guidelines for anticoagulation are based principally on the presence of risk factors and a diagnosis of clinical AF, regardless of AF duration, symptomatology, or burden . This applies even if the AF has been quiescent for long periods or eliminated altogether as the result of rhythm control interventions including antiarrhythmic drugs, ablation, or risk factor modification (January 2019). However, there is increasing recognition that AF burden matters; for example, paroxysmal events have less thromboembolic risk than persistent AF . This understanding has been extended during continuous monitoring from CIEDs which depict AF with high granularity, and first advanced the metrics of "AF days" and burden in terms of cumulative load (hours/day) and concentration (density of AF days) . This measure is likely to be important for understanding mHealth discovered AF. AF burden can be characterized as %/time monitored, longest duration, and density. Retrieved data provide an insight into natural history and associated sequelae (Healey 2012 , Van Gelder 2017 . This led to oral anticoagulation intervention trials to determine the ability to reduce stroke on the basis of AF duration (Lopes 2017 , Martin 2015 . These suggest that a threshold exists below which the risk of thromboembolic stroke is low and risk-benefit ratio may not justify chronic administration of oral anticoagulants. For instance, CIED data indicate that short subclinical AF events have lesser risk than more prolonged (and therefore more likely to be symptomatic) events (Al-Turki 2019). Device-detected, "subclinical" atrial high-rate episodes (AHRE) lasting 6 minutes to 24 hours are associated with increased stroke risk, but the absolute risk is considerably lower than expected based on risk factors alone (Glotzer 2003 , Healey 2012 , van Gelder 2017 . Whether these require anticoagulation in high-risk individuals is the subject of ongoing studies (Kirchoff 2017, Lopes 2017 , van Gelder 2017 . Importantly, very short AF episodes (episodes in which both the onset and offset of AT/AF were present within a single EGM recording) were not associated with adverse outcomes (Swiryn 2016) which may be important for mHealth monitoring. mHealth AF detection using digital health tools offers further insights in patients without indication for implantable devices. mHealth extends AF screening to younger patients without cardiovascular disease and thromboembolic potential may be low. Those with high AF burden (defined by ≥ 11.4%; mean duration 11.7 hours) detected on a 14-day patch monitor had an increased thromboembolic event rate compared to those with lower AF burdens (Go 2018) . There remains significant treatment variation in use of OAC, especially for device-detected AF (Perino 2019) . This may be due to a large clinical uncertainty regarding the optimal cutpoint, even though observational data indicate that OAC is associated with a decreased risk of stroke for episodes > 24 hours and possibly for episodes 6-24 hours (Perino 2019) . Currently, there are no prospectively validated cutpoints or risk models that incorporate AF burden into decision-making for stroke prevention therapies.  (See also section 4.1 Ischemia). The use of mHealth technology to diagnose ventricular arrhythmias lags behind its application to AF (See section 3.1). Detection of symptomatic VT has been reported using the AliveCor cardiac monitor (AliveCor, San Francisco, USA) and SmartWatch (Ringwald 2019 , Waks 2015 . Sophisticated automated analysis of a 2-minute PPG recording by the camera of a commercially available smartphone (iPhone 4S, Apple) can distinguish between AF, PACs, and PVCs from sinus rhythm, with a sensitivity of 0.733 and specificity of 0.976 for PVCs (Chong 2015 . PVCs may challenge to PPG-based systems, as many PVCs are nonperfusing (Billet 2019 ). An ECG tracing is therefore essential in order to facilitate rhythm diagnosis and avoid misclassification of "slow PPG pulse rates" (bradysphygmia) simply as "bradycardia." Syncope presents unique challenges for mHealth applications. While prolonged ambulatory monitoring using medical-grade devices (wearable and implantable) has been the mainstay of cardiac rhythm diagnosis during episodes of syncope, user-activated systems must either be activated by the patient during prodromal symptoms (if present and time permits) in anticipation of syncope, or else incorporate loop recording to allow postsyncope activation . This capability is not incorporated in currently popular consumer-grade wearable devices. However, a randomized controlled trial of AliveCor versus usual care in participants presenting with palpitations or presyncope showed a faster and increased rate of detection of symptomatic arrhythmias in the intervention group, suggesting that at least in presyncope, patient-activated rhythm detection using a commercially available mHealth device is productive (Reed 2019) . Rhythms reported by devices that rely on heart rates will likely require validation with a medical-grade system to provide an ECG tracing during an event to allow determination of the causative rhythm. There is a significant overlap between transient loss of consciousness and mechanical falls due to orthostatic intolerance, neurologic, or orthopedic problems. This is particularly disabling in elderly subjects and often unwitnessed , Heinrich 2010 . Mobile applications that combine analysis of heart rate monitoring together with fall detection, GPS positioning, video recording with display of patients' surroundings, and the capability to send alerts either triggered by patients in case of symptoms or automatically in case of detected falls, may be useful. The detection and response to sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) is an area where mHealth applications may prove lifesaving. As rapid treatment for cardiac arrest has consistently been associated with improved survival, pre-emptive identification of at-risk persons, detection of cardiac arrests, alerting of nearby lay and professional first responders, and coaching or quality assurance in the performance of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) are ideally suited to the mHealth paradigm in societies where mobile smartphones are ubiquitous. It is possible that mHealth devices which continuously monitor heart rhythm and other physiologic data may be able to better predict impending SCA, even using measures which have not shown sufficient specificity or sensitivity when measured intermittently, such as heart rate variability (Lee 2016) . However, such continuous monitoring is present already in CIEDs and has not yet proven to be sufficiently predictive to be clinically useful (Au-Yeung WM 2018). Therefore, the prediction of SCA by mHealth devices, while a tantalizing prospect, remains to be realized. Once cardiac arrest occurs, rapid identification is essential to trigger a response by emergency responders. Wearable devices that combine physiologic monitoring, GPS, and a method of communication with emergency services such as cellular service are well positioned to provide almost instantaneous alert as well as location information (Kwon 2019 , Praveen 2019 ). An early device using a piezoelectric sensor to detect the pulse was capable of transmitting an alert to emergency medical system or other responders when a pulse was not detected and the watch (and thus the wearer) was still (Rickard 2011) . Preliminary reports indicate that smart speakers in commodity smart devices may be able to identify agonal breath patterns for sudden cardiac death detection . Widespread diffusion of such technology to patients at elevated risk of SCA will be necessary before any potential benefits can be tested. The ubiquity of mobile phones in society leads to more rapid notification of emergency services, and the possibility of a dispatcher gathering information from a bystander at the patient's side and delivering instructions on care, such as CPR. This was associated with improved outcomes for a variety of emergencies (Wu 2012) . is also feasible with current technology. A blinded, randomized trial conducted in Stockholm, Sweden, demonstrated that such a system improved the rate of bystander CPR (Ringh 2015) . However, almost 10,000 volunteers were recruited over approximately 18 months, during which 667 activations occurred, emphasizing the large resources needed and the low rate of utilization of trained volunteers, even when alerted by mobile phone. Whether a trained or novice bystander responds, mobile devices may be further useful to provide voice (or video) instructions from a dispatcher or from the device itself. Studies of prerecorded audio, live video, and animation-based instruction have shown improvements in some aspects of CPR delivery and AED use, although technology continues to evolve (Bolle 2009 , Choa 2008 , Merchant 2010 , You 2008 . One limitation is that as such apps are unregulated, many do not convey current basic life support algorithms and may have poor usability (Kalz 2014) . In addition, delay in commencing CPR and in calling emergency services due to distraction of the rescuer by using an app is a concern (Paal 2012). is associated with improved survival, but AED use remains low (Weinsfeldt 2010). Mobile devices have the potential to increase this by assisting with the retrieval and use of AEDs. Multiple apps have been created to locate AEDs in the vicinity of the user, although with mixed results in simulations (Sakai 2011 , Hatakeyama 2018 , Neves Briard 2019 . Barriers include the accuracy of AED location databases, size of the user base, app interface, and the availability of multiple apps instead of a single validated regional, national, or international standard. An emerging approach to circumvent these limitations is the dispatch of an AED via a drone to the location of the cardiac arrest, which is expected to reduce time to defibrillation, especially in rural areas (Boutilier 2017) . Feasibility has been demonstrated (Claesson 2017) . The complete chain from activation of citizen responders was tested in the Heartrunner trial (Andelius 2020) in a region of almost 2 million inhabitants. Results showed that citizen responders arrived before emergency services 42% of out of hospital cardiac arrests, accompanied by a threefold increase in bystander defibrillation with a trend to improved 30-day survival. Results were more pronounced when emergency arrival times were longer, for example, in rural areas. (16) mHealth has significant potential for facilitating these interventions ( Figure 6 ). Early management (e.g., primary angioplasty) of acute ischemic syndromes may reduce infarct territory and ventricular arrhythmias, is approved for use in the United States for patients with prior acute coronary syndrome (ACS) who remain at high risk for recurrent ACS. For lower-risk patients, mHealth may improve symptom recognition and earlier presentation, that is, "symptom-to-door time" (Moser 2006  The next step of patient care involved transmission of ECGs by emergency responders in the field to hospitals for review and triage and was shown to result in shorter door-to-balloon time, lower peak troponin and creatine phosphokinase levels, higher postinfarction left ventricular ejection fraction, and shorter length of stay compared with control patients whose ECGs were not transmitted (Clemmensen 2010 , Sanchez-Ross M 2011 . This paradigm has now been widely implemented. Technical factors, such as transmission failure and lack of network coverage, are the main impediments to adoption of such systems. This is often confusing for patients, who often exhibit a poor understanding of their medications, follow-up procedures, and future appointments (Horwitz LI, 2013; Ziaeian B 2013) . This contributes to frequent hospital readmissions. Mobile technologies may enable individualized contact between patients and healthcare providers. Phone calls led to a modest improvement in medication adherence in patients with coronary artery disease in one large randomized controlled trial (Vollmer 2014) . Text messaging was shown to increase medication adherence and improved cardiovascular risk factors Unal 2018) . Available evidence is limited by short-term follow-up and self-reported adherence (Shariful Islam 2019). Success may depend on personalized messages with tailored advice, the ability to respond to texts, timing messages to coincide with medication doses, higher frequency of messages, and the use of additional apps or websites (Park 2014) . Interoperability with the EMR may facilitate this approach. This was shown to improve health outcomes among patients with heart disease, but is underutilized. The Million Hearts Cardiac Rehabilitation Collaborative aims to increase participation rates to ≥70% by 2022 (Ritchey 2020) . Mobile apps and linked sensors to measure heart rate, respiration rate, and exercise parameters may overcome traditional limitations of availability, cost, and convenience and be more acceptable to some patients (Zwisler 2016) . A randomized controlled trial center-based and mobile rehabilitation found improved uptake, adherence, and completion with home-based cardiac rehabilitation in postinfaction patients ) (See also 4.2.2.) F I G U R E 6 Digital applications can integrate patient relayed information of sensor and clinical information with automatic remote analysis, but also permit patients to receive advice and treatment adjustments from physicians directly. Heart failure is widely prevalent, costly to manage, and degrades patient outcomes (Benjamin 2017 , Albert 2019 Despite promise, most large, multicenter randomized trials failed to demonstrate improved outcomes of remote monitoring in HF patients (Table 4 ) (Boyne 2012 , Chaudhry2010, Dickinson 2018 , Koehler 2011 , Ong 2016 , Takahashi 2012 . Combination algorithms based on multiple parameters may be valuable (Ono 2017) . One trial stands out. The TIM-HF2 trial randomized HF patients to either remote patient management plus usual care or to usual care only and were followed up for over a year (Koehler 2018) . The results showed reduction in the combined endpoint of percentage of days lost due to unplanned hospitalization and all-cause mortality. However cardiovascular mortality was similar between remote monitoring and standard care groups. Implanted devices that monitor pulmonary arterial pressure may be beneficial in select patients when used in structured programs (Dickinson 2018 Failure Patients) trial and subsequent FDA approval has renewed interest in remote patient management for HF patients (Abraham 2016 , Desai 2017 . This requires daily download of hemodynamic data and a prespecified medical treatment plan. An app is also available which illustrates patient compliance with monitoring, alerts the patient when transmissions are not received, shows medication reminders, and allows for medication reconciliation and titration. Boyne Electronic device to assess symptoms and educate patients with HF. Abnormal symptoms directed to a monitoring nurse. Device tailored itself to patient's knowledge. Excellent adherence with use of the device. Planned and unplanned face-to-face HF nurse visits were higher in the control group. Event rates for both groups were lower than expected. Primary limitation appeared to be the excellent outcomes in the control group. Disposable multisensor chest patch for 3 months linked via smartphone to cloud analytics. Apply machine-learning algorithm. Pilot study, compliance eroded. However, this detected precursors of hospitalization for HF exacerbation with 76% to 88% sensitivity and 85% specificity. Abbreviations: BP, blood pressure; HF, heart failure; HR, heart rate; PC, primary care; RPM, remote patient monitoring.  The concept of coupling remote monitoring and mobile cellular technologies is attractive for the HF community , Cipresso 2012 . Heart rate (ECG), BP, and weight were the most frequently monitored parameters. Sensors that detect respiratory rate and pattern by detecting movement of the chest wall, via pressure, stretch, or accelerometry, may have applications in HF. Detecting breathing via microphone (sounds), change in impedance, or pulse oximetry are other possible means to monitor respiratory function. Some of these modalities could be integrated into smart clothing (Molinaro 2018) . Some trials included also alert reminders of medication use, voice messages on educational tips, video education, and tracking of physical activity (See Section 4.6.1). Patients were mostly monitored daily and followed for an average of 6 months. A reduction was seen in HF-related hospital days . High rates of patient engagement, acceptance, usage and adherence have been reported in some trials but not others , Hamilton 2018 . Preliminary results using a disposable multisensor chest patch in the LINK-HF study were encouraging (Stehlik 2020) , detecting precursors of hospitalization for HF exacerbation with 76% to 88% sensitivity and 85% specificity, 1 week before clinical manifestations. Exercise training is recommended for all stable HF patients (Piepoli 2011 . Hybrid cardiac telerehabilitation is a novel approach. Telerehabilitation is the supervision and performance of comprehensive cardiac rehabilitation at a distance, encompassing: telemonitoring (minimally intrusive, often involving sensors), teleassessment (active remote assessment), telesupport (supportive televisits by nurses, psychological support), teletherapy (actual interactive therapy), telecoaching (support and instruction for therapy), and teleconsulting and telesupervision of exercise training . Various devices have been described, from heart rate monitoring (Smart 2005) and transtelephonic electrocardiographic monitoring (Koudi 2006) to tele-ECG-monitoring via a remote device and real-time ECG and voice transtelephonic monitoring (Ades 2000) . Home-based telerehabilitation was demonstrated to be safe, effective with high adherence among HF patients. It improves physical capacity and psychological status , with similar QoL improvement to standard rehabilitation . The first randomized, prospective, multicenter study (TELEREH-HF) showed that hybrid telerehabilitation and telecare in HF patients was more effective than usual care in improving peak VO2, 6-minute walk distance, and QoL, although not associated with  Diabetes mellitus is a strong risk factor for the development of Glycemic control may reduce AF development and recurrence (Chao 2012; Chang 2014; , Otake 2009 ). Mobile apps can facilitate self-management by reminding regular assessment of required parameters and medications to take and provide educational tools and motivational support. Regular transmission of blood glucose levels from patients to their physicians can be based on SMS, email, or diverse web-based services. Bluetooth-enabled glucose meters are frequently used (Andres 2019, Garabedian 2015 be improved by such apps in conjunction with clinical support, but many have suboptimal usability (Veazie 2018) . Phone-based interventions were associated with improved glycemic control as compared to standard care (Liang 2011 , Pillay 2015 , Saffari 2014 . Efficacy for improving glycemic control in randomized controlled trials has shown mixed results (Agarwal 2019 , Quinn 2011 . Meta-analyses indicate that mobile phone interventions for self-management reduced HbA1c modestly by 0.2-0.5% over a median of 6-month follow-up duration, with a greater reduction in patients with type 2 compared to type 1 diabetes (Pal 2014) . A significant impact on clinical outcomes may affect healthcare expenditures by reducing the need for in-person contact with healthcare providers, preventing hospital admissions, and improving prognosis. In a retrospective study, the use of mHealth technologies was associated with a 21.9% reduction in medical spending than a control group during the first year (Whaley 2019) . Key determinants to successful uptake of decision-support apps will be their user-friendliness and complexity and the delivery of electronic communications and feedback to the patient. Hypertension, because of its high prevalence, provides the highest attributable risk for the development of AF (Huxley 2011 (Mantua 2016) . Preliminary data suggest that wearable devices may be capable of detecting sleep apnea with good accuracy compared to gold-standard polysomnography (Selvaraj 2014) and transform the approach to sleep disorder screening, diagnosis, and treatment. Sleep irregularity diagnosed by 7 day wrist actigraphy was linked to risk of cardiovascular events (Huang 2020) . Preliminary studies indicated that use of wearables may permit behavior modifications that improve sleep quality (Berryhill 2020) . In this regard, mHealth applications to sleep diagnosis and treatment promise facilitation of rhythm control. Figure 5)  Physical activity is any bodily movement from skeletal muscle contraction to increase energy expenditure above basal level. Athletic activity varies from recreational sports to competitive events. There is a compelling evidence that regular aerobic exercise at the levels recommended by Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee reduces the risk of a variety of cardiovascular conditions, including AF (Everett 2011 , Mozaffarian 2008 , Piercy 2018 . However, the majority of the population is not engaged in physical activity at the recommended levels (Piercy 2018) . Among patients with cardiovascular disease, patient activity measured automatically by ICDs correlated with survival following ICD implantation (Kramer 2015) . • Cardiorespiratory fitness has an inverse relationship to AF burden (Faselis 2015) . • Improvement in exercise capacity of 2 METs in overweight individuals may double freedom from AF . trackers that can stand alone, a fitness tracker that is coupled with a companion app, or an app that can be downloaded onto a smartphone, which then utilizes various features of the smartphone to measure activity and sleep. The accuracy of these measurements varies between different products and between measures within the same product (Rosenberger 2016) . Furthermore, while step-counting is long established, measuring the intensity of exercise is more complex. Although fitness technology has the exciting potential to increase physical activity by promoting goal setting and providing feedback, its effectiveness in motivating positive behavioral change remains unclear (Sullivan 2017) . One cautionary tale is the study by Jakicic et al. that examined the effectiveness of a lifestyle intervention with or without a fitness tracker (Jakicic 2016) . Two groups received instruction to promote physical activity and dietary restriction. Six months into the intervention, half of the participants were provided with an upper arm fitness tracker and web-based support accompanying the device. The other half logged and tracked their activity and diet on a study website. Of note, the group that wore the tracker lost less weight than the group who did not. Moreover, changes in physical activity between the two groups were not significantly different. These results cast doubt on the effectiveness of fitness trackers in promoting greater physical activity, and thus, further data are required to assess the impact of this approach (See Section 5). These are a unique category. Endurance athletes may have increased Importantly, mHealth solutions enable easy access to athletes' medical data. The latter approach can be of special interest in management of athletes' health during competitions abroad. In 2010, the American Heart Assiociation promulgated "Life's Simple 7" as a public health strategy to improve cardiovascular health with the motto: "7 Small Steps to Big Changes. It's easy and simple. Anyone can do it. Start with one or two!" Unfortunately, research has shown that this strategy is anything but simple: virtually, no adults (<1%) are compliant with all recommendations and 42% are compliant with only 0-2 recommendations . Although there is ample evidence that weight loss and maintaining an ideal weight are beneficial in reducing AF burden and symptoms, compliance with this recommendation is poor; the reasons include among others, inability to track food intake (Abed 2013 . • Weight loss combined with risk factor modification is a Class 1 (B-R) recommendation in treatment of AF (January 2019) • >10% weight reduction/ target BMI <27 kg/m 2 reduces AF burden . There are currently many consumer-oriented mobile phone-based applications (apps) designed for tracking food intake, but their utility for use in carbohydrate counting is limited due their design (El-Gayar 2013) . Commonly, these consumer-oriented apps require multiple steps. As an example, the user types in the food consumed and then scrolls through the search results to match with the program's food and nutrient database. Next, after finding a matching food type, the user must estimate and enter an amount. These apps require significant user input and time burden along with high possibility of error. In addition, they are also plagued by uncertain accuracy. Recently, research has shown that nutrient calculations from leading nutrition tracking apps tended to be lower than results from using 24-hour recall with analysis by the Nutrition Data System for Research (NDSR), a research-level dietary analysis software (Griffiths 2018). By contrast, a visual image-based app, such as the Technology-Assisted Dietary Assessment (TADA) system, directly addresses the aforementioned shortcomings (Boushey 2017 , Six J 2010 , Zhu 2010 . This is in research phase. The TADA system consists of two main components: (1) A smartphone app that runs on either iPhones (iOS) or Android devices: the Mobile Food Record (mFR), and (2) Cloud-based server that communicates with the mFR, processes, and stores the food images. Using the TADA system, a person takes a photograph of the meal they are planning to eat using their smartphone's camera. The use of geometric models has permitted the TADA system to use a single image of a meal to estimate portion size to within 15% of the actual amount (Fang 2015) . Hence, smartphone-based technology such as the TADA system can facilitate tracking of food intake, which in turn can potentially help with weight management. Despite the profusion of diet-and weight-related apps, and the interest in weight loss in the community, there remains a dearth of high-quality evidence that these apps are actually effective (Dounavi 2019  Generally, structured management programs inclusive of intensive patient education may improve outcomes (Hendriks 2012; USPTF 2014; Angaran 2015) . These may be facilitated by mHealth.  A recent HRS statement advocates for transparent and secure access by patients to their digital data HCPs , Gandhi 2017 , Phaeffli 2016 . In some cardiovascular conditions, self-management (without any HCP input) improved key outcomes (Hagglund 2015 Limitations should be recognized: • Demands of self-management may be excessive for even well intentioned patients required to be facile with setting up their own medical monitoring device, assessing frequency of download, interpreting and acting on data when required, and troubleshooting. These are not trivial challenges. Individual health status has been found to be a strong independent predictor of mortality and cardiovascular events (Rumsfeld-2013) . mHealth may catalyze positive behavioral change and facilitate health care. An induced healthy-user effect was likely the basis of survival benefit among CIED patients adhering more closely to remote management (Varma 2015) . mHealth may support patients with text messaging or mobile applications to remind patients of medication doses and times, as well as medical appointments (but synchronization with healthcare providers and/or EMR is generally lacking). The "just-in-time adaptive intervention" (JITAI) premise is to provide the appropriate type and amount of support to an individual at the correct time, with the ability to adjust depending on the person's current internal and situational factors (Nahum-Shani 2018). mHealth technology is an ideal platform to facilitate JITAIs by providing "real-time" personalized information, which can be utilized to inform the intervention delivered. JITAIs have been widely employed for health promotion and to support behavior change, but evidence of their efficacy is limited (Gustafson 2014 , Patrick 2009 , Riley 2008 . Timing is integral to the perception of benefit, as is receptivity to accept and use the support (Nahum-Shani 2015) . Bespoke, multi-faceted mHealth tools, with motivational messages and incorporating gamification, are most engaging , Gandhi 2017 , Pfaelli 2016 . Incorporation of gamification strategies (e.g., rewards, prizes, avatars, performance feedback, leader-boards, competitions, and social connection) into mHealth promotes patient engagement and sustains healthy behaviors (Blondon 2017 , Cugelman 2013 , Edwards 2016 , Johnson 2016 , Sardi 2017 . However, a recent systematic review demonstrated that only 4% (64/1680) of English-language "top-rated" health apps incorporated ≥1 gaming feature (Edwards 2016) . There are limited hypothesis-generated data for these mHealth interventions, and their efficacy in this context is as yet unmeasured. Self-regulatory behavior change techniques, such as feedback and monitoring (including self-monitoring), comparison of behavior, rewards, incentives and threats, and social support, are the most common behavior change techniques employed in gamification apps and are frequently utilized in successful nongaming apps targeting health promotion and secondary prevention (Conroy 2014 , Direito 2014 , Edwards 2016 . Engaging with apps involving gamification can also improve emotional well-being through feelings of accomplishment and social connectivity (Johnson 2016). Incorporation of a patient as part of a wider community may offer benefits. Social networking is widely used for health (Fox 2011) . Online communities enable individuals to "meet," share their experiences, discuss treatment, and receive and provide support from peers, patient organizations, or HCPs (Fox 2011 , Swan 2009 , Swan 2012 . While crowdsourcing via the Internet and social networks allows collective sharing and exchange of information from a large number of people, the integrity and accuracy of such information remains largely un-vetted and as such may be unreliable (Besaleva & Weaver 2014) . Sustaining healthy behaviors and minimizing intervention fatigue is paramount to long-term maintenance. Although mHealth may help to maintain motivation, available data demonstrate significant attrition with mHealth interventions targeting risk factors and chronic conditions, even when people report liking the intervention and have purchased it , Flores Mateo 2015 , Fukuoka 2015 , Morgan 2017 , Owen 2015 , Simblett 2018 , Whitehead 2016 , web- A representative patient's experience is described below: A few years ago (2017) Understanding the basis for health-protective behavior is vital (Dunton 2018) . Many apps, including those from national heart foun- , are available to support healthy lifestyle choices, but their efficacy remains largely untested or is limited by design features (i.e., small sample sizes, selection bias, etc.). Cost, service connectivity, and credibility of information sources are important factors. However, patient engagement may be jeopardized by worries about privacy and personal data security (Burke 2015 , Kumar 2013 ). The level and duration of clinic support needed will likely depend on condition monitored and goals for treatment. Reduction in compulsory routine in-clinic evaluations and reliance on continuous remote monitoring improved retention to long-term follow-up of patients with CIEDs (Varma 2014) . In one HF trial, gain was related to the period of remote instruction. Whether this indicates that efficacy of the active program had peaked and stabilized or that it needed to be sustained is unclear . Ideally, a training program should be finite in time but its effects durable. Although mHealth is highly promising in transforming health care, it can potentially exacerbate disparities in health care along sociodemographic lines. Older people are perceived to engage less with mHealth. A 2017 Pew Research Center survey found that 92% of 18-29 year olds and 74% of age 50-64 year olds own a smartphone (Pew 2017). However, the lack of familiarity with the technology and access to mobile devices, rather than lack of engagement per se, remain the principal barriers , Gallagher 2017 . Older users of mHealth prefer personalized information, which is clearly presented and is easy to navigate (Neubeck 2015) . There is also disparity across the educational spectrum, with smartphone usage in 57% of the population with less than high school education and 91% of the population who graduated from college. 67% of the population with income annual ≤ $30,000 and 93% of the population with income ≥ $75,000 (PR.C Mobile 2018). Limited evidence from the USA suggests that, although there is some variation in the mHealth use related to ethnicity, black and Hispanic Americans are not disadvantaged (Martin 2012) . mHealth permits information and apps to be tailored appropriately for language, literacy levels (including "text to speech" technology), and cultural differences to promote engagement ). There is heterogeneity of mHealth availability among different countries . Even some of the best studied and FDA and CE approved technologies described here may be currently unavailable due to regulatory or marketing rules or simply unaffordable to either individuals or healthcare systems in many other countries. As healthcare systems leverage and incorporate smartphone-based technology in their workflow and processes, a strategy is needed in parallel to ensure that those who do not have access to smartphone-based technology will continue to receive appropriate high-quality care. This critical initiative will require consensus and action among all stakeholders including HCPs, hospital systems, insurance providers, and state and federal government agencies. Thus enabled, mHealth promises improved patient outcomes in resource-limited areas (Bhavnani 2017) . 6 | CLINI C AL TRIAL S mHealth may have particular impact on trials of heart rhythm disorders. Traditionally, clinical trials testing drugs and devices for arrhythmias utilized time-to-event outcomes and analyses, such as first recurrence of AF after a blanking period (Piccini 2017) . Patients randomized to the control and intervention would be monitored intermittently, either with ambulatory devices and/or in-clinic visit. Such monitoring had limited sensitivity for recurrent arrhythmias, including symptomatic and asymptomatic episodes. Furthermore, time-to-first event may not accurately capture reductions in arrhythmia burden, which have also been shown to be beneficial in recent randomized trials (Andrade 2019) . While CIEDs such as pacemakers and defibrillators can be leveraged for continuous monitoring , these studies do not generalize to broader CIED-free populations. ILRs may have a potential role, but are costly and unless used for clinical indications, difficult to justify simply for study event ascertainment. There are a variety of free-standing handheld ECG monitors, some of which have automated AF detection (Table 1 ). However, many do not have cellular or networking capability and therefore generally cannot transmit data or findings in real time. This is where smart-or mobile-connected arrhythmia and pulse detection technologies have significant promise. These may enhance detection and measurement of clinical outcomes while also allowing for remote or virtual data collection without the need for site-based study visits. Examples include remote rhythm assessment with single-or multilead ECGs from smartphone or smartwatch-based technologies and automatic ascertainment of hospitalizations using smartphone-based geofencing (Nguyen 2017) . These operational enhancements, in turn, can improve participant satisfaction, reduce cost, improve study efficiency, and facilitate or expand enrollment. An example is the ongoing Health eHeart study, a site-free cardiovascular research study that leverages self-reported data, data from wearable sensors, electronic health records, and other importable "big data" to enable rapid-cycle, low-cost interventional and observational cardiovascular research (https://www.healt h-ehear tstudy.org/). Two recent large-scale studies highlight the potential advantages of mHealth for AF screening and treatment. This was a highly pragmatic, single-arm investigational device exemption study designed to test the performance and safety of a PPG-based irregular rhythm detection algorithm on the Apple Watch for identification of AF . The study was a siteless "bring your own device" study, such that participants needed their own compatible smartphone and watch to enroll online. All study procedures, including eligibility verification, onboarding, enrollment, and data collection, were performed via the study app, which could be downloaded from the app store. If a participant received an irregular pulse notification, then subsequent study visits were done via video conferencing to study physicians directly with the app. The study enrolled over 419,000 participants without pre-existing AF in just an eight-month period, in large part due to the pragmatic, virtual design, and easy accessibility (Figure 4) . The algorithm was found to have a positive predictive value of simultaneous ECG-confirmed AF of 0.84 . Only 0.5% of the enrolled population received any irregular pulse notification, but 3.2% of those age ≥ 65 years received notifications. However, only 153/450 (34%) patients had AF detected by a subsequent single ECG patches after the irregular rhythm notification was received. This may reflect the paroxysmal nature of early-stage AF rather than explicit false positives. Because the study only administered ECG patch morning to those with irregular rhythm notification rather than then entire cohort or to negative controls, the negative predictive value was not estimated. It should be noticed that the Apple Heart Study was in a population without diagnosed AF; test performance and diagnostic yield could be considerably different in a population with known AF, and this software is not approved for use for AF surveillance in established AF. • The Huawei heart study A similar study was performed using smart device-based (Huawei fitness band or smartwatch) PPG technology (Guo JACC 2019) . The algorithm had been validated with over 29 485 PPG signals before commencement of the trial. More than 246,000 people downloaded the PPG screening app, of which about 187 000 individuals monitored their pulse rhythm for 7 months. AF was found in 0.23% (slightly lower than Apple Heart, possibly due to a younger and healthier enrolled cohort). Validation was achieved in 87% (PPV >90%) compared to 34% in Apple Heart. The results indicated that this was a feasible frequent continuous monitoring approach for the screening and early detection of AF in a large population. A significant observation was that clinical decision-support tools provided enabled management decisions, for example, almost 80% high-risk patients were anticoagulated. Subsequent enrollment into the mAFA II trial showed significantly reduced risk of rehospitalization and clinical adverse events (Guo JACC 2020) . These trial results encourage incorporation of such technology effectively into the AF management pathways at multiple levels, that is, screening and detection of AF, as well as early interventions to reduce stroke and other AF-related complications. Another large-scale virtual study to identify episodes of irregular heart rhythm suggestive of AF was announced by Fitbit in May 2020 (HRS 2020 7 May 2020). The next step beyond parameterizing safety could be to actionably guide therapy at the point of care (Figure 6 ). For example, patients could obtain ECGs before and after taking "pill-in-the-pocket" antiarrhythmic drug therapy such as flecainide to confirm AF, ensure no QRS widening, and confirm restoration of sinus rhythm. A similar approach has been proposed for rhythm-guided use of direct OACs in lower-risk AF patients with infrequent episodes either spontaneously or as the result of a rhythm control intervention including drugs and ablation; a randomized trial is in development (Passman 2016) . The use of smartwatch-guided rate control as a treatment strategy could also be tested, as this may provide a more personalized approach rather than prior randomized trials of lenient versus strict rate control that used population level rather than personalized heart rate treatment thresholds (Van Gelder 2010). • Generalizability This is key to application of results from trials. mHealth is widely available and often simple to apply and wear. , Glotzer 2009 . Does pill-in-the-pocket DOAC treatment of PAF adequately cover the risk of stroke? Some measures remain less well studied, like the occurrence of irregularity with a wearable pulse-based monitor system, particularly without ECG confirmation. Since these mHealth prediagnostic or diagnostic tools may then be directly tied to initiation or termination of treatment, rigorous evaluation of clinical safety and efficacy will be required and, in some cases, warrant a combined drug-device regulatory approval. Despite these challenges, there is enormous potential for patients to use these technologies to self-monitor their arrhythmia treatment and extend this to manage comorbidities (See Section 4). The process of data transparency and accessibility to the patient may improve the patient's engagement with their overall care, even if the data are not directly actionable by the patient. The restrictions to clinic access during the SARS-Cov-2 pandemic have accelerated the adoption of mHealth solutions (Varma JACC 2020) . ECGs for clinical trials were recorded by smart devices and assessed at virtual visits instead of routine in-person evaluations. In some cases, the entire management of clinical trials went online. or patient-facing (consumer digital health products, e.g., the Apple Watch (Apple Inc., Cupertino, Ca)). CIEDs: Experience with CIEDs provides a framework. CIEDs generate voluminous quantities of eHealth data. In a single patient, this may be generated from distinct sources, that is, remote monitoring and in-person interrogations. Transmission from remote monitoring has been well worked out: data flow from the CIED to the remote transceiver and then to the manufacturer's server for access by individual practices. Unfortunately, this is usually retrieved in an image format rendering the granular data uninterpretable by the practice's electronic health record (EHR). When shared with the patient, the image file is posted on the EHR's patient portal. These files are difficult for physicians to interpret and practically uninterpretable by the lay public. In order to engage patients and caregivers, the data will need to be provided in a format that enables the lay public to get a high-level summary of key features (such as battery status and remote monitor function status) with explanations and the ability to drill down to the more granular details for those individuals who wish to do so. Consumer digital health product data: Consumers are rapidly adopting products to monitor their health status for early detection of abnormalities as well as for managing chronic diseases. These tools empower and engage patients in managing their health, but the very basic task of sharing the data with their healthcare provider presents challenges. From a technical standpoint, many EHR portals do not permit patients to send attachments. Therefore, the patient and provider are left using email, which is not considered secure or HIPPA or GDPR compliant. Even if the EHR portal accepts attachments, incorporating the digital health data into the EHR remains ad hoc and inconsistent. The logistical and practical concerns frighten many care providers into discouraging their patients from using these devices. Concerns among providers include the fear of being inundated with unnecessary transmissions to review as well as the concern that patients may send inappropriate data, for example, BP or glucose monitoring data to their electrophysiologist. Cloud-based storage may avoid some of these challenges. Assimilating the data obtained from digital health tools, whether implantable or wearable, is proving to be one of the greatest clinical challenges. Clinicians feel increasingly burdened as both the volume of data as well as the sources of data increase. Creating the nomenclature and data models that would enable the information to be incorporated in the electronic medical record is less a technical chal-  There is interest in mHealth to support patients with text messaging or mobile applications to remind patients of medication doses and times or medical appointments. To be effective, this requires synchronization with healthcare providers, ideally by integration with the EMR, allowing changes in medications and doses, as well as appointments, to flow between patients and clinicians in an accurate and bidirectional manner (Spaulding 2019) . However, EMR systems software is lacking such functionality and interoperability at this point (Ratwani 2018) . Interconnection of medical devices and clinical data promises facilitation of clinical care but also creates opportunities for intrusions by maleficent actors (i.e., hackers) to disable systems and/or access private health information (PHI) (Jalali 2019 , Kruse 2017 2. Theft and sale of patient data (i.e., PHI). 3. Company attack. A hacker may identify flaws in a system or device, short the company's stock, and then make the flaws public. Alternatively, a maleficent user may try to harvest insider information from a breached company's network. Attackers may compromise a company, but not take any of the above actions. Instead, they may sell their methods or credentials to another group who will use them (Perkalis 2014) Scenarios where a cyber attack results in the deaths of individuals or groups (e.g., by corrupting the firmware of a pacemaker or insulin pump) can be easily imagined and have been demonstrated by researchers (Klonoff 2015) , but to date, no such attack is known to have occurred in the real world. It is possible that that this is because attacks against organizations yield greater gain than attacks against individuals. It is essential therefore to establish best practice methods to maintain patient safety and privacy in this new ecosystem of remotely managed devices and mass data collection. Often times, attackers will not directly compromise the system that they are after; they will instead start by compromising a  It is not possible to create systems that cannot be hacked. However, systems/devices should be designed to fail gracefully in conjunction with a plan. This enables rapid correction in the event of intrusion. Business decisions (e.g., budget, timeline) should not override security which should be the priority. Attempting to close or obscure devices/protocols is not a solution, and the so called security through obscurity, as a defensive measure, has long been rejected as inadequate (Shanon) . A balance between usability and security has to be struck carefully. Securing devices against attackers, while keeping them open to clinicians is a difficult task. In mHealth, this difficulty can be amplified by the dependence on the patient's devices (e.g., smartphone) and practices, which are outside the control of a healthcare IT system. An example of an engineering compromise in implantable cardiac devices is the requirement for important wireless communications to only work at very short ranges. These communications could be made more secure but less usable (e.g., requiring wires), or less secure but more usable (e.g., using Bluetooth). The organization should be designed with security in layers (also called defense in depth), where each system is protected with more than one layer of security. Hence, a breach in one layer will not necessarily result in total compromise. For example, a database may 1) require a password, 2) only grant a minimum level of access to each user, and 3) only accept internal connections. Thus, if a user's password is compromised (#1 failed), an attacker still cannot use it remotely. If the server is accidentally opened to remote access (#3 failed), the attacker can still only access that one user's data. Other innovative solutions include delegating security to a personal base station to use a novel radio design that can act as a jammer-cumreceiver (Gollakotta 2015). When recommending devices for patients, it is important to consider the potential privacy/security weaknesses compared to alternatives, ensure the patient is informed about these tradeoffs, and review how the manufacturer has responded to security incidents in the past (Saxon 2018) . However, the lack of outcome data, combined with the lack of documented real-world instances of actual cybersecurity intrusions to these devices or to peripheral products that support device connectivity (programmer, home communicator, database, communication protocols), pose a difficult risk-benefit assessment for clinicians and patients alike. Regulatory frameworks around cybersecurity are changing rapidly (Voelker 2018) . The FDA (as well as other regulatory agencies worldwide) now includes security as a part of device safety/efficacy checks, and we encourage readers to report security issues to manufacturers and the government (e.g., through FDA Medwatch) (Shuren 2018). Clear advice to patients concerning cybersecurity should be followed by a formal patient informed consent. Reimbursement is a powerful driver of adoption of new clinical pathways and typically instituted once an intervention has been proven scientifically valid and cost-effective (Treskes 2016) . This process has only just started in mHealth and may be more complex to measure given the wide scope of telemedicine. • This technology may promote an effective means for early diagnosis and treatment of arrhythmias and associated comorbidities, leading to benefits of screening, prevention, and early treatment, thereby reducing adverse effects related to delayed therapy and utilization of costly healthcare resources (e.g., ER visits or hospitalizations). mHealth may help individuals adhere to health recommendations, empower active participation in lifestyle changes to modify cardiovascular risk profile, and promote adherence to medical therapy (Feldman 2018) . Together, these may reduce the burden of chronic disease and associated long-term disability. However, assessment of these longer-term cost advantages is challenging, and value will vary according to country and healthcare system. in-office follow-up (Heidbuchel 2014) . From a payer perspective, there was a trend for cost-saving given fewer and shorter hospitalizations, seen also in other trials (Crossley 2011 , Guedon-Moreau 2014 , Hindricks 2014 , Mabo 2012 . However, in systems with fee-forservice reimbursement, less in-office visits (and hospitalizations) will lead to less income for the providers (i.e., physicians and hospitals) without adaption of the new remote-monitoring paradigm. This illustrates the complexities in reimbursement. Currently, remote-monitoring reimbursement (e.g., USA, Germany, France, UK) is implemented in a discrete way following the protocols of randomized trials like TRUST or IN-TIME (Hindricks 2014 , with billing after demonstration of a remote contact, with a maximum number per year. Given the technological trend toward more continuous transmissions, and decision-support server systems that alert healthcare providers of potentially relevant information, possibly a subscription-based system providing a lump sum per year per followed patient may be more effective. This should cover costs of hardware, software, and other services (like potential use of third-party data monitoring centers) and would result in a much better prospective budgeting for both healthcare insurers and providers. This scheme may be apt for mobile technology. It is anticipated that mobile health technology may provide a more efficient and cost-effective approach to healthcare delivery that could improve clinical workflow and enhance clinical care when integrated into clinical practice . Linking this to improved outcome will be an important driver of reimbursement, for example, for a process leading to an arrhythmia management decision (but not when monitoring the large asymptomatic population without risk factors). Ongoing studies evaluating mobile technology, such as use of a smartphone ECG for AF screening in the AF SMART II (Atrial Therapy) study, include a cost-effectiveness analysis (Orchard 2018) . Responsibilities for reimbursement may extend beyond traditional parties in health care and drive novel pathways. Mobile device companies are clearly interested in reimbursement issues, evidenced by contact between Apple health executives and insurance companies (Bruining 2014) . Initiatives undertaken in the USA are described in Appendix. The pace of changes and improvement of digital technology is furiously fast. With the release and spread of the 5G cellular technology, this growth will probably be strengthened, and new frontiers around data streaming and associated analytics will be crossed. Unfortunately, this growth has been slower in the field of digital  Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a broad term that describes any computational programs that normally require human intelligence such as image perception, pattern recognition, inference, or prediction (www.oed.com; . Most commonly, AI is implemented using analytical methods of machine learning or deep learning. These methods are well suited for pattern classifications, such as images, including ECG. The potential synergy between AI and mHealth has excited the healthcare community since this may enable solutions to improve patient outcomes and increase efficiency with reduced costs in health care (Davenport 2019; Marcolino 2018) . Smartphone apps and wearable devices generate a huge amount of data that exceed the human capacity of integration and interpretation . Biometric datasets of astronomical proportions may be compiled. This knowledge may be directed to treat an individual or understand populations. For instance, 6 billion nights of surrogate sleep data reflecting global sleep deprivation may potentially inform public health initiatives (https://aasmo rg/fitbi t-scien tists -revea l-resul ts-analy sis-6-billi on-night s-sleep -data). Mobile health with Internet connection enables cloud-based predictive analytics from individual-level information (Bumgarner 2018 , Nascimento 2018 . Cardiology has been an early area of investigation in AI due to the abundance of data well suited for classification and prediction (Seetharam 2019) . Neural networks have been tested, trained, and successfully validated to be at least as accurate, if not more, than physicians in diagnosis or classification of 12-lead ECGs and recognition of arrhythmias in rhythm strips and ambulatory ECG recordings methods have also been applied to prediction, not just classification, for example, using 12-lead ECG to predict risk of AF from a sinus rhythm ECG (Attia 2019b). Already, AI has been embedded in mHealth applications, such as smartwatch and smartphone-connect ECG semi-automated diagnosis of arrhythmias (Bumgarner 2018  AF detected by mHealth"-despite the fact that AF has been an early use case with strong patient and clinician interest (Curry 2018) . Thus, mHealth devices are currently nonprescription devices marketed directly to consumers to track data without enabling interventions. Some of the steps needed to standardize mHealth applications are outlined below. • Promote standards and create tools for the comparative assessment of functionality, relative to a medical use device. Results from different devices applied to the same condition may not match: for example, the diagnosis of AF by ECG or PPG based systems are made very differently. This has significant implications for medical decisions. • Screening a. Assess value according to the population addressed b. Establish a uniform set of criteria for clinical actionability . Screening should be medically directed and not driven by commercial interests. Caution should be exercised in extrapolating management strategies learned from cohorts with clinically diagnosed AF (usually from healthcare system data, trials or inpatient registries) to AF detected with mHealth technologies ("healthy consumers"). Data from low-risk populations carry a relatively high risk of false positives, which may generate additional tests with resultant clinical risk to patient (even inducing anxiety rather than reassurance), risk from overtreatment, and costs to the payor. There is a risk that unless directed to a higher risk population, screening for AF using mHealth technologies may fail and follow the trajectory of many medical screening programs throughout history. Key knowledge gap-Identify characteristics (duration, episode number/ density) and risk factors that justify anticoagulation for mHealth detected AF. • Disease management a. Identify conditions and schedules for home-based therapeutic strategies that may reduce dependency on clinic evaluations (as shown for CIEDs) b. Identify signals that predict decompensation and design pre-emptive interventions c. Assess efficacy of therapies. Evidence for benefit of mHealth directed: a. Arrhythmia treatment b. Management of modulating factors (e.g., comorbidities, lifestyle modifications). • Cost-effectiveness Eg impact of improved clinical workflow and enhance clinical care, according to condition . Impact on costs to patient or consumer. • Public health and Professional society initiatives Bring together stakeholders Guidelines. Patients control the intensity of monitoring and act on patient-facing data. Frequency of data acquisition is sporadic determined by, for example, convenience, or following symptoms, or recreational. This strategy is likely insensitive for events and rarely delivers rapid clinical actionability for life-threatening conditions. What is required is as follows: • Education on which data are clinically actionable in individual's clinical context and • Tailor monitoring schedule accordingly • Proof of safety. In one recent example illustrates an on-demand use. The Fibricheck app was utilized by patients to monitor rate and rhythm for a week prior to teleconsultations during the COVID-19 pandemic to enable remote assessment of the disease state and support treatment decisions. This was regulated by a time-limited prescription to use the app for a predefined period, avoiding unnecessary data-load and additional follow-up patients-contacts (Pluymaekers 2020). • Patients' legal right to their medical data to include data collected from nonmedical (i.e., consumer) products. mHealth introduces the manufacturer as a party with significant responsibilities. mHealth tools largely have been developed as consumer-facing technologies accessible to a broader market through retail channels rather than through established medical supply channels. This may make business sense for the technology supplier, given high community penetration of wearable, smart-technology devices (1 in 10 Americans (30 million total)). However, a direct to consumer healthcare delivery bypasses both the clinician, healthcare system, and insurer, without addressing the needs of health professionals-who remain responsible for clinical decision-making on acquired data. Any advance toward medical application (beyond toys for the worried well/ wealthy well) will require manufacturers to: • Facilitate accessibility and affordability • Engage with clinicians to engineer devices according to clinical needs and partner in validation. This is vital, since physician carries ultimate responsibility for medical decisions and is best positioned to guide development and application • Define role as data controllers (e.g., GDPR in Europe). • Identify parties (manufacturer, hospital, third party) responsible for cybersecurity, data protection, and liability for mis-diagnosis or missed diagnosis • Define standard of care for clinic response time according to condition. This assumes greater significance as clinical decisions become enabled in real time using cloud processing resources linked to enhanced data transmission rates (5G) and Internet of Things (IoT) and scalability increases. • Ethical and societal issues with multiple screening (Yan 2019, Turakhia 2020). Interconnectedness between individual applications and with existing healthcare architectures may reshape the current environment. • "Exception-based" ambulatory care, that is, see patients as they need to be seen • Centralized (cloud) based processing to forward only clinically relevant data to physician/clinic. • Identify at-risk patients early (even before symptoms develop) and permit pre-emptive care (Boehmer 2017 , Rosier 2016 a. Enable interventional procedures, for example, Tele-Robotic ablations models which could improve access to patients living in remote areas with highly skilled EPs operating remotely (Choi 2018 , Haidegger 2011 , Shinoda 2020 . b. Enable precision medicine by incorporation of the wider range of mobile signals seamlessly into genetic and clinical profile, with environmental and lifestyle data ("big data"). (https://ghr.nlm.nih. gov/prime r/preci sionm edici ne/initi ative). mHealth application is at different stages of evolution around the world. Few of the technologies described are universally approved and/or affordable in all countries. As a result, this document reflects largely US perspectives. The experience described may serve to guide other members of the international professional bodies endorsing this collaborative statement. The World Health Organization envisioned that increasing the capacity to implement and scale up F I G U R E 7 Connectivity and Questions. Multiple levels of cooperation among a variety of stakeholders are needed to capitalize fully on the vast potential of mHealth, but many questions remain unanswered. Healthy consumers (increasing) predominate among mhealth users. Only a minority of patients are prescribed these digital tools. Potential health benefits of mHealth may be realized when manufacturer participates with clinic for validation in defined disease states. Parties responsible for data control-and therby predictive analytics-need to be defined. Ultimately, the payor and physician need to be convinced of benefits before digital tools are firmly embedded in clinical practice. cost-effective innovative digital health could play a major role in toward achieving universal health coverage and ensuring access to quality health services, at the same time recognizing barriers to implementation similar to those discussed in this document. Some of these can be resolved rapidly, as seen in response to the recent SARS-CoV-2 global pandemic that forced a need for contactless monitoring and thereby adoption of digital tools (DHSS, FDA, Varma 2020) . Regulatory bodies were responsive, approving technologies, relaxing rules confining use of telehealth services within borders and to certain patient populations, and creating a reimbursement structure, illustrating that appropriate solutions can be created when necessary. Demonstration of the clinical utility of mHealth has the potential to revolutionize how populations interact with health services, worldwide. In  
