17f98cfa9e4c69ac10bf7a3090c880034a3958b8
Supplementary appendix



This document details the approach that will be used to assess the efficacy and safety of the University of Oxford sponsored studies of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine (AZD1222). The analysis detailed herein has been developed in collaboration with AstraZeneca for the purposes of the marketing authorisation application for the vaccine and does not preclude additional analyses being conducted that are beyond those required for regulatory submissions. Any additional analyses should follow the principles of the analysis detailed in the global SAP to the extent that is possible. Other 02Nov2020 Analysis sets were renamed/modified; overview of analysis was added in the appendix; redefined strategy for subgroups; AESI listing was replaced with updated definition in tables. Clarify the analysis planned. Update according to new information. Other 03Nov2020 Remove highlight in TOC; change version to 3.0 from 1.1 in title (skip version 2.0) to match with version in ANGEL. Correct the HIV group in COV002. Clean the file. Primary or secondary endpoints 03Nov2020 Update case definition of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection. Update the homogeneity test may be conducted and change the model of subgroup analysis. Provide the source of information and reduce parameters in model. Added appendix for pooling of solicited events. Clarified COVID-19 infection will be virologically confirmed. Clarified subgroup analyses will be performed for all endpoints, unless specified otherwise. INTRODUCTION AZD1222 is a recombinant replication-defective chimpanzee adenovirus expressing the SARS-CoV-2 S surface glycoprotein driven by the human cytomegalovirus major immediate early promoter that includes intron A with a human tPA leader sequence at the N terminus. AZD1222 has been shown to be immunogenic in BALB/c, CD-1 mice, porcine, and NHP models. Further, in a NHP SARS-CoV-2 challenge model, a single administration of AZD1222 significantly reduced viral load in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and respiratory tract tissue of vaccinated animals as compared to vector controls (van Doremalen et al 2020). Efficacy studies in ferret and NHP models are in their final completion stage. Biodistribution studies with similar ChAd vaccines (AdCh63 ME-TRAP, AdCh63 MSP-1 and AdCh3NSmut) in mice have previously been performed and showed no evidence of replication of the virus or presence of disseminated infection after IM injections. Given these data, biodistribution studies were not performed based on advice from the MHRA. Toxicology studies have not been conducted on AZD1222. A toxicology study in mice for another ChAdOx1 vectored vaccine expressing a related betacoronavirus S surface antigen (ChAdOx1 MERS) is shown for reference. Further background information is presented in AZD1222 Investigator's Brochure, Section 4. The University of Oxford is investigating the safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy of AZD1222 in 3 ongoing meningococcal vaccine-controlled clinical studies: a FIH Phase I/II Study COV001 in healthy adults 18 to 55 years of age in the UK; a Phase II/III Study COV002 in healthy adults ≥ 18 years of age (including the elderly) and children 5 to 12 years of age in the UK; and a Phase III Study COV003 in healthy adults ≥ 18 years of age in Brazil. An additional Phase I/II study using a saline placebo control, COV005, is ongoing in South Africa. For these studies, AZD1222 CTM from 3 different sources has been used: 1) The CBF at the University of Oxford; 2) Advent, Italy, and 3) Cobra Biologics. The analytical comparability assessment of AZD1222 Process 1 (CBF), Process 2 (Advent), and Process 3 (Symbiosis) for the clinical Drug Product, was conducted. Due to a potency miscalculation, participants in Groups 1, 2, 4 and 5a in Study COV002 received a lower dose of approximately 2 × 10 10 vp instead of the planned dose of 5 × 10 10 vp. Groups receiving this lower dose are listed as having received 5 × 10 10 vp (Abs260) Advent in the study protocols. The complete list and description of these ongoing University of Oxford-sponsored AZD1222 clinical studies is presented in Table 1 . Emerging safety and immunogenicity data from all the Oxford sponsored studies are reviewed approximately every 2 weeks by an independent DSMB. Preliminary safety and immunogenicity data are available for Study COV001, which enrolled the first volunteer on 23 April 2020 and completed enrolment on 21 May 2020. A total of 1 077 volunteers have been enrolled, including 544 volunteers who received at least one dose of 5 × 10 10 vp AZD1222 and 10 volunteers who received a second dose of 5 × 10 10 vp AZD1222 (homologous prime boost) 4 weeks later. Safety data found the vaccine was generally well tolerated, with no treatmentrelated SAEs reported through 28 days post vaccination. The most common local solicited AEs were vaccination site pain and tenderness. The most common systemic solicited AEs were chills, feverishness, fever, headache, malaise, and myalgia. The majority of events were mild or moderate in severity and resolved within 1 to 7 days. Following the second dose, a general attenuation in the incidence and severity of local and systemic solicited AEs was observed, although this was based on only 10 participants. Preliminary immunogenicity data from Study COV001 suggest that a single dose can elicit both humoral and cellular immunogenicity responses and that antibody responses are boosted after a second dose. Spike-specific T-cell responses peaked on Day 14. Anti-S IgG responses rose by Day 28 and were boosted 3-fold following a second dose. Neutralising antibody responses against SARS-CoV-2 were detected in 32 of 35 (91%) participants after a single dose when measured in a microneutralisation assay (MNA80) and in all 35 (100%) participants when measured in a plaque reduction neutralisation test (PRNT50) by day 28. After a second dose, all participants had neutralising activity (9 of 9 in MNA80 at Day 42 and 10 of 10 in the Marburg virus neutralisation assay on Day 56). Neutralising antibody responses correlated strongly with antibody levels measured by ELISA (Folegatti et al 2020). This statistical analysis plan defines methodology and procedures in performing analyses of pooled efficacy and safety data from AZD1222 trials to determine the benefits and risks of AZD1222 as a non-replicating ChAdOx1 vector vaccine in healthy adults against COVID-19. To estimate the efficacy of 2 IM doses of AZD1222, with the second dose being SD, compared to control for the prevention of COVID-19 in adults ≥ 18 years of age.  To evaluate the efficacy of AZD1222 against severe COVID-19 disease.  To assess the safety, tolerability and reactogenicity profile of AZD1222.  To assess humoral immunogenicity of AZD1222 if data are available.  To assess the cellular immunogenicity of AZD1222 if data are available. To assess the safety of AZD1222 To assess efficacy of AZD1222 against COVID-19 in adults aged ≥18 years Co-Primary: To assess the safety of AZD1222 in adults and children. To evaluate the efficacy of AZD1222 against COVID-19 disease virologicallyconfirmed c For group 1 and groups 2a and 2b: To assess safety, tolerability and reactogenicity profile of AZD1222; Co-primary objective for groups 2a and 2b: To assess efficacy of AZD1222 a) Virologically-confirmed c SARS-CoV-2 asymptomatic infection b) Differences in viral loads between those with severe, mild, and asymptomatic virologically-confirmed c SARS-CoV-2 infections. Where possible, sensitivity analyses will be conducted using common alternative definitions of virologicallyconfirmed COVID-19 disease, including those in use in other Phase 3 protocols (including but not limited to: USA AstraZeneca Phase 3 trial, South Africa COV005 trial, WHO solidarity trial, CEPI definition). Where possible, sensitivity analyses will be conducted using common alternative definitions of virologicallyconfirmed c COVID-19 disease, including those in use in other Phase 3 protocols (including but not limited to: USA AstraZeneca Phase 3 trial, South Africa COV005 trial, WHO solidarity trial, CEPI definition). Table 4 . If hospitalised for isolation only, record status as for ambulatory patient. ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; FiO2 = fraction of inspired oxygen; NIV = non-invasive ventilation; pO2 = partial pressure of oxygen; SpO2 = oxygen saturation. Source: (WHO et al 2020). Case definitions for the pooled analysis are given in Table 6 . Per protocol in UK studies ICU admission was a protocol defined endpoint. In order to standardise "ICU admission" across trials for differences in local medical practice, this was redefined as "Requiring ICU admission" and corresponds to those WHO severity grades reflecting the need for mechanical ventilation. Studies COV001, COV002, COV003, and COV005 are all randomised, controlled studies in healthy volunteers with similar efficacy endpoints. Case detection methods for efficacy assessments are also similar. Access to care for passive case detection is available in all studies; COV002 also includes weekly self-swabs for detection of infection and COV005 includes nasal swab and/or saliva on each scheduled visit. Key inclusion criteria are similar for all studies, except for age. Although there are some differences in the exclusion criteria across the studies, study populations are generally similar. All studies excluded patients with serious conditions or receiving medication that could interfere with the study conduct or the interpretation of study data. The proposed primary and interim pooled analyses provide an opportunity to produce early and robust estimates of efficacy to support rapid decision making in the present conditions of Table 3 Populations for Analysis Only participants in Any dose for Safety who received LD/SD or SD/SD of AZD1222 or in corresponding control group. Participants without at least one post baseline immunogenicity result will be excluded. The treatment assignment will follow the same rule of Any dose for safety analysis set. This population will be used for the immunogenicity analysis. Only participants in Any Dose for Safety who received two SDs of AZD1222 or in corresponding control group. Participants without at least one post baseline immunogenicity result will be excluded. The treatment assignment will follow the same rule of Any dose for safety analysis set. This analysis set will be used for immunogenicity analysis. a Virologically-confirmed from RT-PCR or other nucleic acid amplification test. ITT = intent-to-treat; LD = low dose; RT-PCR = reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction; SD = standard dose. Across the 4 University of Oxford-sponsored studies, participants were randomized to receive a single dose or two doses of either AZD1222, ranging from 2.2 to 5.0 × 10 10 vp, or control (as described in Table 4 ). AZD1222 CTM was sourced from: 1) CBF at the University of Oxford; 2) Advent, Italy, and 3) Cobra Biologics. For control, the MenACWY vaccine was administrated in Studies COV001, COV002, and the first dose of COV003, and 0.9% normal saline (0.9% NaCl) was administered in Study COV005 and the second dose of Study COV003 for participants who received two doses. Table 4 presents the actual AZD1222 dose levels participants received across the 4 studies by the CTM source and SD or LD designation. For the pooled analyses, a designation of SD or LD was given to each of the AZD1222 dose levels. Generally, 5 × 10 10 vp or equivalent is designated as a SD, and 2.2 × 10 10 vp or 2.5 × 10 10 vp are designated as a LD. Due to a potency miscalculation, participants in Study COV002 groups 1, 2, 4 and 5a who were to receive 5 × 10 10 vp (Abs260) Advent as the first dose per protocol, received a lower dose of approximately 2 × 10 10 vp (qPCR). Study COV005 groups 1 and 2 also had the LD vaccine. One source of heterogeneity relates to logistical constraints in the context of the rapid conditions in which this clinical program and scale up manufacturing were initiated in parallel, which led to delays in clinical study material availability for second dose vaccinations in studies to be included in the pooled analyses. This resulted in the fact that, for some participants, the interval between the first and second doses (ie, dose schedule) exceeded 1 month. Dose schedule of two doses will be summarized and homogeneity among different dose schedules will be investigated when needed. The planned 5% alpha will be split across the interim and primary analyses as described in Section 4.1. All efficacy analyses will use a 2-sided alpha test unless otherwise stated. P values will be rounded to 4 decimal places. If a p value is less than 0.0001, it will be reported as "< 0.0001". If a p value is greater than 0.9999, it will be reported as "> 0.9999". All continuous variables will be summarized using descriptive statistics, reporting N, mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and maximum. As appropriate, minima and maxima will be reported with the same precision as the raw values; medians and means will have one additional decimal place; standard deviation will have 2 additional decimal places. Data will be displayed by treatment group in all listings, as needed. Participants will be uniquely identified in the listings by the combination of study number, study site number, and subject number. For discrete, or categorical data, percentages will be suppressed when the count is zero. A row denoted as "Missing" will be included in the count tabulations where necessary to account for dropouts or missing values. All regulatory analyses will be performed using SAS ® , Version 9.4 or higher (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). A windowing convention will be used to determine the analysis value for a given study visit for immunogenicity data analyses. The window definitions as following will be used for the immunogenicity.  A window of ± 14 days from the target day is applied to the following visits: Study Days 28, 56, 90 and 182;  A window of ± 30 days from the target day is applied to the following visits: Study Days 364;  A window of ± 42 days from the target day is applied to the following visits: Overall post first dose + 28; One or more results for a particular immunogenicity variable may be obtained in the same visit window. In such an event, the result with the date closest to the expected visit date will be used in the analysis. In the event that two observations are equidistant from the expected visit date, the later observation will be used in the analysis. For each dosing period, the administration of the study intervention is designated as Study Day 0. For analyses within a period, the study day value is incremented by 1 for each date following the vaccine administration. Dates prior to the vaccine administration are decremented by 1, with the date preceding the vaccine administration designated as Study Day 0. For each dosing period, the administration of the study intervention is designated as Study Day 0. For analyses within a period, the study day value is incremented by 1 for each date following the vaccine administration. Dates prior to the vaccine administration are decremented by 1, with the date preceding the vaccine administration designated as Study Day 0. A Poisson regression model with robust variance (Zou 2004) will be used as the primary efficacy analysis model to estimate the relative risk (RR) of the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 virologically-confirmed primary symptomatic COVID-19 between the AZD1222 and control groups. The model contains the term of study code, treatment group, and age group at randomization (ie, 18-55 years, 56-69 years, and ≥ 70 years). The logarithm of the period at risk for primary endpoint for pooled analysis will be used as an offset variable in the model to adjust for volunteers having different follow up times during which the events occur. Vaccine efficacy (VE), which is the incidence of infection in the vaccine group relative to the incidence of infection in the control group expressed as a percentage, will be calculated as VE = 1-relative risk. The VE, and its corresponding 2-sided (1-α) % confidence interval (CI), will be estimated from the model. In addition, the 2-sided p value testing null hypothesis that the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 virologically-confirmed primary symptomatic COVID-19 between AZD1222 and control groups are the same will be obtained from the model. Statistical significance will be achieved if the 2-sided p value is ≤ α, where α for interim and primary analysis as descripted in Section 4.1. The Poisson regression with robust variance analysis will be implemented by using the SAS PROC GENMOD procedure for binary data with the REPEATED statement for subject ID and logarithm link. The estimated parameter [ie, log ( )], 2-sided (1-α) % CI for , and the 2-sided p value will be obtained from the SAS outputs. The estimated RR and corresponding CI for the RR is given by exponentiating and its confidence limits. Therefore, the percent of VE is given by [(1 -exp ( )) * 100%]. The CI for the percent of VE is given by ([1 -exp(upper confidence limit for ) * 100%], [1 -exp(lower confidence limit for ) * 100%]). If the Poisson regression model with robust variance fails to converge, the exact conditional method for stratified Poisson regression using PROC GENMOD with the exact statement will be used. To investigate if the pooled studies are homogeneous, a study-by-treatment interaction term may be included in the Poisson regression model as a factor and the type III p value for this term will be presented. If the p value is greater than or equal to 0.05, the study-by-treatment interaction term may be dropped from the model for presentation of summary analysis results. Same method may be performed for dose schedule (< 6 weeks, 6-8 weeks, 9-11 weeks, 12+ weeks), and dose pattern (LD/SD, SD/SD) if further exploration is warranted. To support the primary analysis, a Cox Proportional Hazards model using the same covariates as for the primary analyses as well as Kaplan-Meier curves will be presented for the active and control groups based on observed events, showing the cumulative incidence of the first case of SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR-positive symptomatic illness occurring ≥ 15 days post second dose of study intervention. Time to event, i.e., the duration in days since 15 days post second study dose to event or censoring, will be fit using the PH model with treatment as a factor and age group, country as stratum. Hazards ratios for each study arm along with the two-sided (1-α) % CI will be obtained from the PH model. The number of participants with a primary endpoint and the number of censored participants will also be provided. The censoring timing at each month will be displayed. The analyses for the primary endpoint for the pooled analysis will be repeated for participants who received two SDs of vaccine and the second dose is SD based on randomized treatment (ie, SDSD + LDSD Seronegative ITT for Efficacy analysis set). The analysis for those endpoints will be conducted in a similar manner as described in Section 9.2.1.1 (see Pooled Analysis of Primary Efficacy Endpoint) but remove Study code from model. Summary by treatment group will be calculated for this variable. All local and systemic AEs that occur within 28 days after each vaccination observed by the Investigator or reported by the participant, will be recorded by the participants in the Diary of Symptoms and by the Investigators in the study CRF. For COV001, diary cards for the second vaccines will not be filled out for participants in groups 2f, 2g, 4c and 4d. For COV002, solicited and unsolicited AEs will be reported for 7 days only for group 1-3, 5, 7, 8, 11 and 12 and a subset of up to 3000 participants for groups 4, 6, 9, and 10. In COV003, solicited AEs will be reported for a subset of 200 participants. SAEs and Adverse Events of Special Interest will be collected throughout the study period. Adverse events will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) Version 23 or higher. The severity of AEs will be assessed according to toxicity rating scales adapted from the FDA for healthy volunteers recruited in preventive vaccine clinical trials, listed in the specific study work instructions and Table 7 . For COV005, DAIDS grading the severity of adult and paediatric adverse events is used. For solicited AE, refer to Appendix B.  Diary cards will collect the timing and severity of predefined Solicited AEs listed in Appendix B. Solicited local AEs and solicited systemic AEs collected for 7 days (Day 0 to Day 6 for COV005 while Day 0 to Day 7 for rest of studies) after vaccination for each dose will be summarized respectively. The strategy for pooling the data across different studies is provided in Appendix B. Each solicited AE will be summarized by treatment group at the following time intervals: Days 0-7, and Days 0 to day 7 individually (for PA only). Each time interval will be repeated for after dose 1, after dose 2 and after any dose. For each time interval, the count and percentage of participants will be determined for each of the following categories: participants evaluated, participants with any event, mild events, moderate events, severe events, and potentially life-threatening events. Participants should not be double counted; therefore, the event of greatest severity will be used for participants with more than one episode of the same event. Similar counts and percentages will be presented for solicited local AEs "Overall" and solicited systemic AEs "Overall". For participants evaluated for diary cards, missing values will be treated as missing in the calculation. A listing of all solicited AEs will be provided at the time of the primary analysis. All AEs are unsolicited AEs unless categorized as solicited AEs. Unsolicited AEs from the start of each dose through 28 days (ie, day of vaccination and the following 27 days) will be summarized. Summaries will be produced of:  Number of participants with unsolicited AEs by treatment group, system organ class and preferred term  Number of participants with unsolicited AEs, assessed by investigator as possibly related to investigational product, by treatment, system organ class and preferred term  Number of participants with unsolicited AEs ≥x% in either treatment group, by treatment and preferred term where x may be 1, 3 or 5 In the summary of number of participants, should a subject experience multiple events within a SOC or PT, the subject will be counted only once for that SOC or PT. A listing of all unsolicited AEs will be provided at the primary analysis. SAEs are those events recorded as "Serious" on the AE page of the eCRF. SAEs following the first vaccination to 364 days after the last vaccination will be summarized. Summaries will be produced of:  Number of SAEs by treatment group, Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) system organ class and preferred term  Number of participants with SAEs by treatment group, system organ class and preferred term  Number of participants with SAEs, assessed by investigator as possibly related to investigational product, by treatment group, system organ class and preferred term  Number of participants with SAEs ≥ x% in either treatment group, by treatment and preferred term where x may be 1, 3 or 5 In the summary of number of participants, should a subject experience multiple events within a SOC or PT, the subject will be counted only once for that SOC or PT. A listing of all SAEs including those prior to the first vaccination will be provided at the time of the primary analysis. AZD1222 AESIs are based on Brighton Collaboration case definitions (SPEAC 2020), clinical experience, and scientific interest. There is no current evidence to suggest that AZD1222 is associated with these AESIs. Table 9 Adverse Events of Special Interest Neurologic Generalized convulsion: Seizures are episodes of neuronal hyperactivity most commonly resulting in sudden, involuntary muscular contractions. They may also manifest as sensory disturbances, autonomic dysfunction and behavioral abnormalities, and impairment or loss of consciousness. Other neurologic events: These events would include new onset event (acute or subacute) motor and sensory disturbances (eg, weakness, numbness, paresthesias, hypoesthesia, hyperesthesia, dysesthesias), bowel/bladder dysfunction, gait impairment, or visual disturbance, or other sudden neurological deficit. Thrombotic, thromboembolic, and neurovascular events: These are events that can manifest as transient or permanent vision problems, dizziness, trouble understanding, facial droop, slurred speech, unilateral weakness, deep vein thrombosis with swollen, warm or painful leg, pulmonary embolism with shortness of breath, chest pain or irregular heart rate Hematologic Thrombocytopenia: Thrombocytopenia is a disorder in which there is an abnormally low platelet count; a normal platelet count ranges from 150 000 to 450 000 platelets per μL. Vasculitides: Vasculitides are a group of related disorders characterized by inflammation of blood vessels (vasculitis) leading to tissue or end-organ injury. Anaphylaxis: Anaphylaxis an acute hypersensitivity reaction with multi-organ-system involvement that can present as, or rapidly progress to, a severe life-threatening reaction requiring immediate medical attention. This list may be updated along with the studies. AESIs following the first vaccination to 364 days after the last vaccination will be summarized. The number and percentage of participants with AESIs will be summarized by treatment group, and by treatment, AESI term, and PT. Should a participant experience multiple events within a PT, the participant will be counted only once for that PT according to the first onset date. A listing of all AESIs will be provided at the primary analysis. Listings of all death due to causes other than COVID-19 will be provided at the time of the primary analysis. Clinical laboratory results on scheduled visits for COV001, COV002 and COV005 (group 1 and 3 only) will be pooled to examine the most extreme value encoded in the 30 days post dose 1 and 30 days post dose 2 by treatment group and severity grade. The strategy for severity grading across different studies is provided in Appendix C. A listing for clinical laboratory results and a listing for laboratory results with toxicity grading scale ≥ 3 will be provided at the primary analysis. Overview of AEs including factors below will be summarized by subgroup.  Incidence of all AEs  Incidence of solicited AEs  AEs by severity  Incidence of unsolicited AEs  Incidence of SAEs  Incidence of AESI  Deaths other than due to COVID-19 Immunogenicity analysis will be based on participants with data available. Summary by actual treatment for overall and by serostatus group (Seronegative, Seropositive) for analysis sets planned in Appendix A. The immunogenicity endpoints are:  SARS-CoV-2 S, RBD antibody quantification  Virus NAb assays against SARS-CoV-2  Antibody seroconversion rate (≥ 4-fold increase from baseline) against SARS-CoV-2 S protein, RBD and NAb A multiplexed immunoassay that assesses SARS-CoV-2 S, RBD, and N antigens, will be utilised to determine the antibody responses to AZD1222 vaccination. GMTs and GMFRs of these antigens may be provided at baseline and 28 days after each dose in participants for whom data are available. Data on neutralising antibodies will be provided in the form of a pseudoneutralisation assay, with GMTs and GMFRs reported at the same timepoints as above. The proportion of participants who have a post-treatment seroresponse (≥ 4-fold rise in titers from the day of dosing baseline value to 28 days post each dose) to AZD1222 as measured by SARS-CoV-2 binding or neutralising antibodies will also be provided, as data are available. For neutralization assays the proportion with neutralizing titres (> LLOQ) will be generated for the primary manuscript. As bandwidth of laboratories allows, live virus neutralisation and ELISpot data will complement the data provided. These data will be stratified by age (category 1: 18-55, 56-69, and ≥ 70 year-old participants for primary manuscript and category 2: 18-64 and ≥ 65 year-old participants), baseline serostatus and provided following validation of the assays and testing. Descriptive statistics for GMTs and GMFRs will include number of participants, geometric mean, 95% CI, minimum and maximum. Medians, 25 th quartiles and 75% quartiles may also be presented. The GMT will be calculated as the antilogarithm of Σ (log 2 transformed titer/n), ie, as the antilogarithm transformation of the mean of the log-transformed titer, where n is the number of participants with titer information. The 95% CI will be calculated as the anti-logarithm transformation of the upper and lower limits for a two-sided CI for the mean of the logtransformed titers. The fold rise is calculated as the ratio of the post-vaccination titer level to the pre-vaccination titer level, ie, the baseline level. GMFR will be calculated as anti-logarithm of Σ (log 2 transformed (post-vaccination titer/ pre-vaccination titer)/n). The 95% CIs for GMFR will be calculated similarly to those for GMT. Results reported as lower than the LLOQ for SARS-CoV-2 S and RBD responses and virus neutralizing antibody responses will have a value equal to half of the LLOQ imputed in the calculation. Immunogenicity data will be presented in a listing at the time of the primary analysis. Seronegative is not considered. The dose information is based on the spreadsheet from Oxford in Aug2020. Number is floored to 100. Seronegative is not considered. The dose information is based on the spreadsheet from Oxford in Aug2020. Number is floored to 100. AE = adverse event; AESI = adverse event of special interest; SAE = serious adverse event; SD = standard dose. Seronegative and non-missing post baseline value is not considered. The dose information is based on the spreadsheet from Oxford in Aug2020. Number is floored to 100. LD = low dose; SD = standard dose. In AZD1222 Studies COV001, COV002, COV003, and COV005, diary cards collect predefined local and systemic AEs that are commonly associated with vaccine administration, including the severity of these events. Although there are many similarities in the collection of solicited AEs in these studies, there are also differences. This document presents the similarities and differences in solicited event collection across these studies and a strategy for pooling events across studies.  Solicited AEs as defined in the CSP and in the patient diaries are presented in Table B2 below. Studies COV001 and COV002 have identical terms in the CSPs and patients diaries. Study COV003 terms are synonymous with the terms in Studies COV001 and COV002. Study COV005 has identical or synonymous terms for 12 of the solicited AEs, but some protocolspecified events are not collected in the patient diary (ie, pain, warmth, malaise, nausea, vomiting) and an additional local event, bruising, is collected in the patient diary.  Four solicited AEs will be reported with objective measurements: fever (measured by body temperature in degrees Celsius), redness, swelling, and induration (reported in diameter in millimeters). All 4 studies collected body temperature in degrees Celsius to the nearest tenth of a degree. In the individual CSPs, Studies COV001, COV002, and COV003 specify the use of the US FDA DMID scale for vaccine studies while Study COV005 specifies the use of the US NIH DAIDS grading scale. The scales are presented in Table B3 below. Note that the life-threatening criteria are identical, but the ranges of the other 3 severity grades overlap by 0.1-0.3°C. As the data collected are objective numerical measurements, the data can be easily pooled. The severity grades of fever from all 4 studies will be assessed based upon the DMID scale specified in Studies COV001, COV002, and COV003 prior to pooling.  Feverishness and chills will be reported with common severity grades in Studies COV001 and COV002, slightly different severity grades in Study COV003, and a binary "yes" or "no" without severity grading in Study COV005 (Table B6 ). The severity grades used in Studies COV001, COV002, and COV003 are similar enough to justify pooling of these 2 solicited AEs across the 3 studies. The lack of severity grading of these events in Study COV005 precludes them being pooled with the other studies. (Table B7) . Study COV005 has event-specific criteria and differs further from the other studies in that a 3-point mild, moderate, and severe scale will be used for these events. The severity grades used in Studies COV001, COV002, and COV003, as discussed above, are similar enough to justify pooling of these 6 solicited AEs across all 3 studies. In addition, the 3-level event-specific severity grades used in Study COV005 do define mild, moderate, and severe events and are also judged to be similar enough to justify pooling across studies.  In Studies COV001, COV002, and COV005, the severity of laboratory toxicity from scheduled assessments will be assessed on scales of Grades 1-4. In Studies COV001 and COV002, these laboratory abnormalities will be assessed according to grading scales that have been adapted from the US FDA Toxicity Grading Scale for Healthy and Adolescent Volunteers Enrolled in Preventive Vaccine Clinical Trials (FDA 2007), using identical grading scales. In Study COV005, laboratory toxicity will be assessed using grading scales adapted from the DAIDS In order to pool laboratory abnormalities from these studies, all pooled data will be uniformly graded using the US FDA grading system as the common grading system. (Note: Study COV003 does not contribute data to this pooling as the study does not have scheduled laboratory assessments.) For the purposes of reporting, values which do not meet at least the criteria of Grade 1 will be reported as normal, to account for results falling between the upper limit of normal for individual laboratories and the lower limit for Grade 1 toxicity. For those variables in which US FDA severity gradings are based upon multiples of the upper limit of the normal reference range (ie, alanine transaminase, alkaline phosphate, and bilirubin), study specific reference ranges will be used. Table C1 presents the severity gradings that will be used for pooled laboratory abnormalities from Studies COV001, COV002, and COV005. Table C2 presents a comparison of the US FDA severity grade criteria with the 3 studies' individual criteria. in Group 2 will be invited to receive a booster dose at the earliest opportunity (minimum 4 weeks). **Group 4 will consist of an overall sample size of up to 580 volunteers, of which up to 112 will be given Paracetamol at D0 visit. All volunteers in Group 4 will be invited to receive a booster dose at the earliest opportunity (minimum 4 weeks).  In December 2019, a cluster of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause was linked to a seafood wholesale market in Wuhan, China and were later confirmed to be infected with a novel coronavirus, known as 2019-nCoV [1] . The virus was subsequently renamed to SARS-CoV-2 because it is similar to the coronavirus responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-CoV), a lineage B betacoronavirus. SARS-CoV-2 shares more than 79% of its sequence with SARS-CoV, and 50% with the coronavirus responsible for Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV), a member of the lineage C betacoronavirus [2] . COVID-19 is the infectious disease caused by SARS-CoV-2. By January 2020 there was increasing evidence of human to human transmission as the number of cases rapidly began to increase in China. Despite unprecedented containment measures adopted by the Chinese government, SARS-CoV-2 rapidly spread across the world. The WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak a public health emergency of international concern on 30 th January 2020. As of 10 th March 2020, over 118,000 cases have been reported with more than 4200 deaths and 115 countries affected. Coronaviruses (CoVs) are spherical, enveloped, large positive-sense single-stranded RNA genomes. One-fourth of their genome is responsible for coding structural proteins, such as the spike (S) glycoprotein, envelope (E), membrane (M) and nucleocapsid (N) proteins. E, M, and N are mainly responsible for virion assembly whilst the S protein is involved in receptor binding, mediating virus entry into host cells during CoVs infection via different receptors. [3] SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the phylogenetic lineage B of the genus Betacoronavirus and it recognises the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as the entry receptor [4] . It is the seventh CoV known to cause human infections and the third known to cause severe disease after SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. The spike protein is a type I, trimeric, transmembrane glycoprotein located at the surface of the viral envelope of CoVs, which can be divided into two functional subunits: the N-terminal S1 and the Cterminal S2. S1 and S2 are responsible for cellular receptor binding via the receptor binding domain (RBD) and fusion of virus and cell membranes respectively, thereby mediating the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into target cells. [3] The roles of S in receptor binding and membrane fusion make it an ideal target for vaccine and antiviral development, as it is the main target for neutralising antibodies.  Refer to the Investigator Brochure for most recent pre-clinical data update Mice (balb/c and CD-1) were immunised with ChAdOx1 expressing SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein or green fluorescent protein (GFP). Spleens were harvested for assessment of IFY ELISpot responses and serum samples were taken for assessments of S1 and S2 antibody responses on ELISA at 9 or 10 days post vaccination. The results of this study show that a single dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV was immunogenic in mice. . Box and whisker plot of the optical densities following ELISA analysis of BALB/C mouse sera (Top panel) incubated with purified protein spanning the S1 domain (left) or purified protein spanning the S2 domain (right) of the SARS-CoV-2 spike nine or ten days post vaccination, with 1.7 × 10 10 vp ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or 8 × 10 9 vp ChAdOx1 GFP. Box and whisker plots of the optical densities following ELISA analysis of CD-1 mouse sera (Bottom panel) incubated with purified protein spanning the S1 domain (left) or purified protein spanning the S2 domain (right) of the SARS-CoV-2 spike. Pre-clinical efficacy studies of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in ferrets and non-human primates are underway. Results will be included in the Investigator's Brochure when available. Safety concerns around the use of full length coronavirus Spike glycoproteins and other viral antigens challenge in mice, ferrets and non-human primates immunised with whole SARS-CoV inactivated or full-length S protein based vaccines, including a study using Modified Vaccinia Ankara as a vector. [6] [7] [8] To date, there has been one report of lung immunopathology following MERS-CoV challenge in mice immunised with an inactivated MERS-CoV candidate vaccine. [9] However, in preclinical studies of ChAdOx1 immunisation and MERS-CoV challenge, no ADE was observed in hDPP4 transgenic mice, dromedary camels or non-human primates (van Doremalen et al, manuscript submitted). [10, 11] The risks of inducing lung immunopathology in the event of COVID-19 disease following ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination are unknown. Challenge studies on ferrets and NHPs are underway and these pre-clinical studies will report on presence or absence of lung pathology. Results will be reviewed as soon as they emerge and will inform discussions on risk/benefit to participants receiving the IMP. All pathology data arising from challenge studies of other SARS-CoV-2 vaccine candidates will also be taken into account. Replication deficient vectors, however, avoid that risk while maintaining the advantages of native antigen presentation, elicitation of T cell immunity and the ability to express multiple antigens [16] . Subunit vaccines usually require the use of adjuvants and whilst DNA and RNA vaccines can offer manufacturing advantages, they are often poorly immunogenic requiring multiple doses, which is highly undesirable in the context of a pandemic. Chimpanzee adenovirus vaccine vectors have been safely administered to thousands of people using a wide range of infectious disease targets. ChAdOx1 vectored vaccines have been given to over 320 volunteers with no safety concerns and have been shown to be highly immunogenic at single dose administration. Of relevance, a single dose of a ChAdOx1 vectored vaccine expressing full-length spike protein from another betacoronavirus (MERS-CoV) has shown to induce neutralising antibodies in recent clinical trials. Data generated in this study will be used to support further larger phase II/III efficacy studies, which will include target groups at higher risk of severe disease. The use of an active comparator (MenACWY) will minimise the chances of accidental participant unblinding, decreasing bias in reactogenicity or safety reporting and/or health seeking behaviours once symptomatic for COVID-19. The use of prophylactic paracetamol reduces the incidence and severity of fever and other adverse events following immunisation, and it has been previously recommended following Meningococcal B vaccine administration without negatively impacting its immunogenicity profile (reference: Bexsero SmPC). A prophylactic paracetamol dose arm has been introduced in order to assess safety, reactogenicity, immunogenicity and efficacy of the co-administration of paracetamol and ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 as an exploratory objective.  This is a Phase I/II, single-blinded, -controlled, individually randomised study in healthy adults aged 18-55 years recruited in the UK. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or active control (licensed MenACWY) will be administered via an intramuscular injection into the deltoid. The study will assess efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Additional steps may be taken to keep clinical investigators assessing the primary efficacy endpoint blinded to group allocation with an aim to minimise unblinding of participants, where this is possible and practical to do so. There will be 4 study groups with up to 540 volunteers in each of the single dose vaccine arms (ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or licensed MenACWY) in groups 1, 2 & 4 combined and 10 participants in group 3 with an overall sample size of up to 1090 (Table 3 ). Randomisation will take place at an intervention to control ratio of 1:1. Only participants enrolled in groups 1, 2 and 4 will be randomised. Participants in group 3 will not be randomised or blinded. Up to 112 participants in group 4 will be requested to take prophylactic paracetamol 1000mg every 6 hours for 24 hours from the time of vaccination to reduce the chance of fever post immunisation. Participants receiving a booster dose in groups 2f, 2g, 4c and 4d will be advised to take prophylactic paracetamol for 24h post booster vaccine. Staggered enrolment will apply to the first volunteers receiving the IMP as described in section 7.4.2.2. Participants will be first recruited in groups 1 and 3. Once groups 1 and 3 are fully recruited, subsequent volunteers will be enrolled in groups 2 and 4. Safety will be assessed in real time and interim reviews are scheduled after 1, 4, and up to 54 participants received the IMP. Randomisation blocks will ensure there is at least 1 control for each participant receiving the IMP, so these safety reviews will take place after 2, 8, and up to 98 participants are enrolled in the study overall (groups 1 and 3). Up to 62 participants enrolled in group 2 (a and b) will be invited to receive a booster vaccine. Participants in groups 2c and 2d will be randomised to receive either a standard booster dose (5x10 10 vp), or a lower booster dose (2.5x10 10 vp) at approximately 8 weeks post prime. Up to 10 volunteers from 2b will be receive a second dose of MenACWY at the same interval. The remaining participants in groups 2 and 4 (those who have not already been boosted) will be invited to receive a booster dose of either ChAdOx1 nCoV-19: 0.5mL (3.5-6.5x1010vp) or MenACWY. Volunteers in groups 2f, 2g, 4c and 4d will be advised to take prophylactic paracetamol for 24h post booster dose. The DSMB will periodically assess safety and efficacy data every 4-8 weeks and/or as required. Participants will be followed over the duration of the study to record adverse events and episodes of virologically confirmed symptomatic COVID-19 cases. Participants will be tested for COVID-19 if they present with a new onset of fever (37.8 C) OR cough OR shortness of breath OR anosmia/ageusia. controls) will receive a booster dose at 8 weeks (-7/+14 days), and the remainder will be invited to receive a booster dose at the earliest opportunity (minimum 4 weeks apart). **Group 4 will consist of an overall sample size of up to 580 volunteers, of which up to 112 will be given Paracetamol at D0 visit. All volunteers in Group 4 will be invited to receive a booster dose at the earliest opportunity (minimum 4 weeks apart). Healthy adult volunteers aged 18-55 will be recruited into the study. Volunteers will be considered enrolled immediately following administration of first vaccination. The end of the trial is the date of the last assay conducted on the last sample collected. The total duration of the study will be 12 months from the day of the last vaccination dose. The potential risks are those associated with phlebotomy, vaccination and disease enhancement 5x10 10  Localised bruising and discomfort can occur at the site of venepuncture. Infrequently fainting may occur. These will not be documented as AEs if they occur. The total volume of blood drawn over a six month period will be 177.5-621.5mL (blood volumes may vary slightly for volunteers at different investigator sites due to use of different volume vacutainers, following local Trust SOPs). This should not compromise these otherwise healthy volunteers, as they would donate 470mL during a single blood donation for the National Blood transfusion Service over a 3-4 month period. Volunteers will be asked to refrain from blood donation for the duration of their involvement in the trial. Allergic reactions from mild to severe may occur in response to any constituent of a medicinal product's preparation. Anaphylaxis is extremely rare (about 1 in 1,000,000 vaccine doses) but can occur in response to any vaccine or medication. The typical local reaction as a result of IM injection is temporary pain, tenderness, redness, and swelling at the site of the injection. Constitutional influenza-like symptoms such as fatigue, headache, malaise, feverishness, and muscle aches can occur with any vaccination and last for 2-3 days. Presyncopal and syncopal episodes may occur at the time of vaccination which rapidly resolve. For subset of participants in group 4, use of prophylactic paracetamol for 24 hours will be advised to alleviate potential fevers and flu-like symptoms. As with any other vaccine, temporary ascending paralysis (Guillain-Barré syndrome, GBS) or immune mediated reactions that can lead to organ damage may occur, but this should be extremely rare (1 in 100,000-1,000,000 vaccine doses). Control participants will receive one or two doses of a licensed MenACWY vaccine, the risks of which are described in these vaccines SmPC. The risks of inducing disease enhancement and lung immunopathology in the event of COVID-19 disease following ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination are unknown as described above. Challenge studies on ferrets and NHPs are underway and results will be reviewed as they emerge. All pre-clinical data from challenge studies using ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and other vaccine candidates (when available) will inform decisions on risk/benefit to participants receiving the IMP.  Volunteers enrolled into the control groups will receive 1-2 doses of MenACWY, a licensed vaccine that has been administered to teenagers in the UK routine schedule since 2015 and is used as a travel vaccine for high risk areas. The majority of participants in this study will not have had this vaccine previously, and therefore will gain the benefit of protection against group A, C, W and Y meningococcus. Those participants who have previously had MenACWY vaccines will have their immunity against these organisms boosted. Recipients of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 do not have any guaranteed benefit. However, it is hoped that the information gained from this study will contribute to the development of a safe and effective vaccine against COVID-19. The only benefits for participants would be information about their general health status. Healthy adults in the UK will be recruited by use of an advertisement +/-registration form formally approved by the ethics committee(s) and distributed or posted in the following places: • In public places, including buses and trains, with the agreement of the owner / proprietor. • In newspapers or other literature for circulation. • On radio via announcements. • On a website or social media site operated by our group or with the agreement of the owner or operator (including on-line recruitment through our web-site). • By e-mail distribution to a group or list only with the express agreement of the network administrator or with equivalent authorisation. • By email distribution to individuals who have already expressed an interest in taking part in any clinical trial at the Oxford Vaccine Centre and other trial sites. • On stalls or stands at exhibitions or fairs. • Via presentations (e.g. presentations at lectures or invited seminars). • Direct mail-out: This will involve obtaining names and addresses of adults via the most recent Electoral Roll. The contact details of individuals who have indicated that they do not wish to receive postal mailshots would be removed prior to the investigators being given this information. The company providing this service is registered under the General Data Protection Regulation 2016/679. Investigators would not be given dates of birth or ages of individuals but the list supplied would only contain names of those aged between 18-55 years (as per the inclusion criteria). • Direct mail-out using National Health Service databases: These include the National Health Applications and Infrastructure Services (NHAIS) via a NHAIS data extract or equivalent. Initial contact to potential participants will not be made by the study team. Instead study invitation material will be sent out on our behalf by an external company, CFH Docmail Ltd, in order to preserve the confidentiality of potential participants. CFH Docmail Ltd is accredited as having exceeded standards under the NHS Digital Data Security and Protection Toolkit (ODS ID -8HN70). • future studies for which they may be eligible. All volunteers will sign and date the informed consent form before any study specific procedures are performed. The information sheet will be made available to the volunteer at least 24 hours prior to the screening visit. At the screening visit, a video presentation of the aims of the study and all tests to be carried out may be screened to an audience, or made available for them to access it remotely. Individually each volunteer will have the opportunity to question an appropriately trained and delegated researcher before signing the consent. At the screening visit, the volunteer will be fully informed of all aspects of the trial, the potential risks and their obligations. The following general principles will be emphasised: • Participation in the study is entirely voluntary • Refusal to participate involves no penalty or loss of medical benefits • The volunteer may withdraw from the study at any time. • The volunteer is free to ask questions at any time to allow him or her to understand the purpose of the study and the procedures involved • There is no direct benefit to the volunteer from participating • The volunteer's GP will be contacted to corroborate their medical history. Written or verbal information regarding the volunteer's medical history will be sought from the GP or other sources. This can either be via the study team accessing patient's electronic care summaries, GP and other medical records from local systems, by contacting the GP practice, or volunteers bringing their medical care summaries from the GP to the study clinicians. However, volunteers may be enrolled based on medical information obtained during screening only, at the physician's discretion. • Blood samples taken as part of the study may be sent outside of the UK and Europe to laboratories in collaboration with the University of Oxford. These will be anonymised. Volunteers will be asked if they consent to indefinite storage of any leftover samples for use in other ethically approved research, this will be optional. • The volunteer will be registered on the TOPS database (The Over volunteering Prevention System; www.tops.org.uk ). The aims of the study and all tests to be carried out will be explained. The volunteer will be given the opportunity to ask about details of the trial, and will then have time to consider whether or not to participate. If they do decide to participate, they, and the investigator will sign and date the consent form. However, in the current crisis, there may be occasions when it is necessary for the consent form to be signed by an appropriately trained and delegated research nurse instead of the investigator. The participant would always have the opportunity to discuss the study with a medically qualified investigator if they wish. The volunteer will then be provided with a copy of the consent form to take away and keep, with the original being stored in the case report form (CRF). Reconsent will be taken by appropriately trained and delegated members of the team. Participants are required to consent to receive an additional swab should they develop symptoms of COVID-19. Updated information will be sent to participants and written re-consent requested at the earliest scheduled visit. If the earliest visit to occur is in the symptomatic pathway, the participant may consent using an electronic signature on a tablet for infection control purposes. This study will be conducted in healthy adults, who meet the following inclusion and exclusion criteria: The volunteer must satisfy all the following criteria to be eligible for the study: • Healthy adults aged 18-55 years. • Able and willing (in the Investigator's opinion) to comply with all study requirements (participants must not rely on public transport or taxis). • Willing to allow the investigators to discuss the volunteer's medical history with their General Practitioner and access all medical records when relevant to study procedures. • For females only, willingness to practice continuous effective contraception (see below) during the study and a negative pregnancy test on the day(s) of screening and vaccination. • Agreement to refrain from blood donation during the course of the study. • Provide written informed consent. The volunteer may not enter the study if any of the following apply: • Prior receipt of any vaccines (licensed or investigational) ≤30 days before enrolment CONFIDENTIAL COV001, v12.0, 09 Nov 2020 Page 42 of 110 • Planned receipt of any vaccine other than the study intervention within 30 days before and after each study vaccination with the exception of the licensed seasonal influenza vaccination and the licensed pneumococcal vaccine. Participants will be encouraged to receive these vaccinations at least 7 days before or after their study vaccine. • Prior receipt of an investigational or licensed vaccine likely to impact on interpretation of the trial data (e.g. Adenovirus vectored vaccines, any coronavirus vaccines) • Administration of immunoglobulins and/or any blood products within the three months preceding the planned administration of the vaccine candidate. • Any confirmed or suspected immunosuppressive or immunodeficient state, including HIV infection; asplenia; recurrent severe infections and use of immunosuppressant medication within the past 6 months, except topical steroids or short-term oral steroids (course lasting <14 days) . • Any autoimmune conditions, except mild psoriasis, well-controlled autoimmune thyroid disease, vitiligo or stable coeliac disease not requiring immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory therapy. • History of allergic disease or reactions likely to be exacerbated by any component of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or MenACWY vaccines. • Any history of angioedema. • Any history of anaphylaxis. • Pregnancy, lactation or willingness/intention to become pregnant during the study. • History of cancer (except basal cell carcinoma of the skin and cervical carcinoma in situ). • History of serious psychiatric condition likely to affect participation in the study (e.g. ongoing severe depression, history of admission to an in-patient psychiatric facility, recent suicidal ideation, history of suicide attempt, bipolar disorder, personality disorder, alcohol and drug dependency, severe eating disorder, psychosis, use of mood stabilisers or antipsychotic medication). • Bleeding disorder (e.g. factor deficiency, coagulopathy or platelet disorder), or prior history of significant bleeding or bruising following IM injections or venepuncture. • Any other serious chronic illness requiring hospital specialist supervision. • Chronic respiratory diseases, including mild asthma (resolved childhood asthma is allowed) • • Suspected or known current alcohol abuse as defined by an alcohol intake of greater than 42 units every week. • Suspected or known injecting drug abuse in the 5 years preceding enrolment. • Any clinically significant abnormal finding on screening biochemistry, haematology blood tests or urinalysis. • Any other significant disease, disorder or finding which may significantly increase the risk to the volunteer because of participation in the study, affect the ability of the volunteer to participate in the study or impair interpretation of the study data. • History of laboratory confirmed COVID-19. • New onset of fever or a cough or shortness of breath or anosmia/ageusia since February 2020. Should a reliable test become available, this exclusion criteria will be replaced with seropositivity for SARS-CoV-2 before enrolment. • Those who have been at high risk of exposure before enrolment, including but not limited to: close contacts of confirmed COVID-19 cases, anyone who had to self-isolate as a result of a symptomatic household member, frontline healthcare professionals working in A&E, ICU and other higher risk areas. Should a reliable test become available, this exclusion criteria will be replaced with seropositivity for SARS-CoV-2 before enrolment. • Living in the same household as any vulnerable groups at risk of severe COVID-19 disease (as per PHE guidance) Additional exclusion criteria (subset of participants receiving Paracetamol in group 4 only) • History of allergic disease or reactions likely to be exacerbated by Paracetamol The following AEs associated with any vaccine, or identified on or before the day of vaccination constitute absolute contraindications to further administration of an IMP to the volunteer in question. If any of these events occur during the study, the subject will not be eligible to receive a booster dose and will be followed up by the clinical team or their GP until resolution or stabilisation of the event: • Anaphylactic reaction following administration of vaccine Participants who develop COVID-19 symptoms and have a positive NAAT test after the first vaccination can   only receive a booster dose after a minimum 4 weeks interval from their first NAAT positive test, provided   their symptoms have significantly improved. The decision to proceed with booster vaccinations in those cases   will be at clinical discretion of the investigators. For participants who are asymptomatic and have a positive NAAT test, a minimum of 2 weeks from first NAAT positivity will be required before boosting. Female volunteers of childbearing potential are required to use an effective form of contraception at least during the first 3 months after their booster vaccination (groups 2-4) and the first 3 months after their single dose vaccine administration (group 1). Acceptable forms of contraception for female volunteers include: • Established use of oral, injected or implanted hormonal methods of contraception. • Placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS). • Total abdominal hysterectomy. • Bilateral tubal Occlusion • Barrier methods of contraception (condom or occlusive cap with spermicide). • Male sterilisation, if the vasectomised partner is the sole partner for the subject. • True abstinence, when this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject. Periodic abstinence (e.g., calendar, ovulation, symptothermal, post-ovulation methods), declaration of abstinence for the duration of exposure to IMP, and withdrawal are not acceptable methods of contraception Volunteers will be excluded from the study if they are concurrently involved in another trial where an IMP has been administered within 30 days prior to enrolment, or will be administered during the trial period. In order to ensure this, volunteers will be asked to provide their National Insurance or Passport number (if they are not entitled to a NI number) and will be registered on a national database of participants in clinical trials (www.tops.org.uk). They will not be enrolled if found to be actively registered on another trial until further information on IMP and bleeding schedule is obtained.  In accordance with the principles of the current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki and any other applicable regulations, a volunteer has the right to withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason, and is not obliged to give his or her reasons for doing so. The Investigator may withdraw the volunteer at any time in the interests of the volunteer's health and well-being. In addition, the volunteer may withdraw/be withdrawn for any of the following reasons: • Administrative decision by the Investigator. • Ineligibility (either arising during the study or retrospectively, having been overlooked at screening). • Significant protocol deviation. • Volunteer non-compliance with study requirements. • An AE, which requires discontinuation of the study involvement or results in inability to continue to comply with study procedures. The reason for withdrawal will be recorded in the CRF. If withdrawal is due to an AE, appropriate follow-up visits or medical care will be arranged, with the agreement of the volunteer, until the AE has resolved, stabilised or a non-trial related causality has been assigned. The DSMB or DSMB chair may recommend withdrawal of volunteers. Any volunteer who is withdrawn from the study may be replaced, if that is possible within the specified time frame. If a volunteer withdraws from the study, data and blood samples collected before their withdrawal will still be used on the analysis. Storage of blood samples will continue unless the participant specifically requests otherwise. In all cases of subject withdrawal, long-term safety data collection, including some procedures such as safety bloods, will continue as appropriate if subjects have received one or more vaccine doses, unless they decline any further follow-up. Should a volunteer become pregnant during the trial, no further study IMP will be administered. She will be followed up for clinical safety assessment with her ongoing consent and in addition will be followed until pregnancy outcome is determined. We would not routinely perform venepuncture in a pregnant volunteer unless there is clinical need. This section describes the trial procedures for evaluating study participants and follow-up after administration of study vaccine. All volunteers in groups 1 will have the same schedule of clinic attendances and procedures as indicated in the schedules of attendance (Table 6) . Group 2 will have clinic attendances and procedures as indicated in the schedules of attendances below (Table 7) . Group 3 will have clinic attendances and procedures as indicated in the schedules of attendances below (Table 8) . Group 4 will have clinic attendances and procedures as indicated in the schedules of attendances below (Table 9 ). Subjects will receive either the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine or MenACWY control, and undergo follow-up for a total of 12 months from the last vaccination visit. The total volume of blood donated during the study will be 177.5 -621.5mL depending on which group they are allocated to. Additional visits or procedures may be performed at the discretion of the investigators, e.g., further medical history and physical examination, urine microscopy in the event of positive urinalysis or additional blood tests if clinically relevant. Pulse, blood pressure and temperature will be measured at the time-points indicated in the schedule of procedures and may also be measured as part of a physical examination if indicated at other time-points. Blood will be drawn for the following laboratory tests and processed at agreed NHS Trust laboratories using NHS standard procedures: • Haematology; Full Blood Count • Biochemistry; Sodium, Potassium, Urea, Creatinine, Albumin, Liver Function Tests (ALT, ALP, Bilirubin) • Diagnostic serology; HBsAg, HCV antibodies, HIV antibodies (specific consent will be gained prior to testing blood for these blood-borne viruses) • Immunology; Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) typing (groups 1 and 3 only) A nose/throat swab will be conducted for COVID-19 NAAT SARS-CoV-2 serology to be conducted at screening on participants at high risk of COVID-19 exposure (healthcare workers will be prioritised), subject to test availability and lab capacity. • Urinalysis; Urine will be tested for protein, blood and glucose at screening. For female volunteers only, urine will be tested for beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-HCG) at screening and immediately prior to vaccination. • Stool samples; SARS-CoV-2 NAAT, infectivity assays, calprotectin, and other exploratory immunology and microbiology assays may be conducted in a subset of participants, subject to site capacity, sample and test availability Collaboration with other specialist laboratories in the UK, Europe and outside of Europe for further exploratory tests may occur. This would involve the transfer of serum, urine or plasma, PBMC and/or other study samples to these laboratories, but these would remain anonymised. Informed consent for this will be gained from volunteers. Samples collected for the purposes of COVID-19 diagnosis might be sent to reference labs in the UK alongside their personal data. This would be in line with the national guidance and policy for submitting samples for testing at reference labs. Immunological assays will be conducted according to local SOPs. Subjects will be informed that there may be leftover samples of their blood (after all testing for this study is completed), and that such samples may be stored indefinitely for possible future research (exploratory immunology), including genotypic testing of genetic polymorphisms potentially relevant to vaccine immunogenicity. Subjects will be able to decide if they will permit such future use of any leftover samples. With the volunteers' informed consent, any leftover cells, urine and serum/plasma will be frozen indefinitely for future analysis of COVID-19 and other coronaviruses related diseases or vaccine-related responses. If a subject elects not to permit this, all of that subject's leftover samples will be discarded after the required period of storage to meet Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and regulatory requirements. Samples that are to be stored for future research will be transferred to the OVC Biobank (REC 16/SC/0141).  The study visits and procedures will be undertaken by one of the clinical trials team. The procedures to be included in each visit are documented in the schedule of attendances (Tables6-9). Each visit is assigned a timepoint and a window period, within which the visit will be conducted. Participants will be required to complete an online questionnaire as an initial confirmation of eligibility. All potential volunteers will have a screening visit, which may take place up to 90 days prior to vaccination. At the screening visit, a video presentation of the aims of the study and all tests to be carried out may be screened to an audience. Individually each volunteer will have the opportunity to question an appropriately trained and delegated researcher before signing the consent. Informed consent will be taken before screening, as described in section 6.2. If consent is obtained, the procedures indicated in the schedule of attendances will be undertaken including a medical history, physical examination, blood tests and height and weight. To avoid unnecessary additional venepuncture, if the appropriate blood test results for screening are available for the same volunteer from a screening visit for another study, these results may be used for assessing eligibility (provided the results date is within the 6 months preceding enrolment in COV001). We will aim to contact the subject's general practitioner with the written permission of the subject after screening to corroborate medical history when possible and practical to do so. GPs will be notified that the subject has volunteered for the study. During the screening, the volunteers will be asked to provide their National Insurance or passport number so that this can be entered on to a national database which helps prevent volunteers from participating in more than one clinical trial simultaneously or over-volunteering for clinical trials (www.tops.org.uk). Abnormal clinical findings from the urinalysis or blood tests at screening will be assessed by a medically qualified study member. Abnormal blood tests following screening will be assessed according to specific laboratory adverse event grading tables. Any abnormal test result deemed clinically significant may be repeated to ensure it is not a single occurrence. If an abnormal finding is deemed to be clinically significant, the volunteer will be informed and appropriate medical care arranged with the permission of the volunteer. The eligibility of the volunteer will be reviewed at the end of the screening visit and again when all results from the screening visit have been considered. Decisions to exclude the volunteer from enrolling in the trial or to withdraw a volunteer from the trial will be at the discretion of the Investigator. If eligible, a day 0 visit will be scheduled for the volunteer to receive the vaccine and subsequent follow-up. Volunteers will be considered enrolled in to the trial at the point of vaccination. Before vaccination/trial intervention, the eligibility of the volunteer will be reviewed. Pulse, blood pressure and temperature will be observed and if necessary, a medical history and physical examination may be undertaken to determine need to withdraw the participant. Participants with symptoms meeting the case definition for COVID-19 or likely recent exposure to COVID-19 will be excluded. Vaccinations will be administered as described below. All vaccines will be administered intramuscularly according to specific SOPs. The injection site will be covered with a sterile dressing and the volunteer will stay in the trial site for observation, in case of immediate adverse events. Observations will be taken 60 minutes after vaccination (+/-30 minutes) for the prime dose and from 15 minutes after booster vaccination. The sterile dressing will be removed and injection site inspected. In all groups, volunteers will be given an oral thermometer, tape measure and diary card (paper or electronic), with instructions on use, along with the emergency 24 hour telephone number to contact the on-call study physician if needed. Volunteers will be instructed on how to self-assess the severity of these AEs. There will also be space on the diary card to self-document unsolicited AEs, and whether medication was taken to relieve the symptoms. Volunteers in groups 2f, 2g, 4c and 4d will not be asked to fill-out diary cards for their booster vaccines. Diary cards will collect information on the timing and severity of the following solicited AEs:  Prior to initiation of the study, any newly available safety data will be reviewed from animal studies or clinical trials of coronavirus vaccines being tested elsewhere, and discussed with the DSMB and/or MHRA as necessary. For safety reasons, the first volunteer to receive the IMP will be vaccinated ahead of any other CONFIDENTIAL COV001, v12.0, 09 Nov 2020 Page 51 of 110 participants and the profile of adverse events will be reviewed after 24 hours (+24h) post vaccination. Provided there are no safety concerns, as assessed by a medically qualified investigator and/or chair of DSMB, another 3 volunteers will be vaccinated with the IMP after at least 48 hours (±24h) has elapsed following first vaccination and at least 1 hour apart from each other. The profile of AEs will be assessed by a medically qualified investigator in real time and after 24 hours (+24h) of the first 4 participants receiving the IMP, further vaccinations will proceed provided there are no safety concerns. Relevant investigators and chair of DSMB will be asked to provide a decision on whether further vaccinations can go ahead after the first 4 participants received the IMP. A full DSMB may also be consulted should safety concerns arise at this point. A review will be conducted based on accumulated safety data of the first up to 54 participants receiving the IMP. Enrolment of the remaining participants will only proceed if the CI, and/or other designated relevant investigators and the chair of DSMB assess the data as indicating that it is safe to do so. At this point, any new immunopathology data from pre-clinical challenge studies in ferrets and non-human primates will be assessed by the CI and/or other designated relevant investigators and the DSMB prior to enrolment of the remaining participants. A second review will be conducted based on accumulated safety data once the trial is fully recruited. The  Follow-up visits will take place as per the schedule of attendances described in tables 6-9 with their respective windows. Volunteers will be assessed for local and systemic adverse events, interim history, physical examination, review of diary cards (paper or electronic) and blood tests at these time points as detailed in the schedule of attendances. Blood will also be taken for immunology purposes. If volunteers experience adverse events (laboratory or clinical), which the investigator (physician), CI and/or DSMB chair determine necessary for further close observation, the volunteer may be admitted to an NHS hospital for observation and further medical management under the care of the Consultant on call. Given the evolving epidemiological situation both globally and in the UK, should a participant be under quarantine and unable to attend any of the scheduled visits, a telephone/video consultation will be arranged using smartphone or computer app if clinically appropriate in order to obtain core study data where possible.  Participants who become symptomatic during follow-up will be instructed to call the study team who will then advise on how to proceed with clinical testing for COVID-19 if necessary, as per the trial working instructions. Participants will get weekly reminders (email or text messages) to get in touch with the study team if they present with a new onset of fever or cough or shortness of breath or anosmia/ageusia and if they are admitted to hospital for any reason. At the COVID-19 testing visit, a nose/throat swab, blood samples for safety (FBC, Biochemistry, CRP, others if deemed clinically relevant) and immunology (paxgenes, cytokine profile, PBMCs, serum and others), vital signs and other clinical data will be taken. Symptomatic volunteers may be regularly reviewed over the phone or via video call using a smartphone or computer app if clinically appropriate. Participants will be asked to attend a follow-up visit at 3-5 days post symptoms onset (+2 days) for clinical review and further testing or will be given a kit with instructions for a self-swab instead of a clinic visit. . Participants will be asked to record information on an electronic diary COVID-19 related symptoms for safety monitoring until symptom resolution or for at least 14 days if symptoms do not resolve before then. Participants who have a positive NAAT at S0, will not be required to attend a S3-5 visit (or provide a self-swab), but will be reviewed for safety at 7 days post positive swab. Clinical data, and additional blood samples for safety and immunology purposes will be taken at the S7 visit. Participants who have a positive swab at S3-5 will be reviewed for safety at 7 days post positive swab where clinical data, and additional blood samples for safety and immunology purposes will be taken. Participants who have 2 negative NAAT results from S0 and either a S3-5 visit or a self-swab will not be required to attend for an S7 visit. Closer follow-up and safety monitoring may be carried out by local trial teams if felt this is clinically indicated. If breathlessness is the only symptom that triggers a swab, further testing at S3-5 or S7 will be conducted at clinical discretion if there is no objective signs of respiratory distress (e.g. tachypnea,desaturation). Participants who develop COVID-19 symptoms and have a positive NAAT test after the first vaccination can only receive a booster dose after a minimum 4 weeks interval from their first NAAT positive test, provided their symptoms have significantly improved. The decision to proceed with booster vaccinations in those cases will be at clinical discretion of the investigators. For participants who are asymptomatic and have a positive NAAT test (e.g. done outside the study), a minimum of 2 weeks from first NAAT positivity will be required before boosting. Participants will be asked to record information on a weekly basis about illnesses amongst household contacts and friends, their contact with the general public, and infection control procedures. This will be optional. Volunteers will be asked to enter data in a diary from baseline to the end of the follow-up period. This will be recorded via a web-based electronic diary to which participants will be provided access at baseline. Those participants who have a SARS-CoV-2 positive NAAT test result, may be asked to provide a stool sample at approximately 7 days after symptom onset and 14 days after the first sample if necessary, as per trial specific instructions. Samples will be processed to look at differences in viral shedding between the investigational vaccine and control arms, and to measure calprotectin levels as a marker of gastrointestinal inflammation. These samples will be collected and processed depending on test availability, laboratory capacity, and will not be compulsory to the volunteers. Further exploratory immunology and microbiology tests may be conducted at the investigators' discretion. With the participants consent, the study team will request access to medical notes or submit a data collection form for completion by attending clinical staff on any medically attended COVID-19 episodes. Any data which are relevant to ascertainment of efficacy endpoints and disease enhancement (AESI) will be collected. These are likely to include, but not limited to, information on ICU admissions, clinical parameters such as oxygen saturation, respiratory rates and vital signs, need for oxygen therapy, need for ventilatory support, imaging and blood tests results, amongst others. Participants will be randomised to investigational vaccine or MenACWY in a 1:1 allocation, using block randomisation. Block sizes will reflect the numbers to be recruited at each stage of the study. The first block will be a block of 2 participants, followed by a block of 6, then blocks of 4 as required to meet the totals for randomisation for each day. Participants enrolled in groups 1, 2 and 4 will be blinded to the arm they have been allocated to, whether investigational vaccine or control. The trial staff administering the vaccine will not be blinded. Vaccines will be prepared out of sight of the participant and syringes will be covered with an opaque object/material until ready for administration to ensure blinding.  The vaccine manufactured at CBF or Advent Srl is stored at nominal -80 o C in a secure freezer, at the clinical site. The vaccine manufactured by Cobra Biologics Ltd is stored at 2-8°C in a secure fridge, at the clinical site. All movements of the study vaccines will be documented in accordance with existing standard operating procedure (SOP). Vaccine accountability, storage, shipment and handling will be in accordance with relevant SOPs and forms. To allow for large number of participants to receive the vaccine in a short time period additional clinic locations may be used. In this instance vaccines will be transported in accordance with local SOP's and approvals as required. For Advent manufactured vaccine: On vaccination day, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will be allowed to thaw to room temperature and will be administered within 1 hour of removal from storage. For Cobra manufactured vaccine: On vaccination day, the multi-dose vial will be removed from 2-8 storage as required. If the vaccine is stored outside of 2-8 it must be used within 6 hours. The vaccine will be administered intramuscularly into the deltoid of the non-dominant arm (preferably). All volunteers will be observed in the unit for a minimum of 1 hour (±30 minutes) after vaccination for the prime dose and a minimum of 15 minutes after the booster vaccination. During administration of the investigational products, Advanced Life Support drugs and resuscitation equipment will be immediately available for the management of anaphylaxis. Vaccination will be performed and the IMPs handled according to the relevant SOPs. The dose to be administered in this trial have been selected on the basis of clinical experience with the Another simian adenovirus vector (ChAd63) has been safely administered at doses up to 2 x 10 11 vp with an optimal dose of 5 x 10 10 vp, balancing immunogenicity and reactogenicity. MERS001 was the first clinical trial of a ChAdOx1 vectored expressing the full-length Spike protein from a separate, but related betacoronavirus. ChAdOx1 MERS has been given to 31 participants to date at doses ranging from 5x10 9 vp to 5x10 10 vp. Despite higher reactogeniticy observed at the 5x10 10 vp, this dose was safe, with self-limiting AEs and no SARs recorded. The 5x10 10 As this is a first-in-human assessment of the SARS-CoV-2 S antigenic insert, a staggered enrolment will apply for the first volunteers enrolled in the study. The same procedure will apply, should other batches of ChAdOx1 of Symbiosis' product is 3.5 -6.5 × 10 10 viral particles per dose based on the vp/mL concentration determined by A260, with a 0.5 mL dosing volume. This dosing range is based on a target 5 × 10 10 viral particles per dose and a ± 30% range to take into account process and method variabilities. When the planned clinical dosage of Symbiosis' product is compared to that of CBF and Advent products, the resulting Symbiosis' product dosage at 0.5 mL for lot 20481A is somewhat lower in total viral particle per dose (20% from the lower range limit), slightly higher in total viral genome copies per dose (12% from the higher range limit), and slightly lower in total infectious particle per dose (8% from the lower range limit). These differences are considered to be comparable to or within the variabilities from the analytical methods used in concentration determination (A260, qPCR, and infectivity) and the dosing volumes during clinical administration. In summary, with a 0.5 mL dosing volume for Symbiosis' product, the strength difference from CBF and Advent products is not expected to have significant clinical impact in terms of reactogenicity and immunogenicity/efficacy.  The study will be performed in accordance with the current version of the UK Genetically Modified Organisms (Contained Use) Regulations. Approved SOPs will be followed to minimise dissemination of the recombinant vectored vaccine virus into the environment. GMO waste will be inactivated according to approved SOPs. Participants who are allocated to the control groups will receive one or two injections of MenACWY vaccine instead of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Either of the two licensed quadrivalent protein-polysaccharide conjugate vaccine MenACWY vaccines will be used, i.e.: • Nimenrix (Pfizer The summary of product characteristics for both vaccines allows for administration of a booster dose if indicated by ongoing risk, therefore allows for the two doses administered to a subset of participants in this study. Similarly, previous receipt of either vaccine (or a plain polysaccharide quadrivalent meningococccal A, C, W and Y vaccine) will not be a contraindication to receiving a further vaccine in this study. Participants will be blinded as to which intervention they are receiving. A vaccine accountability log of MenACWY will be maintained at each trial site. There will be no additional labelling of these vaccines beyond their licensed packaging. MenACWY will be stored in a locked (or access controlled) refrigerator (2°C -8°C) at the sites, as per SmPC.  All vaccinations will be administered by the research team and recorded in the CRF. The study medication will be at no time in the possession of the participant and compliance will not, therefore, be an issue. Accountability of the IMP and control vaccine will be conducted in accordance with the relevant SOPs. Paracetamol will be provided to a subset of participants in group 4 to be taken at vaccination day for 24hours. Participants in groups 2f, 2g, 4c, and 4d will be advised to take prophylactic paracetamol for 24h post booster vaccine. As set out by the exclusion criteria, volunteers may not enter the study if they have received: any vaccine in the 30 days prior to enrolment or there is planned receipt of any other vaccine within 30 days of each vaccination, any investigational product within 30 days prior to enrolment or if receipt is planned during the study period, or if there is any use of immunosuppressant medication within 6 months prior to enrolment or if receipt is planned at any time during the study period ( except topical steroids and short course of low dose steroids < 14 day). If this vaccine is proven to be efficacious following analysis of the primary endpoint and if the DSMB agrees,  Safety will be assessed by the frequency, incidence and nature of AEs and SAEs arising during the study. An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a volunteer, which may occur during or after administration of an IMP and does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the intervention. An AE can therefore be any unfavourable and unintended sign (including any clinically significant abnormal laboratory finding or change from baseline), symptom or disease temporally associated with the study intervention, whether or not considered related to the study intervention. An AR is any untoward or unintended response to an IMP. This means that a causal relationship between the IMP and an AE is at least a reasonable possibility, i.e., the relationship cannot be ruled out. All cases judged by the reporting medical Investigator as having a reasonable suspected causal relationship to an IMP (i.e. possibly, probably or definitely related to an IMP) will qualify as AR. Adverse events that may be related to the IMP are listed in the Investigator's Brochure for each product. An SAE is an AE that results in any of the following outcomes, whether or not considered related to the study intervention. • Death • Life-threatening event (i.e., the volunteer was, in the view of the Investigator, at immediate risk of death from the event that occurred). This does not include an AE that, if it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death. • Persistent or significant disability or incapacity (i.e., substantial disruption of one's ability to carry out normal life functions). • Hospitalisation or prolongation of existing hospitalisation, regardless of length of stay, even if it is a precautionary measure for continued observation. Hospitalisation (including inpatient or outpatient hospitalisation for an elective procedure) for a pre-existing condition that has not worsened unexpectedly does not constitute a serious AE. • An important medical event (that may not cause death, be life threatening, or require hospitalisation) that may, based upon appropriate medical judgment, jeopardise the volunteer and/or require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above. Examples of such medical events CONFIDENTIAL COV001, v12.0, 09 Nov 2020 Page 79 of 110 include allergic reaction requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or clinic, blood dyscrasias, or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalisation. • Congenital anomaly or birth defect. An AE that is both serious and, in the opinion of the reporting Investigator or Sponsors, believed to be possibly, probably or definitely due to an IMP or any other study treatments, based on the information provided. A SAR, the nature and severity of which is not consistent with the information about the medicinal product in question set out in the IB. No IMP related SAEs are expected in this study. All SARs will therefore be reported as SUSARs. The foreseeable ARs following vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 include injection site pain, tenderness, erythema, warmth, swelling, induration, pruritus, myalgia, arthralgia, headache, fatigue, fever, feverishness, chills, malaise and nausea. Disease enhancement following vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will be monitored. Severe COVID-19 disease will be defined using clinical criteria. Detailed clinical parameters will be collected from medical records and aligned with agreed definitions as they emerge. These are likely to include, but are not limited to, oxygen saturation, need for oxygen therapy, respiratory rate, need for ventilatory support, imaging and blood test results, amongst other clinically relevant parameters. Acute respiratory distress, pneumonitis, acute cardiac injury, arrhythmia, septic-shock like syndrome and acute kidney injury related with COVID-19 disease will be monitored from medical records review of hospitalised participants. Eosinophilia as a marker skewed Th2 responses will be routinely monitored in participants attending their COVID-19 testing and follow-up visits. Marked eosinophilia of ≥ 1.5 x10 9 /L will be reported as SAEs. AESI relevant to vaccination in general will also be monitored such as: generalised convulsion, Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS), Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM), Thrombocytopenia, Anaphylaxis, Vasculitides in addition to serious solicited AEs will be monitored.  For every AE, an assessment of the relationship of the event to the administration of the vaccine will be undertaken by the CI-delegated clinician. An interpretation of the causal relationship of the intervention to the AE in question will be made, based on the type of event; the relationship of the event to the time of vaccine administration; and the known biology of the vaccine therapy (Table 11 ). Alternative causes of the AE, such as the natural history of pre-existing medical conditions, concomitant therapy, other risk factors and the temporal relationship of the event to vaccination will be considered and investigated. Causality assessment will take place during planned safety reviews, interim analyses (e.g. if a holding or stopping rule is activated) and at the final safety analysis, except for SAEs, which should be assigned by the reporting investigator, immediately, as described in SOP OVC005 Safety Reporting for CTIMPs.  All local and systemic AEs occurring in the 28 days following each vaccination observed by the Investigator or reported by the volunteer, whether or not attributed to study medication, will be recorded in electronic diaries or study database. All AEs that result in a volunteer's withdrawal from the study will be followed up until a satisfactory resolution occurs, or until a non-study related causality is assigned (if the volunteer consents to this). SAEs and Adverse Events of Special Interest will be collected throughout the entire trial period.  The severity of clinical and laboratory adverse events will be assessed according to scales based on FDA toxicity grading scales for healthy and adolescent volunteers enrolled in preventive vaccine clinical trials, listed in the study specific working instructions and tables 11-13 below,  Moderate: Mild to moderate limitation in activity -some assistance may be needed; no or minimal medical intervention/therapy required Severe: Marked limitation in activity, some assistance usually required; medical intervention/therapy required. Potentially Life-threatening: requires assessment in A&E or hospitalisation  In order to comply with current regulations on SAE reporting to regulatory authorities, the event will be documented accurately and notification deadlines respected. SAEs will be reported on the SAE forms to members of the study team immediately after the Investigators become aware of their occurrence, as described in SOP OVC005 Safety Reporting for CTIMPs. Copies of all reports will be forwarded for review to the Chief Investigator (as the Sponsor's representative) within 24 hours of the Investigator being aware of the suspected SAE. The DSMB will be notified of SAEs that are deemed possibly, probably or definitely related to study interventions; the chair of DSMB will be notified immediately (within 24 hours) of the Sponsor being aware of their occurrence. SAEs will not normally be reported immediately to the ethical committee(s) unless there is a clinically important increase in occurrence rate, an unexpected outcome, or a new event that is likely to affect safety of trial volunteers, at the discretion of the Chief Investigator and/or DSMB. In addition to the expedited reporting above, the Investigator shall include all SAEs in the annual Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) report.  All SUSARs (including SUSARs related to the non-IMP where there is a possibility of an interaction between the non-IMP and IMP) will be reported by the sponsor delegate to the relevant Competent Authority and to the REC and other parties as applicable. For fatal and life-threatening SUSARS, this will be done no later than 7 calendar days after the Sponsor or delegate is first aware of the reaction. Any additional relevant information will be reported within 8 calendar days of the initial report. All other SUSARs will be reported within 15 calendar days. Principal Investigators will be informed of all SUSARs for the relevant IMP for all studies with the same Sponsor, whether or not the event occurred in the current trial. A Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) will be prepared annually, within 60 days of the anniversary of the first approval date from the regulatory authority for each IMP. The DSUR will be submitted by the CI to the Competent Authority, Ethics Committee, HRA (where required), Host NHS Trust and Sponsor. Eligibility for enrolment in the trial in terms of laboratory findings will be assessed by clinically qualified staff. Abnormal clinical findings from medical history, examination or blood tests will be assessed as to their clinical significance throughout the trial. Laboratory AEs will be assessed using specific toxicity grading scales adapted from the FDA Toxicity Grading Scale for Healthy Adult and Adolescent Volunteers Enrolled in Preventive Vaccine Clinical Trials. If a test is deemed clinically significant, it may be repeated, to ensure it is not a single occurrence. If a test remains clinically significant, the volunteer will be informed and appropriate medical care arranged as appropriate and with the permission of the volunteer. Decisions to exclude the volunteer from enrolling in the trial or to withdraw a volunteer from the trial will be at the discretion of the Investigator. The safety profile will be assessed on an on-going basis by the Investigators. The CI and relevant Investigators (as per the trial delegation log) will also review safety issues and SAEs as they arise. Interim safety reviews are planned after the first volunteer in the intervention arm and after the first 4 participants have been given a dose of the IMP. Data from pre-clinical studies will be assessed by the CI, relevant investigators and the DSMB a soon as they are available and before up to 100 volunteers receive a dose of the IMP. Safety data available from the first up to 54 volunteers receiving a dose of the IMP will be reviewed by the CI, relevant investigators and the chair of DSMB before proceeding with vaccination in the remaining volunteers. The DSMB will review safety data accumulated when the study is fully recruited. The DSMB will evaluate frequency of events, safety and efficacy data every 4-8 weeks and/or as required. The DSMB will make recommendations concerning the conduct, continuation or modification of the study. A Data Safety Monitoring Board will be appointed to a) periodically review and evaluate the accumulated study data for participant safety, study conduct, progress, and efficacy. b) make recommendations concerning the continuation, modification, or termination of the trial. There will be a minimum of three appropriately qualified committee members of whom one will be the designated chair. The DSMB will operate in accordance with the trial specific charter, which will be established before recruitment starts. The chair of the DSMB may be contacted for advice and independent review by the Investigator or trial Sponsor in the following situations: • Following any SAE deemed to be possibly, probably or definitively related to a study intervention. • Any other situation where the Investigator or trial Sponsor feels independent advice or review is important. The DSMB will review SAEs deemed possibly, probably or definitively related to study interventions. The DSMB will be notified within 24 hours of the Investigators' being aware of their occurrence. The DSMB has the power to place the study on hold if deemed necessary following a study intervention-related SAE. Safety holding rules have been developed considering the fact that this is a first-in-human study. Safety holding rules apply to participants receiving ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 only. o If more than 25% of doses of the vaccine at a given time point (e.g. Day 0, Day 28) in a study group are followed by the same Grade 3 unsolicited adverse event beginning within 2 days after vaccination (day of vaccination and one subsequent day) and persisting at Grade 3 for >72 hrs • Laboratory adverse event: • If more than 25% of doses of the vaccine at a given time point (e.g. Day 0, Day 28) in a study group are followed by the same Grade 3 laboratory adverse event beginning within 3 days after vaccination and persisting at Grade 3 for >72 hrs ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (e.g. if considered to be a clinical presentation of a disease enhancement episode). COVID-19 related SAEs will be regularly reviewed by the DSMB, and a single event will not trigger a holding rule. ▪ SAEs reported under the Hy's Law requirement will not necessarily trigger a holding rule. These cases will also be reviewed by the DSMB If any of the above holding rules are activated, then further vaccinations in any group will not occur until a safety review by the DSMB, study sponsor and the chief investigator has been conducted and it is deemed appropriate to restart dosing. The Regulatory Authority will be informed and a request to restart dosing with pertinent data will be submitted as a substantial amendment. The safety review will consider: • The relationship of the AE or SAE to the vaccine. • The relationship of the AE or SAE to the vaccine dose, or other possible causes of the event. • If appropriate, additional screening or laboratory testing for other volunteers to identify those who may develop similar symptoms and alterations to the current Participant Information Sheet (PIS) are discussed. • New, relevant safety information from ongoing research programs on the various components of the vaccine. The local ethics committee and vaccine manufacturers will also be notified if a holding rule is activated or released. All vaccinated volunteers will be followed for safety until resolution or stabilisation (if determined to be chronic sequelae) of their AEs. In addition to the above stated group holding rules, stopping rules for individual volunteers will apply (i.e., indications to withdraw individuals from further vaccinations). Study participants who present with at least one of the following stopping rules will be withdrawn from further vaccination in the study: • Local reactions: Injection site ulceration, abscess or necrosis • the volunteer develops a Grade 3 systemic solicited AE considered possibly, probably or definitely related within 2 days after vaccination (day of vaccination and one subsequent day) and persisting continuously at Grade 3 for > 72hrs. • Unsolicited adverse events: • the volunteer has a Grade 3 adverse event, considered possibly, probably or definitely related to vaccination, persisting continuously at Grade 3 for >72hrs. • the volunteer has a SAE considered possibly, probably or definitely related to vaccination. • the volunteer has an acute allergic reaction or anaphylactic shock following the administration of vaccine investigational product. If a volunteer has an acute respiratory illness (moderate or severe illness with or without fever) or a fever (oral temperature greater than 37.8°C) at the scheduled time of administration of investigational product/control, the volunteer will not be enrolled and will be withdrawn from the study. All vaccinated volunteers will be followed for safety until the end of their planned participation in the study or until resolution or stabilisation (if determined to be chronic sequelae) of their AEs, providing they consent to this. In addition to these pre-defined criteria, the study can be put on hold upon advice of the DSMB, Chief Investigator, Study Sponsor, regulatory authority, Ethical Committee(s), for any single event or combination of multiple events which, in their professional opinion, jeopardise the safety of the volunteers or the reliability of the data.  Both a fully detailed study level statistical analysis plan (SAP) as well as a separate Statistical Analysis Plan for the Marketing Authorisation Application (MAA SAP) will be written and signed off before any interim data analyses are conducted. The data from this study will be included in prospective pooled analyses of studies for efficacy and safety of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 to provide greater precision of both efficacy and safety outcomes. The primary efficacy endpoint is PCR* positive symptomatic COVID-19. This is defined as a participant with a PCR+* swab and at least one of the following symptoms: cough, fever ≥ 37.8, shortness of breath, anosmia, or ageusia. Where possible, sensitivity analyses will be conducted using common alternative definitions of virologicallyconfirmed COVID-19 disease, including those in use in other phase 3 protocols (including but not limited to: USA AstraZeneca phase 3 trial, South Africa COV005 trial, WHO solidarity trial, CEPI definition). This will aid in comparisons between various studies and meta-analyses. These alternative definitions will be detailed in the statistical analysis plan as exploratory analyses. * Or other nucleic acid amplification test The primary and secondary analyses will be conducted on participants who are seronegative at baseline. A sensitivity analysis will be conducted including all participants regardless of baseline serostatus. Analysis of the primary endpoint will be computed as follows: 1. Efficacy of two doses of vaccine. Only cases occurring more than 14 days after the second vaccine will be included. Proportions will be compared between ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and MenACWY groups using a Poisson regression model with robust variance (Zou 2004). The model will contain terms including treatment group, and age group at randomization if there is a sufficient sample size within each age category. The logarithm of the period at risk for primary endpoint will be used as an offset variable in the model to adjust for volunteers having different follow up times during which the events occur. Vaccine efficacy (VE) will be calculated as (1 -RR) x 100%, where RR is the relative risk of symptomatic infection (ChADOx1 nCoV-19: Control) and 95% confidence intervals will be presented. If the Poisson regression model with robust variance fails to converge, the exact conditional method for stratified poisson regression will be used. Cumulative incidence of symptomatic infections will be presented using the Kaplan-Meier method. Secondary efficacy endpoints will be analysed in the same way as the primary efficacy endpoint. Analyses will conducted for all adults combined as well as conducting analyses stratified by age cohorts. All data from participants with PCR*-positive swabs will be assessed for inclusion in the efficacy analyses by two blinded assessors who will independently review each case according to pre-specified criteria as detailed in the statistical analysis plan, to classify each for inclusion in the primary and secondary outcomes. A separate CRF will be designed for this purpose. All PCR*-positive results will be assessed for the primary outcome, including those with symptoms swabbed by trial staff and other potential sources of information such as health-care workers who are tested at their workplace as either a routine test procedure or due to developing symptoms. PCR+* swabs from outside the trial (for example, a workplace routine swab result in a healthcare worker) will be reviewed by blinded staff and only included as a potential endpoint if the test was conducted in 1) a medical laboratory with ISO 15189 accreditation (provided by UKAS in UK) AND 2) an assay that is either CE marked or that has a derogation authorisation from the MHRA. * Or other nucleic acid amplification test Counts and percentages of each local and systemic solicited adverse reaction from diary cards, and all unsolicited AEs and SAEs will be presented for each group. Highly skewed antibody data will be log-transformed prior to analysis. The geometric mean concentration and associated 95% confidence interval will be summarised for each group at each timepoint, by computing the anti-log of the mean difference of the log-transformed data. The geometric mean concentration at day 28 and the proportion of participants seroconverting to the Sspike protein from day 0 to day 28 will be computed. Comparisons between ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine and MenACWY groups will be made using a Mann Whitney U test due to the low titres expected in the control group which will cause a non-normal distribution. Spike-specific T cell responses (ELISpot) will be presented as means and confidence intervals, or medians and interquartile ranges if non-normally distributed at all post vaccination time points. Comparisons between ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine and MenACWY groups will be made using a Mann Whitney U test due to the low responses expected in the control group which will cause a non-normal distribution.  Subgroup comparisons of efficacy, and safety will be conducted by incorporating vaccine-group by subgroup interaction terms into appropriate regression models. Subgroup comparisons will only be conducted if there are at least 5 cases in all subgroups. Comparisons will include: 1. Males vs females 2. Age (18 to 55 years vs 56-<70 years vs 70+ years) 3. Seropositive to S-spike or non-spike proteins at baseline vs not seropositive 4. Health care workers and highly-exposed participants versus others It is planned that the primary evidence of efficacy and safety for the ChADOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine will be based on global analyses utilizing studies COV001 (the UK P1/2 study), COV002 (the UK P2/3 study), COV003 (the Brazil P3 study) and COV005 (the South Africa P1/2 study) including a pooled analysis across the studies. As such the interim and primary analyses for the primary outcome will be based on cases accumulated across multiple studies, details of which will be specified within the MAA SAP rather than for each individual study. Interim and primary data cuts from this study will therefore be carried out to support the pooled analysis. The global MAA SAP allows for interim and primary analyses to be conducted once sufficient eligible cases have accumulated, where the overall type 1 error is controlled at the 5% level using a flexible alphaspending approach that accounts for the incorporation of data from this study into pooled interim analyses under the global MAA SAP. Evidence of efficacy will be determined if the lower bound of the multiplicity adjusted confidence interval is greater than a 20% threshold. The primary analysis will have approximately 90% power assuming a vaccine efficacy of 60%. A flexible alpha spending approach will be implemented to allow an earlier primary analysis in the situation where accumulation of eligible cases were lower than expected. Evidence of efficacy at an interim or primary analysis of pooled data will not be considered a reason to stop the trial, but instead will be interpreted as early evidence of efficacy. However if an interim analysis demonstrates evidence of efficacy then a study level analysis according to the study SAP may be used to support study level evidence of efficacy.  A final analysis will be conducted at the end of the study. The final study-specific analysis will incorporate all data from the study, including data that has previously contributed to global efficacy estimates under the pooled analysis strategy. The final analysis will be considered a supportive analysis to the global efficacy analysis. Alpha at the final study-specific analysis will be adjusted to incorporate the number of previous global analyses to which the study contributed data in order to control the overall study level type 1 error at 5%. Details will be specified in the study level SAP. All available data will be included in the analysis All vaccinated participants will be included in the analysis unless otherwise specified in the SAP. The independent DSMB will meet regularly to review safety data from all available studies of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and will assess whether the assumptions underlying the sample size calculation are in line with the observed cases. Additionally the independent DSMB will make recommendations based on the interim analyses to assess evidence of efficacy.  The Chief Investigator will be responsible for all data that accrues from the study. All study data including participant diary will be recorded directly into an Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system (e.g. OpenClinica, REDCap, or similar) or onto a paper source document for later entry into EDC if direct entry is not available or is not practical at site. This includes safety data, laboratory data and outcome data. Any additional information that needs recording but is not relevant for the CRF (such as signed consent forms etc.) will be recorded on a separate paper source document. All documents will be stored safely and securely in confidential conditions. All adverse event data (both solicited and unsolicited) reported by the volunteer will be entered onto a volunteer's electronic diary card (eDiary) for a maximum of 28 days following administration of the IMP. The eDiary provides a full audit trail of edits and will be reviewed at each review time-point indicated in the schedule of events. Any adverse event continuing beyond the period of the diary will be copied into the eCRF and followed to resolution, if there is a causal relationship to the IMP, or to the end of the study if there is no causal relationship. The participants will be identified by a unique trial specific number and code in any database. The name and any other identifying detail will NOT be included in any trial data electronic file. The EDC system (CRF data) uses a relational database (MySQL/ PostgreSQL) via a secure web interface with data checks applied during data entry to ensure data quality. The database includes a complete suite of features which are compliant with GCP, EU and UK regulations and Sponsor security policies, including a full audit trail, user-based privileges, and integration with the institutional LDAP server. The MySQL and PostgreSQL database and the webserver will both be housed on secure servers maintained by the University of Oxford IT personal. The servers are in a physically secure location in Europe. Backups will be stored in accordance with the IT department schedule daily, weekly, monthly, and are retained for one month, three months, and six months, respectively. The IT servers provide a stable, secure, well-maintained, and high capacity data storage environment. REDCap and OpenClinica are widely-used, powerful, reliable, wellsupported systems. Access to the study's database will be restricted to the members of the study team by username and password. The Investigators will maintain appropriate medical and research records for this trial, in compliance with GCP Investigator, co-Investigators and clinical research nurses will have access to records. The Investigators will permit authorised representatives of the Sponsor(s), as well as ethical and regulatory agencies to examine (and when required by applicable law, to copy) clinical records for the purposes of quality assurance reviews, audits and evaluation of the study safety and progress. All trial records will be stored for a minimum of 5 years after the end of the trial at a secure archiving facility . If volunteers consent to be contacted for future research, information about their consent form will be recorded, retained and stored securely and separately from the research data. If volunteers consent to have their samples stored and used in future research, information about their consent form will be recorded, retained and stored securely as per Biobanking procedures and SOP. All protocol-required information will be collected in CRFs designed by the Investigator. All source documents will be filed in the CRF. Source documents are original documents, data, and records from which the volunteer's CRF data are obtained. For this study, these will include, but are not limited to, volunteer consent form, blood results, GP response letters, laboratory records, diaries, medical records and correspondence. In the majority of cases, CRF entries will be considered source data as the CRF is the site of the original recording (i.e. there is no other written or electronic record of data). In this study this will include, but is not limited to medical history, medication records, vital signs, physical examination records, urine assessments, blood results, adverse event data and details of vaccinations. All source data and volunteer CRFs will be stored securely. Source data verification requirements will be defined in the trial risk assessment and monitoring plan. To prevent withdrawal of a participant due to relocation, if there is a nearby participating site and with the consent of the participant, copies of relevant participant research records (such as ICF, paper source documents) will be transferred to the local site using secure email addresses such as nhs.net or by password protected sheets. The electronic research data stored on REDCap will also be transferred to the new site. The original records will be retained by the recruiting site. Consent to transfer information could be completed electronically. The study protocol, documentation, data and all other information generated will be held in strict confidence. No information concerning the study or the data will be released to any unauthorised third party, without prior written approval of the sponsor.  Data collection tools will undergo appropriate validation to ensure that data are collected accurately and completely. Datasets provided for analysis will be subject to quality control processes to ensure analysed data is a true reflection of the source data. Trial data will be managed in compliance with local data management SOPs. If additional, study specific processes are required, an approved Data Management Plan will be implemented Study data may be stored electronically on a secure server, and paper notes will be kept in a key-locked filing cabinet at the site. All essential documents will be retained for a minimum of 5 years after the study has finished. The need to store study data for longer in relation to licensing of the vaccine will be subject to ongoing review. For effective vaccines that may be licensed, we may store research data securely at the site at least 15 years after the end of the study, subject to adjustments in clinical trials regulations. Participants' bank details will be stored for 7 years in line with the site financial policy. General archiving procedures will be conducted in compliance to SOP OVC020 Archiving.  Approved site-specific standard operating procedures (SOPs) will be used at all clinical and laboratory sites. Regular monitoring will be performed according to GCP by the monitor. Following written SOPs and an approved, risk based monitoring plan, the monitor will verify that the clinical trial is conducted and data are generated, documented and reported in compliance with the protocol, GCP and the applicable regulatory requirements. The site will provide direct access to all trial related source data/documents and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the Sponsor and inspection by local and regulatory authorities. Any deviations from the protocol will be documented in a protocol deviation form and filed in the trial master file. Each deviation will be assessed as to its impact on volunteer safety and study conduct. Significant protocol deviations will be listed in the end of study report. The QA manager conducts systems based internal audits to check that trials are being conducted according to local procedures and in compliance with study protocols, departmental SOPs, GCP and applicable regulations. The Sponsor, trial sites, and ethical committee(s) may carry out audit to ensure compliance with the protocol, GCP and appropriate regulations. GCP inspections may also be undertaken by the MHRA to ensure compliance with protocol and the Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations 2004, as amended. The Sponsor will assist in any inspections and will support the response to the MHRA as part of the inspection procedure.  The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations contain a requirement for the notification of "serious breaches" to the MHRA within 7 days of the Sponsor becoming aware of the breach. A serious breach is defined as "A breach of GCP or the trial protocol which is likely to effect to a significant degree (a) the safety or physical or mental integrity of the subjects of the trial; or (b) the scientific value of the trial". In the event that a potential serious breach is suspected the Sponsor will be informed as soon as possible, to allow preliminary assessment of the breach and reporting to the MHRA within the required timelines.  The Investigators will ensure that this study is conducted according to the principles of the current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki. The Investigator will ensure that this trial is conducted in accordance with relevant regulations and with Good Clinical Practice. Following Sponsor approval the protocol, informed consent form, participant information sheet and any proposed advertising material will be submitted to an appropriate Research Ethics Committee (REC), HRA (where required), regulatory authorities (MHRA in the UK), and host institution(s) for written approval. No amendments to this protocol will be made without consultation with, and agreement of, the Sponsor. The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that changes to an approved trial, during the period for which regulatory and ethical committee(s) approval has already been given, are not initiated without regulatory and ethical committee(s)' review and approval except to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to the subject (i.e as an Urgent Safety Measure). The study will comply with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and Data Protection Act 2018, which require data to be de-identified as soon as it is practical to do so. The processing of personal data of participants will be minimised by making use of a unique participant study number only on all study documents and any electronic database(s), with the exception of informed consent forms and participant ID logs. All documents will be stored securely and only accessible by study staff and authorised personnel. The study staff will safeguard the privacy of participants' personal data. A separate confidential file containing identifiable information will be stored in a secured location in accordance with the current data protection legislation. Photographs taken of vaccination sites (if required, with the volunteer's written, informed consent) will not include the volunteer's face and will be identified by the date, trial code and subject's unique identifier. Once developed, photographs will be stored as confidential records, as above. This material may be shown to other professional staff, used for educational purposes, or included in a scientific publication. If participants have a positive swab result for COVID-19 during the course of the study then the Public Health Authority will be notified as COVID-19 is a "notifiable disease" and this is legal requirement in the UK. This CONFIDENTIAL COV001, v12.0, 09 Nov 2020 Page 100 of 110 may mean participants personal information from their health records will be shared with Public Health either by the processing lab or the study site. Participants may also be contacted by the NHS Test and Trace service. Samples collected using home swab kits may be processed at laboratories within and outside the UK, as determined by the community testing programme. These laboratories provide a test result for the barcode to NPEx (National Pathology Exchange) and this result is then recombined with participant identifiable information by NHS Digital. NHS Digital provide lab results to the Sponsor (University of Oxford) who will match this with personal data including identifying contact information sent to them by the site in order to centralise the processing of results. Participants will be required to separately consent to the terms and conditions of the national community swabbing programme, each time they perform a self-swab. This is available at:  The study is funded through UK Government The University has a specialist insurance policy in place which would operate in the event of any participant suffering harm as a result of their involvement in the research (Newline Underwriting Management Ltd, at Lloyd's of London). NHS indemnity operates in respect of the clinical treatment which is provided. Volunteers will be compensated for their time, the inconvenience of having blood tests and procedures, and their travel expenses. The total amount compensated will be approximately £190-625 depending on the exact number of visits, and whether any repeat or additional visits are necessary. They will be compensated £25 for attending the screening visit. For all other trial visits as outlined in Tables 6-8, compensation will be calculated according to the following: •  The Investigators will be involved in reviewing drafts of the manuscripts, abstracts, press releases and any other publications arising from the study. Data from the study may also be used as part of a thesis for a PhD or MD.  Total number to enrol: up to 12,390 participants.  To assess the safety of the candidate vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in adults and children. Occurrence of serious adverse events (SAEs) throughout the study duration. To assess the safety, tolerability and Despite unprecedented containment measures adopted by the Chinese government, SARS-CoV-2 rapidly spread across the world. The WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak a public health emergency of international concern on 30 th January 2020. As of 26 th May 2020, over 5, The spike protein is a type I, trimeric, transmembrane glycoprotein located at the surface of the viral envelope of CoVs, which can be divided into two functional subunits: the N-terminal S1 and the C-terminal S2. S1 and S2 are responsible for cellular receptor binding via the receptor binding domain (RBD) and fusion of virus and cell membranes respectively, thereby mediating the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into target cells. 3 The roles of S in receptor binding and  Refer to the Investigator Brochure for most recent pre-clinical data update Mice (balb/c and CD-1) were immunised with ChAdOx1 expressing SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein or green fluorescent protein (GFP). Spleens were harvested for assessment of IFY ELISpot responses and serum samples were taken for assessments of S1 and S2 antibody responses on ELISA at 9 or 10 days post vaccination. The results of this study show that a single dose of GFP at a dose of 2.5 x 10 10 vp/animal at 28 days before challenge. The dose is half that which is planned for humans. Animals were challenged with 2.6 x 10 6 TCID¬50/animal of SARS-CoV-2 using 4 routes: following MERS-CoV challenge in mice immunised with an inactivated MERS-CoV candidate vaccine. 9 However, in preclinical studies of ChAdOx1 immunisation and MERS-CoV challenge, no ADE was observed in hDPP4 transgenic mice, dromedary camels or non-human primates (van Doremalen et al, manuscript submitted). 10, 11 The risks of inducing lung immunopathology in the event of COVID-19 disease following Further challenge studies on ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccinated ferrets and NHPs with observation periods greater than 7 days after challenge are underway. These pre-clinical studies will report on presence or absence of lung pathology. Results will be reviewed as soon as they emerge and will inform discussions on risk/benefit to participants receiving the IMP. All pathology data arising from challenge studies of other SARS-CoV-2 vaccine candidates will also be taken into account. A batch comparison group (Group 5) has been included to assess potential differences in safety, reactogenicity and immunogenicity profiles across different ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine manufacturers. Group 6 has been added to provide a comparison between efficacy at 5x10 10 vp dose on Abs260 and 5x10 10 vp qPCR methods from different vaccine manufacturers. Groups 7 and 8 have been added to provide safety, reactogenicity and immunogenicity data in older age groups receiving a 5x10 10 vp dose on qPCR, and replicate the study design in groups 1 and 2. Group 4b has been added to provide immunogenicity data on homologous prime-boost at 5x10 10 vp  Deaths from COVID-19 infections are more common in adults aged 70 or older, and in those with pre- This study will recruit volunteers aged 56 to 70 years and those aged over 70 years. Simultaneously we will proceed to enrol a further up to 10,000 participants aged 18+ for a wide assessment of efficacy, with those over 55 years included in this larger cohort only as safety data become available from Group 1 and 2 cohorts. has all ages as target population, recognizing that herd immunity (and transmission blocking) will depend on broad immunization, likely including children (WHO, COVID-19 Vaccine TPP). In influenza, which has a similar age-dependent severity profile, universal vaccination of primary-school age children is an important strategy in UK immunisation policy to control disease through herd immunity. We will, therefore, seek to enrol children procedures and contraception requirements, we have taken a pragmatic approach to limit the upper age to 12 years old. The lower age limit has been chosen based on safety concerns of febrile induced seizures following immunisation in younger children up to 5 years of age and potential for highest impact in curbing disease transmission in the community by prioritising school aged children. 18, 19 Since the benefit for children is lower than for adults in the population, we will accrue safety data from the phase I-III adult studies before embarking on the paediatric trial. Recent reports of increased incidence in Kawasaki-like disease in children during the pandemic have raised concerns over the potential role for SARS-CoV-2 infection or its immune mediated response as a potential triggers 24 . The role of vaccine induced immune response against the SARS-CoV-2 in Kawasaki-like disease and other hyperinflammation syndromes is currently unknown. Kawasaki-like disease will be monitored and recorded as an adverse event of special interest. The phase I/II study of efficacy, safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV19 vaccine (COV001, EudraCT 2020-001072-15) is the first evaluation of the vaccine in healthy adults aged 18-55 years in the UK started in April 2020. Over 1000 participants were enrolled and received either the investigational vaccine or a licensed MenACWY vaccine. The two clinical studies are aligned in terms of study procedures and endpoints to allow data to be compared and combined across the two studies. The safety data from animal studies and from COV001 will be reviewed prior to vaccinating the first participant in COV002, and at each time point prior to expansion into additional age groups. See section 5 for further details. People living with HIV may have less functional immunity and have more associated co-morbidities Throughout the study To assess the safety of the candidate vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in adults and children. Occurrence of serious adverse events (SAEs) throughout the study duration. Throughout the study To assess the safety, tolerability and reactogenicity profile of the candidate vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 a) occurrence of solicited local reactogenicity signs and symptoms for 7 days following vaccination; b) occurrence of solicited systemic reactogenicity signs and symptoms for 7 days following vaccination; c) occurrence of unsolicited adverse events (AEs) for 28 days following vaccination ; d) change from baseline for safety laboratory measures and (except groups 4, 6, 9 and 10); e) Occurrence of disease enhancement episodes a) Day 0-7 Self-reported symptoms recorded using electronic diaries b) Day 0-7 Self-reported symptoms recorded using electronic diaries c) Day 0-28 Self-reported symptoms recorded using  To assess vaccine induced mucosal immunity  This is a Phase 2/3, participant-blinded individually randomised controlled trial in adults and healthy children in the UK, administering either a single dose or two-doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or licensed MenACWY vaccine via IM injection. Additional steps may be taken to keep clinical investigators assessing the primary efficacy endpoint blinded to group allocation, where this is possible and practical to do so. All data from participants with PCR (or other nucleic acid amplification test)positive swabs will be assessed for inclusion in the primary efficacy analysis by two blinded assessors who will independently review each case according to pre-specified criteria as detailed in the statistical analysis plan, to classify each for inclusion in the primary and secondary outcomes. After review of all available data from animal studies and at least 4 weeks safety and immunogenicity data from the first 54 participants receiving ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in COV001, following DSMB review, enrolment into Groups 1, 4, 5 & 6 will commence. A minimum of 7 days safety data from group 1 will be reviewed by the DSMB prior to enrolment of participants into group 2. Participants will be randomised to ChAdOx1 nCoV-19/MenACWY on a 3:1:3:1 ratio in groups 1 and 7, and 5:1:5:1 ratio in groups 2 and 8, 1:1 in groups 3, 4, 5a, 5b, 5c, 6, 9 and 10, and 5:1 in group 5d. Participants in groups 4, 6, 9 and 10 will be advised to take prophylactic paracetamol for 24 hours (1000 mg every 4-6 hours) from the time of vaccination to reduce the likelihood of fever. The sequence of enrolment of participants over the age of 56 years is outlined in section 7.3.2.2. Recruitment into group 3 will not start before a minimum of 4 weeks safety and immunogenicity data from all healthy adult volunteers recruited into COV001 and all participants in groups 1 and 2 and 5, from COV002 are reviewed. Staggered enrolment will apply to group 3 with an interim review after 15 participants have received the IMP (half of the total number of participants expected to receive the IMP in this group). Up to 100 volunteers in group 4 will be invited to receive a booster dose of 2.2x10 10 vp (qPCR) 4-6 weeks after prime. All remaining volunteers in group 4 and all participants in group 6 will be invited to receive a booster dose of 0.5mL (3.5 -6.5 × 10 10 vp, Abs 260, corrected for PS80) at least 4 weeks after prime. Participants who were originally randomised to receive a single dose in groups 1 (a1 and a2), 2 (a1 and a2) and 5 (a1 and a2) will be invited to receive a booster dose of 0.5mL (3.5 -6.5 × 10 10 vp, Abs 260, corrected for PS80) at the earliest available opportunity, with a minimum 4 weeks interval from prime. Safety will be assessed in real time. The DSMB will periodically assess safety and efficacy data every 4-8 weeks and/or as required. Participants will be followed over the duration of the study to record adverse events and episodes of virologically confirmed symptomatic COVID-19 cases. Participants will be tested for COVID-19 if they present with a new onset of fever (37.8 C) OR cough OR shortness of breath OR anosmia/ageusia. Weekly testing for PCR+ infection with SARS-CoV-2 using home test kits will also be undertaken in partnership with the Department of Health and Social care national community testing programme, subject to testing resource availability. Moderate and Severe COVID-19 disease will be defined using clinical criteria. Detailed clinical parameters will be collected from medical records and aligned with agreed definitions as they emerge. These are likely to include, but are not limited to, oxygen saturation, need for oxygen therapy, respiratory rate and other vital signs, need for ventilatory support, Xray and CT scan imaging and blood test results, amongst other clinically relevant parameters. Accumulated safety data from COV001 will be reviewed before commencing enrolment. To account for the multisite recruitment activity, it is recognised that the number of volunteers enrolled into each group 9 and 10 will be 1000 +/-10%. This is a single arm group whereby up to 60 HIV infected individuals who are stable on antiretroviral therapy (ARV) will be recruited and receive ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination according to the schedule of attendance described in table 14. **** Participants in groups 1a (a1 and a2), 2a (a1 and a2) and 5a (a1 and a2) will be invited to receive a booster dose in the respective a3 and a4 groups, keeping the overall sample size in group 1a, 2a and 5a the same. Adult volunteers aged at least 18 years, and healthy children aged 5 -12 years (inclusive) will be recruited into the study. Volunteers will be considered enrolled immediately following administration of the vaccine. The end of the trial is the date of the last assay conducted on the last sample collected. The potential risks are those associated with phlebotomy, vaccination and disease enhancement Localised bruising and discomfort can occur at the site of venepuncture. Infrequently fainting may occur. These will not be documented as AEs if they occur. The total volume of blood drawn over a 12 month period will be 105-621.5mL in the adult groups (blood volumes may vary slightly for volunteers at different investigator sites due to use of different volume vacutainers, following local Trust SOPs). The total volume of blood drawn over a 12 month period in the HIV group will be 1077.5mL. This should not compromise these otherwise healthy volunteers, as they would donate 470mL during a single blood donation for the National Blood transfusion Service over a 3-4 month period. Volunteers will be asked to refrain from blood donation for the duration of their involvement in the trial. In the paediatric group maximum blood volumes per visit are based on 0.8ml/kg. This is in line with guidance given by the European Commission of Public Health which are tabled below in table 3. The weights for each age group are based on the 0.4th centile on the female UK-WHO growth chart. These volumes should not compromise these otherwise healthy paediatric participants to ensure < 3% total blood volume sampling over a 3 month period.  Allergic reactions from mild to severe may occur in response to any constituent of a medicinal product's preparation. Anaphylaxis is extremely rare (about 1 in 1,000,000 vaccine doses) but can occur in response to any vaccine or medication. The typical local reaction as a result of IM injection is temporary pain, tenderness, redness, and swelling at the site of the injection. Constitutional influenza-like symptoms such as fatigue, headache, malaise, feverishness, and muscle aches can occur with any vaccination and last for approximately 2-3 days. In the phase 1 COV001 study, approximately 30-40% of participants not taking prophylactic paracetamol felt feverishness, or had chills, muscle ache, malaise, fatigue, or headache which they rated as moderate to severe. (See the investigator brochure for further details). Presyncopal and syncopal episodes may occur at the time of vaccination which rapidly resolve. As with many vaccines, temporary ascending paralysis (Guillain-Barré syndrome, GBS) or immune mediated reactions that can lead to organ damage may occur, but this should be extremely rare (1 in 100,000-1,000,000 vaccine doses). Transient neutropenia, lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia has been described following immunization with other adenoviral-vectored vaccines, and is not perceived to be of clinical significance. Control participants will receive one or two doses of a licensed MenACWY vaccine, the risks of which are described in these vaccines SmPC. The risks of inducing disease enhancement and lung immunopathology in the event of COVID-19 disease following ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination are unknown as described above. Two NHP challenge studies have shown no evidence of disease enhancement from immunisation with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or inactivated SARS-CoV-2 virus, but caution should be taken when interpreting these negative findings. . All pre-clinical data from challenge studies using ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and other vaccine candidates (when available) will inform decisions on risk/benefit to participants receiving the IMP. Any safety signals associated with disease enhancement potentially observed in COV001 will also inform these decisions. Volunteers enrolled into the control groups will receive 1 or 2 doses of MenACWY, a licensed vaccine that has been administered to teenagers in the UK routine schedule since 2015 and is used as a travel vaccine for high risk areas. The majority of participants in this study will not have had this vaccine previously, and therefore will gain the benefit of protection against group A, C, W and Y meningococcus. Those participants who have previously had MenACWY vaccines will have their immunity against these organisms boosted. Recipients of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 do not have any guaranteed benefit, however it is hoped that the information gained from this study will contribute to the development of a safe and effective vaccine against COVID-19. Volunteers will be recruited by use of an advertisement +/-registration form formally approved by the ethics committee(s) and distributed or posted in the following places: • In public places, including buses and trains, with the agreement of the owner / proprietor. • In newspapers or other literature for circulation. • On radio via announcements. • On a website or social media site operated by our group or with the agreement of the owner or operator (including on-line recruitment through our website). • By e-mail distribution to a group or list only with the express agreement of the network administrator or with equivalent authorisation. • By email distribution to individuals who have already expressed an interest in taking part in any clinical trial at the Oxford Vaccine Centre and at trial sites. • On stalls or stands at exhibitions or fairs. • Via presentations (e.g. presentations at lectures or invited seminars). • Direct mail-out: This will involve obtaining names and addresses of adults via the most recent • Direct mail-out using National Health Service databases: These include the National Health Applications and Infrastructure Services (NHAIS) via a NHAIS data extract or equivalent. Initial contact to potential participants will not be made by the study team. Instead study invitation material will be sent out on our behalf by an external company, CFH Docmail Ltd, in order to preserve the confidentiality of potential participants. CFH Docmail Ltd is accredited as having exceeded standards under the NHS Digital Data Security and Protection Toolkit (ODS ID -8HN70). • Oxford Vaccine Centre databases and study site databases: We may contact individuals from databases of groups within the CCVTM (including the Oxford Vaccine Centre database) and other study sites of previous trial participants who have expressed an interest in receiving information about all future studies for which they may be eligible. • Using local GP practices or Trusts as Participant Identification Centres (PICs) Recruitment of those with likely higher exposure to SARS-CoV-2 will be prioritised, in order to increase the likelihood of obtaining efficacy endpoints in the context of a waning epidemic. These areas (e.g. hospital porters, receptionists, cleaners, other hospital workers), and other public facing keyworkers with no access to personal protective equipment, amongst others. The parent/legal guardian of the participant or the participant themselves (when aged 18 or over) will personally sign and date the latest approved version of the Informed Consent form. A written version and verbal explanation of the Study Information leaflet and Informed Consent will be presented to the participant/parent/legal guardian of the participant detailing: • the exact nature of the study • what it will involve for the participant • the implications and constraints of the protocol • the known side effects and any risks involved in taking part • sample handling -participants will be informed that anonymised samples taken during the course of the study may be shared with study collaborators. • Individual results will not be shared with participants The Study Information leaflet will be made available to the participant and/or parent/legal guardian for an appropriate amount of time (where possible this will a minimum of 24 hours) prior to consent being obtained. A video presentation of the Study Information leaflet may be screened to an audience, or made available for them to access it remotely. However, participants will have the opportunity to individually question an appropriately trained and delegated researcher before signing consent. Assent will also be sought from children 7 years of age or older, to participate in the trial. The following general principles will be emphasised: • • Blood samples taken as part of the study may be sent outside of the UK and Europe to laboratories in collaboration with the University of Oxford. These will be de-identified. Volunteers will be asked if they consent to indefinite storage of any leftover samples for use in other ethically approved research, this will be optional. The parent/legal guardian of the participant or adult participant will be allowed as much time as wish to consider the information, and the opportunity to question the Investigator, their GP or other independent parties to decide whether they will participate in the study. Written informed consent will then be obtained by means of the adult participant or the parent/legal guardian of the participant dated signature, and dated signature of the person who presented and obtained the Informed consent. The person who obtained the consent must be suitably qualified and experienced, and have been authorised to do so by the Chief/Principal Investigator and listed on the delegation log. A copy of the signed informed consent will be given to the participant or parent/legal guardian of the participant. The original signed form will be retained at the research study site, in the case report form (CRF). Updated information that require volunteers to be re-consented will be sent to participants and written re-consent requested at the earliest scheduled visit. If the earliest visit to occur is in the symptomatic pathway, the participant may consent using an electronic signature for infection control purposes. Where appropriate, and when re-consenting in person is not possible (e.g. participants in self-isolation), volunteers may be contacted over the phone and an appropriately trained and CONFIDENTIAL COV002, V14.0, 09-NOV-2020 Page 69 of 159 delegated researcher will obtain re-consent. In this instance the re-consent discussion will be documented by the researcher, the participant will sign the form (electronic or paper) and a copy will be signed by the researcher. The dates of signature may be different and a fully signed copy will be provided to the participant at the next scheduled visit. The participant may re-consent using an electronic signature. This study will be conducted in adults and children, who meet the following inclusion and exclusion criteria: The volunteer must satisfy all the following criteria to be eligible for the study: • Adults aged 18 -55 years (groups 4, 5, 6 and 11) • Adults aged 56-69 years (groups 1, 7, and 9) • Adults aged 70 years and older (groups 2, 8, and 10) • Children aged 5-12 years inclusive (group 3) • Able and willing (in the Investigator's opinion) to comply with all study requirements. • Willing to allow the investigators to discuss the volunteer's medical history with their General Practitioner and access all medical records when relevant to study procedures. • For females of childbearing potential only, willingness to practice continuous effective contraception (see below) during the study and a negative pregnancy test on the day(s) of screening and vaccination. • Agreement to refrain from blood donation during the course of the study. • Provide written informed consent. • Parent/Guardian provides informed consent Additional Inclusion criteria to Group 12 (HIV sub-study): • HIV positive • CD4>350 cells/mL The volunteer may not enter the study if any of the following apply: • Participation in COVID-19 prophylactic drug trials for the duration of the study. Note: Participation in COVID-19 treatment trials is allowed in the event of hospitalisation due to COVID-19. The COV002 study team should be informed as soon as possible. days before and after each study vaccination, with the exception of the licensed seasonal influenza vaccination and the licensed pneumococcal vaccination. Participants will be encouraged to receive these vaccinations at least 7 days before or after their study vaccine. • Prior or planned receipt of an investigational or licensed vaccine or product likely to impact on interpretation of the trial data (e.g. Adenovirus vectored vaccines, any coronavirus vaccines). This exclusion criteria will not apply to group 11, as recruitment will be targeted at those volunteers who previously received a ChAdOx1 vectored vaccine. • Administration of immunoglobulins and/or any blood products within the three months preceding the planned administration of the vaccine candidate. • Any confirmed or suspected immunosuppressive or immunodeficient state (except group 12, where HIV infected participants are allowed); asplenia; recurrent severe infections and use of immunosuppressant medication within the past 6 months, except topical steroids or short-term oral steroids (course lasting ≤14 days) • History of allergic disease or reactions likely to be exacerbated by any component of ChAdOx1 • Any history of angioedema. • Any history of anaphylaxis. • Pregnancy, lactation or willingness/intention to become pregnant during the study. • Current diagnosis of or treatment for cancer (except basal cell carcinoma of the skin and cervical carcinoma in situ). • History of serious psychiatric condition likely to affect participation in the study. • Bleeding disorder (e.g. factor deficiency, coagulopathy or platelet disorder), or prior history of significant bleeding or bruising following IM injections or venepuncture. • Continuous use of anticoagulants, such as coumarins and related anticoagulants (i.e. warfarin) or novel oral anticoagulants (i.e. apixaban, rivaroxaban, dabigatran and edoxaban) • Suspected or known current alcohol or drug dependency. • Any other significant disease, disorder or finding which may significantly increase the risk to the volunteer because of participation in the study, affect the ability of the volunteer to participate in the study or impair interpretation of the study data. • Severe and/or uncontrolled cardiovascular disease, respiratory disease, gastrointestinal disease, liver disease, renal disease, endocrine disorder and neurological illness (mild/moderate well controlled comorbidities are allowed) • History of laboratory confirmed COVID-19 (except groups 5d, 9, 10 and 11) .  The following AEs associated with any vaccine, or identified on or before the day of vaccination constitute absolute contraindications to further administration of an IMP to the volunteer in question. If any of these events occur during the study, the subject will not be eligible to receive a booster dose and will be followed up by the clinical team or their GP until resolution or stabilisation of the event: • Anaphylactic reaction following administration of vaccine  Female volunteers of childbearing potential are required to use an effective form of contraception during the course of the study. Acceptable forms of contraception for female volunteers include: • Established use of oral, injected or implanted hormonal methods of contraception. • Placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS). • Total hysterectomy. • Bilateral Tubal Occlusion • Barrier methods of contraception (condom or occlusive cap with spermicide). • Male sterilisation, if the vasectomised partner is the sole partner for the subject. • True abstinence, when this is in line with the preferred and usual lifestyle of the subject (Periodic abstinence and withdrawal are not acceptable methods of contraception). In accordance with the principles of the current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki and any other applicable regulations, a volunteer has the right to withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason, and is not obliged to give his or her reasons for doing so. The Investigator may withdraw the volunteer at any time in the interests of the volunteer's health and well-being. In addition, the volunteer may withdraw/be withdrawn for any of the following reasons: • Administrative decision by the Investigator. • Ineligibility (either arising during the study or retrospectively, having been overlooked at screening). • Significant protocol deviation. • Volunteer non-compliance with study requirements. • An AE, which requires discontinuation of the study involvement or results in inability to continue to comply with study procedures. The reason for withdrawal will be recorded in the CRF. If withdrawal is due to an AE, appropriate follow-up visits or medical care will be arranged, with the agreement of the volunteer, until the AE has resolved, stabilised or a non-trial related causality has been assigned. Any volunteer who is withdrawn from the study may be replaced, if that is possible within the specified time frame. The DSMB or DSMB chair may recommend withdrawal of volunteers. If a volunteer withdraws from the study, data and blood samples collected before their withdrawal will still be used on the analysis. Storage of blood samples will continue unless the participant specifically requests otherwise. In all cases of subject withdrawal, long-term safety data collection, including some procedures such as safety bloods, will continue as appropriate if subjects have received one or more vaccine doses, unless they decline any further follow-up.  Should a volunteer become pregnant during the trial, no further study IMP will be administered. She will be followed up for clinical safety assessment with her ongoing consent and in addition will be followed until pregnancy outcome is determined. We would not routinely perform venepuncture in a pregnant volunteer unless there is clinical need. This section describes the clinical procedures for evaluating study participants and follow-up after administration of study vaccine. All volunteers will have clinic attendances and procedures as indicated in the schedule of attendances below (tables 5-12). Subjects will receive either the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine or MenACWY, and undergo follow-up for a total of 12 months from the last vaccination visit. Additional visits or procedures may be performed at the discretion of the investigators, e.g., further medical history and physical examination, or additional blood tests and other investigations if clinically relevant. Temperature will be routinely measured at the time-points indicated in the schedule of procedures. Respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, pulse, blood pressure and temperature will be measured at the COVID-19 testing visits and if clinically required. All subjects will undergo medical history and a targeted physical examination if considered necessary at screening or pre-enrolment on D0. The purpose of this examination is to assess and document the subject's baseline health status so that any later change can be determined. Vital signs (temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure +/-oxygen saturation) will be measured at screening or pre-enrolment on D0 as part of baseline assessments. Further medical history, physical examination and observations may be done throughout the study based on clinical discretion. A targeted physical examination, including neurological assessment, must be conducted, when appropriate, in the event of a SAE. Blood tests, Nose/Throat Swabs, Saliva samples and urinalysis Blood will be drawn for the following laboratory tests and processed at contractually agreed NHS • Diagnostic serology; HBsAg, HCV antibodies, HIV antibodies in groups 1, 2, 5a, 5b, 5c and 5d, 7 and 8 only (specific consent will be gained prior to testing blood for these blood-borne viruses). HBsAg and HCV antibodies will be in group 12 with HIV antibodies only done at the investigators discretion. • Immunology; Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) typing (groups 5a, 5b, 5c only) • COVID-19; A nose/throat swab and/or saliva sample will be taken for COVID-19 NAAT testing • SARS-CoV-2 weekly PCR sample; weekly nose/throat swabs will be processed via the Department of Health and Social Care's community testing programme. At each site: • Urinalysis; For female volunteers of child bearing potential only, urine will be tested for betahuman chorionic gonadotrophin (β-HCG) at screening (when applicable) and immediately prior to vaccination. Where local policies require, a serum β-HCG may replace urinary test. • Serum; Samples may be centrifuged at local sites and shipped to University of Oxford laboratories or elsewhere for analysis. SARS-CoV-2 serology will be conducted at screening (except in groups 5d, 9, 10 and 11). These may be conducted at appropriate university research or NHS trust laboratories facilities at sites. SARS-CoV-2 screening serology samples and or COVID-19 related immunology samples taken, may also be shipped from sites to a central laboratory facility at the University of Oxford or elsewhere. Collaboration with other specialist laboratories in the UK, Europe and outside of Europe for further exploratory tests may occur. This would involve the transfer of serum, urine, stool or plasma, PBMC and/or other study samples to these laboratories, but these would remain anonymised. Informed consent for this will be gained from volunteers. Samples collected for the purposes of COVID-19 diagnosis might be sent to reference labs in the UK alongside their personal data. This would be in line with the national guidance and policy for submitting samples for testing at reference labs. Immunological assays will be conducted according to local SOPs. Subjects will be informed that there may be leftover samples of their blood (after all testing for this study is completed), and that such samples may be stored indefinitely for possible future research (exploratory immunology), including genotypic testing of genetic polymorphisms potentially relevant to vaccine immunogenicity. Subjects will be able to decide if they will permit such future use of any Samples that are to be stored for future research will be transferred to the OVC Biobank (REC 16/SC/0141). The study visits and procedures will be undertaken by one of the clinical trials team. The procedures to be included in each visit are documented in the schedule of attendances (tables 5-12). Each visit is assigned a time-point and a window period, within which the visit will be conducted. Participants will be required to complete an online questionnaire as an initial confirmation of eligibility. In order to minimise the risks of COVID-19 exposure in clinic, participants may be asked to provide All potential volunteers will have a screening visit, which may take place up to 90 days prior to vaccination. At the screening visit, a video presentation of the aims of the study and all tests to be carried out may be screened to an audience or accessed remotely. Individually each volunteer will have the opportunity to question an appropriately trained and delegated researcher before signing the consent. Informed consent will be taken before screening/enrolment, as described in section 6.2. If written consent is obtained, the procedures indicated in the schedule of attendances will be undertaken including a medical history (if not already collected by phone), physical examination (if required), height and weight and blood tests including a SARS-CoV-2 screening test (all groups except 4c, 6b, 5d, 9, 10 and 11) and safety bloods (groups 1, 2, 5, 7 and 8) will be done. volunteer from a screening visit for another study, these results may be used for assessing eligibility (provided the results date is within the 6 months preceding enrolment in COV002). We will aim to contact the subject's general practitioner with the permission of the subject after screening to corroborate medical history when possible and practical to do so (Groups 1, 2, 7 and 8 only, except group 12 where GPs can be replaced by their HIV consultant). GPs will be notified that the subject has volunteered for the study (all study groups,). Abnormal clinical findings from blood tests at screening (Groups 1, 2, 5, 7 and 8 only) will be assessed by a medically qualified study member. Abnormal blood tests following screening will be assessed according to site-specific laboratory adverse event grading tables. Any abnormal test result deemed clinically significant may be repeated to ensure it is not a single occurrence. If an abnormal finding is deemed to be clinically significant, the volunteer will be informed and appropriate medical care arranged with the permission of the volunteer. The eligibility of the volunteer will be reviewed at the end of the screening visit and again when all results from the screening visit have been considered. Decisions to exclude the volunteer from enrolling in the trial or to withdraw a volunteer from the trial will be at the discretion of the Investigator. If eligible, a day 0 visit will be scheduled for the volunteer to receive the vaccine and subsequent follow-up. The parent(s)/legal guardian(s) of participants in group 3 and participants in all remaining groups will have informed consent taken as per section 6.2. Volunteers will be considered enrolled in to the trial at the point of vaccination. Before vaccination/trial intervention, the eligibility of the volunteer will be reviewed. Temperature will be observed and if necessary, a medical history and physical examination maybe undertaken to determine need to postpone vaccination or withdraw the participant. Vaccinations/trial intervention will be administered as described below. All vaccines will be administered intramuscularly according to specific SOPs. The injection site will be covered with a sterile dressing and the volunteer will stay in the trial site for observation for a In groups 1-3, 5, 7, 8, 11 and 12 and in a subset of volunteers in groups 4, 6, 9 and 10 (n=up to 1000, in each groups 4 and 6 and approximately 500 in each of groups 9 and 10), participants will be given an oral thermometer, tape measure and diary card (paper or electronic), with instructions on use. The approximate 3000 participants in groups 4, 6, 9 and 10 that are required to complete diaries will be allocated according to site. The allocation will ensure distribution of ages. All participants will be given the emergency 24 hour telephone number to contact the on-call study physician if needed. Volunteers will be instructed on how to self-assess the severity of these AEs. There will also be space on the diary card to self-document unsolicited AEs, and whether medication was taken to relieve the symptoms. Participants in groups 4, 6, 9 and 10 will be advised to take prophylactic paracetamol for 24 hours after vaccination and will record this in the e-diary (up to 1,000 participants in each of groups 4 and 6, and approximately 500 in each of groups 9 and 10 only). Participants in groups 1-3 and 5, 7, 8 and 11 will be asked to report on solicited AEs for 7 days and unsolicited AEs for 28 days. The subset of approximately 3000 participants in groups 4, 6, 9, and 10 will be asked to report solicited and unsolicited AEs for 7 days only. Participants in group 12 will be asked to report on solicited local and systemic AEs for 7 days and unsolicited AEs for 28 days. Diary cards will collect information on the timing and severity of the following solicited AEs:  Prior to initiation of the study, any newly available safety data will be reviewed from animal studies or clinical trials of coronavirus vaccines being tested in the UK (COV001) or elsewhere, and discussed with the DSMB and/or MHRA as necessary. Recruitment of groups 1, 4, 5, 6, 11 and 12 may occur simultaneously. However, older adults aged 56 and above will only be recruited into groups 4, 6, 7 and 8 following a safety review of participants enrolled in groups 1 and 2. This review will include the profile of AEs observed following a single dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Adults aged 56 and above will only be recruited into group 9 following safety review of groups 1 and 7, and into group 10 following safety review of groups 2 and 8. Follow-up visits will take place as per the schedule of attendances described in tables 5-12 with their respective windows. Volunteers in groups 1-3 and 5, 7 and 8 will be assessed for local and systemic adverse events, interim history, physical examination, review of diary cards (paper or electronic) and blood tests at these time points as detailed in the schedule of attendances. Blood will also be taken for immunology purposes.  Biochemistry, Haematology (mL) 5 Where a second dose is administered, the window will apply to the time their last vaccination took place . ^Vital signs at screening or pre-enrolment assessment on D0 include pulse, blood pressure, temperature, respiratory rate +/-oxygen saturation. Only temperature will be routinely measured at subsequent follow-up visits. At COVID-19 testing visits a full set observations will be taken, including respiratory rate and oxygen saturation. % Cumulative blood volume for volunteers if blood taken as per schedule, and excluding any repeat safety blood test that may be necessary. Blood volumes may vary according to local site equipment and practices. a Subject to site capacity, sample and test availability. d Optional and subject to site capacity. $ A subset of up to 1000 volunteers will be asked to fill an e-diary with reactogenicity symptoms for 7 days only in groups 4, 6, 9 and 10. P Pax genes sample at D364 to be done only on participants with positive SARS-CoV-2 NAAT at COVID-19 testing visits, an extra 2.5mL should be added to the cumulative blood volume when this applies.  Biochemistry, Haematology (mL) 5  Biochemistry, Haematology (mL) 5  Biochemistry, Haematology (mL) 5  Given the evolving epidemiological situation both globally and in the UK, should a participant be under quarantine and unable to attend any of the scheduled visits, a telephone/video consultation will be arranged in order to obtain core study data where possible. Participants who become symptomatic during follow-up will be instructed to call the study team who will then advise on how to proceed with clinical testing for COVID-19 if necessary, as per the trial working instructions. Participants will get weekly reminders (email or text messages) to get in touch with the study team if they present with a fever or cough or shortness of breath or anosmia/ageusia, experience any new event requiring medical attendance, or if they are admitted to hospital for any reason. At the COVID-19 testing visit, a nose/throat swab and/or saliva sample, blood samples for safety (FBC, Biochemistry, CRP and others if deemed clinically relevant) and immunology (paxgenes, cytokine profile, PBMCs, serum and others), vital signs and other clinical data will be taken. Symptomatic volunteers may be regularly reviewed over the phone or via video call using a smartphone or computer app if clinically appropriate. Participants will be asked to attend a follow-up visit at 3-5 days post symptoms onset (+2 days) for clinical review and further testing or will be given a kit with instructions for a self-swab instead of a clinic visit. Participants will be asked to record information on COVID-19 related symptoms in an electronic diary for safety monitoring until symptom resolution or for at least 14 days. Participants who have a positive NAAT at S0, will not be required to attend a S3-5 visit (or provide a self-swab), but will be reviewed for safety at 7 days post positive swab. Clinical data, and additional blood samples for safety and immunology purposes will be taken at the S7 visit. Participants who have a positive swab at S3-5 will be reviewed for safety at 7 days post positive swab where clinical data, and additional blood samples for safety and immunology purposes will be taken. Participants who have 2 negative NAAT results from S0 and either a S3-5 visit or a self-swab will not be required to attend for an S7 visit. Closer follow-up and safety monitoring may be carried out by local trial teams if felt this is clinically indicated. If breathlessness is the only symptom that triggers a swab, further testing at S3-5 or S7 will be conducted at clinical discretion if there is no objective signs of respiratory distress CONFIDENTIAL COV002, V14.0, 09-NOV-2020 Page 104 of 159 (e.g. tachypnea, desaturation). Immunology samples from symptomatic volunteers will be optional at their COVID-19 testing visits and will be subject to local site capacity. Participants who develop COVID-19 symptoms and have a positive NAAT test after the first vaccination can only receive a booster dose after a minimum 4 weeks interval from their first NAAT positive test, provided their symptoms have significantly improved. The decision to proceed with booster vaccinations in those cases will be at clinical discretion of the investigators. For participants who are asymptomatic and have a positive NAAT test, a minimum of 2 weeks from first NAAT positivity will be required before boosting. Participants may be asked provide a saliva and/or a nose/throat self-swab sample every week from the date of enrolment, which will be posted and processed in the Department of Health and Social Care's community testing programme. . This process will be detailed in trial specific instructions. Weekly PCR samples will be collected and processed depending on test availability, laboratory capacity, and other local screening programmes, which will determine the number of participants asked to provide weekly samples. Participants with a positive test result from home testing (self-swabbing) will be notified of their test results by the Department of Health and Social Care community testing programme and advised to self-isolate as per current government guidance. No additional trial follow up of these participants will occur at this time unless they become symptomatic. Symptomatic volunteers will then be reviewed follow the procedures outlined in section 7.3.5 above. Those participants who have a SARS-CoV-2 positive NAAT test result, may be asked to provide a stool sample at approximately 7 days after symptom onset or positive NAAT result if asymptomatic and 14 days after the first sample if necessary, as per trial specific instructions. Samples will be processed to look at differences in viral shedding between the investigational vaccine and control arms, and to measure calprotectin levels as a marker of gastrointestinal inflammation. These samples will be collected and processed depending on test availability, laboratory capacity, and will not be compulsory to the volunteers. Further exploratory immunology and microbiology tests may be conducted at the investigators' discretion.  Participants will be asked to record information on a weekly basis about illnesses amongst household contacts and friends, their contact with the general public, and infection control procedures. This will be optional. Volunteers will be asked to enter data in a diary from baseline to the end of the follow-up period. This will be recorded via a web-based electronic diary to which participants will be provided access at baseline. Participants working in clinical areas will be exempt from this questionnaire to reduce the study load on these participants whose exposure to COVID-19 is likely to be in the workplace rather than the home or community. With the participant's consent, the study team will request access to medical notes or submit a data collection form for completion by attending clinical staff on any medically attended COVID-19 episodes. Any data which are relevant to ascertainment of efficacy endpoints and disease enhancement (AESI) will be collected. These are likely to include, but not limited to, information on ICU admissions, clinical parameters such as oxygen saturation, respiratory rates and vital signs, need for oxygen therapy, need for ventilatory support, imaging and blood tests results, amongst others. Participants will be randomised to investigational vaccine or MenACWY in a 3:1:3:1 (Groups 1 and 7), 5:1:5:1 (Groups 2 and 8) and 1:1 (groups 3, 4, 5a, 5b, 5c, 6, 9 and 10) and 5:1 (group 5d) allocation, using block randomisation. Group 11 will be open-label and randomisation to investigational vaccine or comparator will not apply. Participants will be blinded to the arm they have been allocated to, whether investigational vaccine or MenACWY. The trial staff administering the vaccine will not be blinded. Vaccines will be prepared out of sight of the participant and syringes will be covered with an opaque object/material until ready for administration to ensure blinding. If the clinical condition of a participant necessitates breaking the code, this will be undertaken according to a trial specific working instruction and group allocation sent to the attending physician, if unblinding is thought to be relevant and likely to change clinical management. Additional steps may be taken to keep clinical investigators assessing primary endpoints blinded to group allocation, where this is possible and practical to do so. A designated member of the clinical team may be unblinded for the purposes of safety reporting procedures. All data from participants with NAAT-positive swabs will be assessed for inclusion in the primary efficacy analysis by two blinded assessors who will independently review each case according to pre-specified criteria as detailed in the statistical analysis plan, to classify each for inclusion in the primary and secondary outcomes.  The vaccine manufactured by Advent is stored at nominal -80 o C (+/-20 o C) in a secure freezer, at the clinical site. The vaccine manufactured by Cobra Biologics Ltd is stored at 2-8°C in a secure fridge, at the clinical site. All movements of the study vaccines will be documented in accordance with existing standard operating procedure (SOP). Vaccine accountability, storage, shipment and handling will be in accordance with relevant SOPs and forms. To allow for large number of participants to receive the vaccine in a short time period, additional clinic locations may be used. In this instance vaccines will be transported in accordance with local SOP's and approvals as required On vaccination day, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will be allowed to thaw to room temperature and will be Another simian adenovirus vector (ChAd63) has been safely administered at doses up to 2 x 10 11 vp with an optimal dose of 5 x 10 10 vp, balancing immunogenicity and reactogenicity. MERS001 was the first clinical trial of a ChAdOx1 vectored expressing the full-length Spike protein from a separate, but related betacoronavirus. ChAdOx1 MERS has been given to 31 participants to date at doses ranging from 5x10 9 vp to 5x10 10 vp. Despite higher reactogeniticy observed at the 5x10 10 vp, this dose was safe, with self-limiting AEs and no SARs recorded. The 5x10 10 vp was the most immunogenic, in terms of inducing neutralising antibodies against MERS-CoV using a live virus assay 16 . Given the immunology findings and safety profile observed with a ChAdOx1 vectored vaccine against MERS-CoV, the 5x10 10 vp dose was chosen for ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. For children, a lower-dose of 2.5x10 10 VP will be administered as the lower dose is likely to be less reactogenic and therefore more acceptable given the lower risk of severe illness in this age group. The Clinical BioManufacturing Facility (CBF), who manufactured and tested batches 02P20-01 and 02P20-02 for the COV001 trial, determined vp/mL for Advent manufactured batch(es). This was done using a spectrophotometry-based methodology documented in their internal SOP (SOP A104). The doses to be administered in COV002, on Advent manufactured batches, will be determined by both methods (Abs260 and qPCR) . Overseas studies conducted on Advent batch(es) will be dosed based volume. This dosing range is based on a target 5 × 10 10 viral particles per dose and a ± 30% range to take into account process and method variabilities. The planned clinical dosage of Symbiosis' product is compared to that of CBF and Advent products, the resulting Symbiosis' product dosage at 0.5 mL for lot 20481A is somewhat lower in total viral particle per dose (20% from the lower range limit), slightly higher in total viral genome copies per dose (12% from the higher range limit), and slightly CONFIDENTIAL COV002, V14.0, 09-NOV-2020 Page 110 of 159 lower in total infectious particle per dose (8% from the lower range limit). These differences are considered to be comparable to or within the variabilities from the analytical methods used in concentration determination (A260, qPCR, and infectivity) and the dosing volumes during clinical administration. In summary, with a 0.5 mL dosing volume for Symbiosis' product, strength difference from CBF and Advent products is not expected to have significant clinical impact in terms of reactogenicity and immunogenicity/efficacy. The study will be performed in accordance with the current version of the UK Genetically Modified Organisms (Contained Use) Regulations. Approved SOPs will be followed to minimise dissemination of the recombinant vectored vaccine virus into the environment. GMO waste will be inactivated according to approved SOPs. Participants who are allocated to the control groups will receive one or two injections of MenACWY Participants will be blinded as to which injection they are receiving. A vaccine accountability log of MenACWY will be maintained at each trial site. There will be no additional labelling of these vaccines beyond their licensed packaging. MenACWY will be stored in a locked (or access controlled) refrigerator (2°C -8°C) at the sites, as per SmPC. All vaccinations will be administered by the research team and recorded in the CRF. The study medication will be at no time in the possession of the participant and compliance will not, therefore, be an issue. Accountability of the IMP and MenACWY will be conducted in accordance with the relevant SOPs. As set out by the exclusion criteria, volunteers may not enter the study if they have received: any vaccine in the 30 days prior to enrolment, any investigational product within 30 days prior to enrolment or if receipt is planned during the study period, or if there is any chronic use (>14 days) of any immunosuppressant medication within 6 months prior to enrolment or if receipt is planned at any time during the study period (topical steroids are permitted). Participants on continuous use of oral anticoagulants, such as coumarins and related anticoagulants (i.e. warfarin) or novel oral anticoagulants (i.e. apixaban, rivaroxaban, dabigatran and edoxaban) will be excluded from this trial, as per the exclusion criteria. Participants in groups 4 and 6 will be advised to take Paracetamol after vaccination at 1g every 4-6 hours for the first 24 hours (maximum dose 4g within 24 hours). This will not be a requirement for study participation, and participants will have the option to not follow the advice.  If this vaccine is proven to be efficacious following analysis of the primary endpoint and if the DSMB agrees, participants allocated to MenACWY group may be offered the IMP, should extra doses become available. Safety will be assessed by the frequency, incidence and nature of AEs and SAEs arising during the study. An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a volunteer, which may occur during or after administration of an IMP and does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the intervention. An AE can therefore be any unfavourable and unintended sign (including any clinically significant abnormal laboratory finding or change from baseline), symptom or disease temporally associated with the study intervention, whether or not considered related to the study intervention. An AR is any untoward or unintended response to an IMP. This means that a causal relationship between the IMP and an AE is at least a reasonable possibility, i.e., the relationship cannot be ruled out. All cases judged by the reporting medical Investigator as having a reasonable suspected causal relationship to an IMP (i.e. possibly, probably or definitely related to an IMP) will qualify as AR. Adverse events that may be related to the IMP are listed in the Investigator's Brochure for each product. An SAE is an AE that results in any of the following outcomes, whether or not considered related to the study intervention. • Life-threatening event (i.e., the volunteer was, in the view of the Investigator, at immediate risk of death from the event that occurred). This does not include an AE that, if it occurred in a more severe form, might have caused death. • Persistent or significant disability or incapacity (i.e., substantial disruption of one's ability to carry out normal life functions). • Hospitalisation or prolongation of existing hospitalisation, regardless of length of stay, even if it is a precautionary measure for continued observation. Hospitalisation (including inpatient or outpatient hospitalisation for an elective procedure) for a pre-existing condition that has not worsened unexpectedly does not constitute a serious AE. • An important medical event (that may not cause death, be life threatening, or require hospitalisation) that may, based upon appropriate medical judgment, jeopardise the volunteer and/or require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above. Examples of such medical events include allergic reaction requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or clinic, blood dyscrasias, or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalisation. • Congenital anomaly or birth defect. An AE that is both serious and, in the opinion of the reporting Investigator or Sponsors, believed to be possibly, probably or definitely due to an IMP or any other study treatments, based on the information provided. A SAR, the nature and severity of which is not consistent with the information about the medicinal product in question set out in the IB. No IMP related SAEs are expected in this study. All SARs will therefore be reported as SUSARs.  The foreseeable ARs following vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 include injection site pain, tenderness, erythema, warmth, swelling, induration, pruritus, myalgia, arthralgia, headache, fatigue, fever, feverishness, chills, malaise, nausea and vomiting. Disease enhancement following vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will be monitored. Severe COVID-19 disease will be defined using clinical criteria. Detailed clinical parameters will be collected from medical records and aligned with agreed definitions as they emerge. These are likely to include, but are not limited to, oxygen saturation, need for oxygen therapy, respiratory rate, need for ventilatory support, imaging and blood test results, amongst other clinically relevant parameters. Acute respiratory distress, pneumonitis, acute cardiac injury, arrhythmia, septic-shock like syndrome and acute kidney injury related with COVID-19 disease will be monitored from medical records review of hospitalised participants. Kawasaki-like disease and other hyperinflammatory syndromes will be monitored and recorded as AESI in the paediatric group. Eosinophilia as a marker skewed Th2 responses will be routinely monitored in participants attending their COVID-19 testing and follow-up visits. Marked eosinophilia of ≥ 1.5 x109/L will be reported as an SAE. AESI relevant to vaccination in general will also be monitored such as: generalised convulsion, Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS), Acute Disseminated Encephalomyelitis (ADEM), Thrombocytopenia, Anaphylaxis, Vasculitides in addition to serious solicited AEs will be monitored. For every AE, an assessment of the relationship of the event to the administration of the vaccine will be undertaken by the CI-delegated clinician. An interpretation of the causal relationship of the intervention to the AE in question will be made, based on the type of event; the relationship of the event to the time of vaccine administration; and the known biology of the vaccine therapy ( Known pattern of response seen with other vaccines Table 16 . Guidelines for assessing the relationship of vaccine administration to an AE. All local and systemic AEs occurring in the 28 days following each vaccination observed by the Investigator or reported by the volunteer, whether or not attributed to study medication, will be recorded in electronic diaries or study database. Participants in a subset of groups 4 and 6 will be CONFIDENTIAL COV002, V14.0, 09-NOV-2020 Page 118 of 159 asked to record local and systemic AE's for 7 days following vaccination in the electronic diary. Any unsolicited AEs reported by participants in any group at subsequent routine visits will be documented on the eCRF until at least 6 months of safety data has accrued for ChAdOx1 nCOV19. All AEs that result in a volunteer's withdrawal from the study will be followed up until a satisfactory resolution occurs, or until a non-study related causality is assigned (if the volunteer consents to this). SAEs and Adverse Events of Special Interest will be collected throughout the entire trial period.  The severity of clinical and laboratory adverse events will be assessed according to scales based on FDA toxicity grading scales for healthy and adolescent volunteers enrolled in preventive vaccine clinical trials, listed in the study specific working instructions and tables 14-16 below.  Moderate: Mild to moderate limitation in activity -some assistance may be needed; no or minimal medical intervention/therapy required Severe: Marked limitation in activity, some assistance usually required; medical intervention/therapy required. Potentially Life-threatening: requires assessment in A&E or hospitalisation  In order to comply with current regulations on SAE reporting to regulatory authorities, the event will be documented accurately and notification deadlines respected. SAEs will be reported on the SAE forms to members of the study team immediately the Investigators become aware of their occurrence, as described in SOP OVC005 Safety Reporting for CTIMPs. Copies of all reports will be forwarded for review to the Chief Investigator (as the Sponsor's representative) within 24 hours of the Investigator being aware of the suspected SAE. The DSMB will be notified of SAEs that are deemed possibly, probably or definitely related to study interventions; the chair of DSMB will be notified immediately (within 24 hours) of the sponsor being aware of their occurrence. SAEs will not normally be reported immediately to the ethical committee(s) unless there is a clinically important increase in occurrence rate, an unexpected outcome, or a new event that is likely to affect safety of trial volunteers, at the discretion of the Chief Investigator and/or DSMB. In addition to the expedited reporting above, the Investigator shall include all SAEs in the annual Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) report.  All SUSARs will be reported by the sponsor delegate to the relevant Competent Authority and to the REC and other parties as applicable. For fatal and life-threatening SUSARS, this will be done no later than 7 calendar days after the Sponsor or delegate is first aware of the reaction. Any additional relevant information will be reported within 8 calendar days of the initial report. All other SUSARs will be reported within 15 calendar days. Sponsor, whether or not the event occurred in the current trial. A Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) will be prepared annually, within 60 days of the anniversary of the first approval date from the regulatory authority for each IMP. The DSUR will be submitted by the CI to the Competent Authority, Ethics Committee, HRA (where required), Host NHS Trust and Sponsor. Eligibility for enrolment in the trial in terms of laboratory findings will be assessed by clinically qualified staff. Abnormal clinical findings from medical history, examination or blood tests will be assessed as to their clinical significance throughout the trial. Laboratory AEs will be assessed using specific toxicity grading scales adapted from the FDA Toxicity Grading Scale for Healthy Adult and Adolescent Volunteers Enrolled in Preventive Vaccine Clinical Trials. Paediatric laboratory AEs will be assessed using site specific paediatric laboratory reference ranges, values outside of these age CONFIDENTIAL COV002, V14.0, 09-NOV-2020 Page 123 of 159 specific ranges will be reviewed by a study clinician to determine clinical significance. If a test is deemed clinically significant, it may be repeated, to ensure it is not a single occurrence. If a test remains clinically significant, the volunteer will be informed and appropriate medical care arranged as appropriate and with the permission of the volunteer. Decisions to exclude the volunteer from enrolling in the trial or to withdraw a volunteer from the trial will be at the discretion of the Investigator The safety profile will be assessed on an on-going basis by the Investigators. The CI and relevant Investigators (as per the trial delegation log) will also review safety issues and SAEs as they arise. Immunopathology data from pre-clinical and phase 1 studies will be assessed by the CI, relevant investigators and the DSMB as soon as they are available and before any volunteers receive a dose of the IMP. The DSMB will evaluate frequency of events, safety and efficacy data every 4-8 weeks and/or as required. The DSMB will make recommendations concerning the conduct, continuation or modification of the study. In particular, the DSMB will review the data at the following key timepoints: • Before vaccination of the first participant (all accumulated data available will be reviewed from COV001, with a minimum 4 weeks safety and immunogenicity data from the first 54 participants receiving the IMP and all accumulated data from the animal studies) • Prior to expansion of the recruitment of groups 4 and 6 in those aged older than 55 years (data will be reviewed from groups 1 and 2) • Prior to enrolment of the first child (all data available will be reviewed from both studies, with a minimum 4 weeks safety data from groups 1 and 2 in COV002 and 4 weeks safety data from all volunteers recruited into COV001) The Data Safety Monitoring Board that is in place for COV001 will also oversee COV002 and review data from both studies combined The chair of the DSMB may be contacted for advice and independent review by the Investigator or trial Sponsor in the following situations: • Following any SAE deemed to be possibly, probably or definitively related to a study intervention. • Any other situation where the Investigator or trial Sponsor feels independent advice or review is important. The DSMB will review SAEs deemed possibly, probably or definitively related to study interventions. The DSMB will be notified within 24 hours of the Investigators' being aware of their occurrence. The DSMB can recommend placing the study on hold if deemed necessary following a study interventionrelated SAE. The DSMB will only be able to judge the short-term safety of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine. Given the complexity of the underlying immunology and the minimal immunological data that will be available for review early in the study, the DSMB will not be in a position to comment on the effects of a later wave of SARS-CoV-2 as vaccine-induced immunity wanes and the theoretical risk of immune enhancement increases. These safety holding rules apply to ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine only. Staggered enrolment will apply to group 3 where half of the overall number of participants allocated to the IMP arm will be vaccinated first and their safety data reviewed after 7 days before enrolment of the remainder. Solicited, unsolicited and laboratories adverse events will be systematically collected in groups 1, 2, 3, 5, 7 and 8. Only a sub-set of up to 1000 participants in each of Groups 4 and 6 will be asked to record solicited and unsolicited AEs for 7 days. request to restart dosing with pertinent data will be submitted as a substantial amendment. The safety review will consider: • The relationship of the AE or SAE to the vaccine. • The relationship of the AE or SAE to the vaccine dose, or other possible causes of the event. • If appropriate, additional screening or laboratory testing for other volunteers to identify those who may develop similar symptoms and alterations to the current Participant Information Sheet (PIS) are discussed. • New, relevant safety information from ongoing research programs on the various components of the vaccine. The local ethics committee and vaccine manufacturers will also be notified if a holding rule is activated or released. All vaccinated volunteers will be followed for safety until resolution or stabilisation (if determined to be chronic sequelae) of their AEs. In addition to the above stated group holding rules, stopping rules for individual volunteers will apply (i.e., indications to withdraw individuals from further vaccinations). Study participants who present with at least one of the following stopping rules will be withdrawn from further vaccination in the study: o the volunteer has a SAE considered possibly, probably or definitely related to vaccination. o the volunteer has an acute allergic reaction or anaphylactic shock following the administration of vaccine investigational product. If a volunteer has an acute respiratory illness (moderate or severe illness with or without fever) or a fever (oral temperature greater than 37.8°C) at the scheduled time of administration of investigational product/control, the volunteer will not be enrolled and will be withdrawn from the study. All vaccinated volunteers will be followed for safety until the end of their planned participation in the study or until resolution or stabilisation (if determined to be chronic sequelae) of their AEs, providing they consent to this. In addition to these pre-defined criteria, the study can be put on hold upon advice of the DSMB, Chief Investigator, Study Sponsor, regulatory authority, Ethical Committee(s), for any single event or combination of multiple events which, in their professional opinion, jeopardise the safety of the volunteers or the reliability of the data.  Both a fully detailed study level statistical analysis plan (SAP) as well as a separate Statistical Analysis Plan for the Marketing Authorisation Application (MAA SAP) will be written and signed off before any interim data analyses are conducted. The data from this study will be included in prospective pooled analyses of studies for efficacy and safety of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 to provide greater precision of both efficacy and safety outcomes. The primary efficacy endpoint is PCR* positive symptomatic COVID-19. This is defined as a participant with a PCR+* swab and at least one of the following symptoms: cough, fever ≥ 37.8, shortness of breath, anosmia, or ageusia. Where possible, sensitivity analyses will be conducted using common alternative definitions of virologically-confirmed COVID-19 disease, including those in use in other phase 3 protocols (including but not limited to: USA AstraZeneca phase 3 trial, South Africa COV005 trial, WHO solidarity trial, CEPI definition). This will aid in comparisons between various studies and meta-analyses. These alternative definitions will be detailed in the statistical analysis plan as exploratory analyses. *or other nucleic acid amplification test The primary and secondary analyses will be conducted on participants who are seronegative at baseline. A sensitivity analysis will be conducted including all participants regardless of baseline serostatus. Analysis of the primary endpoint will be computed as follows: 1. Efficacy of two doses of vaccine where the booster vaccine was a high-dose ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Only participants who received two doses will be included (LD/SD or SD/SD) and only cases occurring more than 14 days after the second vaccine will be included. Secondary analysis 2. Efficacy of at least one standard-dose of any ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Cases occurring more than 21 days after the first vaccination will be included if the first vaccine was a high-dose vaccine. For participants who received a low-dose as their first vaccine, only cases occurring more than 14 days after a standard-dose booster will be included. Participants receiving only low-dose vaccines will be excluded. Only participants who received two standard-dose vaccines will be included and only cases occurring more than 14 days after the second vaccine will be included. Proportions will be compared between ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and MenACWY groups using a Poisson regression model with robust variance (Zou 2004). The model will contain terms including treatment group, and age group at randomization if there is a sufficient sample size within each age category. The logarithm of the period at risk for primary endpoint will be used as an offset variable in the model to adjust for volunteers having different follow up times during which the events occur. Vaccine efficacy (VE) will be calculated as (1 -RR) x 100%, where RR is the relative risk of symptomatic infection (ChADOx1 nCoV-19: Control) and 95% confidence intervals will be presented. If the Poisson regression model with robust variance fails to converge, the exact conditional method for stratified poisson regression will be used. Cumulative incidence of symptomatic infections will be presented using the Kaplan-Meier method. Secondary efficacy endpoints will be analysed in the same way as the primary efficacy endpoint. Analyses will conducted for all adults combined as well as conducting analyses stratified by age cohorts. All data from participants with PCR-positive swabs will be assessed for inclusion in the efficacy analyses by two blinded assessors who will independently review each case according to pre-specified criteria as detailed in the statistical analysis plan, to classify each for inclusion in the primary and secondary outcomes. A separate CRF will be designed for this purpose. All PCR-positive results will be assessed for the primary outcome, including those with symptoms swabbed by trial staff, those with positive throat swabs from weekly home-testing, and other potential sources of information such as health-care workers who are tested at their workplace as either a routine test procedure or due to developing symptoms. PCR+ swabs from outside the trial (for example, a workplace routine swab result in a healthcare worker) will be reviewed by blinded staff and only included as a potential endpoint if the test was conducted in 1) a medical laboratory with ISO 15189 accreditation (provided by UKAS in UK) AND 2) an assay that is either CE marked or that has a derogation authorisation from the MHRA. *or other nucleic acid amplification test Counts and percentages of each local and systemic solicited adverse reaction from diary cards, and all unsolicited AEs and SAEs will be presented for each group. Highly skewed antibody data will be log-transformed prior to analysis. The geometric mean concentration and associated 95% confidence interval will be summarised for each group at each timepoint, by computing the anti-log of the mean difference of the log-transformed data. The geometric mean concentration at day 28 and the proportion of participants seroconverting to the Sspike protein from day 0 to day 28 will be computed. Comparisons between ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine and MenACWY groups will be made using a Mann Whitney U test due to the low titres expected in the control group which will cause a non-normal distribution. In addition, those aged 56 years or older receiving either a single-dose or two-doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine will be compared with those in phase 1 (COV001) aged 18-55 years who received single-dose ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Spike-specific T cell responses (ELISpot) will be presented as means and confidence intervals, or medians and interquartile ranges if non-normally distributed at all post vaccination time points. Comparisons between ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine and MenACWY groups will be made using a Mann Whitney U test due to the low responses expected in the control group which will cause a non-normal distribution. Comparison between two different dose levels of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will be made using ttests. In addition, those aged 56 years or older receiving either a single-dose or two-doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine will be compared with those in phase 1 (COV001) aged 18-55 years who received single-dose ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Subgroup comparisons of efficacy, and safety will be conducted by incorporating vaccine-group by subgroup interaction terms into appropriate regression models. Subgroup comparisons will only be conducted if there are at least 5 cases in all subgroups. 3. Seropositive to S-spike or non-spike proteins at baseline vs not seropositive 4. Health care workers and highly-exposed participants versus others 5. Standard dose versus low dose It is planned that the primary evidence of efficacy and safety for the ChADOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine will be based on global analyses utilizing studies COV001 (the UK P1/2 study), COV002 (the UK P2/3 study), COV003 (the Brazil P3 study) and COV005 (the South Africa P1/2 study) including a pooled analysis across the studies. As such the interim and primary analyses for the primary outcome will be based on cases accumulated across multiple studies, details of which will be specified within the MAA SAP rather than for each individual study. Interim and primary data cuts from this study will therefore be carried out to support the pooled analysis. Page 131 of 159 The global MAA SAP allows for interim and primary analyses to be conducted once sufficient eligible cases have accumulated, where the overall type 1 error is controlled at the 5% level using a flexible alpha-spending approach that accounts for the incorporation of data from this study into pooled interim analyses under the global MAA SAP. Evidence of efficacy will be determined if the lower bound of the multiplicity adjusted confidence interval is greater than a 20% threshold. The primary analysis will have approximately 90% power assuming a vaccine efficacy of 60%. A flexible alpha spending approach will be implemented to allow an earlier primary analysis in the situation where accumulation of eligible cases were lower than expected. Evidence of efficacy at an interim or primary analysis of pooled data will not be considered a reason to stop the trial, but instead will be interpreted as early evidence of efficacy. However if an interim analysis demonstrates evidence of efficacy then a study level analysis according to the study SAP may be used to support study level evidence of efficacy. A final analysis will be conducted at the end of the study. The final study-specific analysis will incorporate all data from the study, including data that has previously contributed to global efficacy estimates under the pooled analysis strategy. The final analysis will be considered a supportive analysis to the global efficacy analysis. Alpha at the final study-specific analysis will be adjusted to incorporate the number of previous global analyses to which the study contributed data in order to control the overall study level type 1 error at 5%. Details will be specified in the study level SAP. All available data will be included in the analysis All vaccinated participants will be included in the analysis unless otherwise specified in the SAP. The independent DSMB will meet regularly to review safety data from all available studies of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and will assess whether the assumptions underlying the sample size calculation are in line with The Chief Investigator will be responsible for all data that accrues from the study. All study data including participant diary will be recorded directly into an Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system (e.g. OpenClinica, REDCap, or similar) or onto a paper source document for later entry into EDC if direct entry is not available. This includes safety data, laboratory data and outcome data. Any additional information that needs recording but is not relevant for the CRF (such as signed consent forms etc.) will be recorded on a separate paper source document. All documents will be stored safely and securely in confidential conditions. All adverse event data (both solicited and unsolicited) reported by the volunteer will be entered onto a volunteer's electronic diary card (eDiary) for a maximum of 28 days following administration of the IMP. The eDiary provides a full audit trial of edits and will be reviewed at time-points as indicated in the schedule of events. Any adverse event continuing beyond the period of the diary will be copied into the eCRF and followed to resolution, if there is a causal relationship to the IMP, or to the end of the study if there is no causal relationship. The participants will be identified by a unique trial specific number and code in any database. The name and any other identifying detail will NOT be included in any trial data electronic file, with the exception of the electronic diaries and household questionnaire, for which consent will be obtained to store the participant email address for quality control purposes. Only site research staff and sponsor data managers have access to view the email address. The EDC system (CRF data) uses a relational database (MySQL/ PostgreSQL) via a secure web interface with data checks applied during data entry to ensure data quality. The database includes a complete suite of features which are compliant with GCP, EU and UK regulations and Sponsor security policies, including a full audit trail, user-based privileges, and integration with the institutional LDAP server. The MySQL and PostgreSQL database and the webserver will both be housed on secure servers maintained by the University of Oxford IT personnel. The servers are in a physically secure location in Europe. Backups will be stored in accordance with the IT department schedule of daily, weekly, and monthly retained for one month, three months, and six months, respectively. The IT servers provide a stable, secure, well-maintained, and high capacity data storage environment. REDCap and CONFIDENTIAL COV002, V14.0, 09-NOV-2020 Page 134 of 159 OpenClinica are widely-used, powerful, reliable, well-supported systems. Access to the study's database will be restricted to the members of the study team by username and password. If participants consent to provide stool samples; the stool sample (in an anonymised form) will be collected from them by a courier and processed in a laboratory by International Health Management Associates (IHMA), an accredited central laboratory. The sample will then be shipped for analysis by Astra Zeneca in a laboratory in the US. The participant would need to provide their name and address to the courier company. The Investigators will maintain appropriate medical and research records for this trial, in compliance with GCP and regulatory and institutional requirements for the protection of confidentiality of volunteers. The Chief Investigator, co-Investigators and clinical research nurses will have access to records. The Investigators will permit authorised representatives of the Sponsor(s), as well as ethical and regulatory agencies to examine (and when required by applicable law, to copy) clinical records for the purposes of quality assurance reviews, audits and evaluation of the study safety and progress. Identifiable information such as contact details will be stored for a minimum of 5 years and until the youngest participant turns 21 years. De-identified research data maybe be stored indefinitely. If volunteers consent to be contacted for future research, information about their consent form will be recorded, retained and stored securely and separately from the research data. If volunteers consent to have their samples stored and used in future research, information about their consent form will be recorded, retained and stored securely as per Biobanking procedures and SOP. All protocol-required information will be collected in CRFs designed by the Investigator. All source documents will be filed in the CRF. Source documents are original documents, data, and records from which the volunteer's CRF data are obtained. For this study, these will include, but are not limited to, volunteer consent form, blood results, GP response letters, laboratory records, diaries, medical records and correspondence. In the majority of cases, CRF entries will be considered source data as the CRF is the site of the original recording (i.e. there is no other written or electronic record of data). In this study this will include, but is not limited to medical history, medication records, vital signs, physical examination records, urine assessments, blood results, adverse event data and details of vaccinations. All source data and volunteer CRFs will be stored securely. To prevent withdrawal of a participant due to relocation, if there is a nearby participating site and with the consent of the participant, copies of relevant participant research records (such as ICF, paper source documents) will be transferred to the local site using secure email addresses such as nhs.net or by password protected sheets. The electronic research data stored on REDCap will also be transferred to the new site. The original records will be retained by the recruiting site. The study protocol, documentation, data and all other information generated will be held in strict confidence. No information concerning the study or the data will be released to any unauthorised third party, without prior written approval of the sponsor. Data collection tools will undergo appropriate validation to ensure that data are collected accurately and completely. Datasets provided for analysis will be subject to quality control processes to ensure analysed data is a true reflection of the source data. Trial data will be managed in compliance with local data management SOPs. If additional, study specific processes are required, an approved Data Management Plan will be implemented Study data may be stored electronically on a secure server, and paper notes will be kept in a keylocked filing cabinet at the site. All essential documents will be retained for a minimum of 5 years after the study has finished. The need to store study data for longer in relation to licensing of the vaccine will be subject to ongoing review. For effective vaccines that may be licensed, we may store research data securely at the site at least 15 years after the end of the study, subject to adjustments General archiving procedures will be conducted in compliance to SOP OVC020 Archiving. Approved site-specific standard operating procedures (SOPs) will be used at all clinical and laboratory sites. A Trial Steering Committee will be appointed and will consist of an independent Chairman, not less than two other independent members and the Chief Investigator. All significant operational matters relating to the research will be decided upon by the trial steering committee that would have as main objectives: • provide advice, through its chair, to the investigators, the trial sponsor, the collaborators on all appropriate aspects of the trial • concentrate on progress of the trial, adherence to the protocol, patient safety and the consideration of new information of relevance to the research question • agree proposals for substantial protocol amendments and provide advice to the sponsor and funder regarding approvals of such amendments The trial steering committee will meet regularly and as required. Regular monitoring will be performed according to GCP by the monitor. Following written SOPs, the monitor will verify that the clinical trial is conducted and data are generated, documented and reported in compliance with the protocol, GCP and the applicable regulatory requirements. The site will provide direct access to all trial related source data/documents and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the Sponsor and inspection by local and regulatory authorities.  Any deviations from the protocol will be documented in a protocol deviation form and filed in the trial master file. Each deviation will be assessed as to its impact on volunteer safety and study conduct. Significant protocol deviations will be listed in the end of study report. The QA manager conducts systems based internal audits to check that trials are being conducted according to local procedures and in compliance with study protocols, departmental SOPs, GCP and applicable regulations. The Sponsor, trial sites, and ethical committee(s) may carry out audit to ensure compliance with the protocol, GCP and appropriate regulations. GCP inspections may also be undertaken by the MHRA to ensure compliance with protocol and the Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations 2004, as amended. The Sponsor will assist in any inspections and will support the response to the MHRA as part of the inspection procedure. The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations contain a requirement for the notification of "serious breaches" to the MHRA within 7 days of the Sponsor becoming aware of the breach. A serious breach is defined as "A breach of GCP or the trial protocol which is likely to effect to a significant degree (a) the safety or physical or mental integrity of the subjects of the trial; or (b) the scientific value of the trial". In the event that a potential serious breach is suspected the Sponsor will be informed as soon as possible, to allow preliminary assessment of the breach and reporting to the MHRA within the required timelines.  The Investigators will ensure that this study is conducted according to the principles of the current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki. The Investigator will ensure that this trial is conducted in accordance with relevant regulations and with Good Clinical Practice. Following Sponsor approval the protocol, informed consent form, participant information sheet and any proposed advertising material will be submitted to an appropriate Research Ethics Committee (REC), HRA (where required), regulatory authorities (MHRA in the UK), and host institution(s) for written approval. No amendments to this protocol will be made without consultation with, and agreement of, the Sponsor. The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that changes to an approved trial, during the period for which regulatory and ethical committee(s) approval has already been given, are not initiated without regulatory and ethical committee(s)' review and approval except to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to the subject (i.e. as an Urgent Safety Measure). The study will comply with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and Data Protection Act 2018, which require data to be de-identified as soon as it is practical to do so. The processing of personal data of participants will be minimised by making use of a unique participant study number only on all study documents and any electronic database(s), with the exception of informed consent forms, participant ID logs, electronic diaries and the Household Questionnaire. All documents will be stored securely and only accessible by study staff and authorised personnel. The study staff will safeguard the privacy of participants' personal data. A separate confidential file containing identifiable information will be stored in a secured location in accordance with the current data written, informed consent) will not include the volunteer's face and will be identified by the date, trial code and subject's unique identifier. Once developed, photographs will be stored as confidential records, as above. This material may be shown to other professional staff, used for educational purposes, or included in a scientific publication. If participants have a positive swab result for COVID-19 during the course of the study then the Public Health Authority will be notified as COVID-19 is a "notifiable disease" and this is a legal requirement in the UK. This may mean participants personal information from their health records will be shared with Public Health either by the processing lab or the study site. Participants may also be contacted by the NHS Test and Trace service. Samples collected using home swab kits may be processed at laboratories within and outside the UK, as determined by the community testing programme. These laboratories provide a test result for the barcode to NPEx (National Pathology Digital. NHS Digital provide lab results to the Sponsor (University of Oxford) who will match this with personal data including identifying contact information sent to them by the site in order to centralise the processing of weekly surveillance results. Participants will be required to separately consent to the terms and conditions of the national community swabbing programme, each time they perform a self-swab. This is available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid- The study is funded by the UK Government through the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). AstraZeneca have provided funding for some exploratory objectives. The University has a specialist insurance policy in place which would operate in the event of any voucher for each study visit which will be given on completion of the trial. Should a volunteer from any group decide to withdraw from the trial before it is completed, payment will be pro rata. Participants in Groups 4, 6, 9, 10 and 11 will not be compensated. The Investigators will be involved in reviewing drafts of the manuscripts, abstracts, press releases and any other publications arising from the study. Data from the study may also be used as part of a thesis for a PhD or MD. Change of PI at Cambridge site. ................................................................................................................. 12   2 ABBREVIATIONS ...................................................................................................... 16   3 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE ............................................................................... 19   3.1 Background ...................................................................................................... 19 ............................................................................................ 20 3. ................................................................................ 35   5 STUDY DESIGN ......................................................................................................... 36   5.1 Study groups ................................................................................................ PARTICIPANTS ................................... 44 ............................................................................. 44 Consent Form .................................................................................... 44 and exclusion criteria ..................................................................... medication ................................................................................... 71 of treatment for controls ................................................................... 72   8 SAFETY ASSESSMENT ............................................................................................... 72   8.1 Definitions ........................................................................................................ 72 8 .................................................................. 74 8.5 Causality ....................................................................................................... ............................................................................................................ 81 of statistical methods ..................................................................... 81 Outcomes ........................................................................................ The geometric means of concentration on day 28 and the proportion of participants with serum conversion to S-spike protein from day 0 to day 28 will be computed. Comparisons between the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine and control groups will be made using a Mann Whitney U test due to the low titers expected in the control group that will cause non-normal distribution. ............................................................................... ................................................................................................. 86 in the analysis .................................................................................... 86 Committee ............................................................ 86   10 DATA MANAGEMENT .............................................................................................. 87 10 ............................................................................................. 88 quality ...................................................................................................... 88   10.6 Archiving .......................................................................................................... 89 ASSURANCE ................................... 89 .............................................................................. ....................................................................................................... 89 from the protocol .............................................................................. 89 and inspection ......................................................................................... 90   12 ETHICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS ......................................................... 90   12.1 Declaration of Helsinki ...................................................................................... 90 for good clinical practices ................................................................. 90 and regulatory approvals ....................................................................... 90   12.4 Volunteers confidentiality ................................................................................. 91   13 FUNDING AND INSURANCE .................................................................................. ....................................................................................................... 92 Policy ............................................................................................. 92 GENERATION ..............................................................................................................  Health professionals and adults with high potential for exposure to SARS-CoV-2, aged ≥18 years. The total sample size will be up to 10,300 participants (with a margin of 1%).  In December 2019, a group of pneumonia patients of unknown cause was linked to a wholesale seafood market in Wuhan, China, and it was later confirmed that they were infected with a new coronavirus, known as 2019-nCoV 1 The spike protein is a type I transmembrane, trimeric, type I glycoprotein located on the surface of the viral envelope of CoVs, which can be divided into two functional subunits: the N-terminal S1 and the C-terminal S2. S1 and S2 are responsible for the binding to the cellular  Refer the Investigator's Brochure for the most recent update of preclinical data. The mice (balb/c and CD-1) were immunized with ChAdOx1 which expresses the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein or green fluorescent protein (GFP). From 9 to 10 days after vaccination, spleen samples were used to assess IFN-γ ELISpot responses and serum samples for assessments of S1 and S2 antibody responses with ELISA. The results of these studies show that a single dose of ChAdOx1 nCoV was immunogenic in mice. by intracellular cytokine staining after splenocyte stimulation with clustered S1 (black) or clustered S2 (gray) peptides in CD1 mice. Pre-clinical efficacy studies of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in ferrets and non-human primates are ongoing. Once available, the results will be included in the Investigator's Brochure. Challenge studies in ferrets and non-human primates (PNH) are ongoing and these pre-clinical trials will report on the presence or absence of pulmonary pathology. The results will be reviewed as soon as they are available and will be part of the risk/benefit discussions for participants who receive the investigational product (IMP). All pathological data from challenge studies of other SARS-CoV-2 candidate vaccines will also be taken into account. continuously monitors the study, has so far not reported any concerns to the MHRA or the study sponsor (secure follow-up of one to four weeks per participant). Safety follow-up for the full four weeks will be available to a subset of participants prior to the application of the first vaccine in Brazil. In addition, before the start of the COV003 study in Brazil, another phase II study, COV002, will be initiated at various locations in the United Kingdom. In a first stage, COV002 will include 80 healthy adults from 56 to 69 years old, 120 elderly people over 70 with no upper age limit and 60 children from 5 to 12 years old. The assessed endpoints will be safety and immunogenicity, including T cell immunity. This study will be expanded in stage 2 to a phase III study of safety, immunogenicity and efficacy, including 10,000 adults over in the safety report and/or changes in the search for health services once that were symptomatic for COVID-19. Groups 1c and 1d have been added following interim immunogenicity results on homologous prime-boost groups (as part of the COV001 UK study -see investigator's brochure for further details) showing improved neutralising antibody titres after 2 doses when compared to 1 dose regimen. A saline placebo will be used in place of an active comparator in group 1d. As we have seen less reactogenicity when giving the booster dose in the UK studies, there is less risk of unblinding the participant by using placebo as a comparator for the booster dose. ** Cellular immune responses will be measured in a subset of individuals only (up to 60 volunteers who will be recruited from the CRIE-UNIFESP site, sequentially) This is a phase III, controlled, randomized, single-blind study to be conducted in adults with high exposure to COVID-19, who are administered two-doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or After reviewing all available data from animal studies and UK studies (COV001 and COV002), participants will be randomized to ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or MenACWY vaccine in a 1:1 ratio in blocks of 4, and all participants will be blinded to the allocation of the vaccine groups. The DSMB will periodically evaluate safety and efficacy data, every 4-8 weeks and/or as needed. The DSMB will consist of the members of the DSMB currently convened who oversee trials in the UK. (before approvals for the second dose were in place) will be offered a booster dose 4-12 weeks after the prime dose of either ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or saline placebo, depending on which arm they were originally allocated to. Any volunteers enrolled prior to the booster dose protocol amendment will be able to refuse a second dose and will continue their follow-up as per their previously agreed schedule of attendances. Participants will be followed for the duration of the study to record adverse events and episodes of symptomatic COVID-19 confirmed by PCR. Participants will be assessed for Page 41 of 99 The overall sample size will be up to 10,300 (with a margin of 1%) participants. All volunteers previously enrolled in groups 1a and 1b will be offered a booster dose. Any new participants recruited into the study on version 4.0 of the protocol onwards will necessarily have to consent to a 2-dose schedule. Adult participants over the age of 18 will be enrolled in the study. Participants will be considered enrolled immediately after the vaccine is administered. Recruitment will focus on healthcare professionals and those with likely high known exposure to COVID-19. drivers, among others. Participants in older age groups (56-69 years and 70 years and above) will be recruited at the investigators' discretion. Their likelihood of COVID-19 exposure will be judged on a case-by-case basis, regardless of their previous occupation. The end of study is the date of the last test performed on the last sample collected. Potential risks are those associated with phlebotomy, vaccination, and disease potentiation. Hematomas and discomfort located at the venipuncture site may occur. More rarely. Fainting may occur. These will not be documented as AE if they occur. The total volume of blood drawn during the study period will be approximately 330 mL, excluding any necessary repeated extraction (blood volumes may vary slightly between participants due to the use of different volume vacutainers, the operational procedures of the research sites and the number of symptomatic visits). Participants will be asked to refrain from donating blood during the period of their involvement in the study. Clinical Protocol  Constitutional symptoms similar to the flu, such as fatigue, headache, malaise, feverish sensation and muscle pain can occur with any vaccination and last from 2 to 3 days. Presyncopal and syncopal episodes may occur at the time of vaccination. Participants will be asked to administer prophylactic paracetamol for 24 hours to minimize possible fever and flulike symptoms. As with many vaccines, temporary ascending paralysis (Guillain-Barré syndrome, GBS) or immune-mediated reactions can occur that can lead to organ damage, but this should be extremely rare (1 in 100,000-1,000,000 doses vaccine). Transient neutropenia and thrombocytopenia have been described after immunization with other adenoviral vectorized vaccines, but it is not perceived as clinically significant. Control group participants will receive a single dose of an authorized MenACWY vaccine, the risks of which are described in the vaccine package insert. The risks of inducing disease enhancement and pulmonary immunopathology in case of Page 44 of 99 safety signs associated with the enhancement of the disease potentially observed in COV001/COV002 will also guide these decisions. Participants enrolled in the control groups will receive MenACWY, a licensed vaccine that has been administered to adolescents on routine vaccination schedules in several countries, including the United Kingdom, and is used as a travel vaccine for high-risk areas. Most of the participants in this study will not have received this vaccine before and therefore will gain the benefit of protection against meningococci in groups A, C, W and Y. Participants who had previously been vaccinated with MenACWY will have their immunity enhanced against these organisms and are not exposed to additional risks when receiving the additional dose of the comparator vaccine. Participants receiving ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will have no guaranteed benefit, however, it is expected that the information obtained in this study will contribute to the development of a safe and effective vaccine against COVID-19. All participants will obtain information about their general health. If the effectiveness of the vaccine against COVID-19 is proven, after the analysis of the effectiveness results and approval by the Data and Safety Monitoring Committee, the sponsor will make this vaccine available to the research participants who received the control vaccine, MenACWY. Committee. The leaflets will be distributed, including the name of the study, information from the centers, age group, disease, and vaccine. The participant will sign and date personally or electronically the last approved version of the Form. When the process is carried out electronically, participants will individually receive a link to access the electronic version of the Informed Consent Form. In both cases, it will be detailed: • the exact nature of the study; • what it will imply for the participant; • the implications and restrictions of the protocol; • the known side effects and any risks involved in participating; • sample manipulation -participants will be informed about the samples that will be collected anonymously during the course of the study and that can be shared with the study collaborators; • that individual results will not be shared with participants. The Informed Consent Form will be made available to the participant before obtaining consent. However, participants will have the opportunity to individually question a properly trained and delegated researcher before signing the consent. The following general principles will be emphasized: • Participation in the study is completely voluntary; • Refusal to participate does not involve a penalty or loss of medical benefits; • The participant can withdraw from the study at any time; • The participant is free to ask questions at any time to understand the purpose of the study and the procedures involved; • The study involves researching an investigational vaccine; • There is no direct benefit expected for the participant; • Page 46 of 99 will be asked whether they agree to biorepository storage for future use, but this will be optional.  This study will be performed in healthy adults, who meet the following inclusion and exclusion criteria: The participant must meet all the following criteria to be eligible for the study: • Adults from 18 to 55 years of age. • Adults aged 56-69 years old (after review of safety data by DSMB in this age group in the UK trial) • Adults aged 70 and above years old (after review of safety data by DSMB in this age group in the UK trial) • Able and willing (in the Investigator's opinion) to fulfill all study requirements; • Health professionals and/or adults at high risk of exposure to SARS-CoV-2, as defined in section 5.2 of this protocol; • Serology with SARS-CoV-2 negative IgG antibodies; This inclusion criteria does not apply to participants enrolled from version 4.0 of the protocol onwards. Clinical Protocol Page 47 of 99 • Willing to allow investigators to discuss the participant's clinical history with their GP/personal physician and access medical records relevant to the study procedures; • Only for women of childbearing age willing to practice continuous effective birth control (see below) during the study, and a negative pregnancy test on the screening and vaccination day(s); • Consent to abstain from blood donation during the course of the study; • Provide informed consent in writing. The DSMB will review safety data from volunteers aged 56 and above recruited as part of the COV002 UK study. Recruitment of older adults will only be allowed following advice from the DSMB. Clinical Protocol Page 48 of 99 The participant will not be eligible for the study if any of the following criteria apply: • Participation in trials of prophylactic drugs for COVID-19 during the course of the study; Note: Participation in COVID-19 treatment trials is permitted in case of hospitalization due to COVID-19, after confirmation of positive PCR. The study team should be informed as soon as possible. Participants with COVID-19 not hospitalized with positive PCR results for COVID-19 may be medicated according to standard clinical practice, however, participation in treatment trials will not be allowed. • Planned receipt of any vaccine (authorized or investigational), within 30 days before and after vaccination; • Prior receipt of an investigational or licensed vaccine with the possibility of impacting the interpretation of the study data (for example, Adenovirus vector vaccines , any vaccines against coronavirus); • Administration of immunoglobulins and/or any blood products in the three months prior to the planned administration of the candidate vaccine; • Any confirmed or suspected immunosuppressive or immunodeficiency state, including HIV (regardless of treatment, CD4 count or viral load status); asplenia; severe recurrent infections and chronic use (more than 14 days) of immunosuppressive medication in the last 6 months, except for topical steroids or short-term oral steroids (cycle lasting ≤14 days); • History of allergic disease or reactions possibly exacerbated by any component of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or MenACWY or paracetamol; • Any history of angioedema; • Any history of anaphylaxis; • Pregnancy, lactation or willingness/intention to become pregnant during the study; • Current diagnosis or treatment for cancer (except basal cell carcinoma of the skin and cervical carcinoma in situ); • History of severe psychiatric illness that possibly affects your participation in the study; Clinical Protocol Page 49 of 99 • Hemorrhagic disorder (for example, factor deficiency, coagulopathy or platelet disorder), or a previous history of significant bleeding or bruising after IM injections or venipuncture; • Current suspected or known dependence on alcohol or drugs; • Severe and/or uncontrolled cardiovascular diseases, respiratory diseases, gastrointestinal diseases, liver disease, kidney disease, endocrine disorder, and neurological disease (mild/moderate well-controlled comorbidities are allowed); • History of COVID-19 confirmed by laboratory (serology, rapid tests based on antigen or antibody or PCR); • Seropositive for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 before recruitment; This exclusion criteria does not apply to participants enrolled from version 4.0 of the protocol onwards • Continued use of anticoagulants, such as coumarins and related anticoagulants (for example, warfarin) or new oral anticoagulants (for example, apixaban, rivaroxaban, dabigatran and edoxaban); • Any other significant illness, disorder or finding that may significantly increase the risk for the participant, affect his/her ability to participate in the study or impair the interpretation of the study data. The following AEs associated with any vaccine, or identified on or before the day of vaccination constitute absolute contraindications to further administration of an IMP to the volunteer in question. If any of these events occur during the study, the subject will not be eligible to receive a booster dose and will be followed up by the clinical team or their regular doctor until resolution or stabilisation of the event: • Anaphylactic reaction following administration of vaccine cases will be at clinical discretion of the investigators. For participants who are asymptomatic and have a positive PCR test, a minimum of 2 weeks from first PCR positivity will be required before boosting Participants of childbearing potential must use an effective form of birth control during the 12 months of study. Acceptable forms of birth control for participants include: • Established use of oral, injected or implanted hormonal of birth control methods; • Placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS); • Complete hysterectomy; • Bilateral occlusion of the tubes; • Contraceptive barrier methods (condom or occlusive tampon with spermicide); • Male sterilization, if the vasectomized partner is the participant's only sexual partner; • True abstinence, when it is in line with the subject's preferred and usual lifestyle (periodic abstinence and withdrawal are not acceptable of birth control methods). In accordance with the principles of the current version of the Declaration of Helsinki and any other applicable regulations, the participant has the right to withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason, and is not required to give his/her reasons for doing so. The Investigator may withdraw the participant at any time for the sake of his/her health and wellbeing. In addition, the participant can withdraw/be withdrawn for any of the following reasons: Clinical Protocol Page 51 of 99 • Investigator's Decision; • Ineligibility (both during the study and retrospectively, having been omitted in the screening); • Significant deviation from the protocol; • Non-adherence of the participant to the study requirements; • An AE, which requires discontinuing participation in the study or resulting in an inability to continue to comply with the study procedures. The reason for the withdrawal will be registered with the CRF. If the withdrawal is a consequence of an AE, appropriate follow-up visits and/or medical care will be scheduled, with the consent of the participant, until the AE is resolved, stabilized or a causality unrelated to his/her participation in the study has been attributed. Any participant who is withdrawn from the study may be replaced, if this is possible within the specified period. The DSMB or DSMB president may recommend withdrawing participants. If a participant withdraws from the study, the data collected before their withdrawal will still be used in the analysis. The storage of blood samples will continue unless the participant specifically requests otherwise. In all cases of withdrawal from the subject, the collection of long-term safety data, including some procedures such as a safety blood test, will continue as appropriate if individuals have received one or more doses of the vaccine, unless they refuse any additional follow-up. If a participant becomes pregnant during the trial, she will be followed up for clinical safety assessment with her continuous consent and, in addition, she will be followed up until the outcome of the pregnancy is determined. We will not routinely perform venipuncture on a pregnant participant unless there is a clinical need. In addition, full and free follow-up and assistance will be ensured, for as long as necessary for: (a) the participants who become pregnant, and (b) the fetus, if applicable. Clinical Protocol  This section describes the clinical procedures for evaluating study participants and following up after administering the study vaccine. All participants will have visits and clinical procedures as indicated in the visit schedule below table 4. The subjects will receive the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or MenACWY vaccine/saline solution placebo, and will be followed up for a total of 12 months post final vaccination procedure. Additional visits or procedures may be performed at the investigators' discretion, for example, medical history and additional physical examination, or additional blood tests, if they are clinically relevant. All participants in groups 1a and 1b will be offered a booster dose of vaccine, however if a participant declines the booster dose they will continue in group 1a or 1b and follow the planned visit schedule, as per table 4. Temperature will be routinely measured at the time-points indicated in the schedule of procedures. Respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, pulse, blood pressure and temperature will be measured at the COVID-19 testing visits and if clinically required. All subjects will undergo medical history and a targeted physical examination if considered necessary at screening or pre-enrolment on D0. The purpose of this examination is to assess and document the subject's baseline health status so that any later change can be determined. Vital signs (temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure +/-oxygen saturation), height and weight will be measured at screening or pre-enrolment on D0 as part of baseline assessments. Further medical history, physical examination and observations may be done throughout the study based on clinical discretion. • PCR process for COVID-19. A nose andthroat swab will be collected for COVID-19 PCR. Clinical Protocol Page 53 of 99 • Immunology. Immunogenicity will be assessed using a variety of immunological assays. This may include antibodies to SARS-CoV-Spike and non-Spike antigens by ELISA, ex vivo ELISpot assays for interferon gamma and flow cytometry assays, neutralization and other functional antibody assays and B cell analyses. Other exploratory immunological assays, including cytokine analysis and other antibody assays, among others, may be performed at the Investigators' discretion. Immunology samples for the assays described above will be drawn as per the schedule of attendances below (table 4) • Urine analysis. In the case of participants of childbearing age, urine will be tested for beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) at screening (when applicable) and immediately before vaccination. Collaboration with other specialized laboratories in the UK, Europe and outside of Europe may take place for new exploratory tests and for some of the immunology testing described above. This would involve transferring serum, or plasma, PBMC and/or other study samples to these laboratories, but these would remain anonymous. For this, after evaluation and prior approval of the REC/CONEP system, the participant will be presented with a new Informed Consent Form. Only after obtaining this new consent form can the samples be used for purposes other than those specified in this protocol. Immunological tests will be performed according to the standard operating procedures of the research sites, the University of Oxford, and collaborating international laboratories. The subjects will be informed which blood sample (after all tests for this study are completed), will be stored in a biorepository for future use. The subjects will be able to decide whether to allow such future use of any sample. With the informed consent of the participants, blood serum and/or PBMCs will be frozen for future analysis of COVID-19 and responses related to the vaccine. If a subject chooses not to allow this, no sample will be stored beyond the storage period required to meet Good Laboratory Practices (GLP) and regulatory requirements. Clinical Protocol Page 54 of 99 Study visits and procedures will be performed by the research sites staff. The procedures to be included in each visit are documented in the visit schedule (table 4) . Each visit is assigned a time and window period, within which the visit will take place. All potential participants will have a screening visit, up to 7 days before vaccination for a baseline assessment. For participants who are recruited in the study before version 4.0 of the study protocol, a serological evaluation of baseline antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 is performed. The results of the serology should be available within this period, no later than 7 days after collection. Volunteers with negative serology for IgG antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 may participate in the study (applicable to previous protocol versions only and not from version 4.0 onwards). Having established that there is a low baseline seropositivity in the study population, the remaining participants can be included without baseline SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. This allows the screening visit to take place at the same day as the vaccination visit, and will precede vaccination procedure. At the screening visit, the objectives of the study and all tests to be performed will be described to the participants. Individually, each participant will have the opportunity to question a duly trained and delegated researcher before signing the consent. The informed consent procedure will be performed before screening/recruitment procedures, as described in section 6.2. A medical history, including previous vaccinations, and targeted physical examination (when necessary) will be conducted at the screening visit. Findings will be recorded as part of baseline and eligibility assessment. A screening visit can be repeated if time from screening to vaccination is greater than the pre-specified window in the study protocol. The research site staff may contact the subject's general practitioner/personal physician with written permission after screening to corroborate the clinical history when possible and practical to do so. The participant's doctor may be notified that the subject has been enrolled voluntarily in the study. Clinical Protocol Page 55 of 99 Participants will be considered enrolled in the trial at the time of vaccination. Before the investigational vaccination/treatment, the eligibility of the participant will be reviewed. The temperature and, if necessary, a medical history and physical examination will be performed to determine the need to postpone vaccination. The study vaccines/treatment will be administered as described below. All vaccines will be administered intramuscularly according to specific standard operating procedures. The injection site will be covered with a sterile dressing and the participant will remain at the study site for observation, in case of immediate adverse events. Observations will be made at a minimum of 15 minutes after vaccination, the sterile dressing will be removed and the injection site inspected. A sub sample of 200 participants will receive a thermometer, a metric ruler, access to the electronic diary via web, a printed diary (for use in case the electronic diary presents problems), guidelines and instructions for use, together with a contact card containing the number of 24-hour emergency telephone number to contact the research site if necessary. Participants will be instructed on how to self-assess the intensity and severity of requested adverse events (Table 3 -Requested and unsolicited AEs). There will also be space in the electronic (or paper) Symptom Diary for the participant to document unsolicited AEs for 28 days, and if a medication has been taken to relieve the symptoms. The diaries will collect information about the timing and severity of the following solicited AEs. Participants who were asked to fill out a diary post prime vaccination will be asked to fill out the same diary post booster vaccination. The use of electronic diaries allows the real-time monitoring of the safety of the study vaccines. NB All volunteers who develop COVID-19 symptoms triggering the symptomatic pathway will be asked to fill out a symptoms diary (electronic or paper), which is separate to the vaccine reactogenity diaries described above. Follow-up visits will take place according to the visit schedule described in (X) = if deemed necessary ^ = Vital signs at screening or pre-enrolment assessment on D0 include pulse, blood pressure, temperature, respiratory rate +/-oxygen saturation. Only temperature will be routinely measured at subsequent follow-up visits. At COVID-19 testing visits a full set of observations will be taken, including respiratory rate and oxygen saturation; ** Chronology is approximate only. Page 59 of 99 times of the visits refer to the day of recruitment, that is, each visit must take place within the indicated interval of days after recruitment ± time window. % Accumulated blood volume for participants if blood is drawn according to schedule, and excluding any repeat safety blood tests that may be required. a A second PCR at 3-5 days post symptoms onset will be done if the first sample is negative. $ Vaccine reactogeniticy diaries are applicable to a subset of participants only, all volunteers in the trial who present COVID-19 symptoms will be asked to fill out a COVID-19 symptoms diary. NB Participants who refuse a booster vaccination should be followed-up as per the schedule of attendances above. Attendance Number (boost) Screenin (X) = if deemed necessary ^ = Vital signs at screening or pre-enrolment assessment on D0 include pulse, blood pressure, temperature, respiratory rate +/-oxygen saturation. Only temperature will be routinely measured at subsequent follow-up visits. At COVID-19 testing visits a full set of observations will be taken, including respiratory rate and oxygen saturation; ** Chronology is approximate only. The exact times of the visits refer to the day of recruitment, that is, each visit must take place within the indicated interval of days after recruitment ± Clinical Protocol Study Code: COV003 Version 8.0 12 th November 2020 Page 63 of 99 time window. % Accumulated blood volume for participants if blood is drawn according to schedule, and excluding any repeat safety blood tests that may be required. a A second PCR at 3-5 days post symptoms onset will be done if the first sample is negative. $ Vaccine reactogenicity diaries are applicable to a subset of participants only, all volunteers in the trial who present COVID-19 symptoms will be asked to fill out a COVID-19 symptoms diary. b New PIS/ICF only for participants enrolled before protocol 4.0 from groups 1c and 1d NB Participants who accept to take part in booster dose subgroup will have their schedule of attendances replaced by above schedule. Participants who already attended their D28 visit post prime will be asked to attend a separate visit for their booster. Clinical Protocol appropriate. Participants who test positive for COVID-19 will continue to be followed throughout the duration of the trial, including repeated COVID-19 testing visits if symptomatic again during the course of the study and until the end of the trial. New episodes will be considered if they have a minimum 28 days interval between the previous PCR positive result. If PCR is negative at S0 (first swab), participants will be asked to attend a follow-up visit at 3-5 days post symptoms onset (+2 days) for clinical review and further testing. Participants will be asked to record information on an electronic diary COVID-19 or a printed diary (for use in case the electronic diary presents problems), related symptoms for safety monitoring until symptom resolution or for at least 14 days if symptoms do not resolve before then. Volunteers who have 2 consecutive negative swabs may stop filling out the diaries before symptom resolution or 14 days. Participants who have a positive PCR at S0, will not be required to attend a S3-5 visit, but will be reviewed for safety at 7 days post positive swab. Clinical data, and additional blood samples for safety and immunology purposes will be taken at the S7 visit. Participants who have a positive swab at S3-5 will be reviewed for safety at 7 days post Further details and instructions on the symptomatic pathway can be found on the clinical study plan. With the consent of the participant, the study team will request access to the medical records or send a data collection form to be filled out by the clinical team, in any episodes of medically attended COVID-19 . Investigators will aim to collect clinical data from medical records where participants with suspected COVID-19 have been admitted to Relevant data will be collected to verify the efficacy endpoints and disease enhancement. There is no internationally accepted definition of disease enhancement. Severity between groups will be described and compared. In addition, a proportion of serious illness/all illnesses will be constructed for recipients of the candidate and control vaccine. In case the vaccine induces increased disease, this proportion would be higher in the vaccine than in the control group. These probably include, but are not limited to information about ICU admissions, clinical parameters such as oxygen saturation, respiratory rates and vital signs, need for oxygen therapy, need for ventilatory support, blood test results and images, among others. Clinical Protocol Page 66 of 99 Participants will be randomized to investigational vaccine or MenACWY vaccine in a 1:1 allocation ratio, using block randomization of 4 participants. The blinding scheme will be applied to the participants in relation to the arm in which they were allocated. The blinding scheme will not apply to the study team administering the vaccine. Vaccines will be prepared out of the participant's reach and the syringes will be covered with an opaque label that will guarantee the unilateral blinding of the participant. If a participant's clinical condition requires unblinding, this will be done according to a specific study work instruction and the group allocation will be sent to the attending physician if unblinding is considered relevant and possibly changes treatment clinical. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine consists of the ChAdOx1 deficient replication monkey adenovirus vector, containing the SARS-CoV-2 structural surface glycoprotein antigen. The vaccine manufactured by Advent is stored at -80 o C in a safe freezer at the clinics. The vaccine manufactured by Cobra Biologics Ltd is stored at 2-8°C in a secure fridge, at the clinical site. The traceability of the study vaccines will be documented according to the existing standard operating procedure (SOP). Accounting, storage, shipping, and handling of vaccines will be in accordance with relevant SOPs and forms. On the day of vaccination, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will be thawed at room temperature and will be administered according to specific assay instructions. The vaccine manufactured by Cobra Biologics is a multi-dose vial which is stored at 2-8 degrees and does not require thawing. If the vaccine is stored outside of 2-8 it must be used within 6 hours. The vaccine will be administered intramuscularly in the deltoid of the non-dominant arm (preferably). All Page 67 of 99 resuscitation equipment will be immediately available for the treatment of anaphylaxis. Vaccination will be performed and IMPs handled according to the relevant SOPs. The dose to be administered in this study was selected based on clinical experience with the adenovirus vector ChAdOx1 expressing different inserts and other similar vectorized adenovirus vaccines (for example, ChAd63). A first dose escalation study in humans using the ChAdOx1 vector encoding an influenza antigen (FLU004) administered ChAdOx1 NP + M1 safely at doses ranging from 5 x 10 8 to 5 x Another monkey adenovirus vector (ChAd63) was safely administered in doses of up to 2 x 10 11 pv, with an optimal dose of 5 x 10 10 pv, balancing immunogenicity and reactogenicity. MERS001 was the first clinical trial of a vector ChAdOx1 expressing the total Spike protein from a separate, but related beta-coronavirus. ChAdOx1 MERS has been administered to 31 participants so far in doses ranging from 5x10 9 pv to 5x10 10 pv. Despite the greater reactogenicity observed with the dose of 5x10 10 pv, this dose was safe, with self-limiting AE and without registered SARs. The dose of 5x10 10 that of CBF and Advent products, the resulting Symbiosis' product dosage at 0.5 mL for lot 20481A is somewhat lower in total viral particle per dose (20% from the lower range limit), slightly higher in total viral genome copies per dose (12% from the higher range limit), and slightly lower in total infectious particle per dose (8% from the lower range limit). These differences are considered to be comparable to or within the variabilities from the analytical methods used in concentration determination (A260, qPCR, and infectivity) and the dosing volumes during clinical administration. In summary, with a 0.5 mL dosing volume for Symbiosis' product, strength difference from CBF and Advent products is not expected to have significant clinical impact in terms of reactogenicity and immunogenicity/efficacy Testing performed using the Advent infectivity assay. The possibility of environmental contamination with genetically modified organisms (GMOs) will be appropriately controlled. The study will be performed in accordance with the relevant local regulations regarding GMO products, following the recommendations of CTNBio. The approved SOPs will be followed to minimize the spread of the recombinant vector vaccine virus in the environment. GMO residues will be inactivated according to the approved SOPs. All material used during vaccination and by vaccination personnel will be autoclaved and incinerated later. Participants who are allocated to control groups will receive an injection of the MenACWY The masking of the participants regarding the injection they are receiving will be maintained. A vaccination accounting record from MenACWY will be maintained at each study site. MenACWY will be stored in a locked (or controlled access) refrigerator (2 °C to 8 °C) at the research site, according to the package insert. Participants who were allocated to the control group will receive a placebo injection of 0.9% saline instead of MenACWY at the time of boosting. The volume and site of injection will be the same as for the intervention arm and participants will be blinded as to which injection they are receiving. A vaccine accountability log of the saline will be maintained at each trial Page 71 of 99 All vaccines will be administered by the research team and registered with the CRF. The study medication will not be in the participant's possession at any time and, therefore, compliance will not be a problem. IMP accounting and control vaccines will be performed in accordance with the relevant SOPs. As established by the exclusion criteria, participants cannot be enrolled in the study if they have received: any vaccine within 30 days prior to enrollment or if any other vaccine is expected to be administered within 30 days after each vaccination, any research product within 30 days prior to recruitment or if administration is planned during the study period, or if there is any chronic use (> 14 days) of any immunosuppressive medication in the 6 months prior to enrollment or if administration is planned at any time during the study period (topical steroids are allowed). Participants who make continuous use of oral anticoagulants, such as coumarins and related anticoagulants (i.e. warfarin) or new oral anticoagulants (i.e. apixaban, rivaroxaban, dabigatran and edoxaban), and/or who received immunoglobulins and/or any blood products in the three months prior to the planned administration of the candidate vaccine, will be excluded from this study, according to the exclusion criteria. Participants will be advised to take paracetamol, unless contraindicated (in which case they will be excluded from the study), for 24 hours after vaccination. Paracetamol will be stored according to the package insert. There will be no additional labeling beyond its authorized packaging.  If the efficacy of the candidate vaccine is proven, after analysis of the primary endpoint and approval by the DSMB (Data and Safety Monitoring Committee), as established in the study protocol, the sponsor will make the candidate vaccine available to participants in the research allocated to the comparator group (MenACWY vaccine). Safety will be assessed by the frequency, incidence and nature of the Aes and SAE emerging during the study. An AE is any unexpected medical occurrence in a participant, which can occur during or after the administration of an IMP and does not necessarily have a causal relationship to treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including any clinically significant abnormal finding or change from baseline), symptom or disease temporally associated with study treatment, even if it is considered to be related to study treatment or not. An AR is any unexpected or unintended response to an IMP. This means that the causal relationship between the IMP and the AE is at least reasonable, that is, the relationship cannot be ruled out. All cases judged by the medical investigator to have a reasonable causal relationship with an IMP (that is, possibly, probably, or definitely related to an IMP) will qualify as AR. Adverse events that may be related to the IMP are listed in the Investigator's Brochure for each product.  An SAE is an AE that results in any of the following endpoints, considered or unrelated to the study treatment. • Death; • Life-threatening event (i.e., the participant was, in the Investigator's view, at immediate risk of death from the event); • Persistent disability or disability or significant disability (i.e., substantial disruption of the ability to perform normal life functions); • Hospitalization or extension of existing hospitalization, regardless of length of stay, even if it is a precautionary measure for continuous observation; o Note: Hospitalization (including hospitalization or outpatient hospitalization for an elective procedure) for a pre-existing condition that has not unexpectedly worsened does not constitute a serious AE. • An important clinical event (which cannot cause death, be life-threatening or require hospitalization) that may, based on appropriate clinical criteria, harm the participant and/or require medical or surgical treatment to avoid one of the outcomes listed above. Examples of such clinical events include an allergic reaction that requires intensive treatment in an emergency room or clinic, blood dyscrasias or seizures that do not result in hospitalization; • Congenital anomaly or birth defect. A serious AE that, in the opinion of the investigator or sponsor, is believed to be possibly, probably, or definitely related to IMP or any other treatment of the study, based on the information provided. A SAR, whose nature and severity are not consistent with the information on the drug in question set out in the IB.  IMP-related SAE is not expected in this study. All SARs will therefore be reported as SUSAR. Predictable/expected AR after vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 include pain at the injection site, tenderness, erythema, heat, swelling, induration, itching, myalgia, arthralgia, headache, fatigue, fever, feverish feeling, chills, malaise, and nausea. The potentiation of the disease after vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will be monitored. Serious COVID-19 disease will be defined by clinical criteria. Detailed clinical parameters will be collected from medical records and aligned with agreed definitions as they emerge. These probably include, but are not limited to oxygen saturation, need for oxygen therapy, respiratory rate, need for ventilatory support, results of blood tests and images, among other clinically relevant parameters. As there is no internationally accepted definition of ADE, differences in the severity of the disease between the groups will be described. If the proportion of serious illness is similar between the two groups, this would support the lack of effectiveness and not the improvement of the illness. Acute respiratory failure, pneumonitis, acute cardiac injury, arrhythmia, septic shock syndrome and acute kidney injury related to COVID-19 disease will be monitored based on the review of medical records of hospitalized participants. Eosinophilia as a marker of deviated Th2 responses will be monitored routinely in participants who attend their study visits and follow-up of COVID-19. Marked eosinophilia of ≥ 1.5 x10 9 /L will be reported as SAE. AESI relevant to vaccination in general will also be monitored, such as: generalized seizure, Page 75 of 99 For each AE, an assessment of the relationship between the event and the administration of the vaccine will be performed by the clinician delegated by the IC. An interpretation of the causal relationship of the treatment with the AE in question will be made, based on the type of event; the relationship of the event to the time of vaccine administration; and the known biology of vaccine therapy. Alternative causes of AE will be considered and investigated, such as the natural history of pre-existing medical conditions, concomitant therapy, other risk factors and the temporal relationship of the event to vaccination. The causality assessment will take place during planned safety reviews and in the final safety analysis, except for SAEs, which must be designated immediately by the investigator reporting the events. Known response pattern seen with other vaccines Table 5 . Guidelines for assessing the relationship between vaccine administration and an AE. All local and systemic AE that occur within 28 days after vaccination observed by the Investigator or reported by the participant, whether or not attributed to the study medication, will be recorded by the participants in the Diary of Symptoms and by the Investigators in the study CRF. All Aes that result in the withdrawal of a participant from the study will be followed up until a satisfactory resolution occurs, or until a causality unrelated to the study is assigned (if the participant agrees to do so). SAE and Adverse Events of Special Interest will be collected throughout the study period. The severity of adverse events will be assessed according to toxicity rating scales adapted from the FDA for healthy volunteers recruited in preventive vaccine clinical trials, listed in the specific study work instructions and tables 6-8 below. Adverse Event Grade Intensity Page 77 of 99 Table 6 . Severity criteria for local adverse events *erythema ≤2.5cm is an expected consequence of skin puncture and therefore will not be considered an adverse event Moderate: Mild to moderate limitation in routine activity -some assistance may be required; minimal medical treatment/therapy was required or none GRADE 3 Serious: Marked limitation in routine activity, some assistance is usually required; medical treatment/therapy was required. Potentially fatal: requires assessment in A/E or hospitalization Table 8 . Severity classification criteria for local and systemic AE. To comply with the rules in force on reporting SAE to regulatory authorities, the event will be accurately documented and the notification deadlines respected. Serious adverse events will be reported on the SAE forms to members of the study team as soon as the Investigators become aware of their occurrence. Copies of all reports will be forwarded for review by the Principal Investigator (as Sponsor's representative) within 24 hours after the Investigator becomes aware of the alleged SAE. The DSMB will be notified of SAE that are considered to be possibly, probably or definitely related to the study treatments; the DSMB president will be notified immediately (within 24 hours) as soon as the Sponsor become aware of the occurrence. Normally, SAE will not be reported immediately to the Ethics Committee, unless there is a clinically significant increase in the rate of occurrence, an unexpected endpoint, or a new event that may affect the safety of study participants, at the discretion of the Principal Investigator and/or DSMB. In addition to the expedited report above, the Investigator will include all SAE in the annual Development Safety Update (DSUR) report. In addition, all local reporting requirements apply. ≥2xULN , where no other reason can be found to explain the combination of these abnormal results, e.g., elevated serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) indicating cholestasis, viral hepatitis A, B or C, another drug capable of causing the observed injury, amongst others. All SUSARs will be communicated by the sponsor's delegate to the Competent Authority and REC and other parties, as applicable. For fatal and life-threatening SUSARs, this will be done within 7 calendar days after the Sponsor or delegate becomes aware of the reaction. Any additional relevant information will be reported within 8 calendar days of the initial report. All other SUSARs will be informed within 15 calendar days. The principal investigators will be informed of all SUSARs for the relevant IMP for all studies with the same Sponsor, even if the event occurred or not in the present study. The safety profile will be continuously assessed by the Investigators. The CI and relevant investigators (according to the study delegation record) will also review safety and SAE issues as they arise. The DSMB will assess the frequency of events, safety, and efficacy data every 4-8 weeks and/or as needed. The DSMB will make recommendations regarding the conduct, continuation or modification of the study. The Sponsor may put the study on hold and pause recruitment if SUSARs reported in other international trials within the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 programme are considered to pose a significant safety concern to all participants in the programme. The DSMB will review such events and will make a recommendation as to whether or not recruitment can continue. Study procedures other than vaccinations (e.g. safety follow-ups, immunogenicity assessments, and COVID-19 testing procedures) will continue as normal, regardless of length of study pause. Clinical Protocol Study Code: COV003 Version 8.0 12 th November 2020 Page 81 of 99 The Data Safety Monitoring Committee that is in force for the British studies COV001 and COV002 will also oversee this study and review the safety data for this study. At least one properly qualified clinician/scientist from each international study site will be invited to attend meetings of the existing trial's DSMB. The DSMB president can be contacted for independent advice and review by the Researcher or study sponsor in the following situations: • Follow-up on any SAE considered possibly, probably or definitely related to a study treatment; • Any other situation in which the Investigator or Study Sponsor feels that independent advice or review is important. The DSMB will review the SAE considered to be possibly, probably, or definitely related to the study treatments. The DSMB will be notified within 24 hours after the Sponsor become aware of the occurrence. The DSMB can recommend stopping recruitment into the study, if necessary, to follow up on an SAE related to a study treatment. It will also recommend restarting the study, when appropriate, following review of such safety events (i.e. SUSARs associated with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19). The DSMB will review safety data from volunteers aged 56 and above recruited as part of the COV002 UK study. Recruitment of older adults will only be allowed following advice from the DSMB. Analysis Plan for the Marketing Authorisation Application (MAA SAP) will be written and signed off before any interim data analyses are conducted. Clinical Protocol Study Code: COV003 Version 8.0 12 th November 2020 Page 82 of 99 The data from this study will be included in prospective pooled analyses of studies for efficacy and safety of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 to provide greater precision of both efficacy and safety outcomes The primary efficacy endpoint is PCR positive symptomatic COVID-19. This is defined as a participant with a PCR+ swab and at least one of the following symptoms: cough, fever > 37.8, shortness of breath, anosmia, or ageusia. Where possible, sensitivity analyses will be conducted using common alternative definitions of virologically-confirmed COVID-19 disease, including those in use in other phase 3 protocols (including but not limited to: USA AstraZeneca phase 3 trial, South Africa COV005 trial, WHO solidarity trial, CEPI definition). This will aid in comparisons between various studies and meta-analyses. These alternative definitions will be detailed in the statistical analysis plan as exploratory analyses. Due to the vaccine-induced disease mitigation potential, the inclusion of all positive PCR infections as a primary result may lower the vaccine's estimated effectiveness and reduce its accuracy. COVID-19 disease, positive for PCR and symptomatic, is a more specific primary outcome and may lead to an earlier demonstration of vaccine efficacy, although it includes fewer cases. Regarding the differentiation of ADE and the lack of effectiveness of the vaccine: there is no internationally accepted definition of ADE. Differences in disease severity between groups will be described. If the proportion of serious illness is similar between the two groups, this would support the lack of effectiveness and not the improvement of the illness. The primary and secondary analysis will be conducted on participants who are seronegative at baseline. A sensitivity analysis will be conducted including all participants regardless of baseline serostatus. Clinical Protocol Study Code: COV003 Version 8.0 12 th November 2020 Page 83 of 99 The screening of the participants will be based on the serological exam with IgG antibodies negative for SARs-CoV-2. However, for the analysis of the primary outcome, a validated assay detecting antibodies against SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein will be used to exclude any remaining participants who were seropositive at baseline. Analysis of the primary endpoint will be computed as follows: 1. Efficacy of two doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Participants will be included who received two doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Events will be included if they occurred more than 14 days after the booster dose. Participants who are symptomatic up to 14 days after the second dose of vaccine will be excluded from the analysis. In addition, those with less than 14 days follow up postsecond dose will also be excluded. Secondary analyses of the primary outcome: 2. Efficacy of at least one dose of vaccine. Cases occurring more than 21 days after the first vaccination will be included. Participants who are symptomatic up to 21 days from vaccination will still attend site for PCR testing and blood samples but will be excluded from the analysis as these participants may have been exposed to SARS-CoV-2 prior to vaccination or before the immune system has had time to mount a response to the vaccine. In addition, those with less than 21 days follow up post-vaccination will also be excluded. If the Poisson regression model with robust variance fails to converge, the exact conditional method for stratified poisson regression will be used. The cumulative incidence of symptomatic infections will be presented using the Kaplan-Meier method. Secondary efficacy endpoints will be analysed in the same way as the primary efficacy endpoint. Analyses will conducted for all adults combined as well as conducting analyses stratified by age cohorts. All data from participants with PCR-positive swabs will be assessed for inclusion in the efficacy analyses by two blinded assessors who will independently review each case according to prespecified criteria as detailed in the statistical analysis plan, to classify each for inclusion in the primary and secondary outcomes. A separate CRF will be designed for this purpose. All PCR-positive results will be assessed for the primary outcome, including those with symptoms who were swabbed by trial staff and other potential sources of information such as health-care workers who are tested at their workplace as either a routine test procedure or due to developing symptoms. For each group, the counts and percentages of each local and systemic adverse reaction requested from the daily cards, and all unsolicited AEs and SAEs will be presented.. Highly deviated antibody data will be transformed logarithmically before analysis. The geometric mean of the concentration and the associated 95% confidence interval will be summarized for each group at each timepoint, calculating the anti-log of the average difference of the logarithmically transformed data. Clinical Protocol Study Code: COV003 Version 8.0 12 th November 2020 Page 85 of 99 The geometric means of concentration on day 28 and the proportion of participants with serum conversion to S-spike protein from day 0 to day 28 will be computed. Comparisons between the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine and control groups will be made using a Mann Whitney U test due to the low titers expected in the control group that will cause non-normal distribution. Subgroup comparisons of efficacy, and safety will be conducted by incorporating vaccinegroup by subgroup interaction terms into appropriate regression models. Subgroup comparisons will only be conducted if there are at least 5 cases in all subgroups. Comparisons will include: 3. Seropositive to S-spike or non-spike proteins at baseline vs not seropositive Health care workers and highly-exposed participants versus others 5. Ethnicity 6. BMI (< 30 / >= 30 kg/m2) The research sites will include up to 10,300 participants (with a margin of 1%). It is planned that the primary evidence of efficacy and safety for the ChADOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine will be based on global analyses utilizing studies COV001 (the UK P1/2 study), COV002 (the UK P2/3 study), COV003 (the Brazil P3 study) and COV005 (the South Africa P1/2 study) including a pooled analysis across the studies. As such the interim and primary analyses for the primary outcome will be based on cases accumulated across multiple studies, details of which will be specified within the MAA SAP rather than for each individual study. Interim and primary data cuts from this study will therefore be carried out to support the pooled analysis. The global MAA SAP allows for interim and primary analyses to be conducted once sufficient eligible cases have accumulated, where the overall type 1 error is controlled at the 5% level using a flexible alpha-spending approach that accounts for the incorporation of data from this study into pooled interim analyses under the global MAA SAP. Evidence of efficacy will be determined if the lower bound of the multiplicity adjusted confidence interval is greater than a 20% threshold. The primary analysis will have approximately 90% power assuming a vaccine efficacy of 60%. A flexible alpha spending approach will be implemented to allow an earlier primary analysis in the situation where accumulation of eligible cases were lower than expected. Evidence of efficacy at an interim or primary analysis of pooled data will not be considered a reason to stop the trial, but instead will be interpreted as early evidence of efficacy. However if an interim analysis demonstrates evidence of efficacy then a study level analysis according to the study SAP may be used to support study level evidence of efficacy. A final analysis will be conducted at the end of the study. The final study-specific analysis will incorporate all data from the study, including data that has previously contributed to global efficacy estimates under the pooled analysis strategy. The final analysis will be considered a supportive analysis to the global efficacy analysis. All vaccinated participants will be included in the analysis, unless otherwise specified The independent DSMB will meet regularly to review safety data from all available studies of The Principal Investigator will be responsible for all data that accumulates in the study. All study data, including the participant's diary, will be recorded directly in an Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system (for example, OpenClinica, REDCap or similar) or in a paper source document for later insertion in EDC if the direct entry is not available. This includes safety data, laboratory data and endpoints data. All documents will be stored securely and in confidential conditions. Participants will be identified by a unique number and code specific to the study in any database. The name and any other identifying details will NOT be included in any electronic study data file. The EDC system (CRF data) uses a relational database (MySQL/PostgreSQL) through a secure web interface with data checks applied during data entry to ensure data quality. The database includes a full set of features that comply with GCP, EU and UK regulations and Sponsor security policies, including a full audit trail, user-based privileges and integration with the institutional LDAP server. The MySQL and PostgreSQL databases and the web server will be hosted on servers that are kept secure. The backups will be stored according to the IT department's schedule on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis and retained for one month, three months and six months, respectively. IT servers provide a stable, secure, wellmaintained, high-capacity data storage environment. RedCap and OpenClinica are widely used, powerful, reliable and well supported systems. Access to the study database will be restricted to members of the study team with a username and password. Investigators will maintain adequate medical and research records for this trial, in accordance with the GCP and regulatory and institutional requirements to protect the confidentiality of participants Page 88 of 99 clinical records for the purposes of quality assurance reviews, audits and evaluation of the safety and progress of the study. All information required by the protocol will be collected in CRFs designed by the Sponsor. All source documents will be archived. The source documents are documents, data and original records from which the participant's CRF data is obtained. For this study, these will include, but are not limited to, the Informed Consent Form, blood test results, and response letters from the general practitioner, laboratory records, diaries, medical records and correspondence. In this study, this will include, but is not limited to, medical history, medication records, vital signs, physical exam records, urine tests, blood test results, adverse event data and vaccine details. All source data and CRFs of the participants will be safely stored. Where data are recorded directly onto the electronic data system these will be considered source documents. However, if local regulations require these electronic case report forms to be printed, they will be printed and filed in the participants The study protocol, documentation, data, and all other information generated will be kept strictly confidential. No information about the study or its data will be disclosed to unauthorized third parties without prior written approval from the sponsor. Identifiable details, such as contact details, will be stored for a minimum of 5 years. Unidentified search data may be stored indefinitely. If participants agree to be contacted for future research, information about their Informed Consent Form will be recorded, retained and stored securely and separately from the research data. The data collection tools will undergo proper validation to ensure that the data is collected accurately and completely. The datasets provided for analysis will be subject to quality control processes to ensure that the data analyzed is a true reflection of the source data. Study data will be managed in accordance with local data management SOPs. If an additional study of specific processes is necessary, an approved Data Management Plan will be implemented. Study data can be stored electronically on a secure server, and paper notes will be kept in a filing cabinet locked with a key in the site. All essential documents will be retained for a minimum of 5 years after the end of the study. The need to store study data for a longer time in relation to vaccine authorization will be subject to continuous review. For effective vaccines that can be authorized, we can safely store research data in the sites at least 15 years after the study ends, subject to adjustments to clinical trial regulations. Where participants' relevant bank details will be stored for 7 years, in accordance with the sites's financial policy. Unidentified search data may be stored indefinitely. The approved standard operating procedures (SOPs) will be used in the research sites and in all laboratory centers. Regular monitoring will be performed in accordance with the GCP by the monitor. When proceeding in accordance with the written SOPs, the monitor will verify that the clinical trial is performed and the data are generated, documented and reported in accordance with the protocol, GCP and applicable regulatory requirements. The sites will provide direct access to all data/documents and source reports related to the study for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the Sponsor and to inspect by local and regulatory authorities. Any deviations from the protocol will be documented on a protocol deviation form and filed in the study's master file. Clinical Protocol Page 90 of 99 Each deviation will be assessed for its impact on the safety of the participants and the conduct of the study. Significant deviations from the protocol will be listed at the end of the study report. The QA manager conducts internal systems-based audits to verify that trials are being conducted in accordance with local procedures and in accordance with study protocols, departmental SOPs, GCP and applicable regulations. The Sponsor, the study sites, the Research Ethics Committee, and the Regulatory Agencies may conduct audits to ensure compliance with the appropriate protocol, GCP, and regulations. Investigators will ensure that this study is being conducted in accordance with the principles of the current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki. The Investigator will ensure that this trial is being conducted in accordance with the relevant standards and good clinical practices. After the Sponsor's approval, the Protocol, the Informed Consent Form, the participant's information sheet and any proposed advertising material will be submitted to an appropriate Research Ethics Committee (REC), regulatory authorities and host institutions for written approval. No changes to this protocol will be made without consulting the Sponsor and without its consent. Page 91 of 99 already been given, are not initiated without their review and approval, except to eliminate immediate risks apparent to the subject (i.e., as an urgent safety measure). The study will comply with the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the UK Data Protection Act of 2018, as well as local data protection regulations, which require data not to be identified, whenever and when practical to do so. The processing of participants' personal data will be minimized by using only a single study number of the participant in all study documents and in any electronic database, with the exception of informed consent forms and participant identification records. All documents will be stored securely, and accessible only by study staff and authorized personnel. The study team will protect the privacy of participants' personal data. A separate confidential file containing personally identifiable information will be stored in a secure location in accordance with current data protection legislation. The photographs taken at the vaccination sites (if necessary, with the written and informed consent of the participant) will not include the face of the participant and will be identified by the date, study code and the subject's unique identifier. Once developed, the photographs will be stored as confidential records, as above. This material can be shown to other professionals, used for educational purposes, or included in a scientific publication.  Researchers will be involved in reviewing draft manuscripts, abstracts, press releases and any other publications resulting from the study. The study data can also be used as part of a doctoral or master's thesis. List details of all protocol amendments here whenever a new protocol version is produced. Prime-boost 2* doses, 4 weeks (21-35 days) apart *Participants will receive 2 doses of the same injection (EITHER IP or placebo) as assigned at randomization. § Numbers will be increased to supplement for corresponding number of individuals randomized prior to implementation of Version 3.0 of the protocol that tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on PCR at time of randomization. # Following review of the initial safety/immunogenicity phase I trial conducted in the UK; COV0001 trial, and after review of the initial safety/ immunogenicity trial COV0001 by the DSMC; it was confirmed that Group 2 participants will receive 2 doses. SAHPRA and WHREC had been informed of this decision based on the earlier protocol requirements. Also, considering the unpredictability of the force of SARS-CoV-2 infection and the lower than anticipated attack rate for the primary-endpoint cases in the study being undertaken in the UK, the sample size for Group 2 (efficacy cohort) was expanded from the 550 included in protocol version 1.0, dated 24 th April 2020. This will involve enrolling up to a total of 1900 people in Group-2, which will provide 80% power to detect at least a 60% vaccine efficacy (lower bound of 95%CI >0) with an attack rate of 3.5% in the placebo arm. Ongoing review of the number of COVID-19 endpoint cases accrued during the course of the study, may lend itself to enrolling smaller number of participants should the attack rate be higher than 3.5%. The sample size for Group-1 has been increased to 70 to accommodate for the higher than anticipated infection rate with SARS-CoV-2 (6 of initial 24 randomized subjects in Group-1). Similarly, in anticipation of approximately one-third of Group-3 participants possibly being already infected with SARS-CoV-2, the sample size will be increased to 100 to have approximately 30 sero-negative vaccinees and placebo recipients enrolled into the study. Objectives: Primary objective: To assess the safety of the candidate vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in healthy HIV-uninfected adults. To assess efficacy of the candidate ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 against COVID-19, defined as virologically confirmed (PCR positive) COVID-19 disease, in participants that were COVID-19 naïve at time of randomization and who received two doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or placebo. Events will be included if they occurred more than 14 days after the booster dose. "COVID-19 naïve" will be defined as sero-negative and tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 infection based on a high sensitivity serology antibody test and molecular detection testing of nasal swab, respectively To assess the immunogenicity of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in healthy HIV-uninfected adults  Primary co-objectives: • To assess the safety of the candidate vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV in adults living with HIV. • To evaluate the immunogenicity of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 after first and second doses of vaccine. Objective 3. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE In December 2019, a cluster of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause was linked to a seafood wholesale market in Wuhan, China and were later confirmed to be infected with a novel coronavirus, known as 2019-nCoV [1] . The virus was subsequently renamed to SARS-CoV-2 because it is similar to the coronavirus responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-CoV), a lineage B betacoronavirus. SARS-CoV-2 shares more than 79% of its sequence with SARS-CoV, and 50% with the coronavirus responsible for Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV), a member of the lineage C betacoronavirus [2] . COVID-19 is the illness caused by SARS-CoV-2. By January 2020 there was increasing evidence of human to human transmission as the number of cases rapidly began to increase in China. Despite unprecedented containment measures adopted by the Chinese government, SARS-CoV-2 rapidly spread across the world. The WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak a public health emergency of international concern on 30 th January 2020. As of 22 nd April 2020, over 2.5 million cases have been reported with more than 177 000 deaths globally (Worldometers.info). Coronaviruses (CoVs) are spherical, enveloped, large positive-sense single-stranded RNA genomes. One-fourth of their genome is responsible for coding structural proteins, such as the spike (S) glycoprotein, envelope (E), membrane (M) and nucleocapsid (N) proteins. E, M, and N are mainly responsible for virion assembly whilst the S protein is involved in receptor binding, mediating virus entry into host cells during CoVs infection via different receptors [3] . SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the phylogenetic lineage B of the genus Betacoronavirus and it uses the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as the entry receptor [4] . It is the seventh CoV known to cause human infections and the third known to cause severe disease after SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. The spike protein is a type I, trimeric, transmembrane glycoprotein located at the surface of the viral envelope of CoVs, which can be divided into two functional subunits: the N-terminal S1 and the Cterminal S2. S1 and S2 are responsible for cellular receptor binding via the receptor binding domain Mean with SEM are depicted.  Pre-clinical efficacy studies of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in ferrets and non-human primates are underway. Results will be included in an updated Investigator's Brochure when available. or full-length S protein based vaccines, including a study using Modified Vaccinia Ankara as a vector [6] [7] [8] . To date, there has been one report of lung immunopathology following MERS-CoV challenge in mice immunised with an inactivated MERS-CoV candidate vaccine [9] . However, in preclinical studies of ChAdOx1 immunisation and MERS-CoV challenge, no ADE was observed in hDPP4 transgenic mice, dromedary camels or non-human primates (van Doremalen et al, manuscript submitted) [10, 11] . The risks of inducing lung immunopathology in the event of COVID-19 following ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination are unknown. Challenge studies on ferrets and NHPs are underway and these pre-clinical studies will report on presence or absence of lung pathology. Results will be reviewed as soon as they emerge and will inform discussions on risk/benefit to participants receiving the Investigational Medical Product (IMP). All pathology data arising from challenge studies of other SARS-CoV-2 vaccine candidates will also be taken into account. The phase I/II study in health adults in the UK, initiated in late April 2020 is the first-in-human study employing ChAdOx1 nCoV-19, and as of mid-June 2020 had enrolled more than 7000 participants. VN; p<0·001) . 16 These data support the decision to pursue a two dose schedule for evaluation of efficacy of the vaccine candidate. Hence, this protocol has been adapted as such, with all Group now assigned to receive either two doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or placebo (Folegatti et al, Lancet 2020) . The trial to be conducted in South Africa will enroll adults living without and with HIV to assess safety,  Primary objective: To assess the safety of the candidate vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in healthy HIV-uninfected adults. To assess efficacy of the candidate ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 against COVID-19, defined as virologically confirmed (PCR positive) COVID-19 disease, in participants that were COVID-19 naïve at the time of randomization and who received two doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or placebo. Events will be included if they occurred more than 14 days after the booster dose. "COVID-19 naïve" will be defined as seronegative and tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 infection, based on a high sensitivity serology antibody test and molecular detection testing of nasal swab, respectively. To assess the immunogenicity of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in healthy HIV-uninfected adults The primary efficacy [objective] and endpoint include PCR positive COVID-19 disease cases occurring in participants that were COVID-19 naïve at randomization and who received two doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or placebo. Events will be included if they occurred more than 14 days after the booster dose. Virologically-confirmed COVID-19 clinical disease will be defined as an acute respiratory illness that is clinically consistent with COVID-19 based on presence of criteria indicated in Table 4 and  Mild Any one of: • Fever (defined by subjective or objective measure, regardless of use of anti-pyretic medications) • New onset cough • ≥ 2 COVID-19 respiratory/non-respiratory symptoms in Table 4 AND • Does not meet criteria for moderate or severe Moderate ≥ 1 of: • Fever (≥ 37.8°C) + any 2 COVID-19 symptoms in table 4 for ≥ 3 days (need not be contiguous days) • High fever (≥ 38.4°C) for ≥ 3 days (need not be contiguous days) • Any evidence of significant LRTI: Evidence of major organ dysfunction or failure includes but is not limited to any of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), acute renal failure, acute hepatic failure, acute right or left heart failure, septic or cardiogenic shock, or requirement for vasopressors, systemic corticosteroids, or hemodialysis. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 45 Primary co-objectives: • To assess the safety of the candidate vaccine ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in adults living with HIV. • To evaluate the immunogenicity of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 after first and second doses of vaccine in adults living with HIV.  This is a Phase I/II, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, individually randomized study in adults aged years living with and without HIV in South Africa. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or placebo will be administered via an intramuscular injection into the deltoid. The protocol has been adapted to confirm that the study will assess safety, immunogenicity and efficacy of two doses of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 based on the phase I study results from the UK immunogenicity cohort. 16 For Group-1 (HIV-uninfected adults; n=70) and Group-3 (HIV-infected adults; n=100), a two dose schedule spaced 21-35 days apart will be evaluated for safety and immunogenicity. In Group II (phase II; immunogenicity and efficacy cohort), we will target enrolling 1900 participants to accrue sufficient number of endpoints to analyze for efficacy of at least 60% (and a lower bound of >0%) and 80% power assuming an attack rate of 3.5% for COVID-19 in the placebo arm (see sample size section). Based on the endpoint case accrual and the trajectory of the epidemic in South Africa, the sample size may be adjusted in relation to number of endpoints being accrued. Participants already enrolled prior to implementation of Version 3.0 of the protocol, that tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by PCR at randomization will continue on the study, including all further scheduled visits and procedures. However, an equal number of additional participants that test negative for SARS-CoV-2 on PCR testing will be enrolled into the study. The three trial groups are detailed in Table 7 , with an overall sample size of ~2070. Randomisation will take place at an intervention to placebo ratio of 1:1 in blocks of 8 and all participants and clinical study staff will be blinded to IP or placebo. Site pharmacists and the person administering the allocated IP/placebo will be unblinded. Once group 1 is fully recruited, safety data will be reviewed by DSMC. Group 3 enrolment will follow on from group 1 enrolment. This decision will be guided by DSMC review of COV001 trial in the UK. Initiation of enrolment into Group 2 will be contingent upon review by the joint DSMC of the ongoing study in the UK, which will also ultimately inform whether to pursue a single or two-dose schedule for the efficacy-cohort in South Africa. Participants will be followed over the duration of the study (through to 365 days post-randomization) to record adverse events and episodes of virologically confirmed symptomatic COVID-19. Participants will be tested for SARS-CoV-2 infection if they present with a new onset of symptoms suggestive of COVID-19 (Table 4 ) throughout the duration of their participation. Detailed clinical parameters will be collected from medical records (or examination by study-staff) and aligned with the COVID-19 score; Table 5 . These include measuring severity based on oxygen saturation, need for oxygen therapy, respiratory rate and other vital signs, need for ventilatory support, X-ray imaging and blood test results, amongst other clinically relevant parameters; Table 5 . ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 48 Safety will be assessed in real time and a t l e a s t m o n t h l y interim reviews b y t h e D S M C w i l l b e scheduled after Group 1 (70 HIV-uninfected) participants received the IP (dose 1 and dose 2 if given), after enrolment of 100 HIV-infected adults (Group-3) and once all Group-2 participants are enrolled. The DSMC will periodically assess safety and efficacy data every 4-8 weeks and/or its discretion. All deaths and any serious adverse event considered to be study-related will be reviewed by the DSMC within 72 hours of site reporting of such cases to the DSMC (which will occur within 24 hours of site identification on any such cases). Sample size increased from 50 to 70, following higher than anticipated positivity for SARS-CoV-2 infection (six of initial 24 randomized into the study), to accommodate for non-evaluable (i.e. not COVID-19 naive) participants. *Participants will receive 2 doses of the same injection (EITHER IP or placebo) as assigned at randomization. § Numbers will be increased to supplement for corresponding number of individuals randomized prior to implementation of Version 3.0 of the protocol that tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on PCR at time of randomization. # Following a review of the initial safety/immunogenicity trial being conducted in the UK; COV0001 trial, and review of the initial safety/ immunogenicity trial COV0001 by the DSMC, it was decided that Group 2 in this trial will receive 2 doses of assigned study intervention. SAHPRA and WHREC have already been informed of Group 2 receiving a two-dose schedule based on the earlier version of the protocol. Also, considering the unpredictability of the force of SARS-CoV-2 infection and the lower than anticipated attack rate for the primary-endpoint cases in the study being undertaken in the UK, the sample size for Group 2 (efficacy cohort) has been expanded. This will involve enrolling up to a total of 1900 people in Group-2, which will provide 80% power to detect at least a 60% vaccine efficacy (lower bound of 95%CI >0) with an attack rate of 3.5% in the placebo arm. Ongoing review of the number of COVID-19 endpoint cases accrued during the course of the study, may lend itself to enrolling smaller number of participants should the attack rate be higher than 3.5%. The sample size for Group 1 has been increased to 70 to accommodate for the higher than anticipated infection rate with SARS-CONFIDENTIAL ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 49 CoV-2 (6 of the initial 24 participants randomized in group 1). Similarly, in anticipation of approximately one-third of Group-3 participants possibly being already infected with SARS-CoV-2, the sample size will be increased to 100 to have approximately 30 sero-negative vaccinees and placebo recipients enrolled into the study. Adult participants (healthy HIV-uninfected; and generally well people living with HIV [Group 3]) aged 18-65 years will be enrolled. Participants will be considered enrolled immediately following randomization to receive first vaccination. The end of the trial is the date of the last assay conducted on the last sample collected. The total duration of the study will be 12 months from the day of enrolment for all participants. The potential risks are those associated with phlebotomy, vaccination and disease enhancement Localised bruising and discomfort can occur at the site of venipuncture. Infrequently fainting may occur. These will not be documented as AEs if they occur. The total volume of blood drawn over a six-month period will be 160-315mL (blood volumes may vary slightly for participants at different investigator sites due to use of different volume vacutainers, following local SOPs). This should not compromise these participants, as they would donate 470mL during a single blood donation for the National Blood transfusion Service over a 3-4-month period. Participants will be asked to refrain from blood donation for the duration of their involvement in the trial. Allergic reactions from mild to severe may occur in response to any constituent of a medicinal product's preparation. Anaphylaxis is extremely rare (about 1 in 1,000,000 vaccine doses) but can occur in response to any vaccine or medication. The typical local reaction as a result of IM injection is temporary pain, tenderness, redness, and swelling at the site of the injection.  Constitutional influenza-like symptoms such as fatigue, headache, malaise, feverishness, and muscle aches can occur with any vaccination and last for 2-3 days. Presyncopal and syncopal episodes may occur at the time of vaccination which rapidly resolve. As with any other vaccine, temporary ascending paralysis (Guillain-Barré syndrome, GBS) or immune mediated reactions that can lead to organ damage may occur, but this should be extremely rare (1 in 100,000-1,000,000 vaccine doses). Control participants will receive a placebo injection containing sterile normal saline (0.9% NaCl). The volume of the IP and placebo injections will be equal. The risks of inducing disease enhancement and lung immunopathology in the event of COVID-19 disease following ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccination are unknown. Challenge studies on ferrets and Nonhuman primates (NHPs) are underway and results will be reviewed as they emerge. All pre-clinical data from challenge studies using ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and other vaccine candidates (when available) will inform decisions on risks and benefits to participants receiving the IP. Recipients of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 do not have any guaranteed benefit. However, the information gained from this study could contribute to the development of a safe and effective vaccine against COVID-19. IP recipients may benefit from receipt of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine if the vaccine is found to be effective against reducing COVID-19. Placebo recipients will not benefit from receipt of placebo, however, may benefit from regular follow-up during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic as they will be tested for infection if they are symptomatic. 6. RECRUITMENT AND WITHDRAWAL OF TRIAL PARTICIPANTS Adults in South Africa will be recruited by the following methods: • Research sites will utilize databases available in the research units which contain contact details of participants or parents of participants in previous (completed) vaccine trials. 6.2. Informed consent All participants will have the opportunity to read the information sheet prior to or during screening visit. An 'assessment of understanding' (AOU) will be completed by participant to assess their understanding of participant information sheet. Participants will have the opportunity to discuss the trial information with investigators and family members. Informed consent will be signed and dated before any study specific procedures are performed. The informed consent process will be undertaken in two stages. In the first instance, following brief introduction about the study at the screening visit, including inclusion and exclusion criteria, volunteers will be asked to consent to procedures to determine their eligibility for possible randomization (full-study participation). This will include collection of key demographic information, a brief clinical history, testing inter alia for HIV -1 infection (except for Group 3), Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAG) positivity, evidence for current (by molecular detection) infection with SARS-CoV-2, pregnancy test (for women of reproductive age group), HbA1C (glycosylated hemoglobin) as well as general physical well-being (including blood pressure check). This approach has been adopted to accommodate for the higher than anticipated number of participants (six of 24) that tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection by PCR after having started enrolment of Group-1 participants. Following fulfilment of inclusion and exclusion criteria based on findings from the screening visit, those who remain eligible and agree to undergo randomization into the full study, will be consented further for study participation. Screened participants will be encouraged to take complete informed (enrolment) consent forms home from the screening visit, and read and discuss the trial and their possible involvement in the trial with family. At the randomization visit, the participant will be fully informed of all aspects of the trial, the potential risks and their obligations. The following general principles will be emphasized: Refusal to participate involves no penalty or loss of medical benefits The participant may withdraw from the study at any time. The participant is free to ask questions at any time to allow him or her to understand the purpose of the study and the procedures involved The study involves research of an investigational vaccine There is no direct benefit to the participant from participating Participants will be asked to provide detailed medical and surgical history to investigator verbally and if possibly, patient-held medical records (outpatient cards) will be reviewed. Blood samples taken as part of the study may be sent to laboratories outside South Africa (e.g. University of Oxford and InNexus BioPharma Inc in Canada) for immunogenicity testing. These will be anonymised samples. Participants who agree to full study participation will be asked if they consent to storage of any leftover samples for use in other ethically approved research for up to 25-year period, which will be optional. The aims of the study and all tests to be carried out will be explained. The participant will be given the opportunity to ask about details of the trial, and will then have time to consider whether or not to participate. If they do decide to participate, the participant and the investigator will sign and date the relevant screening consent form, and full-study participation consent form (if eligible). However, in the current crisis, there may be occasions when it is necessary for the consent form to be signed by an appropriately trained and delegated research nurse instead of the investigator. The participant would always have the opportunity to discuss the study with a medically qualified investigator if they wish. The participant will then be provided with a copy of the consent forms to take away and keep, with the original being stored in the case report form (CRF). This trial will be conducted in generally healthy adults without HIV, except for Group-3 (i.e. safety and immunogenicity in people with HIV). The participants must satisfy all the following criteria to be eligible for the trial: • Healthy adults aged 18-65 years. • Documented result of not being infected with HIV (including screening by a rapid HIV antibody test) within two weeks of randomization into the study for Group-1 and Group-2 participants only. • Able and willing (in the Investigator's opinion) to comply with all study requirements. • Agreement to refrain from blood donation during the course of the study. • Provide written informed consent. The participant may not enter the study if any of the following apply: • Planned receipt of any vaccine other (licensed or investigational) than the study intervention within 30 days before and after each study vaccination. • Use of any unproven registered and unregistered treatments for COVID-19. • Evidence of current SARS-CoV-2 infection detected by molecular assay detection of SARS-CoV-2 done within 96 hours prior to randomization. • Acute respiratory and/or non-respiratory illness consistent with potential COVID-19 (see Table 4 for list of symptoms) concurrent or within 14 days prior to first study vaccination (medical history and/or physical examination) or documented temperature of > 38°C during this period. NOTE: This is a temporary exclusion for which the subject may be re-evaluated if they remain free from acute respiratory and/or non-respiratory illness consistent with potential COVID-19 after 14 days. Should a subject have a SARS-CoV-2 positive test, they may NOT be randomized. • Prior receipt of an investigational or licensed vaccine likely to impact on interpretation of the trial data (e.g. Adenovirus vectored vaccines, any coronavirus vaccines). Administration of immunoglobulins and/or any blood products within the three months preceding the planned administration of the vaccine candidate. • HbSAg positivity on the screening sample, or any sample obtained within three months of randomization. • Any history of hereditary angioedema or idiopathic angioedema. • Any history of anaphylaxis in relation to vaccination. • Pregnancy, lactation or willingness/intention to become pregnant during the study. • History of cancer (except basal cell carcinoma of the skin and cervical carcinoma in situ). • History of serious psychiatric condition likely to affect participation in the study. • Bleeding disorder (e.g. factor deficiency, coagulopathy or platelet disorder), or prior history of • Suspected or known current alcohol abuse as defined by an alcohol intake of greater than 42 units every week (% alcohol x volume (ml)/1000= number of units; e.g. Normal beer= 2 units, Glass of wine =3 units). • Suspected or known injecting drug abuse in the 5 years preceding enrolment. • Any clinically significant abnormal finding on screening urinalysis. • Any other significant disease, disorder or finding which may significantly increase the risk to the participant because of participation in the study, affect the ability of the participant to participate in the study or impair interpretation of the study data. • History of laboratory confirmed COVID-19 illness or known close contact with a person that was infected with SARS-COV-2. Close contact refers to being in contact with someone in the same household, or for at least 15 minutes and in close proximity with an infected person in the absence of wearing of a face masks. • New onset of fever or a cough or shortness of breath in the 3 0 days preceding screening  The following AEs associated with any vaccine, or identified on or before the day of vaccination constitute absolute contraindications to further administration of an IP to the participant in question. If any of these events occur during the study, the participant will continue follow-up in the study but will not receive any further study investigational vaccine: follow-up visit). Acceptable forms of contraception for female participants include: Established use of oral, injected or implanted hormonal methods of contraception. Placement of an intrauterine device (IUD) or intrauterine system (IUS). Total abdominal hysterectomy. Barrier methods of contraception (condom or occlusive cap with spermicide). Post-menopausal women, defined as a woman over the age of 45 who has not had a menstrual period for at least 12 months. Female participants will be requested to continue obtaining their contraceptives from their nearest clinic, which is provided at no-cost in the public-sector. Should this not be feasible, the study will provide female participants with the contraceptives. Female participants in a same-sex relationship and women that are post-menopausal will not be required to be on contraception. Participants will be excluded from the study if they are concurrently involved in another trial where an IP has been administered within 30 days prior to enrolment, or will be administered during the trial period. They will not be enrolled they are actively registered on another investigational vaccine or medication trial. In accordance with the principles of the current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki and any other applicable regulations, a participant has the right to withdraw from the study at any time and for any reason, and is not obliged to give his or her reasons for doing so. The Investigator may withdraw the participant at any time in the interests of the participant's health and well-being. In addition, the participant may withdraw/be withdrawn for any of the following reasons: Administrative decision by the Investigator. Ineligibility (either arising during the study or retrospectively, having been overlooked at screening). Participant non-compliance with study requirements. An AE, which requires discontinuation of the study involvement or results in inability to continue to comply with study procedures. The reason for withdrawal will be recorded in the CRF. If withdrawal is due to an AE, appropriate follow-up visits or medical care will be arranged, with the agreement of the participant, until the AE has resolved, stabilized or a non-trial related causality has been assigned. The DSMC or DSMC chair may recommend withdrawal of participants. Any participant who is withdrawn from the study may be replaced, if that is possible within the specified time frame. If a participant withdraws from the study, data and blood samples collected before their withdrawal will still be used on the analysis. Storage of blood samples will continue unless the participant specifically requests otherwise. In all cases of participant withdrawal, long-term safety data collection, including some procedures such as safety bloods, will continue as appropriate if participants have received one or more vaccine doses, unless they decline any further follow-up. Should a participant become pregnant during the trial, no further study IP will be administered. She will be followed up for clinical safety assessment with her ongoing consent and in addition will be followed until pregnancy outcome is determined. We would not routinely perform venipuncture in a pregnant participant unless there is clinical need. Women falling pregnant during the study will also continue in follow-up for COVID-19 and be retained in the efficacy analyses. A 'Pregnancy reporting' form must be completed within 7 days of site staff becoming aware of the pregnancy, and a pregnancy outcome form must be completed within 7 days of delivery, or as soon as possible (within 7 days of site awareness) if site is notified more than 7 days post-delivery. This section describes the trial procedures for evaluating study participants and follow-up after administration of study vaccine. All participants in groups 1 and 3 will have the same schedule of clinic attendances and procedures as indicated in the schedules of attendance ( vaccine or NaCl (0.9%) placebo injection, and undergo follow-up for a total of 12 months' post enrolment. The total volume of blood donated during the study will be 160-315mL depending on which group they are allocated to. Additional visits or procedures may be performed at the discretion of the investigators, e.g., further medical history and physical examination, urine microscopy in the event of positive urinalysis or additional blood tests if clinically relevant. Pulse, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure and temperature will be measured at the time-points indicated in the schedule of procedures and may also be measured as part of a physical examination if indicated at other time-points. Blood will be drawn for the following laboratory tests and processed at an accredited Laboratory for: Haematology; Full Blood Count and differential count (Groups 1 and 3) Biochemistry; U&E (Sodium, Potassium, Urea, Creatinine), Liver Function Tests (Albumin, ALT, Diagnostic serology; HBsAg, HIV antibodies (specific consent will be gained prior to testing blood for these blood-borne viruses). HIV Elisa will be repeated on HIV-negative participants at trial conclusion visit (day 364). HbA1C will be done on all participants, and those with an abnormal result will be referred for further medical care, but remain eligible for study enrolment. (All Groups) Genetics; Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) typing (All Groups) A nasal swab and/or saliva will be collected for testing of SARS-COV-2. Sample processing will be done at the RMPRU using molecular detection methods, with confirmatory testing at another accredited laboratory. In the case of discordant results between RMPRU and the second laboratory, a further aliquot of the sample will be submitted to a third accredited laboratory for testing, and the result from the third laboratory will be assumed to be the final result. Additional safety blood tests may be performed if clinically relevant at the discretion of the medically qualified investigators, including potential prognostic indicators or markers of severe COVID-19 disease. Urinalysis; Urine will be tested for protein, blood and glucose at screening. For female participants only, urine will be tested for beta-human chorionic gonadotrophin (β-HCG) at screening and immediately prior to vaccination. participants, and will be calibrated against standard reference reagent from National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC), which is providing references sera to laboratories as part of a WHO COVID-19 serology working groups. COVID-19 assay will be further harmonized using NIBSC serum panel which includes high, medium and negative control serum panel. Each luminex run will include inhouse high, medium and negative serums for quality control. The assay will further expand to IgA for breast milk analysis. In addition, samples may be sent to the Oxford collaborators group, and possibly another reference group for further testing. The ex vivo IFN-gamma ELISpot assay, will be used to quantify the frequency of antigen-specific effector T cells in response to vaccination. The assay will be performed on standardized procedure from Oxford University. Pools of peptides needed for the assay will be supplied from Oxford University. For Elispot assay, peptides are designed to cover the length of the SARS-CoV2 spike construct and comprise 15mer peptides overlapping by 10 aa, giving a total of 258 peptides. Fc effector functionality, including antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity, complement deposition, and phagocytosis will assess responses to spike trimer or the receptor binding domain. ADCC will use spike trimer or receptor binding domain (RBD)-coated Huh7 cells that express the SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE-2. Targets for ADCD and ADCP will be neutravidin fluorescent beads coated with spike or RBD proteins. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 61 Targets will be incubated with SARS-CoV-2 convalescent sera. Effector cells for ADCC will be PBMCS from uninfected donors, and will measure granzyme B. ADCD will be measured as the amount of C3b deposition on the surface of antigen-coated beads. ADCP will be measured as the percentage of antigencoated beads taken up by THP-1 cells in an antibody dependent manner. In addition, samples may be sent to the Oxford collaborators group, and possibly another reference group for further testing. A detailed update of the specific immunology assays to be used in this study will be provided prior to enrolling the first subject in the study. Other exploratory immunological assays including antibody subtype assays, DNA analysis of genetic polymorphisms potentially relevant to vaccine immunogenicity, monoclonal antibody isolation and gene expression studies amongst others may be performed at the discretion of the Investigators. Collaboration with other specialist laboratories in South Africa, the UK, Europe, Canada and elsewhere for further exploratory tests may occur. This would involve the transfer of serum or plasma and, PBMC and/or other study samples to these laboratories, but these would remain anonymised. Informed consent for this will be gained from participants. Samples collected for the purposes of COVID-19 diagnosis will be sent to reference laboratories in South Africa for confirmatory testing. All participants testing positive for SARS-COV2 will be notified through the Notifiable Medical Conditions, per regulatory requirements in South Africa, and includes providing personal data to implement isolation measures of infected individuals and tracing of their contacts. Participants will be informed the obligation on the part of the investigators to submit this level of information to the Notifiable Medical Conditions registry, and local authorities that are responsible for monitoring of infected cases and their contacts. Participants will be informed that there may be leftover samples of their blood (after testing for this study is completed), and that such samples may be stored up to 25 years for possible future research (exploratory immunology), including genotypic testing of genetic polymorphisms potentially relevant to vaccine immunogenicity. Participants will be able to decide if they will permit such future use of any leftover samples. With the participants' informed consent, any leftover cells, urine and serum/plasma will be frozen for future analysis of COVID-19 and other coronaviruses related diseases or vaccinerelated responses. If a participant elect not to permit this, all of that participant's leftover samples will be discarded after the required period of storage to meet Good Clinical Practice (GCP) and regulatory requirements. Samples that are to be stored for future research will be stored at RMPRU.  The study visits and procedures will be undertaken by one of the clinical trials team. The procedures to be included in each visit are documented in the schedule of attendances. Each visit is assigned a timepoint and a window period, within which the visit will be conducted. Participants will be required to share past medical and past surgical history, and medication at screening visit as an initial confirmation of eligibility. All potential participants will have a screening visit, which may take place up to 14 days prior to vaccination, although some results such as molecular testing for SARS-CoV-2 need to be done within 96 hours of randomization. The screening informed consent will be taken before screening. If consent is obtained, the procedures indicated in the schedule of attendances will be undertaken including a medical history, physical examination, blood tests and height and weight. Individually each participant will have the opportunity to question an appropriately trained and delegated researcher before signing the full-study participation consent at enrollment visit. Abnormal clinical findings from the urinalysis or blood tests at screening will be assessed by a medically qualified study member. Abnormal clinical and blood tests following screening will be assessed according to specific laboratory adverse event grading tables (DAIDS Laboratory Grading of Abnormal Results; Version 2.1, July 2017). Any abnormal test result deemed clinically significant may be repeated to ensure it is not a single occurrence. If an abnormal finding is deemed to be clinically significant (Grade 2 or higher abnormality), the participant will be informed and appropriate medical care arranged with the permission of the participant. The eligibility of the participant will be reviewed at the end of the screening visit and again when all results from the screening visit have been considered. Decisions to exclude the participant from enrolling in the trial or to withdraw a participant from the trial will be based on fulfilling the inclusion and exclusion criteria, as well as at the discretion of the Investigator. If eligible, a day 0 visit will be scheduled for the participant to receive the vaccine and subsequent follow-up. Participants will be consented for full study participation prior to randomization at the day-0 visit.  Participants will be considered enrolled into the trial at the point of written, signed consent for fullstudy participation, i.e. following confirmation of eligibly through the screening visit. The initiation of the consenting process for full-study participation may precede the date on which the consent form is signed, to allow adequate time for potential participants to consider their willingness to participate. Before randomization, the eligibility of the participant will be reviewed. Pulse, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure and temperature will be observed and if necessary, a medical history and physical examination may be undertaken. Vaccinations will be administered as described below. All vaccines will be administered intramuscularly according to specific SOPs. The injection site will be covered with a sterile dressing and the participant will stay in the trial site for observation, in case of immediate adverse events. Observations will be taken 60 minutes after vaccination (+/-30 minutes). Post-vaccination observations include pulse rate, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, blood pressure, temperature and vaccination site review. In all groups, participants will be given an oral thermometer, measurement device and diary card (paper or electronic), with instructions on use, along with the emergency 24-hour telephone number to contact the on-call study doctor if needed. Participants will be instructed on how to self-assess the severity of these AEs. There will also be space on the diary card to self-document unsolicited AEs, and whether medication was taken to relieve the symptoms. Diary cards will collect information on the timing and severity of the following solicited AEs:  Prior to initiation of the study, any newly available safety data will be reviewed from animal studies (including non-human primate studies being conducted in UK) and clinical trials of coronavirus vaccines (including data from first 50 participants being enrolled in similar trial in UK, COV001) being tested elsewhere, and discussed with the DSMC and/or regulatory and ethics committees as necessary. Participants in group 1 (HIV-uninfected adults, prime-boost 2-dose, intensive follow up) and Group-3 may be enrolled concurrently, contingent upon approval by the DSMC. Based on the immunogenicity data from the initial safety/immunogenicity cohort enrolled in the UK study (COV001); 1 and following review by the DSMC it was decided that all participants will receive two doses of the assigned study-intervention. A notification on the dosing schedule for Group-2 was submitted the Ethics committee and SAPHRA. Follow-up visits will take place as per the schedule of attendances described in Table 8 , Table 9 and Table   10 with their respective windows. Participants will be assessed for local and systemic adverse events, interim history, physical examination, review of diary cards (paper or electronic) and blood tests at these time points as detailed in the schedule of attendances. Blood will also be taken for immunology purposes. If participants experience adverse events (laboratory or clinical), which the investigator (physician), CI and/or DSMC chair determine necessary for further close observation, the participant may be admitted to a hospital for observation and further medical management under the care of the attending-physicians. Given the evolving epidemiological situation both globally and in South Africa, should a participant be under isolation or quarantine and unable to attend any of the scheduled visits, a telephone consultation will be arranged in order to obtain core study data where possible. but not limited to, information on ICU admissions, clinical parameters such as oxygen saturation, respiratory rates and vital signs, need for oxygen therapy, need for ventilatory support, imaging and blood tests results, amongst others. Participants will be randomised to investigational vaccine or placebo (0.9% NaCl) in a 1:1 allocation, using block randomisation. Block sizes of 8 will be used for all groups (4 IP and 4 placebo). All participants and clinical study staff, except unblinded pharmacist and vaccine dispenser will be blinded to the trial arm that participants have been allocated to, whether investigational vaccine or placebo. The trial staff administering the vaccine will not be blinded. Vaccines will be prepared out of sight of the participant and syringes will be covered with an opaque object/material until ready for administration to ensure blinding. If the clinical condition of a participant necessitates breaking the code, this will be undertaken according to a trial specific working instruction and group allocation sent to the attending physician, if unblinding is thought to be relevant and likely to change clinical management.  On vaccination day, ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 will be allowed to thaw to room temperature and will be administered in accordance with trial specific instructions or stored at 2-8˚C for a maximum of 6 hours, where multiple doses are required from a single vial. The vaccine manufactured by Cobra Biologics is a multi-dose vial which is stored at 2-8 ˚C and does not require thawing. If the vaccine is stored outside of 2-8˚C it must be used within 6 hours. The vaccine will be administered intramuscularly into the deltoid of the nondominant arm (preferably). All volunteers will be observed in the unit for a minimum of 15 minutes (+15 minutes) after vaccination. During administration of the investigational products, Advanced Life Support drugs and resuscitation equipment will be immediately available for the management of anaphylaxis. Vaccination will be performed and the product is 3.5 -6.5 × 10 10 viral particles per dose based on the vp/mL concentration determined by A260, with a 0.5 mL dosing volume. This dosing range is based on a target 5 × 10 10 viral particles per dose and a ± 30% range to take into account process and method variabilities. The planned clinical dosage of Symbiosis' product is compared to that of CBF and Advent products, the resulting Symbiosis' product dosage at 0.5 mL for lot 20481A is somewhat lower in total viral particle per dose (20% from the lower range limit), slightly higher in total viral genome copies per dose (12% from the higher range limit), and slightly lower in total infectious particle per dose (8% from the lower range limit  Participants who are allocated to the control groups will receive two injections (all Groups) of 0.9% Normal saline (0.9% NaCl) instead of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. Participants will be blinded as to which intervention they are receiving. A vaccine accountability log of IP and placebo (NaCl) will be maintained at each trial site. All vaccinations will be administered by the research team and recorded in the CRF. The study medication will be at no time in the possession of the participant and compliance will not, therefore, be an issue. Accountability of the IP and placebo will be conducted in accordance with the relevant SOPs. As set out by the exclusion criteria, participants may not enter the study if they have  If this vaccine is proven to be efficacious following analysis of the primary endpoint and if the DSMC agrees, participants allocated to placebo group may be offered the IP. Safety will be assessed by the frequency, incidence and nature of AEs and SAEs arising during the study, from the time of randomization (Day 0 visit) onward. An AE is any untoward medical occurrence in a participant, which may occur during or after administration of an IP and does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the intervention. An AE can therefore be any unfavourable and unintended sign (including any clinically significant abnormal laboratory finding or change from baseline), symptom or disease temporally associated with the study intervention, whether or not considered related to the study intervention. An AR is any untoward or unintended response to an IP. This means that a causal relationship between the IP and an AE is at least a reasonable possibility, i.e., the relationship cannot be ruled out. All cases judged by the reporting medical Investigator as having a reasonable suspected causal relationship to an IP (i.e. possibly, probably or definitely related to an IP) will qualify as AR. Adverse events that may be related to the IP are listed in the Investigator's Brochure for each product. An SAE is an AE that results in any of the following outcomes, whether or not considered related to the study intervention. Congenital anomaly or birth defect. An AE that is both serious and, in the opinion of the reporting Investigator or Sponsors, believed to be possibly, probably or definitely due to an IP or any other study treatments, based on the information provided. A SUSAR, the nature and severity of which is not consistent with the information about the medicinal product in question set out in the IB. No IP related SAEs are expected in this study. All SARs will therefore be reported as SUSARs. The foreseeable ARs following vaccination with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 include injection site pain, tenderness, erythema, warmth, swelling, induration, pruritus, myalgia, arthralgia, headache, fatigue, fever, feverishness, chills, malaise and nausea. Participants will be advised to make immediate contact with the site for any solicited adverse that is Grade 3 or 4 that occurred within 7 days of vaccination, to ensure timeliness of it being reported as an SAE and to determine necessary management.  For every AE, an assessment of the relationship of the event to the administration of the vaccine will be undertaken by the PI-delegated clinician. An interpretation of the causal relationship of the intervention to the AE in question will be made, based on the type of event; the relationship of the event to the time of vaccine administration; and the known biology of the vaccine therapy. Alternative causes of the AE, such as the natural history of pre-existing medical conditions, concomitant therapy, other risk factors and the temporal relationship of the event to vaccination will be considered and investigated. Causality assessment will take place during planned safety reviews, interim analyses (e.g. if a holding or stopping rule is activated) and at the final safety analysis, except for SAEs, which should be assigned by the reporting investigator, immediately, as described in SOP for Safety Reporting for CTIMPs. 9.6. Reporting Procedures for All Adverse Events All local and systemic AEs occurring in the 28 days following each vaccination observed by the Investigator or reported by the participant, whether or not attributed to study medication, will be recorded in paper or electronic diaries and entered onto the study database. All AEs that result in a participant's withdrawal from the study will be followed up until a satisfactory resolution occurs, or until a non-study related causality is assigned (if the participant consents to this). SAEs and Adverse Events of Special Interest will be collected throughout the entire trial period. All SAE reports will be submitted to HREC and SAHPRA regularly, as per current guidelines. A line list of all AEs will be submitted to HREC & SAHPRA as an appendix to annual progress report. The severity laboratory adverse events will be assessed according to scales based on DAIDS AE Grading Version 2.1-July 2017 (Table 13) for adolescent adu l t s t u d y participants. Grading for local adverse events will be based on severity grading criteria indicated in Table   12 .  In order to comply with current regulations on SAE reporting to regulatory authorities, the event will be documented accurately and notification deadlines respected. SAEs will be reported on the SAE forms to members of the study team within 24 hours of the Investigators becoming aware of their occurrence, as described in SOP Safety Reporting. Copies of all reports will be forwarded for review to the Principal Investigator in South Africa and the UK Chief Investigator (as the Sponsor's representative) within 24 hours of the Investigator being aware of the suspected SAE. The DSMC will CONFIDENTIAL ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 86 be notified of SAEs that are deemed possibly, probably or definitely related to study interventions; the chair of DSMC will be notified immediately (within 24 hours) of the Investigators' being aware of their occurrence. SAEs assessed to be possibly, probably or definitely related to trial, or involving hospitalization or death of participant will be reported to the ethical committee(s), regulatory authority (SAHPRA) and UK chief investigator within 24 hours of investigator being aware of SAE. In addition to the expedited reporting above, the Investigator shall include all SAEs in the annual Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) report. where no other reason can be found to explain the combination of these abnormal results, e.g., elevated serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) indicating cholestasis, viral hepatitis A, B or C, another drug capable of causing the observed injury, amongst others. All other SUSARs will be reported by the investigator to the sponsor delegate (UK Chief investigator) and to the relevant Competent Authority and to the REC and other parties as applicable. Any additional relevant information for related SAEs and deaths will be reported within 8 calendar days of the initial report. All other SUSARs will be reported within 15 calendar days. Principal Investigators will be informed of all SUSARs for the relevant IP for all studies with the same Sponsor, whether or not the event occurred in the current trial. A Development Safety Update Report (DSUR) will be prepared annually, within 60 days of the anniversary of the first approval date from the regulatory authority for each IMP. The DSUR will be submitted by the national PI to the Competent Authority, Ethics Committee, and Sponsor. 9.11. Procedures to be followed in the event of abnormal findings Eligibility for enrolment in the trial in terms of laboratory findings will be assessed by clinically qualified staff. Abnormal clinical findings from medical history, examination or blood tests will be assessed as to their clinical significance throughout the trial. Laboratory AEs will be assessed using specific toxicity grading scales adapted from the DAIDS AE Grading repeated, to ensure it is not a single occurrence. If a test remains clinically significant, the participant will be informed and appropriate medical care arranged as appropriate and with the permission of the participant. Decisions to exclude the participant from enrolling in the trial or to withdraw a participant from the trial will be at the discretion of the Investigator. The safety profile will be assessed on an on-going basis by the Investigators. The national PI and relevant site Investigators (as per the trial delegation logs) will also review safety issues and SAEs as they arise. Interim safety reviews are planned monthly, and will include safety reviews (i) after group 1 participants have completed 14 day post dose 1 (i) and dose 2 (ii) visits, (iii) after group 3 participants have completed 14-days post dose 1, and once all participants in groups 1,2 and 3 have been enrolled. Immunopathology data from pre-clinical studies will be assessed by the UK-CI, national PI and relevant investigators and the DSMC. The DSMC will evaluate frequency of events, safety and efficacy data every 4-8 weeks and/or as required. The DSMC will make recommendations concerning the conduct, continuation or modification of the study. A Data Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC) has been appointed to oversee the UK trial, and have agreed to oversee the South African study as well. A South African senior scientist has been coopted onto this international DSMC. The DSMC will: a) periodically review and evaluate the accumulated study data for participant safety, study conduct, progress, and efficacy. b) make recommendations concerning the continuation, modification, or termination of the trial. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 88 There will be a minimum of three appropriately qualified committee members of whom one will be the designated chair. The DSMC will operate in accordance with the trial specific charter, which will be established before recruitment starts. In order to maintain continuity, the members of the DSMC overseeing the UK trial of the ChAdOx1-nCoV-19 vaccine (CoV001) will also be members of the DSMC for this trial. At least one African scientist will be added to the existing trial DSMC. The chair of the DSMC may be contacted for advice and independent review by the Investigator or trial Sponsor in the following situations: • Following any SAE deemed to be possibly, probably or definitively related to a study intervention. • Any other situation where the Investigator or trial Sponsor feels independent advice or review is important. The DSMC will review SAEs deemed possibly, probably or definitively related to study interventions. The DSMC will be notified within 24 hours of the Investigators' being aware of their occurrence. The DSMC has the power to place the study on hold if deemed necessary following a study intervention-related SAE. Safety holding rules have been developed considering the fact that this trial will enroll people living with HIV, who have not previously been enrolled in a trial utilizing this IP. Solicited AEs are those listed as foreseeable ARs, occurring within the first 7 days after vaccination (day of vaccination and six subsequent days). 'Unsolicited adverse events' are adverse events other than the foreseeable ARs occurring within the first 7 days, or any AEs occurring after the first 7 days after vaccination. Group holding rules mentioned below will apply to all study Groups • Solicited systemic adverse events: o If more than 25% of doses of the vaccine at a given time point (e.g. Day 0, Day 28) in a study group are followed by the same Grade 3 solicited systemic adverse event beginning within 2 days after vaccination (day of vaccination and one subsequent day) and persisting at Grade 3 for >72 hrs. • Unsolicited adverse events: o If more than 25% of doses of the vaccine at a given time point (e.g. Day 0, Day 28) in a study group are followed by the same Grade 3 unsolicited adverse event beginning within 2 days after vaccination (day of vaccination and one subsequent day) and persisting at Grade 3 for >72 hrs. • Laboratory adverse event: o If more than 25% of doses of the vaccine at a given time point (e.g. Day 0, Day 28) in a study group are followed by the same Grade 3 laboratory adverse event beginning within 2 days after vaccination (day of vaccination and one subsequent day) and persisting at Grade 3 for >72 hrs. • Any serious adverse event considered possibly, probably or definitely related to vaccination. o If an SAE occurs in any one individual, which is possibly, probably or definitely related to vaccination this would trigger a holding rule. There are two exemptions from this rule, which would not activate a holding rule. These include: ▪ COVID-19 related hospital admissions considered to be at least possibly related to ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (e.g. if considered to be a clinical presentation of a disease enhancement episode). COVID-19 related SAEs will be regularly reviewed by the DSMB, and a single event will not trigger a holding rule. ▪ SAEs reported under the Hy's Law requirement will not necessarily trigger a holding rule. These cases will also be reviewed by the DSMC If any of the above holding rules are activated, then further vaccinations in any group will not occur until a safety review by the DSMC, study sponsor and the protocol Co-chairs has been conducted and it is deemed appropriate to restart dosing. The Regulatory Authority will be informed and a request to restart dosing with pertinent data will be submitted. The safety review will consider: The relationship of the AE or SAE to the vaccine. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 90 The relationship of the AE or SAE to the vaccine dose, or other possible causes of the event. If appropriate, additional screening or laboratory testing for other participants to identify those who may develop similar symptoms and alterations to the current Participant Information Sheet (PIS) are discussed. New, relevant safety information from ongoing research programs on the various components of the vaccine. The local ethics committee and vaccine manufacturers will also be notified if a holding rule is activated or released. All vaccinated participants will be followed for safety until resolution or stabilisation (if determined to be chronic sequelae) of their AEs. In addition to the above stated holding rules, stopping rules for individual participants will apply (i.e., indications to withdraw individuals from further vaccinations). Study participants who present with at least one of the following stopping rules will be withdrawn from further vaccination in the study: • Local reactions: Injection site ulceration, abscess or necrosis • Laboratory AEs: the participant develops a Grade 3 laboratory AE considered possibly, probably or definitely related within 7 days after vaccination and persisting continuously at Grade 3 for 72hrs. • Systemic solicited adverse events: the participant develops a Grade 3 systemic solicited AE considered possibly, probably or definitely related within 2 days after vaccination (day of vaccination and one subsequent day) and persisting continuously at Grade 3 for > 72hrs. • Unsolicited adverse events: o the participant has a Grade 3 adverse event, considered possibly, probably or definitely related to vaccination, persisting continuously at Grade 3 for >72hrs. o the participant has a SAE considered possibly, probably or definitely related to vaccination. o the participant has an acute allergic reaction or anaphylactic shock following the administration of vaccine investigational product . • Any serious adverse event considered possibly, probably or definitely related to vaccination. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 91 If a participant has an acute respiratory illness (moderate or severe illness with or without fever) or a fever (oral temperature greater than 37.8°C) at the scheduled time of administration of investigational product/placebo, the participant will not be enrolled and will be withdrawn from the study. All vaccinated participants will be followed for safety until the end of their planned participation in the study or until resolution or stabilisation (if determined to be chronic sequelae) of their AEs, providing they consent to this. In addition to these pre-defined criteria, the study can be put on hold upon advice of the DSMC, 10. STATISTICS A fully detailed statistical analysis plan will be developed and signed by the Co-chairs prior to any data analysis being conducted. For the efficacy endpoints, VE will be calculated as 1-RR and 95% confidence intervals estimated using the Clopper-Pearson exact method. In brief, the analysis will incorporate the following: Criteria for clinical diagnosis of incident COVID-19 disease in adults (Adapted from CEPI recommendations for standardisation COVID-19 vaccine efficacy trials). Virologically confirmed COVID-19 clinical disease will be defined as an acute respiratory illness that is clinically consistent with COVID-19 based on the presence of criteria indicated in Table 5 and a positive SARS-CoV-2 specific reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). An expert external committee of at least two physicians will be convened to adjudicate on inclusion of clinical endpoints of incident COVID-19 cases for inclusion in the VE analyses. The primary efficacy [objective] and endpoint include PCR positive symptomatic COVID-19 occurring in participants that were COVID-19 naïve at randomization who received two-doses of the planned study-allocated intervention, and where the first episode of COVID-19 occurred more than 14 days after the second dose of study-drug. COVID naïve will be defined as seronegative at time of randomization based on a high sensitivity serology antibody targeted at the whole-length spike protein and receptor binding domain protein, and tested negative on nasal swab for SARS-CoV-2 by molecular detection. This analysis will include participants randomised to Group-1 being analysed together with Group-2 participants, all of whom will have received a two-dose schedule of study-intervention. A sensitivity analysis will be conducted using a modified intention-to-treat (mITT) approach. This analysis will include COVID-19 naïve participants who received two doses of either the investigational product or placebo, regardless of whether it was the planned study-allocation intervention. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 93 Only events that occur more than 14 days after vaccination will be included in mITT efficacy evaluations, to allow for exclusion of SARS-CoV-2 infections that may have occurred within 7 days of the 2 nd dose and may have been asymptomatic prior to the anticipated optimal immune response after the second dose of vaccine. Vaccine efficacy (VE) will be calculated as (1 -RR) x 100%, where RR is the relative risk of symptomatic infection (ChADOx1 nCOV-19: placebo) and 95% confidence intervals will be presented. Cumulative incidence of COVID-19 disease will be presented using the Kaplan-Meier method.Depending on the rate of accrual of endpoint cases meeting the primary-endpoint criteria in this study and phase II/III efficacy studies ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 that are currently underway in Brazil (ISRCTN89951424) and the United Kingdom (NCT: 04400838), it may be necessary to undertake a pooled analysis for the primary endpoint across the studies to provide an early readout of the efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19. The study design and endpoint definitions across the studies are similar, and the categorisation of COVID-19 cases would be aligned. Should this be pursued, SAHPRA and the Ethics committees will be engaged to discuss the merits thereof. It is anticipated that blinding will be maintained on the part of the study-staff and the study-participants throughout this process on an interim pooled-analysis. , endpoints and analyses, for overall population and based on COVID-19 sero-status at time of randomization VE in preventing other virologically-confirmed COVID-19 clinical disease endpoints will include all cases occurring onward 14 days after a second dose; and from 21 days after a single dose, for the following endpoints:. a. VE in preventing virologically-confirmed COVID-19 clinical disease irrespective of COVID-19 sero-status at randomization, and in those who were sero-positive at randomization.  Counts and percentages of each local and systemic solicited adverse reaction from diary cards, and all unsolicited AEs, and SAEs of special interest will be presented for each group. Immune responses to be evaluated as per Table 8 , Table 9 , Table 10 include: 1. ELISA or Luminex assay (to be finalized based on current laboratory investigations) for whole spike protein and receptor binding domain. 2. ELISA or Luminex assay for N-protein IgG (to discriminate sero-conversion that is independent of SARS-CoV-2 proteins included in the vaccine. This assay is currently being developed and addresses an exploratory objective of the study. 3. Cell mediated immune response using an ELISPOT assay. 4. Th1 and TH2 cytokine profile using a Luminex assay. Highly skewed ELISA data will be log-transformed prior to analysis. The geometric mean concentration and associated 95% confidence interval will be summarised for each group at each time point, by computing the anti-log of the mean difference of the log-transformed data. Neutralisation measurements will use an assay adapted from well-validated existing HIV-based pseudovirus neutralization assays using the pNL4-3.luc.R-E HIV construct with a SARS- Table 14 shows the probability of observing zero, at least one or at least two participants with an event among groups of size 25 and 50 for a range of true event probabilities. For example, if the true rate of a serious event is 0.01, there is a 77.8% chance that there will be no participants that experience this event in a group of 25 participants and a 22.2% chance of at least one participant who experiences the event. To estimate the true rate of a serious event, Exact Clopper-Pearson two-sided 95% confidence intervals (CIs) will be calculated. Table 15 lists calculated 95% CIs for the true rate of a serious event when 0, 1 or 2 participants observe events for a group of size 25 or 50  The minimum detectable difference in response rates between 2 groups (group size =25) for 80% and 90% power is listed in Table 16 .  Sample size calculations based on the total number of cases required to conclude with 80% power the lower limit of a two-sided 95% confidence interval for vaccine efficacy (VE, success criteria) is greater than 0% and 10% are shown in Table 17 for VE ranging from 60%-90% and attack rate in the unvaccinated population ranging from 5%-20%. Sample sizes are adjusted for a 10% loss to follow-up. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 98 Assuming a final total sample size in Group 2 of 1900 (950 per arm), the power to conclude the lower limit of a 95% confidence interval for VE is greater than 10% is listed below in for various assumed true VE and attack rates in the unvaccinated population. 10.6. Procedure for Accounting for Missing, Unused, and Spurious Data. All available data will be included in the analysis All vaccinated participants will be included in the analysis and will be analysed according to vaccine received. The independent DSMC will meet regularly to review safety data and will assess whether the assumptions underlying the sample size calculation are in line with the observed cases. The national principal investigator will be responsible for all data that accrue from the trial. All trial data including participant diary will be recorded directly into an Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system (REDCap) or onto a paper source document for later entry into EDC if direct entry is not available. This includes safety data, laboratory data and outcome data. Any additional information that needs recording but is not relevant for the CRF (such as signed consent forms etc.) will be recorded on a separate paper source document. All documents will be stored safely and securely in confidential conditions. All adverse event data (both solicited and unsolicited) reported by the participant will be entered onto a participant's paper diary card for a maximum of 28 days following administration of the IP. The Diary provides a full audit trial of edits and will be reviewed at each review time-points indicated in the schedule of events. Any adverse event continuing beyond the period of the diary will be copied into the eCRF and followed to resolution, if there is a causal relationship to the IP, or to the end of the study if there is no causal relationship. The participants will be identified by a unique trial specific number and code in any database. The name and any other identifying detail will only be included in password-protected trial electronic logs, which will be used for tracing and medical records and laboratory results and conducting surveillance calls as required. Personal identifiers will not be accessible by any person/ institution outside of immediate study team. interface with data checks applied during data entry to ensure data quality. The database includes a complete suite of features which are compliant with GCP, EU and UK regulations and Sponsor security policies, including a full audit trail, user-based privileges, and integration with the institutional LDAP server. The REDCap, MySQL and PostgreSQL database and the webserver will both be housed on secure servers maintained by the University of the Witwatersrand and RMPRU IT personal. Backups will be stored in accordance with the IT department schedule of daily, weekly, and monthly retained for one month, three months, and six months, respectively. The IT servers provide a stable, secure, well-maintained, and high capacity data storage environment. REDCap and OpenClinica are widely-used, powerful, reliable, well-supported systems. Access to the study's database will be restricted to the members of the study team by username and password. The Investigators will maintain appropriate medical and research records for this trial, in compliance with GCP and regulatory and institutional requirements for the protection of confidentiality of participants. The South African national principal investigator, co-Investigators and clinical research nurses will have access to records. The Investigators will permit authorised representatives of the Sponsor(s), as well as ethical and regulatory agencies to examine (and when required by applicable law, to copy) clinical records for the purposes of quality assurance reviews, audits and evaluation of the study safety and progress. All trial records will be stored for a minimum of 15 years after the end of the trial at a secure archiving facility. If participants consent to be contacted for future research, information about their consent form will be recorded, retained and stored securely and separately from the research data. If participants consent to have their samples stored and used in future research, information about their consent form will be recorded, retained and stored securely as per sample storage procedures and SOP. All protocol-required information will be collected in CRFs designed by the Investigator. All source documents will be filed in the CRF. Source documents are original documents, data, and records from which the participant's CRF data are obtained. For this study, these will include, but are not limited to, participant consent form, blood results, community clinic and private general practitioner notes held by participant, laboratory records, diaries, medical records and correspondence. In the majority of cases, CRF entries will be considered source data as the CRF is the site of the original recording (i.e. there is no other written or electronic record of data). In this study this will include, but is not limited to medical history, medication records, vital signs, physical examination records, urine assessments, blood results, adverse event data and details of vaccinations. All source data and participant CRFs will be stored  The study protocol, documentation, data and all other information generated will be held in strict confidence. No information concerning the study or the data will be released to any unauthorised third party, without prior written approval of the sponsor. Data collection tools will undergo appropriate validation to ensure that data are collected accurately and completely. Datasets provided for analysis will be subject to quality control processes to ensure analysed data is a true reflection of the source data. Trial data will be managed in compliance with local data management SOPs. If additional, study specific processes are required, an approved Data Management Plan will be implemented. Trial data may be stored electronically on a secure server, and paper notes will be kept in a key-locked filing cabinet at the site. All essential documents will be retained for a minimum of 15 years after the t r i a l has finished. The need to store study data for longer in relation to licensing of the vaccine will be subject to ongoing review. General archiving procedures will be conducted in compliance to local SOP for Archiving. Approved site-specific standard operating procedures (SOPs) will be used at all clinical and laboratory sites. Regular monitoring will be performed according to GCP by the monitor. Following written SOPs, the monitor will verify that the clinical trial is conducted and data are generated, documented and reported in compliance with the protocol, GCP and the applicable regulatory requirements. The site will provide direct access to all trial related source data/documents and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by the Sponsor and inspection by local and regulatory authorities.  Any deviations from the protocol will be documented in a protocol deviation form and filed in the trial master file. Each deviation will be assessed as to its impact on participant safety and study conduct. Significant protocol deviations will be listed in the end of study report. The QA manager conducts systems based internal audits to check that trials are being conducted according to local procedures and in compliance with study protocols, departmental SOPs, GCP and applicable regulations. The Sponsor, trial sites, and ethical committee(s) may carry out audit to ensure compliance with the protocol, GCP and appropriate regulations. GCP inspections may also be undertaken by the HREC or SAHPRA to ensure compliance with protocol and the National Health Act No 61 (as amended) and Guidelines in Good Clinical Practice for the conduct of trials with human participants in South Africa 2006, as amended. The Sponsor will assist in any inspections and will support the response to the HREC/ SAHPRA as part of the inspection procedure. The Investigators will ensure that this study is conducted according to the principles of the current revision of the Declaration of Helsinki. The Investigator will ensure that this trial is conducted in accordance with relevant regulations and with Good Clinical Practice. Following Sponsor approval, the protocol, informed consent form, participant information sheet and any proposed advertising material will be submitted to an appropriate Research Ethics Committee (REC: University of the Witwatersrand, OxTREC, University of Cape Town, University of Stellenbosch), regulatory authorities (SAHPRA in South Africa, MHRA in the UK), and host institution(s) for written approval. No amendments to this protocol will be made without consultation with, and agreement of, the Sponsor and national principal investigator. The Investigator is responsible for ensuring that changes to an approved trial, during the period for which regulatory and ethical committee(s) approval has already been given, are not initiated without regulatory and ethical committee(s)' review and approval except to eliminate apparent immediate hazards to the participant (i.e. as an Urgent Safety Measure). The study will comply with the Protection of Personal Information Act, No 4 of and relevant Data Protection Act, which require data to be de-identified as soon as it is practical to do so. The processing of personal data of participants will be minimised by making use of a unique participant study number only on all study documents and any electronic database(s), with the exception of informed consent forms and participant ID logs. All documents will be stored securely and only accessible by study staff and authorised personnel. The study staff will safeguard the privacy of participants' personal data. A separate confidential file containing identifiable information will be stored in a secured location in accordance with the current data protection legislation. Photographs taken of vaccination sites (if required, with the participant's written, informed consent) will not include the participant's face and will be identified by the date, trial code and participant's unique identifier. Once developed, photographs will be stored as confidential records, as above. This material may be shown to other professional staff, used for educational purposes, or included in a scientific publication. If participants are diagnosed with COVID-19 during the course of the study then the study team will pass on their details to the local health protection team, if required, in line with the relevant notifiable disease legislation. Samples collected for the purposes of COVID-19 diagnosis might be sent to reference labs in South Africa alongside their personal data. This would be in line with the national guidance and policy for submitting samples for testing at reference labs. The vaccine development and manufacture study is funded through UK Research and Innovations. The vaccine will be supplied free of charge to South African sites by UK chief collaborator. Funding for the trial conduct will be finalized prior to trial initiation. National PI is in discussion with several stakeholders who may contribute to trial funding, including The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and South African Medical Research Council. The investigators have medical malpractice insurance. Trial-specific insurance has been obtained and insurance certificates will be shared with regulatory and ethics committees and will be available at all sites prior to trial initiation. Clinical management of COVID-19 will be undertaken by public or private health care providers (participant's choice/ insurance dependent), and will be under relevant institution indemnity. Participants will be compensated for their time, the inconvenience of having blood tests and procedures, and their travel expenses. Compensation rates will be aligned to those recommended by SAHPRA. South African investigators/collaborators and UK collaborators will be involved in reviewing drafts of the manuscripts, abstracts, press releases and any other publications arising from the study. The IP has been developed by the University of Oxford and ownership of IP vests in the University of Oxford. Several UK investigators are applicants or co-inventors on previous patent filings or patents related to ChAdOx1 vaccines. The University of Oxford, which is partnered with the Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust in the NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, is committed to the translational progress and commercial development of healthcare products potentially meeting medical and global health needs, and does and will work with commercial partners towards these goals. Group 1 and 3 sample size remains 50. Considering the unpredictability of the force of SARS-CoV-2 infection and the lower than anticipated attack rate for the primary-endpoint cases in the study being undertaken in the UK, the sample size for Group 2 (efficacy cohort) has been expanded from the 550 included in protocol version 1.0, dated 24 th April 2020 to 2700 in protocol version 2.0, 8 th May 2020. Enrolling up to a total of 2,700 people without HIV in Group-2, will provide 80% power to detect at least a 60% vaccine efficacy (lower bound of 95%CI >0) with an attack rate of 2.5% in the placebo arm. Ongoing review of the number of COVID-19 cases accrued during the course of the study, may lend itself to enrolling smaller number of participants should the attack rate be higher than 2.5%. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 108 Section Amendment made Justification  Table of groups,  visit schedule  table   Protocol amendment  will not be required if  group 2 participants  receive 2 doses Safety and immunogenicity data from the UK trial, COV001, and group 1 of this trial will be reviewed by the DSMC at least monthly. The DSMC will be tasked to make a decision, based on these results, regarding whether participants in Group 2 will receive one or two doses of IP. This decision will be communicated as a formal DSMC resolution communication to investigators, SAHPRA and WHREC. The option of the 2nd dose in group 2 has been built into the study design and events schedule. A protocol amendment would therefore not be necessary. Blood collection in PAXgene® Blood RNA tube has been added in line with COV001 protocol and at the advice of funders, BMGF. The PAXgene® Blood RNA tube assists in stabilisation of intracellular RNA, thereby improving accuracy and reproducibility of gene expression data. The HbA1C is a test done to identify glycated haemoglobin. Measurement of HbA1C gives a clear indication of the average blood glucose levels over the duration of the life of the red blood cell, which is 8-12 weeks. High HbA1C levels indicate poor blood glucose level over time, either in known diabetics or undiagnosed diabetics/ pre-diabetic conditions. Participants with high HbA1C levels will be referred to relevant medical teams for further assessment and management of diabetes or pre-diabetic conditions. To assess possible differences in immunological responses in participants who sero-convert to HIV-positive during the trial participation Timing of group 3 enrolment Group 3 enrolment will either be in parallel with or will follow on from group 1 enrolment. Section 5 updated More than 1000 participants have been enrolled into The UK's COV001 trial and will have had at least 6 weeks follow up prior to trial initiation of trial in South Africa. As of 28 th May 2020, no significant vaccine-relates AEs or SAEs have been recorded in HIV-negative participants in the UK. Screening window clarified Screening window confirmed to be 14 days prior to vaccination. Amended to a modified ITT analysis. Participants will be randomised according to the treatment that they actually received, rather than what they were randomised to receive. A modified intent-to treat analysis is currently the more accepted form of analysis of randomised controlled trials. A modified ITT analysis incorporates the benefits of improved external validity obtained in ITT analyses with improved internal validity obtained in PP analyses. It allows for analysis according to participant's actual experience/ vaccine received, rather than planned experience. Additional sites in Gauteng (PHRU Kliptown; SCTC) and W. Cape (CLII, FAMCRU) have been added to assist with rapid enrolment of participants. External monitor changed from SCT consulting to PPD Added PPD, who will be doing the blinded monitoring, as per requirements outlined in BMGF grant agreement and monitoring capacity for increased sample size SCT will perform unblinded monitoring and provide regulatory support Synopsis, group details tables Sample size increased. Group 1 increased from 50 to 70 participants, and overall sample size increased from 2000 to 2020 participants Enrolment was initiated on 24 th June 2020, and 8 participants were enrolled daily on 24 th , 25 th & 26 th June 2020. Six of the first 24 (25%) participants tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on nasal swab at enrolment visit, which has led to higher than anticipated non-evaluable participants. An additional 20 participants will be enrolled into Group1 to ensure adequate evaluable participants in safety cohort. Nasal swab for SARS-CoV-2 PCR testing will be collected at screening visit in 96 hours prior to randomisation Twenty-five percent of first 24 participants enrolled tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 at enrolment. In order to ensure that this asymptomatic/ pre-symptomatic COVID-19 disease is identified prior to vaccination visit, a nasal swab for SARS-CoV-2 PCR will be collected in the 96 hours prior to vaccination visit. Serological (IgG) testing at screening Participants need to be seronegative at vaccination visit to fulfil efficacy endpoint. Addition of immunology blood sample to screening visit to assess prior infection with SARS-CoV-2 (already screening/ safety bloods collected at screening) Amended Screening process A new, reasonably abridged screening informed consent form is being implemented, which will allow for all screening procedures, including data collection (demographics, medical & ChAdOx1 nCoV-19_ZA_phI/II ZA version 4.1, 30 th September 2020 P a g e | 113 surgical history) and safety and screening bloods. Additionally, a nasal swab for SARS-COV-2 testing collected at screening visit has been added to reduce the possibility of enrolling SARS-CoV-2 infected participant. The previously-approved main ICF will be modified and signed at the enrolment (vaccination) visit. Changes to confirm that two dose schedule being used 2-dsoe schedule was an option earlier on, and now implemented for Group 2 based on the Phase I data from the UK. SAPHRA and Ethics committee already notified. Table 7 Updated that Group 2 to receive two doses of study-intervention. Appears that the latest batch of vaccine (Lot K0011) might have lower concentration per milliliter than initially analyzed for. Some participants (N=XX) have received vaccine from this lot, and may have been under-dosed. These participants will be informed of them having been possibly been under-dosed (without unblinding). For purpose of analyses, these participants remain eligible for the sensitivity and secondary objectives, but are excluded from the primary endpoint analysis. Inclusion the possibility of being involved in a pooled analysis for the primary endpoint that will include data from the studies underway in Brazil and UK. To get an early readout of the efficacy of the study, which will be of global benefit, it is proposed that should it be observed there is significant decline in Covid-19 endpoint cases across the three studies (SA, UK and Brazil), that results for the primary endpoint may be pooled. This will be done without unblinding of study staff or participants, so that the study can reach their individual powered endpoints. Aligned with change to a two dose schedule, and efficacy endpoints following a single dose now being secondary objective. 17 Updated reference Added reference of UK Phase I study The aim of the day 56 visit is to collect immunology samples 28 days after receipt of both doses of vaccine. The timing of the day 56 visit should therefore be calculated in relation to the date of receipt of the 2 nd dose of study vaccine. The window period for the day 56 visit is date of dose 2 + 28 days (+7). Visits conducted prior to 9 th September 2020 which are in alignment with previous protocol will not be regarded as protocol deviations. Clarification to protocol sent to HREC & investigators on 9 th Sept 2020 Sample size-group 3 Increased from 50 to 100 participants Expect ~ one-third to be sero-positive for SARS-CoV-2, hence having 100 will allow for approx. 30 vaccinees being sero-negative Secondary objective added: group 3 (HIVinfected) participants To descriptively compare immune responses to ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 in people living with HIV to HIV-uninfected individuals, overall and stratified by COVID-19 sero-status at enrolment. This trial is the first ChAdOx1 nCoV1-9 vaccine trial which includes people living with HIV. Comparison of immune response in HIVnegative and HIV-positive participants will support planning for future trials and programmatic vaccine implementation 8.2 Revision to the manufacture, packaging, and labelling  
