1a728c730eeeb7fc6eece91ab3803594dd8d79cd
POSTER SESSION ABSTRACTS 212 CFTR 1ଙ DYNAMIC INTERMOLECULAR AND INTRAMOLECULAR INTERACTIONS OF THE CFTR R REGION 2ଙ COTRANSLATIONAL FOLDING OF THE NBD1 ALPHA- HELICAL SUBDOMAIN ANALYZED BY FLUORESCENCE RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER 4ଙ THE CFTR FOLDING PATHWAY: STEPS ALTERED BY ∆F508 AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE DISCOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT OF CF THERAPEUTICS 5ଙ HSP27 SELECTIVELY TARGETS ∆F508 CFTR NBD1 FOR DEGRADATION VIA THE SUMO PATHWAY 7ଙ COMMON CONFORMATIONAL CHANGES WITHIN NBD1 ELICITED BY CF MODULATORS, AN ICL4 PEPTIDE AND SUPPRESSOR MUTATIONS
K  Du G  Lukacs 


Cytoplasmic portions of membrane proteins often contain disordered regions that can function as regulatory components. CFTR, the membrane protein chloride channel mutated in cystic fibrosis, is a dynamic biological machine that undergoes functional conformational changes. A significant modulator of this dynamic behavior is the ~200 residue cytoplasmic regulatory (R) region of CFTR, which is intrinsically disordered in isolation and which makes highly dynamic interactions with the nucleotide binding domains (NBDs) of CFTR, other segments of CFTR and other proteins. Similar to many other disordered proteins, the R region is a "hub" for regulatory protein interactions and is a site of regulatory phosphorylation, in this case by PKA, PKC and AMPK. Building on our previous work, we have performed NMR and fluorescence binding studies on non-phosphorylated and highly PKA phosphorylated states of the isolated R region and have demonstrated binding of the R region with NBD1, NBD2, and a 40-residue peptide from the C-terminus of CFTR, as well as the STAS domain of the SLC26A3 chloride-bicarbonate exchanger that is a co-regulator of CFTR, and the 14-3-3beta protein implicated in CFTR processing. Analysis of NMR resonance broadening and chemical shift changes upon binding coupled with fluorescence binding measurements provides evidence for multi-site interactions of various segments of the R region. Our interpretation of the binding to the NBDs is that the multiple elements interact by transiently stabilizing helical structure, while binding to the 14-3-3beta likely involves transient stabilization of extended structure around each of the PKA sites. The NBD binding is much stronger for the non-phosphorylated R region while binding to the C-terminus and 14-3-3beta is stronger for the PKA phosphorylated state. Initial studies of isolated peptides of the R region suggest that binding of the entire disordered "domain" provides enhancement with synergistic effects of these various interacting elements. The diversity of structural modes and electrostatic contributions to binding contribute to the complex regulatory mechanisms at play within CFTR. These studies provide more evidence for our proposed model of the R region as a highly dynamic integrator of different regulatory inputs in controlling both CFTR chloride channel gating and protein processing. As our understanding of the complexity of regulatory dynamics within CFTR develops, so will our understanding of their functional and pathological implications. As a potential therapy for CF, small-molecule compounds have been identified that correct the processing/folding defects (correctors) and/or channel gating defects (potentiators) of CFTR F508del. Compounds having dual corrector/potentiator activity have been assumed to interact directly with CFTR, possibly at the NBD1, the site of the F508del mutation. Our goal is to determine how these and other small molecule modulators act at a molecular level using NMR spectroscopy. To obtain solubility and yields required for NMR, our constructs lack the regulatory insert (∆RI) of NBD1, as well as the regulatory extension (∆RE) which is the first ~30 residues of the regulatory (R) region. We report assignment of 82% of backbone resonances for human F508del NBD1 (∆RI∆RE) (387-646) based on assignments for the wt NBD1 protein. NMR studies of the interactions of an Epix dual corrector/potentiator, as well as other small-molecule compounds, with human F508del NBD1 (∆RI∆RE) have enabled mapping of the compoundaffected residues onto the structure of NBD1. The compounds interact with a hydrophobic patch comprised of residues in β-strands S3, S9 and S10, located within the ATP-binding core near the C-terminus of the molecule. Binding of the compounds disrupts an interaction between this hydrophobic patch and the C-terminal helices (H8 and H9) of NBD1 leading to a shift in a pre-existing conformational equilibrium from helix to coil. DSC data indicates a small decrease in T m in the presence of compound, consistent with a direct interaction between NBD1 and the compound that decreases NBD1 stability. Disruption of the interaction between H8/H9 and the NBD1 core by a mutation within β-strand S9, H620Q, shown to increase the open probability of the channel (Wei et al. FEBS Letters 439:121, 1998), partially mimics the effect of the compounds by promoting the coil state. These results suggest that perturbations shifting the helices towards the coil state coincide with conditions that promote channel opening. Interestingly, we detect a possible allosteric effect near the site of F508 elicited by both compound binding and the H620Q variant. Evidence for allostery has also been obtained from ICL4 peptide titrations that show chemical shift changes near F508 (at the predicted binding surface) and H8/H9. The suppressor mutations Q637R (between H8 and H9) and V510D (near F508) show similar, although more subtle, effects. These binding and mutagenic data collectively suggest "cross-talk" between the α-subdomain and the hydrophobic patch/C-terminus of NBD1. We hypothesize that the compounds compete with the C-terminal helices (8,9) for the core of NBD1, displacing the RE/R region from the NBD dimerization interface, and thereby promoting NBD dimerization and channel opening. Evidence for allostery suggests that compound binding may also affect interactions with ICLs, particularly ICL4, and/or other parts of CFTR. This work was funded by the CF Foundation Therapeutics. The F508del mutation disrupts CFTR trafficking and function, in part by local destabilization of NBD1 folding and/or stability. Therefore, an important goal in CF therapeutics is to better understand how NBD1 acquires and maintains its folded state in the cellular environment. To address this question, we developed a novel method to monitor de novo NBD1 folding as the nascent chain is synthesized and emerges from the ribosome. Our approach is based on the principle that residues distant in primary structure are brought into close proximity as the domain folds into its native state. Such changes can be detected by fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between an N-terminal donor fluorophore (CFP) and a small fluorescent acceptor dye (7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazole) that is cotranslationally incorporated at strategic residues deduced from the crystal structure. Previous analysis demonstrated that NBD1 translated in a cell free system can reach a native-like state cotranslationally while it is still attached to the ribosome. Detailed studies of nascent chains containing an acceptor probe at residue 450 revealed that NBD1 folding is initiated by an abrupt cotranslational compaction of a small, N-terminal ATP-binding subdomain (residues 378~495). In addition, N-terminal subdomain folding is initiated before Phe508 emerges from the ribosome, suggesting that F508del impacts later folding steps involving the alpha-subdomain (residues 495-564) and/or the F1-type ATPase beta-sheet core. To understand the requirements for alpha-subdomain folding, an acceptor dye was incorporated either at residue 487 or residue 567 (N-terminal or C-terminal to the alpha-subdomain, respectively), both which are proximal to the CFP fusion site in the NBD1 crystal structure. FRET between CFP and the acceptor at residue 487 reached a maximum value (40%) as the nascent chain was extended to residue 624. Since the ribosome exit tunnel sequesters 30-40 residues of the nascent polypeptide, we therefore conclude that residue 487 is optimally positioned in the native NBD1 fold only after the entire alpha-subdomain has emerged from the ribosome. Similarly, maximal FRET for the acceptor at residue 567 (32%) was observed only after the nascent chain was extended to residue 654. Thus, optimal positioning of residue 567 appears to require the presence of the alpha-subdomain as well as an adjacent strand (S7) of the beta-sheet core. Interestingly, the extent to which the alpha-subdomain folds appears to depend on the environment in which folding takes place. When nascent chains were released from isolated ribosomes in a dilute buffer solution, maximum FRET (50%) for residue 487 was observed for truncations as short as 550 aa. This suggests that either the presence of the ribosome or cellular factors might delay alpha-subdomain folding as the domain is synthesized in cytosol. In contrast, the opposite effect was observed for residue 567, wherein the ribosome and/or cytosolic factors appear to stimulate folding during synthesis. These results implicate an unexpected level of complexity in NBD1 folding and provide a basis for analyzing the impact of the F508del mutation. Supported by NIH and CFFTI. Aleksandrov, L.A.; Cui, L.; He, L.; Riordan, J.R. Biochemisry and Biophysics, UNC at CHapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA CFTR is an allosteric protein in which communications between distal sites within and between domains play a crucial role in its stability and function. Earlier we had shown in biochemical and single channel experiments that dynamic coupling between domain-swapped NBDs and MSDs directly mediate some of these allosteric connections (J Biol Chem 283, 26383, 2008) . According to allostery theory, communications between sites are reversible (Science 308, 1424 (Science 308, , 2005 . Here we focused on the bidirectional interactions of sites in the NBDs with ones in the cytoplasmic loops (CLs) of the MSDs on the one hand and with ones in the R domain on the other. Three different methods were used to detect changes at a site in response to perturbation of a coupled site. These included NBD binding of ATP, antibody binding to phosphorylation sensitive epitopes in the R domain and accessibility of maleimide binders to individual cysteines introduced into cysless CFTR. The latter experiments employed a cysless construct modified to mature well in mammalian cells by selective replacements of cysteines in the N-terminal half of the molecule and to have near normal channel gating by replacements in the C-terminal half. Bidirectional interactions between NBD1 and CL4 were reflected in diminished accessibility of CL4 cysteine residues due to NBD1 binding of ATP and a decrease in ATP binding caused by a disease-associated CL4 mutation, R1070Q. Evidence of two way interactions between the R domain and NBD2 came from the altered accessibility of cysteine residues at several positions in NBD2 by R domain phosphorylation while perturbation of NBD2 altered the recognition of epitopes in the R domain. Thus allosteric interactions occur between multiple sites in CFTR and may be fundamental to its complex functional regulation. (Supported by the NIH and CFF). Mendoza, J.L. 1 ; Schmidt, A. 1 ; Brautigam, C.A. 2 ; Caspa, E. 1 ; Barrett, T. 1 ; Thomas, P.J. 1 1. Physiology, UT Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA; 2. Biochemistry, UT Southwestern, Dallas, TX, USA Integral membrane protein maturation is a complex process, involving integration of transmembrane spans into the membrane, association of these spans to form transmembrane domains, folding of extramembrane domains, and ultimately association of the membrane and extramembrane domains to form the final, native, functional structure. The complexity of this process presents many steps sensitive to alteration by changes in the primary sequence. For example, deletion of the F508 residue in the first nucleotide binding domain (NBD1) of CFTR interferes with both domain folding and association and, thus, underlies misfolding, loss-of-function and disease. Second-site suppressor mutations, which compensate for the folding defects of the mutant NBD1 only partially, restore maturation of ∆F508 CFTR. Therefore, ∆F508 CFTR is defective in additional steps required for efficient folding. A structural and evolutionary sequence analysis was combined with two in vitro folding assays to identify and define the steps in which ∆F508 CFTR is defective: 1) stability and efficiency of NBD1 folding and 2) NBD1 / ICL4 (TMD2) association. Correction of either step individually has only modest effect on maturation of CFTR. By contrast, when both steps are improved by introduction of the specific suppressor mutants, the correction "ceiling" observed for single mutations and small molecule correctors is surpassed. This finding highlights the stepwise nature of CFTR folding and the influence of the most common CF-causing mutation on multiple steps in the process. The assay systems and second-site suppressor mutants developed may also find utility in establishing a mechanism of action of extant correctors and aid in the identification of new compounds. The mechanism of misfolding of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), and the pathways that drive its ER associated degradation (ERAD), remain incompletely understood. Like other eukaryotic ABC proteins, CFTR is comprised of two transmembrane domains (TMD1, TMD2), each linked to a cytoplasmic nucleotide-binding domain (NBD1, NBD2). The common mutation leading to protein misfolding, ∆F508, is located in NBD1, where it alters domain stability and domaindomain interactions. As a consequence, the mutant protein is targeted for proteasome-dependent degradation. Small heat shock proteins (sHsps) bind to destabilized proteins during cell stress and disease, but their physiological functions are less clear. Our prior studies found that Hsp27 was the predominant sHsp expressed in airway epithelial cells. It interacted selectively with ∆F508 CFTR and targeted the mutant protein for ERAD. Hsp27 was found to interact with Ubc9, the E2 conjugating enzyme for sumoylation. Experimental manipulation of SUMO pathway components, like Ubc9, also promoted the selective degradation of ∆F508 CFTR, and expressed Hsp27 promoted sumoylation of ∆F508 CFTR in vivo. To better understand the properties of ∆F508 CFTR that lead to its SUMO-dependent degradation, we developed an in vitro assay for the SUMO modification of NBD1 utilizing purified components. In this assay, NBD1 sumoylation was detected primarily from the molecular mass shift associated with SUMO modification upon blotting the reaction mix with an NBD1 antibody. Purified WT and ∆F508 NBD1 were found to be modified by the SUMO-1, -2, and -3 isoforms. As found in vivo, significantly greater modification was observed for ∆F508 vs. WT NBD1, and Hsp27 was shown to facilitate NBD1 modification by In vivo studies of NBD1 were performed by co-expressing Hsp27 in HEK293 cells with membrane tethered fusion proteins, CD4T-NBD1 or CD4T-∆F508-NBD1, in which the C-terminus of CD4T is fused to the WT or mutant NBD1 (1). As observed for full-length CFTR, we found that CD4T-∆F508-NBD1 was selectively degraded relative to CD4T-NBD1. Co-IP experiments using lysates from transiently expressing HEK293 cells showed that: a) Hsp27 preferentially promoted the sumoylation and degradation of CD4T-∆F508-NBD1, b) Hsp27 interacted preferentially with the ∆F508-NBD1-CD4T fusion protein, and c) Hsp27 associated with SUMO-1 and SUMO-2/3 in vivo. These data suggest that the structural defect in ∆F508 NBD1 is interpreted by Hsp27 in a manner similar to that observed for full-length ∆F508 CFTR, and that this interaction makes the mutant NBD accessible to proteasome-mediated degradation by eliciting its SUMO modification. The recapitulation of this pathway for the NBD1 mutant should expedite efforts to identify the site(s) of SUMO modification and further elucidate the mechanism of sHsp-mediated CFTR degradation. The most common CF-causing mutation, found in 90% of patients, is a deletion of phenylalanine at position 508 (∆F508-CFTR) in nucleotide binding domain 1 (NBD1) of CFTR. ∆F508-CFTR misfolds, accumulates in the endoplasmic reticulum, and consequently is degraded. As the mutant protein is expressed in the proper cells, under proper regulatory control, and is functional when induced to fold, a promising strategy to treat the disease is to identify small molecules which correct the mistrafficking and folding of the mutant protein. Prior HTS efforts have discovered a number of small molecules that restore ∆F508-CFTR Cl --channel function or surface expression with limited efficacy. A representative collection of these correctors is available in the CFFTI panel. Some of these compounds may achieve correction by direct interaction with CFTR. Recent work suggests that at least two steps in folding are altered by the deletion of F508 in CFTR: 1) decreased folding efficiency and stability of NBD1 and 2) inefficient assembly of NBD1 and ICL4 of TMD2. Like the extant corrector compounds, secondsite suppressor mutations that overcome either of these two defects also have measurable, but limited, ability to correct mutant CFTR folding. However, when the suppressors are combined, much more significant correction is observed. To test the hypotheses that some extant CFTR correctors act directly on CFTR and that their efficacy is limited because they act on only one of the two defective steps, the effect of the CFFTI panel compounds on assays designed to reflect the individual folding steps were executed. First, compounds were assessed for effect on the stability of the isolated NBD1 and its folding efficiency in cells. Second, compounds were assessed for synergy with ∆F508-CFTR independently in combination with the secondsite suppressors that improve either NBD1 folding or NBD1 ICL4 association utilizing biochemical and functional methods. Understanding the mechanism of action of small molecules that act to rescue ∆F508-CFTR is critical for a targeted, combinatorial therapeutic strategy and may suggest alternative strategies for identification of new correctors. Funding by NIH and CFF. Thanks to CFFT for providing corrector compounds (Kirsten Hencken, khencken@cff.org or by phone (301) 841-2609). ∆F508 CFTR is recognized as a misfolded protein by the ER quality control mechanism and targeted for degradation by the proteasome. Transcomplementation of ∆F508 CFTR by truncated forms of CFTR has been observed to overcome defective processing and allow mature ∆F508 CFTR to reach the cell surface. Here we study whether ∆27-264-CFTR which is missing the first four transmembrane segments of CFTR can also rescue ∆F508-CFTR chloride channel function. To accomplish this, whole cell currents were recorded from CHO cells over expressing wt CFTR-GFP, ∆F508-GFP, ∆27-264-CFTR, or both ∆27-264-CFTR and ∆F508-GFP (n=6). Currents were elicited by 15mV voltage steps from -100mV to 125mV activated by 500mM cpt-cAMP and 40mM forskolin in the absence of a potentiator. The critical aspect of this experiment is that no current was generated from unrescued ∆F508-CFTR alone, or from ∆27-264-CFTR alone. Only when both were added together did we observe significant whole cell currents which reached a level near to that of wt CFTR. The currents measured only when both are cotransfected could have originated either from ∆F508-CFTR or ∆27-264-CFTR. To address this question definitively we utilized a well-known CFTR conduction mutant, S341A. This mutant alters the conductance and anion selectivity of CFTR. The S341 residue has also been identified as critical to the inhibition of arylaminobenzoate drugs such as DPC (see Zhang et al. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 282: L135-L145, 2002) . To confirm these findings, we tested this mutation in S341A-wt-CFTR. High levels of S341A-wt-CFTR protein were detected and normally glycosylated but the whole cell currents were drastically reduced compared to wt CFTR. We then studied the double mutant, S341A-∆F508-CFTR. We detected expression of B-band but no detectable chloride currents consistent with what we observed with ∆F508-CFTR alone. When we cotransfected S341A-∆F508-CFTR with ∆27-264-CFTR we detected rescued C band of ∆F508-CFTR consistent with rescue of S341A-∆F508-CFTR trafficking but the chloride currents were dramatically reduced. These data demonstrate that the currents observed when ∆F508-CFTR and ∆27-264-CFTR were cotransfected were generated by rescued ∆F508-CFTR and not by ∆27-264-CFTR. Our data show that transcomplementation with ∆27-264-CFTR can rescue both trafficking and chloride channel function of ∆F508-CFTR most likely via a bimolecular interaction. Funded by CFF and NHLBI. CFTR trafficking at the plasma membrane is a dynamic process involving rapid clathrin-mediated endocytosis and endosomal sorting/recycling. The regulation of CFTR trafficking is incompletely understood, in part because of the limited resolution of available methods such as immunocytochemistry, biochemistry and imaging of GFP-CFTR chimeras. In this study, we aimed to develop a rapid and sensitive imaging-based approach to study CFTR endocytosis in live cells. Application of fluorescence imaging methods to study CFTR trafficking requires unambiguous distinction of plasma membrane-resident versus endocytic/lysosomal-associated pools of CFTR. We reasoned that surface versus internal pools of CFTR labelled with an external fluorophore could be resolved based on accessibility of a cellimpermeable quencher to fluorophores. A screen of candidate quenchers identified several molecules that efficiently reduced the fluorescence intensity of Alexa Fluor 488 (AF488) in vitro. Most candidate quenchers were unsuitable for the development of cell-based assays because application to cells was associated with greatly increased fluorescence signal (>5-fold background). However, one candidate quencher, bromocresol green (BCG), did not increase background fluorescence when applied to cells. BCG at 4 mM was cell impermeable and reduced the fluorescence intensity of surface-exposed AF488 by ~100%. An MDCK cell line stably expressing CFTR containing a triplet HA-tag engineered into the fourth extracellular loop (CFTR-3HA) was used to study CFTR endocytosis. To selectively label CFTR-3HA, cells were incubated with AF488-conjugated anti-HA antibody and washed. Endocytosis was quantified by assessment of AF488 fluorescence intensity before versus after BCG application after incubations of cells for specified times at 37°C. CFTR internalization was near zero at 0 min, ~8% at 5 min and ~20% at 10 min. As expected, CFTR endocytosis was completely inhibited by latrunculin and jasplakinolide, which disrupt the actin cytoskeleton. CFTR endocytosis was < 2% when the carboxy-terminus of CFTR (residues 1395-1480) was overexpressed, probably due to competition for endocytic adapter proteins that bind motifs within this region of CFTR (including 1424YDSI and 1430LL). Activation of protein kinase A inhibited CFTR endocytosis significantly (~2% at 10 min), but endocytosis was not altered by activation of protein kinase C. We found no change in CFTR endocytosis after deletion of the CFTR C-terminal PSD-95/DlgA/ZO1-(PDZ-) binding domain to prevent PDZ interactions. Similarly, CFTR endocytosis was not altered by expression of a dominant-negative version of the PDZ domain protein EBP50 that does not interact with ezrin or actin. As such, in contrast to members of the G-protein coupled receptor family, PDZ-type interactions do not alter rates of CFTR endocytosis. Our method to study CFTR endocytosis is technically simple and rapid, and suitable for screening of small-molecule stabilizers of surface ∆F508-CFTR expression. Funded by the CFF and NIH. Hsp105 is a member of the Hsp70 superfamily of molecular chaperones. It binds to misfolded proteins and prevents them from aggregation. Hsp105 serves as a nucleotide exchange factor for Hsp70 and functionally relates to Hsp90. To explore the potential impact of Hsp105 on protein misfolding in cystic fibrosis, we investigated the role of human Hsp105α, the constitutively expressed isoform, in the biogenesis and quality control of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Pulse-chase analysis revealed that Hsp105α enhances the co-translational degradation of ∆F508 CFTR but has less effect on wild-type CFTR, suggesting that it plays a role in the co-translational quality control of CFTR. Expression of the substrate binding domain of Hsp105 greatly enhances the synthetic yield of ∆F508 CFTR, and increases the steady state level of its mature form, leading to greater cell surface functional expression of the mutant CFTR. At the post-translational level, Hsp105α overexpression not only promotes the maturation of wild-type CFTR but also enhances the temperature-rescue of ∆F508 CFTR, suggesting a specific role in forward folding of CFTR in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The ∆F508 CFTR has much reduced peripheral stability at physiological temperature. We found that Hsp105α preferentially associates with ∆F508 CFTR in post-ER compartments, and stabilizes ∆F508 CFTR from peripheral quality control. Consistent with the above, overexpressing Hsp105α enhances the processing of ∆F508 CFTR at physiological temperature, and increases its cell surface functional expression in HEK 293 cells. We conclude that Hsp105 regulates the co-translational quality control, post-translational maturation and the peripheral stability of ∆F508 CFTR. The fact that Hsp105 enhances both the maturation of CFTR in the ER and the stability of ∆F508 CFTR at the cell periphery makes it an attractive target for the rescue of ∆F508 misprocessing in cystic fibrosis. Functional assessment of the impact of Hsp105 and its derivative on cystic fibrosis airway epithelial cells is underway. Both Hsp70 and Hsp90 are involved in the biogenesis of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) but their functional relationship remains unclear. The arrest of ∆F508 CFTR conformational maturation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is reversed at reduced temperature in a chaperone-dependent manner. Using the temperature-dependent maturation of ∆F508 CFTR as a model system, we provide evidence for functional cooperation between Hsp70 and Hsp90 during ∆F508 CFTR maturation. In a HEK293 cell line stably expressing ∆F508 CFTR, depletion of Hsp90β by shRNA dramatically reduces the levels of Hsc70, Hop, Hsp105 and Hdj-2, and specifically inhibits ∆F508 maturation at reduced temperature. Using cycloheximide chase and pulse-chase analyses, we demonstrate that neither the peripheral stability nor the post-translational ERAD of ∆F508 CFTR is affected at reduced temperature. Consistent with Hop's role as a functional link between Hsp70 and Hsp90, Hop depletion reciprocally reduces the levels of Hsc70, Hsp90β and Hsp105, and inhibits the ∆F508 CFTR temperature-dependent maturation. Interestingly, depletion of Hsp105, a nucleotide exchange factor for Hsp70, reduces the level of Hsc70 and Hsp90β, and impairs ∆F508 CFTR maturation at low temperature. The conformational rescue of ∆F508 CFTR at low temperature is accompanied by dynamic chaperone recruitment and dissociation. We assessed such dynamic CFTRchaperone association using quantitative co-immunoprecipitation, and found that Hop depletion diminishes the recruitment of Hsp90β and Hsp105 but not Hsp70 or Hdj-2, suggesting that Hop links Hsp90β to Hsp70 during ∆F508 CFTR maturation, and that Hsp105 functions downstream of Hop. Hsp105 depletion also specifically reduces the recruitment of Hsp90β but not other chaperone components, suggesting that Hsp105 also functionally links Hsp70 and Hsp90 in ∆F508 CFTR maturation. Our data support the presence of an Hsp70-Hsp90 relay system on the cytoplasmic face of the ER membrane, specifically facilitating CFTR post-translational conformational maturation. Hop and Hsp105 facilitate the chaperone relay by promoting Hsp90β recruitment. Background: CFTR has been shown to interact directly or indirectly with a wide variety of proteins and form multiprotein macromolecular complexes at specialized subcellular domains. These dynamic protein-protein interactions influence CFTR channel function as well as its localization and processing within cells. We previously found that CFTR complexes with the type 2 lysophosphatidic acid receptor (LPA 2 ) and Na + /H + exchanger regulatory factor-2 (NHERF2) at the plasma membrane of airway epithelia. Objectives: To study the regulatory role of LPA 2 -NHERF2 interaction within the macromolecular complex on CFTR Clchannel function in the airway, and to identify new targets/agents for therapeutic interventions of cystic fibrosis (CF). Methods: Amplified luminescent proximity homogenous assay was used to identify small-molecule inhibitors for LPA 2 -NHERF2 interaction. Lung epithelial cells and a pig tracheal submucosal glands fluid secretion model were used to test the effects of the most potent inhibitor identified (CO-068) on basal and agonist (forskolin or isoproterenol)-stimulated CFTR channel function. CF-bronchial epithelial cells stably expressing ∆F508-CFTR were used to test whether CO-068 further potentiates the channel function of temperature-and CF-corrector rescued ∆F508-CFTR. Results: CO-068 specifically disrupts LPA 2 -NHERF2 interaction in cells, which abolishes the inhibitory effect of LPA 2 -dependent events on adenylyl cyclase (AC) and thus increases cAMP level in proximity to CFTR. Consequently, CO-68 augments the basal and agonist-stimulated CFTR channel function in Calu-3 cells and in pig tracheal submucosal glands. More excitingly, CO-068 further augments the channel function of temperature-and CF-corrector-rescued ∆F508-CFTR in CFBEo-cells (2.3 -fold compared to the control; Fig.1 ). Conclusions: The specific inhibitor for LPA 2 -NHERF2 interaction can augment basal and agonist-stimulated CFTR channel function in cells and in tissues. It can also potentiate the channel function of rescued ∆F508-CFTR in CFBEo-cells. The studies suggest that specific inhibitors for LPA 2 -NHERF2 interaction have the potential to treat CF associated with a decreased or impaired CFTR channel function such as G551D-CFTR or R117H-CFTR, and that when used in combination with a CF-corrector, they have the potential for treating CF associated with ∆F508-CFTR. Supported by NIH grant DK080834 to A.P.N. Fig.1 . CO-068 further potentiates the channel function of rescued ∆F508-CFTR in CFBEo-cells. CFBEo-∆F508-CFTR cells were pretreated with a CF-corrector (C3,10 µM) for 48 h at 28 °C to rescue the ∆F508-CFTR protein. At the cellular level the ∆F508 lesion causes the protein to be recognized as abnormal by quality control systems and degraded, resulting in loss of its function to control epithelial ion and fluid homeostasis. At the protein level the primary impact of the absence of F508 is thermodynamic instability. This property is expected to be context dependent and we postulated that the impact might be different in CFTRs of different species. We have con-firmed this hypothesis and been able to mimic features of the protein, in species less influenced by the mutation, to stabilize the human mutant. Wildtype and ∆F508 versions of CFTR from several other species heterologously expressed in human cells revealed that the mutation had generally similar effects on maturation and stability as in the human protein. In contrast, the ∆F508 mutants of several non-mammalian species including amphibian, elasmobranch and avian matured nearly as well as their wild-type counterparts at 37°C. Most striking was the result with avian CFTR that not only matured similarly whether F508 was present or not, but also was not thermally destabilized by the mutation. Thus strong channel activity persisted at temperatures of 40°C and above where human ∆F508 CFTR was entirely inactive. The half-life in cells of bird ∆F508 CFTR was similar to the wildtype and to the human wild-type. We focused on sequence differences at particular sites between human and avian CFTR that might be expected to influence structural stability and dynamics. In addition to the I539T substitution, present in nearly all species except human, and which promotes ER export but not thermostability of ∆F508, we found a strong correlation between residue substitutions at other specific positions and both maturation and thermostability of the ∆F508 protein. Making these substitutions in human ∆F508 CFTR provided it with a similar level of thermodynamic stability. We believe that these strategically placed residues are part of an allosteric network connecting dynamic elements of the mutant NBD1 enabling overall stability of the domain (and of the full-length protein) similar to the wild-type and hypothesize that the binding of specific ligands to specific sites on the mutant protein may be able to have a similar influence. (Supported by the NIH and CFF.) S-Nitrosothiols (SNO's) are endogenous signaling molecules with many potentially beneficial effects and serve as S-nitrosylating agents. SNO's are normally present in the lungs, but concentrations tend to be low in cystic fibrosis patients. This is likely attributable to up-regulated S-nitrosoglutathione reductase (GSNOR) activity. GSNOR is an enzyme that regulates nitric oxide and S-nitrosothiol homeostasis in tissues and is widely expressed in many tissues, including the lungs. Recently, it has been reported that GSNOR activity is elevated in a murine model of allergic asthma. Mice deficient in GSNOR have increased concentrations of SNO in their lungs. Previously, we and several investigators have shown that different Snitrosothiols increase the expression, maturation and function of mutant ∆F508 CFTR in polarized and non-polarized human bronchial airway epithelial (HBAE) cells. Our studies have indicated that the effect of SNO on ∆F508 CFTR maturation may be mediated through the degradation of Hsp70/Hsp90 organizing protein (Hop), a co-chaperone of the major molecular chaperones Hsp70 and Hsp90. Hop facilitates the interaction between Hsp70 and Hsp90 and modulates their activity by acting as an adapter between the two chaperone proteins. We have recently shown that GSNO treatment decreases Hop expression and Hop-CFTR interaction in the endoplasmic reticulum of CFBE41o-cells, and that this effect is necessary for the maturation and cell-surface expression of ∆F508 CFTR. We have also determined that SNO's affect Hop expression by S-nitrosylation of cysteine residue C403S. Mutation of C403S prevents GSNO-induced Hop degradation and S-nitrosylation. Here, we sought to determine for the first time the role of GSNOR in ∆F508 CFTR maturation in human bronchial airway epithelial cells. We showed that GSNOR activity is significantly elevated in the mutant HBAE cells expressing ∆F508 CFTR when compared to the wild type HBAE cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated by immunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy the cellular colocalization of Hop and GSNOR in CFBE41o-cells. From this experiment, it appears that GSNOR and Hop interact directly. We also were able to demonstrate that GSNOR knockdown with GSNOR siRNA duplexes increases expression of ∆F508 CFTR. We transfected CFBE41o-cells with 50, 75 and 100 nM siRNA duplexes spe-cific for GSNOR using Lipofectamine 2000. After 48h of transfection, cells were rinsed with PBS and lysed directly on plates using lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors. Immunoblot analysis was performed using an anti-CFTR monoclonal antibody (clone CFTR#596 mAb, a kind gift from Dr. J.R.Riordan). Interestingly, knockdown of endogenous GSNOR by using siRNA duplexes for GSNOR produced a marked increase in levels of fully mature forms of ∆F508 CFTR and also decreased Hop expression. This data suggests that GSNOR could potentially become an attractive therapeutic target for cystic fibrosis by preventing SNO toxicity in CF patients. Supported by CF Foundation and the NIH. Despite great efforts to elucidate the mechanism and the molecular factors involved in CFTR biogenesis, trafficking and function, many of these processes are not fully understood. Protein kinases and phosphatases have long been known to regulate CFTR function but their role in CFTR biogenesis and traffic remains less explored. The pleiotropic casein kinase 2 (CK2) was previously shown to interact with CFTR and CK2 inhibition abolishes CFTR conductance in cellattached membrane patches, native epithelial ducts and Xenopus oocytes (1). CFTR possesses several putative CK2 phosphorylation sites, whose impact on its processing and trafficking is unclear, these include: 1) S422; 2) S511; and 3) T1471. The latter ones are of interest given their proximity to F508del (S511), or to the C-terminus, a regulatory motif for NHERF1 anchoring and membrane traffic (2) . Our aim here was to further characterize the role of CK2 in the regulation of CFTR traffic and function as well as to investigate the effects of CK2-site mutation on the regulation of CFTR abundance, maturation and degradation coupled to effects on ion channel activity and cell surface expression. We found further evidence that CK2-dependent regulation of CFTR also has a major role in electrolyte transport in mouse native epithelial tissues (distal colon and trachea) and not only in cellular models. We confirmed previous data demonstrating that inhibition of CK2 correlates with reduced CFTR activity. Furthermore, we found that pharmacological CK2 inhibition affects not only wt-CFTR function as a Clchannel but also its processing. In contrast, F508del-CFTR function and trafficking are unaffected. Elimination of phosphorylation at S422 and T1471 revealed antagonistic roles: while removal of S422 activates CFTR, abrogation of T1471 inhibits the channel. Moreover, we also show that abolition of Y512, a consensus sequence for the Spleen Tyrosine Kinase (SYK) adjacent to the site of the common defect at F508, was found to have a strong effect in both maturation and CFTR currents, acting in a CK2 context, allowing the identification of this kinase as a novel regulator of CFTR. Altogether, these results reinforce the importance of CK2 and the S422, T1471 residues for CFTR modulation, highlighting a dual role for these CK2-putative sites in regulating both CFTR processing and function, and possibly also its plasma membrane stability through CFTR C-terminal specific interactions. They also reveal a novel regulation of CFTR by SYK, a recognized controller of inflammation. One unique feature about CFTR as an ion channel is that the free energy of ATP binding and hydrolysis harnessed by its nucleotide binding domains (NBDs) drives the gating motion of its transmembrane domains (TMDs) that form the ion permeation pathway. Previous studies in our lab have established the idea that in the presence of ATP, CFTR mostly shuttles between two conformations throughout its gating cycle: a close state with two NBDs partially separated and an open state in which NBDs form a dimer with two ATP molecules buried in the dimer interface. Since ATP interacts exclusively with NBDs, the signal upon ATP binding and subsequent NBD dimerization must be allosterically transmitted to TMDs to initiate the cycle. Based on crystallographic data of ABC proteins as well as classical kinetic studies of CFTR gating, it has been proposed that TMDs and NBDs may move in a synchronized manner so that the ATP hydrolysis cycle is strictly coupled to the gating cycle. In this study, by applying rapid ligand-exchange protocols while recording CFTR currents with the patch-clamp technique, we were able to capture a transient conformation between the two aforementioned states by locking the post-hydrolytic channel into an open state with non-hydrolytic ATP analogs, such as pyrophosphate (PPi) or adenylyl-imidodiphosphate (AMP-PNP). We showed that when switching the ligand from ATP to a very brief application of PPi while CFTR is in the open but not the closed state, the channel proceeds directly into a locked-open state without closing. For such an open-to-open transition to take place upon switching the ligand, the NBD dimer must have separated to a dimension larger than that of every participating ligand while TMDs remain in the open conformation. Further supporting this idea, such lock-open effect of PPi is attenuated by ADP in a dose dependent manner, suggesting a competition between ADP and PPi. Such competition indicates that during the open-to-open transition, the NBD dimer is not only separated but the composite site 2, formed by the head of NBD2 and the tail of NBD1, must be vacant. These results thus suggest that The ∆F508 mutation in CFTR impairs its folding, stability and chloride channel gating. Though small molecules that separately correct defective ∆F508-CFTR folding/cellular processing ('correctors') or chloride channel gating ('potentiators') have been discovered and are in clinical trials, single compounds with bona fide dual corrector and potentiator activities have not been identified. Here, screening of ~110,000 not-previously tested small molecules revealed a cyanoquinoline class of compounds with independent corrector and potentiator activities (Corrector-Potentiators, CoPo's). Testing of 180 commercially available CoPo analogs revealed 6 cyanoquinolines with dual corrector and potentiator activities, and 13 with only potentiator activity. Based on the initial results, we synthesized a library of structurally focused CoPo analogs. We found that CoPo analogs having a constrained ring reduced corrector activity whereas analogs containing an arylacid moiety showed greatest corrector and potentiator activities. Reference compound amino)ethyl)-3methoxybenzamide, was synthesized in 6 steps in 52 % overall yield and had micromolar potency for ∆F508-CFTR corrector and potentiator activities. Short-circuit current measurement showed that maximal corrector and potentiator activities of CoPo-22 were comparable to those conferred by the bithiazole Corr-4a and the flavone genistein, respectively. Immunoblot confirmed increased C-band following CoPo-22 incubation. CoPo-22 also activated chloride conductance in cells expressing wild type and G551D CFTR within minutes in a forskolin-dependent manner, indicating broad specificity for potentiator action. Compounds with dual corrector and potentiator activities may be useful for single drug therapy of CF caused by ∆F508 mutation. Supported by CFF and NIH. F508del CFTR fails to traffic efficiently to the cell surface at 37°C. We have shown that butyrate and 4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA) promote maturation of C band CFTR and cAMP-mediated Clsecretion in vitro and in vivo. Dose-limiting toxicities led us to explore structural modifications that would improve bioavailability. We hypothesized that the butyrate derivatives, 2,2dimethylbutyrate (HQK-1001) and trans-styrylacetic acid (TSAA), would be more efficient than 4-PBA with respect to CFTR-mediated short circuit current. Methods: (1) We employed Fisher Rat Thyroid (FRT) cells expressing F508del CFTR (gift of A.S. Verkman). The cells were grown on Snapwell inserts and studied after 7-10 days of culture, when transepithelial resistance was > 3000 Ω. Treatments consisted of 500µM or 1mM TSAA, 2.5mM 4-PBA, 10mM HQK-1001, 0.1% DMSO, or 28° C incubation for 48 to 60 hours. All reagents were obtained from Sigma except HQK-1001 which was supplied by Hemaquest Pharmaceuticals Inc. Isc measurements were recorded in an Ussing chamber with voltage clamped to zero. Resistance measurements were by bipolar voltage pulse every 3 minutes. All experiments began in symmetric solutions of HEPES buffered Ringer's while the basolateral membrane was permeabilized with 400µM nystatin for 20 minutes. An apical to basolateral gradient was imposed by replacing the apical solution with gluconate substituted Ringer's. After Isc equilibration, CFTR mediated Cltransport was stimulated with the apical addition of 50µM forskolin, followed by 100µM genistein. Lastly, 20µM CFTRinh-172 was added to verify that the current was CFTR mediated. (2) The CF cell line, CFBE41o -∆F508 (gift of J.P. Clancy) was grown under standard condi-tions. Treatment consisted of 1mM TSAA, 10mM HQK-1001, or 28° C incubation for 48 hours. Whole cell lysates were run on SDS-PAGE and after Western transfer, the membrane was probed with either 3G11 or M3A7 antibody. Results: Maximal potentiator stimulated Isc was seen with; 1 mM TSAA, 10 mM HQK-1001, and 28° C incubation and was nearly double that of either 500µM TSAA or 2.5 mM 4-PBA (Table) . Western blot in 28° C rescued cells demonstrated both B and C band CFTR. However, in control, TSAA, or HQK treated cells, only B band CFTR was detected. Conclusion: Butyrate derivatives improve potentiator stimulated CFTR mediated Isc suggesting effect on trafficking or cell surface channels. However, this effect was measured in the absence of detectable immunoreactive C band. Cystic fibrosis is characterized by viscous mucus secretions, chronic bacterial infections, inflammation and abnormal ion transport across epithelia that result from misprocessed or non-functional CFTR channels at the apical membrane of exocrine tissues' epithelial cells. In this study we have used VIP knockout mice to demonstrate in vivo the central role of the Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide (VIP) in CFTR membrane localization and exocrine epithelial tissue integrity. VIP is a neuropeptide with potent anti-inflammatory, bronchodilatory and immuno-modulatory functions and a physiological activator of CFTRdependent secretions. In CF, airway glands no longer secrete in response to VIP and early studies showed that VIPergic innervation is lost in sweat glands from CF patients. At the molecular level, we recently demonstrated that prolonged VIP stimulation of bronchial or nasal epithelial cells increases WT and F508del-CFTR function by improving apical membrane insertion and stability via the VPAC1 receptor and PKCε activation. Here we compared CFTR membrane localization, expression and abundance of VIP receptors and pathological changes in the lung, intestine and pancreas of WT and VIP-KO C57BL/6 mice. To assess the corrective effect of VIP, 5 VIP-KO mice received intraperitoneal injections of VIP (500 mg/kg) every other day for 3 weeks. Expression of VPAC1, VPAC2 and PAC1 in WT and VIP-KO tissues was confirmed by RT-PCR. Immunoblotting of lung tissue lysates showed unchanged PAC1 expression level whereas VPAC 1 and 2 were found to be more abundant in VIP-KO tissues and remained up-regulated after VIP treatment. CFTR localization was examined by immunostaining using a monoclonal anti-CFTR antibody followed by confocal microscopy. WT tissues showed CFTR predominantly at the apical membrane of epithelial cells in contrast to VIP-KO tissues where CFTR distribution was intracellular. No changes in CFTR protein abundance or maturation were observed in immunoblots. Interestingly, VIP treatment restored strong CFTR membrane localization. We used H&E staining for pathological assessment. Deletion of the VIP gene resulted in pathological changes that resemble those seen in CF. VIP-KO intestinal tissues had a significant increase in goblet and inflammatory cells. As previously reported, in VIP-KO lungs we observed lymphocyte aggregations, increased airway secretions, alveolar thickening and edema. In the pancreas, increased secretions and increases in inflammatory cells surrounding ducts were found. These pathological changes were largely reversed by VIP treatment. Taken together, these results indicate that VIP stimulation is required to maintain CFTR membrane localization in vivo as well as for the integrity of the intestinal, lung and pancreatic tissues. Importantly, defective CFTR localization and tissue damage were reversed by injection of exogenous VIP. These molecular data reinforce the initial observation that the absence of VIPergic innervation could play a central role in CF pathophysiology. Supported by: CFC, CIHR, NSERC, CFI, NSHRF, NIH. ed forskolin-stimulated anion secretion by >60%, although cAMP generation was reduced by only 20%. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that TGF-β1 down-regulates cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) mRNA abundance. Western blots revealed reduced protein levels for both fully glycosylated (C-band) and core-glycosylated (B-band) CFTR. Biotinylation indicated that TGF-β1 decreases apical cell surface CFTR expression. These results suggest that TGF-β1 causes a reduction in CFTR expression, which limits CFTR-mediated anion secretion. Initial signaling pathway studies showed that exposure to TGF-β1 substantially increased phospho-Smad3, suggesting that TGF-β1 may affect PVD9902 cells through a Smad pathway. Men harboring profound CFTR mutations exhibit infertility and reproductive duct anomalies, whereas mild mutations have variable presentations. These results suggest that TGF-β1 expression can reduce CFTR activity and thus would likely compound the effects associated with mild CFTR mutations (i.e., compromise CFTR expression or activity). [NIH HD058398 and RR017686.] model. We have previously shown by metabolic pulse chase assays that ferret WT-CFTR has a significantly longer half-life (~3 fold) relative to its human counterpart. Furthermore, we have shown that the processing of human and ferret ∆F-CFTR was negligible in both BHK21 and COS7 cells, while low level processing of ∆F-fCFTR could be seen in HT1080 and 293 cells. In the present study we have compared the membrane characteristics including surface stability and function between human and ferret WT-and ∆F-CFTR proteins containing an extracellular HA tag. As expected by surface HA IF staining under non-permeabilization conditions, we found that both fCFTR and hCFTR are present at the cell surface in BHK21, HT1080, and polarized CuFi cells. Furthermore, we found that the surface staining of the ferret and human ∆F-CFTR in BHK21 and CuFi cells was negligible, while low level HA staining was seen in HT1080 cells only with ∆F-fCFTR. We used surface HA On Cell Western blots to quantitatively assess CFTR at the cell membrane in BHK21 and HT1080 cells. We observed a ~3 and ~4.5 fold increase in fCFTR surface staining relative to hCFTR in BHK21 and HT1080 cells respectively. We observed negligible surface staining for both human and ferret ∆F-CFTR in BHK21 cells, while low level surface staining for only ∆F-fCFTR was present in HT1080 cells, consistent with the IF studies in these cell lines. Next we sought to compare functionality of these proteins in human and ferret CF polarized airway epithelial cells using short circuit current and potential difference (PD) measurements. We found that both human and ferret WT-CFTR proteins were able to correct the cAMPinducible chloride (Cl -) conductance defect in polarized human CF airway epithelial cells as ascertained by stimulation with IBMX/forskolin and subsequent inhibition with bumetanide and GlyH101. The combined bumetanide and GlyH101 responses were 3.5 +/-0.8 and 4.6 +/-0.4 µA/cm 2 for human and ferret respectively. Importantly both human and ferret ∆F-CFTR proteins were unable to mediate Clcurrents in CF airway epithelium. Next we expressed ferret WT-and ∆F-CFTR in ferret CFTR -/tracheal xenografts and measured PD in response to cAMP stimulation. We found that only the WT protein was able to correct the Clpermeability defect. We are currently exploring the rates of internalization, recycling, and endolyso- The recently established CFTR2 database contains CFTR mutation and clinical data for ~35,000 cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, including ~300 unique missense mutations. To confirm the disease liability of these mutations, clinical information is compared with cell-based functional assays, but rare and "private" missense mutations occur too infrequently to make statistical comparisons. Computational methods can predict the impact of missense mutation, and typically focus on phylogenetic analysis, comparing amino-acid substitution patterns among sets of genes related to the target gene. Unfortunately, existing methods perform too poorly for clinical utility, often because it is difficult to know a priori what set of sequences best describe the target gene (for instance, CFTR) and phenotype being predicted (for instance, CF). Dorfman et al. showed that the most successful and popular computational methods fail to accurately predict CF disease from CFTR missense mutation 1 . Here, we present a novel method for predicting CF from CFTR missense mutation. The approach combines phylogenetic analysis of CFTRrelated sequences and a novel score function that includes amino-acid conservation and biophysical properties. During a "training" phase, the algorithm aligns a randomly chosen subset of 547 CFTR homologs and paralogs, and uses the random set of sequences to score 65 known CF-causing and 75 known CF-neutral CFTR missense mutations; this process is repeated 100,000 times (iterations). At each iteration, specific CFTR homologs and paralogs determined to confer the greatest predictive ability, in previous iterations, are chosen with a higher probability and have greater influence on the score function; this entire training phase is repeated 50 times (i.e., 5x10 6 sequences sets are tested, beginning from 50 random starting alignments). In a "testing" phase, the sequences determined to have the greatest predictive power in the training phase are used to score 43 known CF-causing and 60 known CF-neutral CFTR missense mutations, and the overall performance is assessed (note: training-and test-set mutations are disjoint). Training and testing phases are repeated in triplicate to ensure the training phase converges on a similar set of sequences and the performance is stable in the testing phase. Preliminary results show that our Phenotype-Optimized Sequence Ensembles (POSE) method can achieve a substantial performance increase relative to previous methods (see Table 1 ). 1). Dorfman R. et al. (2010) Clinical Genetics, 77(5) 464-473 Table 1 : Performance achieved for blind predictions on 43 CFcausing and 60 CF-neutral CFTR missense mutations. †PPV = positive predictive value,*NPV = negative predictive value and proteomics approach, we have previously identified CFTR-associated differential expression of NF-kB signaling and molecular chaperone networks. In this study, our objective was to characterize the CFTR statusdependent transcriptome of lung epithelial cells as an effort to identify cellular networks for therapeutic targeting. In our initial experiment, we determined the global transcriptome of culture CF lung epithelial cells (IB3-1) and its genetically repaired daughter cell (S9) by massive parallel sequencing (RNA-seq) using an Illumina platform (Genome Analyzer IIx) and protocols. This approach generated approximately 40 million sequencing reads of 40 bp length on average per sample. Reads were aligned to a reference human genome using the Tophat algorithm and expression data was calculated using the Cufflinks algorithm to determine the reads per kb exon per million mapped reads (RPKM) value. The Cuffdiff algorithm was used to determine differentially expressed genes between IB3-1 and S9 cells. Eighty-eight percent of the reads were accurately aligned to the human genome and corresponded to 12,634 genes. From this dataset, we observed a high correlation between differentially expressed genes revealed in both microarray-based versus RNA-seq-based analysis. Additionally, we observed a significant number of differentially expressed genes between IB3-1 and S9 cells that were not detected in microarray-based analysis. Using qPCR, we validated 19 of 20 selected differentially expressed transcripts in independent IB3-1 and S9 samples. A subset of 119 differentially expressed genes was enriched for response to biotic stimuli function (p = 0.0003). These genes displayed network connectivity centered on interleukin-8 (IL8), prostaglandin E synthase (PTGES), interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT1), and serpin peptidase inhibitor member 4 (SERPINB4) transcripts. We also observed a high correlation between differential gene expression and protein expression of the high abundance proteome in the cultured lung epithelial cells. Most notably, 7 of 8 differentially expressed proteins with differential protein synthetic rates also possessed differential transcript expression levels. Interestingly, this high confidence transcriptomic-proteomic correlation included keratin 18, which has been demonstrated to interact with mutated CFTR and been observed to be differentially expressed during lung epithelial tissue development. We conclude that further analysis of cultured and primary CF lung epithelial cells using next-generation RNA sequencing techniques will identify the cellular consequences of CFTR defects and provide novel targets for therapeutic intervention for CF disease. The expression pattern of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) is spatially and temporally complex, and understanding how this is regulated is an important goal in the development of new therapies for cystic fibrosis. While cis-acting genomic elements are critical to the regulation of CFTR expression, microRNAs (miRNAs) may also play a significant role. These short (~22nt), endogenously expressed, noncoding RNAs generally suppress gene expression by binding to the 3' UTR of mammalian transcripts and blocking translation or promoting the degradation of the transcript. Despite the potential importance of miRNA regulation of CFTR, it has not yet been the subject of intense investigation. We aimed to determine whether candidate miRNAs, that are predicted to bind the CFTR 3' UTR in silico, function to regulate expression of wildtype or artificial transcripts carrying the CFTR 3' UTR. To accomplish this, candidate miRNAs were identified using the TargetScan 5.1 prediction algorithm and available cell type expression data. Thirteen of these candidate miRNAs with the highest TargetScan context scores were evaluated in relevant human cell lines. The ability of miRNA mimics (dsRNA molecules which are processed like endogenous miRNAs) to repress endogenous CFTR expression and luciferase expression from a reporter construct carrying the CFTR 3' UTR was determined. Twelve of the thirteen miRNAs reproducibly repressed endogenous CFTR mRNA expression by 40-80% in the Caco2 cell line (CFTR+, human colorectal adenocarcinoma). Four of the 12 miRNAs also reproducibly down-regulated expression of the luciferase reporter by 30-50% relative to a negative control miRNA in Caco2 and PANC-1 cells (CFTR-, human pancreatic duct carcinoma), verifying that knockdown is occurring, at least partially, through sites in the CFTR 3' UTR. Each of the four miRNAs also reduced endogenous CFTR protein by 30-60% in Caco2. Three additional miRNAs down-regulated reporter expression in PANC-1, but not Caco2. Expression profiling of three of the miRNAs which repress the 3' UTR reporter in Caco2 cells revealed that all three are expressed in primary human tracheal and bronchial epithelial cell cultures at levels similar to the cell lines used in this study. Further studies will elucidate the effect of these miRNAs on endogenous CFTR protein function and the mechanism by which it occurs. These may provide novel therapeutic opportunities for CF. This work was supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) encodes a large gene that has a complex pattern of expression. We recently showed that tissue-specific CFTR expression is regulated by multiple cisacting regulatory elements, including intronic enhancers that are looped to the promoter creating a transcriptional hub. The mechanism by which the higher order chromatin is organized is not fully understood though it may involve the recruitment of protein complexes such as SATB1 and cohesin. SATB1 is one member of a class of proteins called BUR binding proteins (BURBPs) that interact with base-unpairing regions (BURs) within the genome. We are investigating whether SATB1 and other BURBPS create and/or stabilize the CFTR looped chromatin structure by binding to BURs in CFTR and recruiting chromatin remodelers that establish specific histone modifications. Eight BURs were identified within the CFTR locus and we are evaluating their functions. In vitro binding assays show that several of the CFTR BUR sequences are able to form complexes with SATB1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) experiments are now underway to evaluate the in vivo binding of BURBPs to the CFTR BURs. The recruitment of chromatin remodelers and associated histone modifications at the BURs is also being evaluated by ChIP. Cohesin is essential for maintaining the three-dimensional structure of chromatin. ChIP data showed that cohesin was enriched at several critical regions of open chromatin that are found flanking the CFTR locus and within introns. We are now modulating the expression levels of cohesin components in vitro to determine whether this alters CFTR expression levels and the three-dimensional, looped structure of the CFTR locus. This work was supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and NIH R01 HL094585. Long-range chromosomal interactions are often important for the regulation of gene expression. Control of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene is spatially and temporally regulated, though the promoter lacks tissue-specific regulatory elements. While intronic and flanking regions of the CFTR locus contain some cell-type specific control elements, the mechanism by which they regulate expression is not fully understood. One element that is critical to the regulation of CFTR is located within a DNase I hypersensitive site (DHS) in intron 11 of the gene. Identified in intestinal and male genital duct epithelial cells, this element, which interacts with the CFTR promoter in vivo and encompasses a potent enhancer, acts cooperatively with another CFTR enhancer to augment CFTR Protein folding is the primary role of the proteostasis network (PN), although the stoichiometry(s) of chaperone interactions with wild-type and mutant folds are largely unknown. Also, the principles driving the activity of the PN in normal and disease biology remain elusive. To address the issue of protein folding complexes facilitating wild-type and ∆F508 cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) biogenesis, we have applied state-of-the-art absolute quantification mass spectrometry (MS). Using labeled chaperone proteins and single ion reaction monitoring (SRM) we have defined the in vivo role(s) of the PN in the defective folding of ∆F508 CFTR responsible for cystic fibrosis (CF). Our studies now show the presence of a stalled ∆F508 CFTR folding intermediate in stoichiometric association with the heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) and 90 (Hsp90) PN systems. Temperature correction of ∆F508 restores the substoichiometric association of the Hsp70 and 90 chaperones observed with wild-type CFTR. We propose that this energetically uncoupled chaperone trap kinetically restricts ∆F508 from the productive folding pathway and therefore represents a critical step in CFTR biogenesis that must be resolved to restore normal function. We suggest that such energetically destabilized folding intermediates present a challenge to proteostasis biology, serving as a nidus for CF and other misfolding diseases. F508del is the commonest cystic fibrosis (CF) mutation, which causes defects in trafficking, channel gating and stability of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) Clchannel. To rescue these defects in F508del-CFTR, small-molecule correctors and potentiators are being developed. Here we investigate the effects of a CFTR small-molecule corrector CF-106951 (C18 from the CFFT compound collection) on the expression, single channel activity and the stability of F508del-CFTR at the cell surface. To address our aim, we studied CFTR Clchannels in inside-out membrane patches excised from BHK cells stably expressing wild-type (wt) and F508del-CFTR incubated at 37°C. As a control, we studied low temperature corrected F508del-CFTR. The pipette (external) solution contained 10 mM Cland the bath (internal) solution contained 147 mM Cl -, 1 mM ATP and 75 nM PKA at 37°C; voltage was -50 mV. The gating behavior of wt-CFTR is characterized by bursts of channel openings interrupted by brief closures and separated by longer closures (open probability (P o ) = 0.416 ± 0.043, mean burst duration (MBD) = 187 ± 24 ms, interburst interval (IBI) = 155 ± 19 ms, n ≥ 5). In contrast, low temperature (27°C for 48-72 hours) corrected F508del-CFTR is characterized by short bursts of channel openings separated by prolonged channel closures (P o = 0.054 ± 0.006, MBD = 95 ± 6 ms, IBI = 1584 ± 149 ms, n ≥ 20). When pre-treated with corrector C18 (5 µM) for 24h at 37°C, F508del-CFTR channel gating is characterized by intermediate bursts of openings separated by shortened long closures (P o = 0.158 ± 0.023, MBD = 140 ± 25 ms, IBI = 894 ± 108 ms, n ≥ 6, p < 0.05, Student's t-test). When compared with low temperature corrected F508del-CFTR, drug correction caused a three-fold increase in P o through prolonging MBD by 47% and reducing IBI by 44%. Therefore, C18 is more effective at restoring wild-type channel gating to F508del-CFTR than low temperature incubation. In contrast to wt-CFTR, at 37°C, F508del-CFTR Clchannels are unstable and rapidly run-down in excised membrane patches (t 1/2 ≈ 2 min). We therefore investigated whether C18 could restore channel stability to Deletion of a single phenylalanine residue at position 508 (F508del) is the most prevalent disease-causing mutation among the ~1800 known mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) [1] . F508del-CFTR is rapidly degraded by the quality control systems in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [2] , and there is still no drug that can fully reverse this degradation. The exact molecular mechanisms underlying the degradation process remain unclear. Recent studies from this group and others indicate that the F508del mutation causes misfolding and aggregation of the first nucleotide-binding domain in human CFTR (hNBD1) [3, 4] . This misfolding of hNBD1 may be the central contributor to F508del-CF pathogenesis. These findings suggest new approaches to the development of in vitro high-throughput screening assays to identify chemicals that can prevent aggregation of F508del-hNBD1 and thereby inhibit degradation of F508del-CFTR in vivo. Interdomain associations in CFTR are believed to be important factors in controlling the activity and stability of CFTR and may also be compromised by the F508del mutation [5, 6] . Therefore, there is also interest in developing high-throughput screening assays to identify compounds that strengthen interdomain interactions in CFTR. To support the development of both aggregation and interdomain-association assay using visible fluorescence methods, we have engineered a stable version of hNBD1 that only reacts with maleimide-conjugated fluorophores at an engineered terminal cysteine residue. Native hNBD1 cannot be used for such assays because reaction with the four endogenous cysteines causes irreversible protein aggregation during labeling. Initial attempts to substitute the endogenous cysteines with other amino acids leads to such serious destabilization of hNBD1 that it is impossible to work with the F508del variant. Therefore, we used computational methods to predict the influence of different amino acids substitutions on domain stability. The corresponding mutant proteins were made and evaluated experimentally for their stability before and after labeling with a visible fluorophore, as well as for their utility for high-throughput assays of domain associate and aggregation. The current status of the project will be reported. References: 1. Riordan, JR. et al. Science 245, 1066 , 1989 . 2. Jensen, TJ. et al. Cell 83, 129, 1995 . 3. Protasevich, I. et al. Protein Science 19, 1917 , 2010 4. Wang, C. et al. Protein Science 19, 1932 , 2010 5. Serohijos, AWR. et al. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105, 3256, 2008 . 6. Du K. et al. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 12, 17, 2005 . Acknowledgments: This work was supported from a grant from CFFT. Barcelona, Spain; 2. George S. Wise Faculty Of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel; 3. O2 Health Link Inc, Barcelona, Spain Several models of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) have been published so far, all derived by homology to the bacterial transporter Sav1866. While these models mostly agree with experimental data relating to overall CFTR structure, all present the channel in an outward-facing conformation that does not correspond to the conducting state. Here, a new model of CFTR has been developed that is in its "channel-like" conducting state, derived by a unique modeling approach combining multiple-template homology modeling and Rosetta refinement. In contrast to those previously published, the model is in agreement with expected channel properties such as pore shape and dimensions, relative solvent accessibility of pore residues and experimentally derived pairwise distances. The model also allows for an exploration of the interaction of anionic open channel blockers within the pore, revealing a common binding mode at the lower vestibule dominated by ionic interactions with K95 in agreement with experimental data, as well as interactions with W1145 and R352. The binding site structure and binding mode hypothesis have been further validated with a virtual screening experiment, showing known blockers significantly enriched compared to a random set of drug-like compounds. In addition, a model of mutant F508del CFTR has been derived from the wt, with both proteins subjected to molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. These reveal a destabilizing effect of the F508 deletion, in agreement with experimental data. Modeling and MD suggest previously unaddressed salt-bridge interactions that may be important for structural stability, as well as identifying pore-lining residues that likely confer ion selectivity. CFTR is a chloride channel belonging to the ABC superfamily of proteins. Absence of functional CFTR at apical membranes of epithelial cells leads to cystic fibrosis. The chloride channel activity of CFTR is regulated by the binding and hydrolysis of nucleotides at the nucleotide binding domains, and by the phosphorylation of the R domain by PKA. Currently, it is understood that certain PKA consensus sites (including serines 737 and 768) are phosphorylated in the resting cell and that phosphorylation at these sites may act to maintain the channel in a closed state. On the other hand, PKA mediated phosphorylation of distinct sites, including serines 660, 795 and 813, is enhanced by agonists of cAMP and promotes CFTR activation. However, this model is based primarily on the analysis of PKA site mutations which could lead to structural changes in the R domain as well as changes in the phosphorylation status. Therefore, we assessed the proportional phosphorylation of two PKA sites amenable to quantification by mass spectrometry, S660 and S737. We studied the phosphorylation status of CFTR heterologously expressed in BHK cells. CFTR was immunoprecipitated using the CFTR specific antibody: L12B4, from either resting or stimulated cells (treatment with 10 µM forskolin and 200µM IBMX). Immunoprecipitated CFTR was subjected to complete trypsin proteolysis and analyzed by LC-MS using a selected reaction monitoring (SRM) approach. Proportional phosphorylation was determined for each site as the abundance of CFTR phosphopeptides detected from either resting or cells activated in vivo relative to the maximal achievable, ie. the abundance of phosphopeptide detected from immunoprecipitated CFTR treated to high concentrations of purified PKA catalytic subunit in-vitro (200nm, 1h, 25°C) . Phosphorylation was detected at both sites S660 and S737 (repeated over 2 biological samples with 3 technical replicates) in CFTR from unstimulated, resting cells. The proportional phosphorylation at S660 was measured as 16.2%, and this proportion increased to 58.6% following in-vivo stimulation of PKA. The resting proportional phosphorylation at S737 was 12.3%, increasing to 51.1% upon stimulation. In contrast to the prediction of the model described above, these sites cannot be distinguished with respect to their phosphorylation status in resting or stimulated cells. Furthermore, the relatively high phosphorylation of both sites in resting cells was surprising and prompted us to investigate whether phosphorylation could occur in the biosynthetic compartment. The forward trafficking of CFTR from the ER to post-ER compartments was inhibited by treating cells for 24h with brefeldin A (5µg/mL). In initial studies, we found that there was no detectable reduction in the phosphorylation status of CFTR from brefeldin A treated cells, suggesting that phosphorylation was occurring in the ER. Future studies will focus on phosphorylation at additional sites in the ER and in post-ER compartments. Studies supported by CFC grant (CB) and a CFC Studentship supported SP. Ubiquitination plays critical roles in the proteasomal degradation of misfolded immature CFTR in ER as well as in the lysosomal degradation of misfolded mature CFTR in the cell periphery. Previously, we have shown that the CFTR-associated protein CAL retains and degrades mature CFTR in the lysosomal system. To investigate the possible involvement of the ubiquitination system in CAL-mediated CFTR degradation, we tested a number of E3 ubiquitin ligases that (1) bind to CAL (2) enhance mature CFTR degradation and (3) depend on CAL for its activity. We reasoned that CAL as a scaffold protein may recruit an E3 ubiquitin ligase(s) into CAL-CFTR complexes to facilitate CFTR degradation. By using co-immunoprecipitation assay in transfected HEK293 cells we identified the interaction of CAL with MARCH II and MARCH III proteins. Members of the membrane associated ring CH (MARCH) E3 ubiquitin ligase family were first identified as proteins related to immune-evasion strategies in viruses that degrade the host MHC class I molecules in the lysosome. MARCH II and MARCH III are the most closely related proteins in the MARCH family with 63% identify. MARCH II is ubiquitously expressed in all human tissues examined while MARCH III is enriched in lung, colon and spleen. Overexpression of either HA-tagged MARCH II or MARCH III led to dose-dependent degradation of CFTR. Since MARCH II is ubiquitously expressed, we focused on it for the subsequent studies. Overexpression of MARCH II had no effect on ∆F508-CFTR or on a CFTR mutant lacking PDZ motif (∆TRL-CFTR). Furthermore, silencing of endogenous CAL inhibited the effect of MARCH II on CFTR. These data suggest both CAL and the PDZ motif on CFTR are involved in MARCH II degradation of mature CFTR. MARCH II and MARCH III were previously identified by others as a syntaxin 6 interacting protein. Interestingly, we have previously demonstrated that syntaxin 6 binds to CAL and CFTR and that syntaxin 6 is a component of CAL-complex involved in mature CFTR degradation. Confocal fluorescence microscopy showed the colocalization of HA tagged MARCH II with GFP-CAL and with GFP-syntaxin 6 in transfected HEK293 cells. In addition, syntaxin 6 enhanced the binding of MARCH II to CAL as assayed by coimmunoprecipitation. Taken together, our data indicated that E3 ubiquitin ligases MARCH II/ MARCH III are new components of CAL-complexes and suggested that the multiple interactions of MARCH II / MARCH III with CAL, and syntaxin 6 are necessary for CAL-mediated lysosomal degradation of mature CFTR. Supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and the National Institutes of Health. Wang, Y.; Liu, J.; Bugeja, L.; Warner, R.; Sheppard, D.N.; Li, H. School of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom Small-molecule potentiators have been identified which target the gating defects of F508del-CFTR, the commonest cystic fibrosis (CF) mutation (1). However, relatively little is known about the effects of potentiators on other CF mutations. Here, we investigate the effects of potentiators on A561E-CFTR, the second most common CF mutation in Portugal. Like F508del, A561E is a temperature-sensitive processing mutant located in the first nucleotide-binding domain (2) ; our preliminary studies suggest that it also severely disrupts channel gating. For this study, we used baby-hamsterkidney (BHK) cells stably expressing A561E-CFTR and the iodide efflux assay. As controls, we studied wild-type-CFTR (WT-CFTR) and F508del-CFTR. We tested the potentiators PG-01 (P2), SF-03 (P3), UCCF-853 (P4), ∆F508 act -02 (P5) and UCCF180 (P9) (all obtained from CFFT Compound Collection, and used at 10µM in the presence of the cAMP agonist forskolin, 10µM); genistein (50µM) was used as a reference potentiator. At 37°C, forskolin and genistein failed to elicit iodide efflux from A561E-and F508del-CFTR expressing cells, whereas WT-CFTR expressing cells produced a large transient iodide efflux. When cells were incubated at 27°C for 24hr, Clchannel activity was partially restored to A561E (83%) and F508del (74%), relative to the response evoked by WT-CFTR expressing cells treated with forskolin and genistein. All potentiators tested enhanced iodide efflux from both A561E-and F508del-CFTR expressing cells (n = 4, P<0.05, unpaired T-test versus vehicle). However, none of them restored channel activity to WT-CFTR levels. For A561E-CFTR cells, the rank order of potentiation was P4 ≥ P9 ≥ P2 > P5 > P3 (44 ± 6, 38 ± 5, 33 ± 2, 20 ± 4, 14 ± 1, respectively, %WT-CFTR Genistein, n = 4). For F508del-CFTR, the rank order was P2 ∼ P5 ≥ P4 > P3 > P9 (22 ± 2, 22 ± 5, 19 ± 3, 15 ± 3, 10 ± 1, respectively, %WT-CFTR Genistein, n = 4). In conclusion, all of the small molecules tested that potentiate F508del-CFTR also enhance A561E-CFTR channel function, and the overall potentiating effects are better in A561E-CFTR expressing cells. However, variation in the rank order may indicate differences in the channel behavior of A561E-and F508del-CFTR, which require further investigation using single-channel recording. Supported by CF Trust (UK). We thank Prof. MD Amaral (University of Lisboa), and CF Foundation Therapeutics for BHK cells and small molecules, respectively. The PDZ domain is the most common protein interaction module in the human genome, typically recognizing the C-terminal residues of its target proteins. Individual PDZ binding motifs reveal interactions with up to seven residues, denoted by their distance from the terminus, e.g., P0, P-1. In many cases, however, binding motifs reveal only two or three sequence constraints on the target sequence, and PDZ binding is notoriously promiscuous, with one domain binding multiple targets. Nevertheless, individual domains also exhibit significant affinity differences among sequences with shared motifs. The basis for these "cryptic" stereochemical preferences remains unclear. CFTR is a target protein recognized by multiple PDZ domains, including NHERF1, NHERF2, NHERF3, and the CFTR-associated ligand (CAL). Of these PDZ partners, CAL is the only one which negatively regulates the abundance of CFTR at the cell surface, making it an attractive therapeutic drug target. Global motif analysis of the CAL PDZ domain shows strong residue preferences only at the P0 and P-2 positions. Using a peptide array engineering approach however, we identified robust affinity determinants reaching back to the P-5 position. The result was the inhibitor peptide iCAL36 (ANSRWPTSII), which increases apical abundance of functional ∆F508-CFTR in CFBE cells. We also previously showed that applying iCAL36 to an epithelial monolayer increases the activity of ∆F508-CFTR by about 25%. However, studies using siRNA to inhibit CAL expression in the same system show a >200% increase in chloride efflux by ∆F508-CFTR. In order to design a better inhibitor of the CFTR:CAL interaction, and more effectively recapitulate the effect of siCAL, we first need to understand the basis, and extent, of selectivity of our inhibitor peptide. Consistent with the sequence engineering approach, iCAL36 binds the CAL, but not the NHERF, PDZ domain(s). However, iCAL36 is capable of binding an additional PDZ domain-containing protein, Tax Interacting Protein 1 (TIP-1), which is known to inhibit β-catenin in Wnt signaling pathways. To understand CAL and TIP-1's upstream affinity, as well as design better CAL inhibitors, we co-crystallized their PDZ domains with iCAL36, revealing interactions along the length of the peptide. By varying the P-5 position, and by comparing the structures of peptides with different C-terminal sequences, we can also visualize the interplay between C-terminal and upstream binding determinants. Our results suggest different C-terminal "core" sequences impose different upstream preferences for PDZ domain interactions. Understanding how CAL binds its peptide targets will hopefully allow us to improve inhibition of CFTR:CAL, as well as gain an insight into how CFTR interacts with its other PDZ domain binding partners. This work was supported in part by NIH grants R01DK075309 and T32GM008704. Kota, P. 1 ; Aleksandrov, A.A. 2 ; Riordan, J.R. 1 ; Dokholyan, N.V. 1 1. Biochemistry and Biophysics, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Biomedical Engineering, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Assembly of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) epithelial anion channel is perturbed by the deletion of F508 from the first nucleotide-binding domain (NBD1) responsible for most cystic fibrosis. The mutant polypeptide is recognized by cellular quality control systems and is proteolyzed. CFTR NBD1 contains a 32-residue segment termed the regulatory insertion (RI) absent in other ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters. We have reported that complete removal of RI enables delF508 CFTR to mature and traffic to the cell surface where it mediates regulated anion efflux and exhibits robust single chloride channel activity, none of which are possible via partial removal of RI (Aleksandrov et al 2010) . Now using discrete molecular dynamics (DMD) simulations of NBD1, we have identified unprecedented dynamic coupling between RI and other regions of NBD1. In particular, RI dynamically influences the F508 and I539 containing loops, the importance of which has been realized previously. Our results indicate that RI may indirectly influence the interaction of NBD1 with the rest of the protein by attenuating the coupling of the F508-containing loop with the F1-like ATP-binding core subdomain so that RI removal overcomes the perturbations caused by F508 deletion. We conclude that restriction of RI to a particular conformational state may ameliorate the impact of this disease-causing mutation. References: Aleksandrov AA, Kota P, Aleksandrov LA, He L, Jensen T, Cui L, Gentzsch M, Dokholyan NV, and Riordan JR. "Regulatory insertion removal restores maturation, stability and function of DelF508 CFTR", J Mol Biol, 401:194-210 (2010) We have evidence that CFTR expression is suppressed in the lung of smokers with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We therefore investigated the effect of cigarette smoke on CFTR expression and function. We found that cigarette smoke negatively regulates CFTR expression in human bronchial epithelial cells by decreasing CFTR mRNA transcript and protein levels as measured by quantitative RT-PCR and immunoblotting, respectively. Cigarette smoke also decreased CFTR function in human bronchial epithelial cells as assessed by Ussing chambers. CFTR function was evaluated in vivo in the lung of mice and we found that cigarette smoke decreased alveolar fluid clearance by around 30% in 24 hours. In order to understand the mechanism by which cigarette smoke regulates CFTR expression, we explored the role of MAPK pathways. Cigarette smoke activated the three major MAPK pathways (i.e. P38, JNK and Erk1/2) in a time-and dose-dependent manner in bronchial epithelial cells. Inhibition of the p38 or JNK pathway had no effect on CFTR protein. Conversely, inhibition of the Erk1/2 pathway, using a specific inhibitor, prevented the cigarette smoke-induced loss of CFTR protein in the human bronchial epithelial cells Calu-3 and 16HBE41o-. The involvement of this latter MAPK pathway in CFTR regulation was further confirmed by treating 16HBE41o-cells with phorbol myristate acetate (PMA), an Erk1/2 activator, leading to the loss of CFTR protein. Since Erk1/2 activity has been reported to be elevated in the lung of COPD patients, we propose that targeting this MAPK pathway could restore CFTR expression and function. Previous work showed that CFTR interacts with AMP (adenosine 5'monophosphate) at a site distinct from its two well characterized ATP (adenosine 5'-triphosphate) binding-sites. The data further indicated that in the presence of AMP, CFTR adenylate kinase activity (ATP+AMPÄ2 ADP) is coupled to channel activity. Ap 5 A (P 1 ,P 5 -di(adenosine-5′) pentaphosphate) and Ap 4 A (P 1 ,P 4 -di(adenosine-5′) tetraphosphate) are compounds that inhibit the activity of adenylate kinases and CFTR gating. Both molecules contain two adenosine groups connected by a phosphate linker allowing them to bind simultaneously to an ATP and an AMP binding-site of an adenylate kinase. We hypothesized that Ap 5 A inhibits CFTR channel opening by interacting simultaneously with an ATP-and an AMP-site. To test this hypothesis, we labeled CFTR with a radioactive 8-azido-photoreactive analogue of ATP, [α 32 P]8-N 3 -ATP, in the absence and presence of non-radioactive ATP or Ap 5 A. We then partially proteolized CFTR and fractionated the fragments on 16% tricine gels. We found that photolabeling of some CFTR fragments was prevented by both ATP and Ap 5 A. In other fragments labeling was prevented only by ATP. These results suggest that Ap 5 A competed with ATP, but not at all ATP binding-sites. To identify the ATP-site with which Ap 5 A interacts, we studied two CFTR variants with the single amino acid substitutions A462F and S1248F. These mutations introduced a phenylalanine residue into the phosphate-binding loop of either ATP-site 1 (A462F) or site 2 (S1248F). Therefore, the interaction of ATP (and Ap 5 A) with one ATP-site is impaired in these mutants: mutation A462F interferes with binding to ATP-site 1 and mutation S1248F with binding to ATP-site 2. Both CFTR mutants exhibited low channel open probabilities. Ap 5 A inhibited channel opening in A462F CFTR but not in S1248F CFTR, suggesting that Ap 5 A interacts with ATP-site 2. To test whether Ap 5 A interacts also with an AMPsite, we photolabeled CFTR with [β 3 32 P]8-N 3 -Ap 4 A, [γ 32 P]8-N 3 -ATP, or [α 32 P]8-N 3 -AMP and then studied labeling of proteolytic CFTR fragments. We found that [β 3 32 P]8-N 3 -Ap 4 A labeled a subset of those fragments that were also labeled by [γ 32 P]8-N 3 -ATP. In addition, we identified a proteolytic digestion product that was labelled by [β 3 32 P]8-N 3 -Ap 4 A and [α 32 P]8-N 3 -AMP but not by [γ 32 P]8-N 3 -ATP, indicating that this CFTR fragment was part of the AMP binding-site. Non-radioactive ATP prevented labeling of this fragment by [β 3 32 P]8-N 3 -Ap 4 A but not by [α 32 P]8-N 3 -AMP. These findings confirm that CFTR contains a binding-site for AMP that is distinct from the ATP binding-sites. The data further indicate that photolabeling of the AMP-site by [β 3 32 P]8-N 3 -Ap 4 A required simultaneous interaction of this compound with an ATP-site. Thus the results suggest that Ap 4 A/Ap 5 A interact with CFTR in a similar manner as with other adenylate kinases. Since our previous work showed that adding AMP or AMP analogues can increase or decrease CFTR current, identifying key amino acids that are involved in the interaction of AMP with CFTR may aid development of therapeutics useful for treating cystic fibrosis. Supported by CFF, Francis Family Foundation, and HHMI. CFTR misfolding and subsequent degradation constitute a primary pathophysiological defect in most cases of cystic fibrosis. The most common mutation, F508del, is located in the first nucleotide binding domain (NBD1, residues 389-673) where it confers a temperature sensitive phenotype to CFTR, decreases thermal stability of purified NBD1, and interferes with channel gating by disrupting intramolecular interactions between NBD1 and the second membrane spanning domain. CFTR NBD1 consists of three subdomains: an N-terminal ATP binding subdomain (residues 389-495), an alpha-helical subdomain (residues 495-564) and a mixed alpha, beta-sheet F1-type ATPase core. CFTR NBD1 also contains a unique unstructured regulatory insertion (RI) (residues 405-436) of uncertain function and a C-terminal regulatory extension (RE) (residues 656-673), the latter of which controls channel gating in response to phosphorylation. Recent studies have shown that RI deletion partially restores maturation, stability, and function of full-length F508del CFTR in cells. This suggests that the RI, located within the N-terminal subdomain, is functionally and structurally coupled to the folding defect induced by F508del in the alpha-subdomain. Using a FRET-based approach, we recently showed that NBD1 folding is initiated co-translationally by rapid compaction of the N-terminal ATP binding subdomain. We therefore examined whether deletion of the RI might affect subdomain structure and/or alter the NBD1 co-translational folding pathway. To test this hypothesis, a donor, fluorophore (eCFP) was placed at the N-terminus of NBD1 (residue 389) via an in-frame N-terminal fusion. A small acceptor dye ([N-6-(7-nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazole]-Lys]) was co-translationally incorporated into the nascent chain at residue 450, using a synthetic suppressor tRNA. Because residue 450 is located in close proximity to the eCFP fusion site in the NBD1 crystal structure, the FRET efficiency provides a measure of the folded state of the N-terminus subdomain in the nascent polypeptide. As expected, RI deletion had no effect on FRET for nascent chains truncated prior to subdomain folding, i.e. residue 460 (FRET <10% for WT and RI deletion). In contrast, after the subdomain had exited the ribosome (truncation 550), RI deletion increased FRET from 45% to ~55%. This implies that the N-terminus subdomain achieves a more compact conformation in the absence of RI. FRET was also measured in the presence of a monoclonal antibody whose binding epitope overlaps with the RI (L12B4, residues 386-412) or a control antibody (M3A7). Addition of L12B4 (but not control) to the ribosome-bound subdomain resulted in a 33% decrease in the relative FRET efficiency (from 45% to 30%). These results suggest that RI structure induces subtle changes to the folded state of the NBD1 N-terminal subdomain. Effects of RI deletion on FRET efficiency to other regions of NBD1 are under investigation. (Supported by CFFT, NIH, and the Manpei Suzuki Diabetes Foundation.)  Mardari, G. 1 ; Guggino, W.B. 1 ; Cebotaru, L. 1,2 1. Physiology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2. Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA Human syntaxin 8, a member of the t-SNARE receptor family, was originally cloned using the R domain of CFTR as bait in a yeast-two-hybrid screen of human fetal lung library (Thoreau et al. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Comm. 257:577-583, 1999) . Subsequent experiments showed that STX8 is involved in the post-Golgi, endosomal recycling pathway of wt CFTR. Over expression of STX8 has been shown to both disrupt the recycling of CFTR and inhibit chloride channel currents (Bilan et. al. J. Cell Sci. 117:1923 -1935 , 2004 . The aim of our study is to understand whether STX8 plays a role in the processing and trafficking of ∆F508-CFTR. To accomplish this we cotranfected STX8 and ∆F508-CFTR into Cos7 cells and noticed a dosedependent decrease in the steady state levels of the B band. Over expression did not cause any rescue of ∆F508-CFTR to C band. To study this further, we determined the effect of cycloheximide (CHX) treatment to assess the rate of degradation of STX8 and its impact on ∆F508-CFTR degradation. Our results showed that STX8 is a long-lived protein which is relatively stable over a 24 hr CHX treatment period. Treating cells with the proteasome inhibitor, MG132 showed that STX8 is slowly degraded in the proteasome. Lysosomal inhibition with E64 did not have any effect suggesting that STX8 is not degraded in the lysosome. CHX treatment as expected showed that ∆F508-CFTR is rapidly degraded. The rate of degradation of ∆F508-CFTR was not noticeably changed when ∆F508-CFTR and STX8 were coexpressed. Inhibiting the proteasome with MG132 caused a significant increase in the B band of ∆F508-CFTR in the absence of STX8. This increase in the B band of ∆F508-CFTR following proteasome inhibition still occurred in ∆F508-CFTR and STX8 co-transfected cells. Our data shows that STX8 does affect the steady-state levels of the B band of ∆F508-CFTR but does not affect its degradation in the proteasome. The data suggests that STX8 does play a role in the processing of ∆F508-CFTR in the ER in addition to its known effects on recycling of wt-CFTR at the plasma membrane. One possibility is that STX8 might be involved in the early biogenesis of ∆F508-CFTR. Funded by CFFT Folding Consortium. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein is comprised of two transmembrane spanning domains (TMDs), two nucleotide binding domains (NBDs) and a unique regulatory region (R). The domains obtain cotranslational structure that is required to interact with the other domains as they are produced and folded. The first domain translated, TMD1, forms extensive interdomain interactions with the other domains in CFTR homology models. In TMD1, long intracellular loops extend into the cytoplasm and interact with both NBDs via coupling helices and with TMD2 via transmembrane spans (TMs). In this study, mutations within this domain, either in a TM span or in the cytosolic ICLs, only become apparent in constructs containing different CFTR domains, suggesting they interfere with specific steps in the hierarchical folding of CFTR. TM1 CF-causing mutants, G85E and G91R, directly affect TMD1, whereas most ICL1 and ICL2 mutant effects became apparent only after TMD2 production. A single mutant in ICL2 altered levels only in the pres-ence of NBD2, suggesting it perturbs the ICL2-NBD2 interface. Notably, mutation of hydrophobic residues in the ICL coupling helices increased levels of pre-TMD2 biogenic intermediates, but caused ER accumulation in the presence of TMD2. This result suggests a tradeoff between transient stability during translation and final structure. NBD2 increased the efficiency of mutant trafficking from the ER, consistent with stabilization of the intact CFTR. While the G85E and G91R mutants in TM1 have immediately detectable effects, the influence of most of the studied mutants are apparent only after production of TMD2, suggesting this intermediate is a major point of recognition by protein quality control. Supported by NIH (to AP and PJT) and CFF (to PJT). Ostedgaard, L. 1 ; Welsh, M. Studies of recombinant CFTR showed that the most common CF-associated mutation, ∆F508, disrupts processing of the protein. The mutant protein is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and degraded, preventing glycosylation at the Golgi and maturation to the plasma membrane. Like human CFTR-∆F508 (h∆F), pig CFTR-∆F508 (p∆F) was mostly degraded. However, some p∆F escaped the ER and was processed to the fully glycosylated protein. Moreover, when expressed in a CF airway epithelial model or when studied in the airway of CFTR ∆F508/∆F508 pigs, p∆F generated a small amount of transepithelial Cltransport, suggesting that some of the ∆F508 protein reached the apical surface. To begin to understand the basis for the small proportion of p∆F that matures, we did several studies to compare the biosynthesis of recombinant human and pig CFTR. We found that the disappearance of the band B form of human and pig wild-type CFTR and CFTR-∆F508 did not differ. However, maturation of pig wild-type CFTR (pWT) was greater than human wild-type CFTR (hWT). Furthermore, maturation of h∆F to band C was less than 2%, whereas maturation of p∆F was 15-20%. Processing of h∆F is temperature-dependent; reducing the temperature to 26°C caused a 4-5-fold increase in maturation of h∆F. In contrast, lowering the temperature did not increase the amount of p∆F band C. Disruption of the Golgi by Brefeldin A (BFA) prevents exit of protein from ER. In both hWT and pWT, a portion of band B accumulates in the ER after BFA treatment, the same proportion that processes to mature band C. In h∆F, there is no such accumulation. Unlike h∆F, a portion of p∆F accumulates in the ER, approximately the same proportion of the protein that becomes fully glycosylated. We also compared the trypsin sensitivity of pig and human wildtype and CFTR-∆F508 in membrane vesicles. In contrast to the marked sensitivity of h∆F to proteolysis, p∆F was only slightly more susceptible to trypsin than pWT. These in vitro studies indicate that a small portion of p∆F forms a relatively protease-resistant conformation that is less susceptible to degradation than h∆F. This stable form of p∆F is competent to leave the ER and enter the Golgi. Moreover, these data suggest that this small proportion of p∆F is able to overcome a step in ER processing that is temperature sensitive for h∆F. In addition, our studies suggest the feasibility of using differences in human and pig CFTR sequence to guide us to targeted therapies that could improve processing of human CFTR-∆F508. CFTR transgene expression in CF airway epithelial cells is characterized by a gradual decline over time. To circumvent this, novel strategies that prolong CFTR activity at critical threshold levels above 6-10% are therefore needed. Brief hyperthermic treatment (BHT; 41-43°C for 20-60 min) of the airways has been used in clinical studies and is known to induce heat shock protein 72 (iHsp72). Recent studies suggest that BHT might affect the DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs), and a regulatory link between HDAC7 and CFTR was described in CF bronchial epithelial cells (CFBE41o-; Hutt et al. 2010) . The goals of this study were i) to examine the utility of BHT as an enhancer of episomal CFTR expression using the pCEP4-CFTR plasmid, and ii) to quantify the efficacy of BHT as an enhancer of CFTR-mediated Cl currents in comparison to inhibitors of DNMTs and HDACs. CFBE41o-monolayers were grown on Snapwell inserts, exposed to BHT, and allowed to recover at 37°C for increasing time periods. Measurements of CFTR Cl currents (I Cl ) were carried out in the presence of a Cl gradient in Ussing chambers at specific time points. BHT induced time-dependent increases in iHsp72 protein expression and forskolin/VRT-532 stimulated I Cl (1. 4, 2.7, 4.0, and 4.7-fold after 2, 4, 6, and 24 hours, respectively) . BHT effects on I Cl were validated in three CFBE41o-clones complemented with the wtCFTR cDNA open reading frame (ORF; 4.7 kb) and in one CFBE41o-clone with the entire wtCFTR cDNA (ORF plus the 5' and 3' untranslated regions, UTR; ~6.2kb) inserted into the pCEP4 expression plasmid. Both the 4.7 kb and 6.2 kb constructs responded to BHT, and I Cl peaked at 161±30 µA/cm 2 (4.7 kb) and 386±30 µA/cm 2 (6.2 kb) suggesting that untranslated regions in the 6.2 kb CFTR sequence provide a 2-fold higher efficacy for the correction of CFTR activity in CFBE41o-cells. Treatment with actinomycin D abolished the response to BHT suggesting that BHT affects CFTR transcription. Conversely, exposure of the 6.2 kb clone to 5-aza-dC, a DNMT inhibitor, resulted in a time-dependent activation of I Cl similar to BHT, and I Cl peaked at 301±43µA/cm 2 . Combined treatment of BHT and 5-aza-dC had no additive effects, suggesting that BHT and 5-aza-dC act through a similar mechanism. Treatment of the 6.2 kb clone with HDAC inhibitors for 24 hours was less effective than either BHT or 5-aza-dC, and I Cl peaked at 166±14 µA/cm 2 (Trichostatin A), 135±6.0 µA/cm 2 (SAHA), and 75±1.0 µA/cm 2 (Scriptaid). In summary, the efficacy to enhance forskolin/VRT-532-stimulated I Cl was BHT (4.2-fold) > 5-aza-dC (3.3-fold) > trichostatin A (1.8-fold) > SAHA (1.5-fold) > Scriptaid (no effect). In conclusion, it appears that BHT and 5-aza-dC induce changes in CMV promoter methylation that lead to enhanced CFTR transgene expression. Furthermore, these studies suggest that the use of BHT may provide a novel means to enhance correction of CFTR function during gene transfer. Supported by CFF, CFRI, PACFI, Elizabeth Nash Foundation, Folger Foundation. Molinski, S. 1,2 ; Huan, L. 2 CFTR is a plasma membrane phosphoglycoprotein, belonging to the ATP-Binding Cassette transporter superfamily. CFTR functions as an ATPand PKA-dependent chloride channel, regulating chloride ion flux across apical membranes of polarized epithelial cells. Mutations in CFTR cause cystic fibrosis disease; the major disease-causing mutation, F508del, is located in the first nucleotide binding domain (NBD1). This and many other (>1800) mutations affect protein folding and channel gating, presumably by destabilizing interdomain interfaces; the NBD1:intracellular loop 4 (ICL4) interface is implicated in F508del. Current small molecule 'correctors' lead to partial rescue of the processing defect with some functional (but inefficient) expression at the cell surface, and although the mechanism of action is poorly understood, the NBD1:ICL4 interface is likely repaired to some extent. Consequently, there is a need to understand the roles of this and other interdomain interactions in the biogenesis and functional expression of CFTR. Functionally important interdomain interfaces include: NBD1:ICL4, NBD1:2, NBD1:2:ICL1:2:4, ICL3:Regulatory-domain, and membrane spanning domain (MSD) 1:2. Identification of other interfaces along the pore axis of CFTR is desired. Upon inspection of Sav1866-based atomic homology models of CFTR, and using HOLE software, previously unexplored ICL interfaces (ICL1:2, ICL1:3) were predicted to play important roles in biosynthesis and gating. Further analysis identified a cluster of hydrophobic residues comprised of six ICL amino acids (all of which are located in the helical extensions, two of which are associated with disease) that may be involved in gating. These residues include: Ile177 (ICL1), Val181 (ICL1), Leu259 (ICL2), Val260 (ICL2), Leu973 (ICL3) and Val1056 (ICL4). Individually mutating Ile177 and Leu259, two residues which form the narrowest constriction in the putative permeation pathway, did not affect maturation (as shown by immunoblots), but the double substitution of Ile177Ala/Leu259Ala decreased the rate of functional activation by 40%, presumably by altering the ICL1:2 interface, as measured by a cell-based iodide efflux assay using the halide-sensitive fluorophore 6-methoxy-N- (3sulfopropyl) quinolinium. Substitution of the ICL3 residue Leu973 with disease-causing Pro, but not disease-causing Phe, affected CFTR processing, suggesting that a conserved residue is required at this position for proper assembly and maintenance of alpha-helical structure. Further characterization of these and other ICL mutants is currently in progress. By understanding how the ICLs transmit signals between the MSDs and NBDs via interdomain interfaces, gating mechanisms will become more apparent, and could potentially allow for the design of next generation correctors to treat cystic fibrosis by improving the folding/assembly of mutant CFTR. Elucidation of such molecular events would contribute not only to our understanding of CFTR activity, but also to our understanding of channels and transporters in general. This work is supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and Cystic Fibrosis Canada. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are important contributors to protein biogenesis and function. CFTR in particular is known to be regulated by multiple PTMs, including glycosylation, phosphorylation, and ubiquitination. The functional significance and specific CFTR residues responsible for the majority of PTMs within CFTR are not known. We recently employed a combination of tandem (MS/MS) and multiple reaction ion monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry using 4000 QTRAP and 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometers (AB SCIEX, Concorde, Ontario, Canada) to globally identify specific positions of PTM within full length CFTR. Recombinant His-CFTR was expressed at high levels using an inducible teton lentivirus-based strategy in HEK293 cells. CFTR was purified from culture (10 liter bioreactors) using nickel affinity chromatography, fragmented by enzymatic digestion, and scanned for sites of modification. Using a variety of proteolytic enzymes and a source of CFTR comprising both properly folded and unfolded conformations, we achieved coverage of approximately 72% of the full length gene product. The proteomic survey revealed locations of numerous PTMs, including several modifications not previously reported for CFTR, such as methylation, ethylation, and palmitoylation. The analysis verified CFTR phosphorylation at S660, S686, S700, S712, S737, and S795, and also identified novel phosphate attachments at T717, S1444, and S1456. A putative site of CFTR ubiquitination, a modification known to participate in degradation from both the ER and plasma membrane compartments, was observed at K688. These results describe the first comprehensive analysis of PTMs within CFTR and will help elucidate mechanisms that govern ion channel trafficking and function. Supported by CFF and NIH. Lipid modifications are known to play a crucial role during biogenesis of numerous membrane proteins, including receptor molecules, epithelial ion channels, and members of the ABC gene family. S-palmitoylation is a reversible lipid modification defined by the addition of palmitate, a 16-carbon saturated fatty acid, to sulfhydryl groups of cysteine residues. Using a mass spectrometry (MS) approach, we have established that CFTR undergoes S-palmitoylation at two positions: cysteine 524 (located within NBD1) and cysteine 1395 (in the C-terminal region of the protein). Metabolic labeling with [ 3 H]-palmitic acid was confirmed in both wildtype and F508del mutant forms of CFTR. Blocking attachment of palmitic acid with 2-bromopalmitate (2-BP) decreased levels of mature (Band C) CFTR in HeLa, HEK293, and CFBE (cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial) cells. In addition, anion transport as measured by the fluorescent indicator 6-methoxy-N-(3sulfopropyl)quinolinium (SPQ) and studies of CFBE monolayers in the Ussing chamber showed significantly less CFTR surface activity following treatment with 2-BP. Treatment with 2-BP also blocked CFTR maturation as judged by [ 35 S]-pulse chase. While disruption of C1395 by replacement with alanine had no measurable effect on steady state levels of Band C, CFTR encoding C524A demonstrated a 90% decrease in the mature glycoform. C524 is located in the canonical α helical subdomain of NBD1, arguing against a role in palmitate-dependent membrane association. Moreover, C524A misprocessing was partially rescued by low temperature in a manner similar to correction of F508del, indicating that this substitution may have direct effects on NBD folding. In either case, our results indicate that palmitoylation contributes to CFTR biogenesis as part of a previously unrecognized step in the maturational pathway. Identification of additional palmitoylation sites in CFTR by mass spectrometry will be necessary to clarify the role of this side chain attachment during CF pathogenesis. Supported by CFF and NIH. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) interacts with EBP50/NHERF1 via a C-terminal Post-synaptic density 95/Disc-Large/Zona occludens-1 (PDZ) binding motif (1). Proteins with PDZ domain-interacting motifs have well-established roles in protein scaffolding at the cell surface and are proposed to act as cis-acting determinants directing the molecular sorting of transmembrane cargo from endosomes to the plasma membrane. Recently, several groups have shown that overexpression of NHERF1 can localize mutant CFTR to apical membrane suggesting a potential therapy for CF (2) (3) (4) . To assess whether other regions of CFTR interact with NHERF1, we have been investigating how CFTR bearing the S1455X mutation that deletes the PDZ binding motif partially localizes to apical membrane. The present study was conducted to investigate whether NHERF1 overexpression affects the localization of S1455X CFTR. NHERF1 was transiently overexpressed in MDCK cells stably expressing GFP tagged S1455X CFTR. Plasma membrane proteins were biotinylated at 4°C using EZ-Link-Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin and cells were warmed to 37°C for 2 .5, 5, 7.5, or 10 min to load endocytic vesicles with biotinylated proteins, including CFTR with Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin. There was no significant difference observed in the rate of endocytosis of S1455X. To evaluate recycling, cells were warmed again to 37°C at different time points to allow endocytosed and biotinylated CFTR to recycle to the plasma membrane. It was observed that overexpression of NHERF1 increased the recycling of internalized S1455X CFTR to the apical membrane. This finding was consistent with observations by confocal microscopy where the abundance of S1455X CFTR on the apical surface was increased in cells with NHERF1 overexpression. Since PDZ binding motif is absent in S1455X CFTR, these results suggest that NHERF1 overexpression and increased recycling operates via interaction with sequences other than the PDZ binding motif. We are currently exploring whether an internal C terminal sequence (1417EENKVR1422) previously proposed by our group to interact with NHERF1 (5) may play a role in the increased recycling. Elucidation of mechanisms that promote the recycling of CFTR may provide a path to increase the abundance of CFTR mutants at the cell surface. ( The YFP-based iodide flux assay has been widely deployed in highthroughput screening (HTS) approaches for small molecule CFTR modulators. The most robust cell line developed for this assay is the Fisher Rat Thyroid (FRT) cell, transfected with halide-sensitive YFP and CFTR F508del (Pedemonte et al., 2005, JCI 115; Sui et al., 2010, ADDT 8) . The use of FRT cells in this assay is inevitably associated with strong concerns of potential false positives and negatives in discovery lead identification relative to human cell models. To advance the HTS capability with human epithelial cell models in the drug discovery program at Flatley Discovery Lab (FDL), two human epithelial cell lines were adapted to the iodide flux HTS assay: A549 cells stably transfected with YFP and CFTR F508del (Pedemonte et al., 2010, AJP 298) , and human cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial cells (CFBE) transiently transfected with YFP and CFTR F508del. The A549 cells used at FDL have been sub-cloned from the A549 cells that were kindly provided by Dr. Galietta (see above). Optimized A549 cell assay protocols were developed for the Hamamatsu 384-well plate reader FDSS-6000. For CFBE cells, a suitable stably transfected cell line has not been available. We introduced a high volume transient transfection method (STX by MaxCyte) to transfect CFBE cells with halide-sensitive YFP and CFTR-F508del for the HTS assay. This method allows plasmid titration in order to achieve desirable expression level of each protein, and to optimize the expression ratio of YFP and CFTR-F508del for best assay signals ( Figure 1 ). Viability of the transfected cells is over 90%, and the target expression levels were consistent across experiments and for variable freezing durations. The high transfection volume and consistent transfection parameters make this transient transfection method a suitable approach for HTS. Data generated from FRT, A549, and from CFBE cells against a set of selected compounds are compared, showing the benefits of using human epithelial cells in the HTS assay. Advancing the iodide flux assay on HTS platforms from Fisher Rat Thyroid cells to human cells is a significant step towards the ideal CF cellular model. The human cell-based iodide flux assay is currently the primary HTS assay in the CFTR modulator screening campaign at FDL. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rosalind Franklin University, North Chicago, IL, USA; 2. Physiology and Biophysics, Rosalind Franklin University, North Chicago, IL, USA Cystic fibrosis is caused by a loss in the expression of a chloride channel, CFTR. Of the patients with cystic fibrosis, 90% have a 3bp deletion, which eliminates codon 508 (F508del). This mutation alters CFTR folding such that CFTR does not get to the plasma membrane, but instead, is degraded by endoplasmic reticulum associated protein degradation (ERAD). While the F508del mutation is commonly responsible for cystic fibrosis, little is known on why the mutation alters the folding of CFTR or how it can be corrected by a rational approach. The results in this study demonstrate that the expression and localization of both wild type and F508del CFTR are dramatically dependent on which synonymous codons are used in the open reading frame of CFTR. There is a striking dependence on the synonymous codon usage on the total amount of CFTR expressed in the cell, the trafficking to the plasma membrane, and on the level of functional CFTR for both the wild type and mutant, F508del, forms of CFTR. Surprisingly, by optimizing the synonymous codons, we are able to express the F508del form of CFTR on the plasma membrane of HEK293 cells at levels that are comparable to that observed by expression of wild type CFTR using the native codons. Constructs were designed using the Codon Adaptation Index (CAI), a measure of synonymous codons used in a gene, in reference to codons used in genes whose proteins are highly expressed. This report describes the results from a number of constructs including two that use the codon sequence of endogenous/native, wild type or F508del CFTR and two that that are strongly biased for high expression (high CAI). The constructs were integrated into a single site using the "Flip-in" system in HEK293 cells. Western blot analysis indicates expression of wild type CFTR increased by 15 fold for the hCAI constructs as compared to the native codons. Surprisingly, expression of CFTR F508del in the hCAI codons resulted in expression that was 2 fold higher than that observed for expression of wild type CFTR using native codons. Expression of codon optimized CFTR F508del in FRT cells showed a 20 fold increase in activity, as measured by forskolin induced current, in comparison to expression of CFTR F508del using the native codons. Analysis of the ratio of the relative amount of CFTR to the level of mRNA (Translation Efficiency, TE) indicates that the TE of the codon optimized CFTR F508del increased from near 0, to 0.075, as compared to a TE of 1 for wild type CFTR. Analysis of the RNA levels by real time PCR indicates that the level of mRNA closely tracks the level of protein expression, however the half-lives of the mRNA does not vary (t1/2 = 4hrs). While transcription is not expected to differ, we are currently undertaking nuclear run-on experiments to assess the promoter strengths for all the constructs. Overall, these results have profound implications on the coupling of translation and folding and on the effect of codon usage on translation and transcription in the mammalian cell. Supported by grants from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (MUELLER08P0) and National Institutes of Health (R21-HL094951). The airway mucus gel performs a critical function in defending the respiratory tract from pathogenic and environmental challenges. In cystic fibrosis (CF), overproduction of mucus with abnormal transport properties is an important pathologic feature. Early changes in CF are characterized by adherence of mucus plaques to the airway epithelium, blocking small airways and providing an environment within which bacteria can flourish. This results in chronic inflammation and a vicious cycle of airway damage and mucus hypersecretion, key aspects of morbidity and mortality. The development of effective reagents targeted at reducing mucus adherence in CF is an important unmet clinical need. However, our current understanding of mucin biology is incomplete, particularly with regards to mucin assembly and how they are organized within mucus. To address these issues we have analyzed MUC5B in apical secretions and lysates from normal human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) grown at air-liquid interface, as well as from saliva. Recent work has identified different conformations of MUC5B following granular release suggesting a maturation process (1). During maturation of the related glycoprotein von-Willebrand factor, the N-terminus undergoes proteolytic cleavage in order for vWF to attain its correct conformation (2) . To investigate processing, MUC5B was extracted from HBE cell apical secretions and lysates, purified by density gradient centrifugation and tryptic peptides were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). The results identified peptides throughout the MUC5B polypeptide, including peptides from the N-and C-terminal domains. This suggests there is no evidence for the vWF-like processing mechanism in MUC5B maturation. However, the MS/MS analyses are non-quantitative and a proportion of molecules may be proteolytically modified. Work is ongoing to develop a quantitative MS approach to measure the proportion of MUC5B molecules that are intact and/or processed. Additionally, an important, and largely under-researched, aspect of airway mucus is the native structure and organization of mucins within the mucus gel. At least 250 proteins are present in airway mucus (3) , but how these components come together to result in functional mucus is not known. To investigate the organization of MUC5B within mucus, we have used cryo-electron tomography to generate a 3-D model of a MUC5B mucin network in its native physiological state. Using saliva, we have developed an effective method for sample preparation. Native mucin-complexes are subjected to centrifugal concentration using a 1MDa molecular weight cut-off centrifuge filter. After filtration, MUC5B is retained above the filter along with the majority of the lower molecular weight proteins in the secretion, indicating they are associated with MUC5B in mucus. Preliminary cryo-EM data on MUC5B-protein complexes reveals a network of interlinked fibres. We are currently using MUC5B-domain-specific antibodies in combination with cryo-EM to obtain new insight into the molecular organisation of the mucins within this network. Awadalla, M. 1, 4 ; Fuld, M. 3 ; Choi, J. 2 ; Miyawaki, S. 2 ; Hoffman, E. 3 ; Reynolds, K. 4 ; Lin, C. 2 ; Stoltz, D.A. 1 1. Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Hospital and Clinic, Iowa City, IA, USA; 2. Mechanical engineering, University of Iowa Hospital and Clinic, Iowa City, IA, USA; 3. radiology, University of Iowa Hospital and Clinic, Iowa City, IA, USA; 4. biomedical and electronic engineering, Flinders University, Adelaide, SA, Australia The loss of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductor regulator (CFTR) function causes the genetic disease cystic fibrosis (CF) . Despite the advancement in many areas of CF research, the pathogenesis of CF airway disease is still not well understood. This is, in part, due to the lack of an animal model with lung disease that resembles human CF disease. Therefore, a CF pig model was recently developed. Within months after birth, the CF pig developed lung disease similar to that observed in humans with CF. Interestingly, at birth CF pig airways were less circular than controls, had smaller diameters, had irregularly appearing cartilage rings, and contained abnormal appearing smooth muscle bundles. We hypothesized that these early airway structural abnormalities will affect airflow patterns and particle deposition in the CF airways. An in-house computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code was applied to study the effect of airway structural abnormality in CF newborn pigs on airflow pattern and particle deposition. The code uses parallel large-eddy simulation (LES) technique, which solves filtered continuity and incompressible Navier-Stokes equation. The two airway geometric models of a newborn CF and non-CF pig, were reconstructed from multi-row detector CT (MDCT: Siemens Sensation 64) image datasets. After analyzing the two geometric models we found that CF airways were less circular and smaller in diameter compared to the non-CF airways. When airflow in the upper airways was simulated using CFD the CF upper airways exhibited high turbulence intensity and high wall shear stress caused by the vortices created in the glottis. Moreover, in the CF airways we observed higher airflow velocity, and air pressure near the airway wall causing high wall shear stress compared to non-CF airways. We mathematically modeled airway particle deposition by releasing 1 µm particles evenly into the larynx above the glottis. We found that 24% of the particles went to the porpoise lobe in the CF lung compared to only 5% in the non-CF lung. In addition, we observed that in CF lung the number of particles deposited in the porpoise lobe was higher than the number of particles deposited in the left and right lung. Interestingly, in older CF pigs the lung disease tends to occur in the porpoise lobe. These data show that the CF airway structural abnormality has a significant effect on airflow pattern in the lung, and subsequently on particle deposition. The findings from this model suggest that early structural abnormality in the newborn CF airways might contribute to CF disease pathogenesis and be an important determinant of the regional distribution of CF lung disease. It has been recognized that mucociliary clearance is an integral part of lung defense. However, our understanding of the mechanism which regulates ciliary activities has been limited by our inability to capture ciliary motion and interactions between cilia and mucus in intact epithelia and in three dimensions. Current imaging modalities that study ciliary motion are either destructive (SEM) or lack anatomical information (video microscopy). We hypothesize that visualizing cilia motion and mucus transport in intact respiratory epithelia in three dimensions could yield new findings in a variety of important topics such as ciliary motion patterns and mechanosensitivity of respiratory epithelial cells. µOCT is an optical microscopic technique capable of providing videorate cross-sectional images at the sub-cellular level. We have developed a desktop µOCT system with spatial resolution 2 µm x 2 µm x 1 µm (x,y,z) and a focal depth of 200 µm. The imaging speed is from 32 ~128 fps. Previously we demonstrated that µOCT can be used to measure ciliary beat frequency, airway surface liquid depth, mucus transport rate, and periciliary layer depth, and demonstrated clear difference between CF and non-CF cultures and tissues. Here we show that using our µOCT system resting phase, recovery phase and effective phase in a ciliary beat cycle can be clearly recognized and quantified and is abnormal in CF, with a greater proportion of cilia in the effective position (30%, P<0.05). In addition, we observed that respiratory epithelial cells dynamically respond to mucus loads anticipated to occur in CF and other lung diseases by increasing CBF upon small degrees of periciliary layer compression by mucus in both fully differentiated primary human bronchial epithelial cells (13%, P<0.005) and swine tracheal tissue (15%, P<0.005). In contrast, CF epithelia do not respond to mucus loads, likely due to interdigitation of mucus within the cilia that prevents increased CBF. Using dual imaging with Furo-2 to simultaneously detect intracellular Ca 2+ , we further identify that CBF acceleration in response to PCL compression is calcium dependent, providing a mechanistic basis for autoregulation of CBF. Using µOCT to monitor ciliary motion and the mechanosensitivity of the cell in an intact mucociliary system, we have identified a new mechanism that allows normal epithelia to respond to mucus loads and is dysfunctional in CF. Future development of a catheter could allow three or fourdimensional imaging (three spatial dimensions and time) in vivo and provide new avenues for improving our understanding of activities of the motile cilia and the mechanisms by which mucociliary transport is disrupted in CF. In cystic fibrosis (CF) intestine, abnormal mucus accumulation leads to compromised innate immunity, impairment of absorption and obstructive disease. The major pathological features are goblet cell hyperplasia and accumulation of mucus with abnormal viscoelasticity. Both these features are recapitulated in the intestine of Cftr-null mice. Previous studies have shown that the small intestine of Cftr-null mice have abnormal populations of gram-negative bacteria, increased Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling and low-grade inflammation (Clarke et al., Am. J. Physiol.: 286: G1050, 2004 Norkina, et al., Am. J. Physiol.: 286: G1032, 2004 Canale-Zambrano et al., Am. J. Physiol. 299: 381, 2010) . Therefore, we questioned whether goblet cell hyperplasia and abnormal goblet cell function in the CF intestine result from the abnormal endogenous environment of the intestine or are intrinsic properties of the Cftr-null epithelium. To investigate these questions, we compared goblet cell number and TLR-2/4 expression between wild-type and Cftr-null littermate mice in vivo and in regenerating primary 3D gel cultures of the intestinal epithelium (i.e., 'enteroids'). Sterile enteroid culture provides regenerating intestinal epithelium in the absence of luminal bacteria, inflammatory elements or systemic factors. Consistent with previous reports of TLR-4, Western blot analysis of freshly isolated intestinal epithelium indicated that TLR-2 was significantly up-regulated in the Cftr-null as compared to WT intestine (n =6 littermate pairs). Goblet cell counts of paraffin-embedded histological sections stained with PAS/AB were significantly greater in Cftr-null as compare to WT intestine, especially in the lower villus epithelium (n = 7 littermate pairs). Examination of the sections also revealed defective degranulation of Cftr-null goblet cells as indicated by the retention of PAS-positive masses within goblet cells that extended into the intestinal lumen. In contrast to the in vivo studies, goblet cell numbers, TLR-2 protein and TLR4 protein expression were not significantly different between WT and Cftr-null enteroid (n = 3, 8 and 5 littermate pairs, respec-tively). However, real-time video microscopy of Cftr-null enteroids during treatment with 100 µM carbachol revealed defective mucus release as indicated by mucus strands retained within the goblet cell body and extending into the crypt lumen to form refractile blebs. In WT enteroids, goblet cell degranulation occurred rapidly with brief "flashes" of refractivity within the crypt lumen. We conclude from these studies that goblet cell hyperplasia of the CF intestine is secondary to the abnormal endogenous environment (bacterial flora, inflammation) whereas defective mucus release by goblet cells is an intrinsic property of the Cftr-null epithelium. Supported by CFF and NIH. Abnormalities of airway surface liquid (ASL) are hypothesized to contribute to cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease. We previously found that newborn CFTR -/pigs manifest a host defense defect against bacteria, and with time they spontaneously develop lung disease like that in humans with CF. Therefore, we asked if CF pigs have abnormal ASL. We assessed ASL viscosity in differentiated primary cultures of porcine airway epithelia by measuring fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) of FITCdextran. Diffusion of FITC-dextran was slower in ASL of CFTR -/than wildtype epithelia, suggesting an elevated ASL viscosity. Previous studies suggested that an altered ASL pH and/or HCO 3 concentration might change mucus properties. Electrical measurements across airway epithelia revealed that CFTR -/epithelia had markedly reduced HCO 3 secretion. We also measured ASL pH in differentiated cultures of airway epithelia using SNARFdextran and found that CFTR -/epithelia had a reduced pH. Methacholinestimulated ASL removed from the trachea and analyzed with a pH microsensor also revealed a reduced pH in CFTR -/animals. Likewise, pH was reduced in the lumen of the gallbladder of newborn CFTR -/pigs, another organ that shows abnormal mucus. Calculations of the HCO 3 concentration suggest a reduced concentration in CFTR -/-ASL and gallbladder contents. These results suggest that CF ASL has an increased viscosity that might be due to a reduced pH and/or HCO 3 concentration. Supported by CFF, NHLBI and HHMI. Lung infections are the primary cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF). The airway possesses several mechanisms of innate immunity by which foreign pathogens are cleared or killed. However, it remains unclear whether these mechanisms are inherently defective in individuals with CF at birth, or whether CF airways become more susceptible to infection due to altered host responses to inhaled pathogens (i.e., excessive inflammatory responses). In order to begin to address this question, we evaluated several mechanisms of innate immunity in the airway of the CFTR-/ferret. These animals are highly susceptible to lung infections early in life, suggesting defects in the basic pathways of innate immunity of the lung. We first evaluated mucociliary clearance in CF and non-CF neonatal ferrets. Ciliogenesis and submucosal gland development occurs post-natally in the ferret airway. Analysis of β tubulin IV staining in the ferret trachea indicated that the apical epithelial surface is less than 10% ciliated at birth, but that this percentage increases to ~80% by 24 days of age. We analyzed the percentage of ciliation in the tracheal epithelium of CF ferrets and found no major differences in the development of ciliated cells in the trachea compared to wild-type animals. Mucociliary clearance rates were also similar for CF and non-CF kits until after the first week of life, suggesting that the progressive buildup of thickened mucus and/or dehydration of the airways, but not the absence of or specific dysfunction of ciliated cells, contributes to impaired airway clearance in CF animals. Analysis of bronchial alveolar lavage fluid (BAL) indicated that neonatal ferrets lacked submucosal glandsecreted proteins important for bacterial killing, irrespective of genotype, and no difference in bacterial growth of several species in newborn ferret BAL was detected between wild-type and CF animals. However, direct challenge of newborn ferret airways and tracheal xenografts with P. aeruginosa showed that CF airways failed to eradicate infection. To assess the role of CFTR in this process, we transduced CF ferret tracheal xenografts with an adenoviral vector expressing ferret CFTR, and observed that this completely rescued bacterial killing. These xenograft experiments are particularly informative since they lack a CF immune system and mucociliary clearance, and can directly index CFTR function in the surface airway epithelium. In conclusion, we find that bacterial killing is defective in the CF ferret airway early in life. This mechanism of bacterial clearance requires CFTR, and does not appear to require large numbers of ciliated cells or submucosal glands. Correction of CFTR defects only in the surface airway epithelium of CF tracheal xenografts restored bacterial clearance, suggesting that gene targeting to this region may be sufficient to correct CF lung disease. Accumulating evidence suggests that defective function/expression of CFTR contributes to hyperactive innate immune response and delayed bacterial clearance upon infection of respiratory epithelia in cystic fibrosis (CF). The ongoing debate whether a defect in the innate immune response exists prior to infection has been fuelled by contradicting results obtained on genetically non-matched cell lines and CF animal models. To avoid the limitations of having to compare between cell lines with different genetic backgrounds we generated tetracycline-inducible wtCFTR expressing epithelial models using the CFBE41o-human bronchial epithelial cell line, harbouring undetectable ∆F508CFTR. When cultured under air-liquid conditions, limited induction of wtCFTR expression attenuated pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion (IL-8, IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL1/2/3) by >50%. Focusing on the neutrophil chemoattractant interleukin-8, we found that wtCFTR inhibition increased IL-8 secretion, while activation decreased IL-8 secretion from cells with low CFTR plasma membrane expression. After the recent identification of TMEM16A, a calcium-activated plasma membrane chloride channel, we asked whether activation of this channel could compensate for the lack of CFTR activity in CF epithelia. The endogenous TMEM16A was activated by P2Y receptor stimulation with ATP or UTP, leading to cytoplasmic calcium signalling and transiently increased transepithelial chloride current (3-5 µA/cm 2 ). IL-4 induced the endogenous expression of TMEM16A and increased ATP/UTP stimulated chloride current by ~1.5 fold. Chelation of cytoplasmic calcium transients with BAPTA-AM or TMEM16A knockdown by shRNA strongly inhibited the ATP/UTP stimulated chloride current. These treatments alone or in combination with ATP or UTP stimulation did not influence IL-8 secretion of CFBE41oepithelia cultured under air-liquid conditions. Overexpression of TMEM16A under control of a tetracycline-inducible transcription factor increased both the constitutive and the ATP/UTP-stimulated chloride current in CFBE41o-epithelia. The ATP/UTP-stimulated chloride current was augmented by 4 to 200 fold depending on the doxycycline concentration, relative to that of the endogenous TMEM16A. Strong induction of TMEM16A expression without exogenous activation was sufficient to attenuate IL-8 secretion to a similar extent as observed in wtCFTR expressing CFBE41o-. This could be attributed to constitutively increased wtCFTR (~3.5 µA/cm 2 ) and TMEM16A (~2 µA/cm 2 ) mediated chloride current, determined by using specific channel blockers. Intriguingly, ATP, UTP or their non-hydrolysable -γS analogs failed to suppress IL-8 secretion presumably due to the transient nature of TMEM16A activation or downstream signalling effects. These results indicate that contrary to short-lived activation through P2Y receptor, modest, but constitutive activation of TMEM16A may help to suppress the hyperinflammatory phenotype of CF epithelia. Supported by CIHR and NIH, as well as EMBO and FRSQ fellowships to GV and "Richard & Edith Strauss" fellowship to FB. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) has been identified as a modifier gene of cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease, which is associated with chronic P. aeruginosa (PA) infection and declining lung function in children and adults. The main function of HO-1, an inducible enzyme that is activated under cellular stress such as inflammation and infection, is to degrade heme groups that are released under cellular stress by proteins such as hemoglobin, cytochromes, catalases and peroxidases. Heme degradation leads to the endogenous generation of anti-oxidants (biliverdin and bilirubin) and carbon monoxide (CO), which mediates potent anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant and anti-apoptotic activity. We and others have shown that CF macrophages and airway epithelial cells have a hyper-inflammatory response to PA and PA-LPS (lipopolysaccharide). Given that oxidative stress is a significant complication in CF, we hypothesized that CF cells are unable to activate the HO-1/CO pathway in response to stress, leading to intracellular ROS accumulation and hyperinflammation. To test this hypothesis, primary wild type (WT) and CF macrophages (murine and human) and human bronchial epithelial cells lines (CFBE41o-, and 16HBE14o-) were treated with PA-LPS (100ng/mL) or PA (PAO1; multiplicity of infection=1:2) and HO-1 expression was assessed by Western blot. Under all activating conditions, WT cells induced expression of HO-1 (1-2 fold over baseline), whereas CF cells had a minimal or absent increase of HO-1. As a consequence of reduced HO-1 induction, CF cells treated with PA-LPS or PA exhibited significantly higher intracellular ROS compared to WT cells as assessed by CM-H2-DCF staining (p<0.03). To test whether the decreased activation of the HO-1/CO pathway contributes to the hyper-inflammation observed in CF cells, we aimed to normalize this pathway in CF cells by the exogenous administration of low dose of CO via CO-releasing molecules (CORM-2). Control cells were treated with an inactive negative control (iCORM), which has the same structure as CORM-2 but is unable to release CO. In the presence of CORM-2 (50µM -100µM), CF cells challenged with LPS or PA increased HO-1 expression to almost normal levels. In addition, in the presence of CORM2, challenged CF cells had lower secretion of several pro-inflammatory cytokines (KC, TNF-α, IL-6, IP-10, RANTES) compared to CORM-2-untreated CF cells. iCORM did not affect HO-1 expression or cytokine secretion. Thus, we have compelling evidence that cells lacking functional CFTR have impaired induction of the cytoprotective HO-1/CO pathway during inflammatory stress, which may contribute to intracellular ROS accumulation and hyper-inflammation. Moreover, modulation of this pathway by exogenous administration of CO re-established a controlled inflammatory response in CF cells. This study may help to identify new molecular therapeutic drug targets to treat CF. Funded by NIH. Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) forms biofilms that both prevent attack by white cells and also reduce mucociliary clearance in CF lungs. Production of PA biofilms is regulated by quorum sensing molecules including C12. In addition to regulating gene expression in PA, C12 also affects host cells. We tested the hypothesis that C12 produced by PA biofilms triggered apoptosis in airway epithelia. We examined synthetic purified C12 as well as biofilms of PAO1 and PAO1∆lasI (C12 deficient) for effects on airway epithelial cells -CaLu-3 (wtCFTR), JME (∆F/∆F) and primary airway epithelia (non-CF) -on Snapwell inserts for electrophysiology and imaging, on coverglasses for imaging or on plastic plates for biochemical assays. PA biofilms were grown on nylon membrane for 48 hours prior to application either directly onto the epithelial cells or as a suspension in sterile Ringers solution following removal from the membrane by vortexing. Adding synthetic C12 (50 µM) apically to confluent CaLu-3 monolayers caused transepithelial resistance to decrease nearly to zero over 1-1.5 hrs. Immunofluorescence showed that loss of barrier function was accompanied by, first, release of cytochrome C (cytoC) from mitochondria (mitos) into the cytosol and, next, degradation of tight junctions (loss of ZO1). As measured with targeted redox-sensitive GFP (roGFP), C12 caused (after 30-45 mins) the cytosol to become markedly oxidized, changes that were accompanied by leakage of ER-roGFP into the cytosol. C12 activated caspase 3/7 (beginning at 20 mins, max within 60 mins), and also caspases 8 and 9. C12 caused mito membrane potential (ψ mito , JC-1 imaging) to depolarize by 50-100% within 5 mins. C12 also triggered increases in cytosolic [Ca] (Ca cyto , fura-2 imaging) within 5 mins. PAO1 but not PAO1∆lasI biofilms caused similar depolarization of ψ mito and increases in Ca cyto . It is concluded that C12 induces apoptosis very rapidly in airway epithelia in the sequence, (i) depolarization of ψ mito and release of Ca from the ER, (ii) permeabilization of the outer mito membrane that releases cytoC and also the ER that releases its oxidized contents, and (iii) activation of caspases 3/7, 8 and 9 and tight junction breakdown and loss of barrier function. Qualitatively similar results occurred in all cell types, suggesting that CFTR plays no direct role in controlling apoptotic responses to C12 and also that cell lines and primary cells respond similarly. Finally, the data suggest that [C12] in PAO1 biofilms is sufficient to trigger apoptosis-related depolarization of ψ mito and increases in Ca cyto like those triggered by 10-50µM C12. C12 produced by PA biofilms may contribute to accumulation of apoptotic cells that cannot be cleared by macrophages in CF. Preventing pro-apoptotic effects of C12 in CF airways may be clinically beneficial. We have identified five small molecule compounds that prevent C12-triggered caspase activation. We will present results testing their efficacy in preventing the multiple C12-triggered proapoptotic steps identified. Support: CFF and CFRI. Viral respiratory infections are a common cause of pulmonary exacerbations and clinical decline in CF patients, and RSV is the most common viral respiratory infection encountered in the first year of life. In this study, we examined the effects of RSV infection on monolayer integrity in CFBE41o-cells stably expressing wt or F508del CFTR. Cells were cultured until monolayers had a resistance of ~ 1000 ohm.cm 2 , followed by infection with RSV2 (MOI of 1). Monolayer resistance was monitored following infection to assess integrity and tight junction status. Repeated measures ANCOVA was used to assess differences between groups across days with adjustment for baseline resistance. Linear mixed effects models were used to examine group-specific increasing and decreasing trends in resistance. An autoregressive lag-1 covariance structure with unequal group variances was used to account for longitudinal measurements of resistance for each group. Prior to RSV infection, CFBE41o-cells expressing wtCFTR had a resistance of 971.67±12.72, and F508del CFTR transduced cells had a resistance of 990.83±9.88 (P=NS). In the absence of RSV infection, both wtCFBE41oand F508del CFBE41o-monolayers demonstrated steady and parallel increases in resistance of 440.14±37.19 and 515.24±31.12 per day, respectively. RSV-infected F508del CFBE41o-monolayer resistance decreased by -236.62±27.96 (P<0.0001) per day. Significant decreases were observed for days 1-2: -118.33±101.04 (P<0.0001) 2-3: -515.00±101.04 (P<0.0001) and 3-4: -288.33.±101.04 (P=0.0053) . RSV-infected wtCFBE41o-monolayers had a mixed pattern of change, increasing at a daily rate of +447.17±59.80 (P<0.0001) for the first 4 days, then decreasing by -523.33±70.51 (P<0.0001) per day for the remainder of the experiment. F508del CFBE41ocells with RSV infection had lower mean resistance than non-infected F508del CFBE41o-cells on days 2-6 (all P<0.0001). RSV-infected wtCF-BE41o-monolayers had lower mean resistance than non-infected wtCF-BE41o (days 3-6, P<0.0001 to 0.0294). RSV-infected F508del CFBE41omonolayers had decreased resistance compared to RSV-infected wtCF-BE41o-cells for days 2-6 (all P<0.0001). RSV-infected wtCFBE41o-and F508del CFBE41o-monolayers had lower mean resistance than non-infected monolayers (days 3-6, P<0.0001 to 0.0294). This difference increased by 588.58±48.77 per day (P=0.0012). The reduction in resistance in F508del CFTR expressing cells was associated with enhanced pathologic change and syncytia formation. wtCFTR-expressing cells retained CFTR currents over four days of RSV infection [CFTRinh172-sensitive (10 µM) currents following forskolin/IBMX and genistein (50 µM) = -19.39 µA/cm 2 (3.40) in control cells, and = -8.79 µA/cm 2 (2.91) in RSV-infected cells], indicating that cellular regulation of wtCFTR was diminished but remained intact during RSV infection in the absence of a cellular immune response. The findings indicate that the absence of wtCFTR expression and function leaves human airway cells vulnerable to epithelial disruption by RSV, which may contribute to the more severe pulmonary manifestations seen in the CF airway during RSV infection. DEFICIENT FLUID SECRETION FROM SUBMUCOSAL GLANDS OF NASAL TURBINATES FROM CFTR -/-AND CFTR ∆F508/∆F508 PIGS Cho, H.; Joo, N.; Wine, J.J. Cystic Fibrosis Research Lab, Stanford university, Stanford, CA, USA Cystic fibrosis (CF) , caused by defective CFTR function, includes severe sinonasal disease which may contribute to lung disease. Newly developed CF pigs provide models to study the onset of CF lung disease. We asked if glands from nasal turbinates of pigs are identical to tracheal glands and if CF glands show defective fluid secretion. Unexpectedly, we found that nasal glands differed from tracheal glands in five ways: they were smaller, more numerous (density per airway surface area), more sensitive to carbachol (EC 50 (nM), nasal (114 ± 18) vs. tracheal (590 ± 16)), more sensitive to forskolin (EC 50 (nM), nasal (1691 ± 135) vs. tracheal (6635 ± 1836)), and they were nonresponsive to Substance P, which is a potent agonist for tracheal glands. To determine if the secretory function of nasal glands is compromised in CF pigs, fluid secretion (rate; pl/min/gl) from newborn piglets (12 controls and 12 CF) was measured optically using digital imaging of mucus bubbles formed under oil. The secretion rate in CF piglets following 3 µM forskolin (0.6 ± 0.3) was not significantly increased from the basal rate and was significantly less than responses of control piglets (9.2 ± 2.2). CF piglet nasal glands also responded significantly less to stimulation with 1 µM carbachol (control (143. 5 ± 35.5, n=7) vs. CF (52.2 ± 10.3, n=9) ) and the combination (3 µM forskolin + 0.1 µM carbachol) (control (25.8 ± 5.8, n=8) vs. CF (4.5 ± 0.9, n=9)); We also compared CFTR ∆F508/∆F508 with CFTR -/piglets. The mean secretion forskolin-stimulated rate for the CFTR ∆F508/∆F508 piglets (1.4 ± 0.8, n=4) was significantly greater than CFTR -/piglets (0.2 ± 0.1, n=7). These findings reveal differences between nasal and tracheal glands and show that nasal gland fluid secretion is defective in CF pigs of both genotypes, with some spared function in CFTR ∆F508/∆F508 pigs. Mucins are the principal macromolecular component of airway mucus and the gel-forming mucins, MUC5AC and MUC5B, dominate its rheological properties. Recent details regarding mucin maturation, secretion, and interaction with other proteins have generated novel hypotheses concerning the etiology of CF airway mucus obstruction and its role in CF pathogenesis. In Scnn1b-Tg mice, airway-targeted overexpression of the epithelial sodium channel β subunit (βENaC protein, Scnn1b gene) recapitulates many features of human CF pulmonary disease, including airway surface dehydration, impaired mucus clearance, bacterial infection, and chronic inflammation. We hypothesized that the lung phenotype in Scnn1b-Tg mice would be altered in the absence of gel-forming mucins and that these differences would provide evidence for mucin-specific functions. In this study, Muc5b knock-out mice were bred to Scnn1b-Tg mice, and the pulmonary phenotype was evaluated. Muc5b-deficient Scnn1b-Tg mice exhibited significantly less mucus obstruction than their Muc5b-sufficient littermates, as measured morphometrically in AB-PAS stained lung sections (14±3 vs. 7±2 nl/mm 2 for 5 week-old Muc5b +/+ vs. -/-Scnn1b-Tg mice, n≥7). Muc5b Western blots confirmed a gene dose-dependent reduction in Muc5b secretion (Muc5b +/+ mice > Muc5b +/-) and its complete absence in Muc5b -/mice. Intuitively, therapies aimed at reducing the mucin content of mucus are predicted to ameliorate airway obstruction. We tested this hypothesis by exploiting a Scnn1b-Tg mouse variant that exhibits extremely poor survival due to the severe mucus obstruction, i.e., FVB Scnn1b-Tg mice. Heterozygosity for Muc5b rescued the survival of FVB Scnn1b-Tg mice (from 10±9% to 86±10% at postnatal day 6, n=5 litters), indicating that reduction of secreted Muc5b levels can improve clearance and reduce obstruction. Although Muc5b-deficient Scnn1b-Tg mice exhibited a beneficial reduction in airway mucus plugging, they also exhibited more robust neutrophilia (23±5 vs. 48±8 neutrophils/mL BALF×10 3 , for 5 week-old Muc5b +/+ vs. -/-Scnn1b-Tg mice, n≥7) and higher incidence of bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT, 0.0016±0.001 vs. 0.023±0.005 mm 2 /lung section, for Muc5b +/+ vs. -/-Scnn1b-Tg mice, n=8). This increased inflammatory signature was present even though the bacterial burden in adult Muc5b-deficient Scnn1b-Tg mice was similar to Muc5b-sufficient littermates. We are currently testing whether absence of Muc5b influences the burden/composition of lung microflora in neonatal Scnn1b-Tg mice, and whether the immunophenotype of lung lymphocytes in adult mice can provide clues for the immune imbalance caused by Muc5b deletion. We hypothesize that this "adverse" outcome may reflect a role for Muc5b in organizing an antiinflammatory host defense network. As pharmaceutical strategies aimed at reducing mucin secretion are being evaluated to treat airway mucus obstruction in CF, we believe that our genetic approach to testing risk/benefit of this strategy is warranted. (Friesen et al. 1995) . However, it is not known if CRP levels or change of these levels during hospitalization may predict frequency of exacerbations or time-to-next exacerbation. Eighteen individuals were admitted for uncomplicated CF exacerbation at a single adult care CF center. Mean age was 28.1 yrs, and 66% of patients were male. Admission CRP levels and discharge CRP levels were measured, and the percentage of decline of CRP was calculated. The number of inpatient CF exacerbations was assessed over a 9 month period after initial discharge. Time-to-next hospitalization was also determined and compared against CRP drop. FEV1 was also measured at time of admission and discharge. Descriptive statistics were obtained for each measure (mean, SD). Nonparametric testing between groups was conducted with Mann-Whitney statistic and Spearman correlation; statistical significance was established at p<0.05. Mean admission and discharge CRP among all individuals was 64.5 mg/L and 11.8 mg/L respectively (74.1% decline over hospitalization, p<0.01). For individuals with 2 or more admissions over the ensuing 9 months, the average CRP decline during hospitalization was 60.6% vs. an 84.8% decline in individuals with less than 2 admissions (p=0.058) . In addition, the time-to-next hospitalization correlated closely with both discharge CRP (p=0.025, r=0.57) and decline in CRP levels (p=0.048, r=0.52) but not admission CRP values. In comparison, discharge FEV1 and improvement in FEV1 during hospitalization did not correlate with time-tonext inpatient exacerbation (p=0. 16 and p=0.15, respectively) . In this small cohort of patients, the degree of decline in CRP trends with the number of inpatient exacerbations over a 9 month period. Both CRP decline and the discharge CRP value correlated with time to next CF in-hospital exacerbation. These measures paralleled with number and timeto-next exacerbation better than FEV1 values. Initial results suggest that CRP persistence may serve as a unique biomarker for predicting future exacerbations. Further studies will focus on a larger population of patients hospitalized for CF exacerbation to validate these preliminary findings. Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and NIH. People with cystic fibrosis (PWCF) are predisposed to a continuous cycle of lung infections and a disproportionate neutrophil dominated response. As a result, PWCF incur numerous pulmonary exacerbations, which results in progressive decline of lung function. Pulmonary exacerbations in PWCF are currently defined by a variety of clinical criteria. The use of inflammatory biomarkers represents a potential diagnostic tool to help indicate an increased state of inflammation in PWCF and provide an objective addition to the clinical criteria defining exacerbations in PWCF. Recent work by our group has shown that chemokines such as IL-8 induce the rapid shedding of a novel marker of neutrophil priming, CD16b-alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) complex, from the neutrophil membrane [1] . Neutrophil priming is a prerequisite prior to neutrophil migration towards the lung. The aim of this work was to evaluate the use of CD16b-AAT in serum as a bioactive biomarker of IL-8 priming as an indicator of the inflammatory status of PWCF. Membranes from neutrophils of PWCF during an exacerbation and post-antibiotic treatment and normal healthy controls were analyzed by 2D-PAGE using CyDye™ labeling. Levels of CD16b and AAT were quantified by flow cytometry and Western blot analysis of neutrophil membranes and supernatants. Serum was obtained from PWCF, individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, AAT deficient patients and healthy controls. Levels of IL-8 and CD16b-AAT complex were quantified utilizing a modified ELISA protocol employing a capture antibody against CD16b and a detection antibody against AAT. The CD16b-AAT complex is rapidly released from neutrophils upon stimulation with low levels of IL-8. Decreased levels of CD16b-AAT complex were detected on CF neutrophil membranes compared to CF cells postantibiotic treatment and healthy controls (P<0.05). Quantification of IL-8 in serum resulted in detection of significantly higher levels in PWCF compared to the patient groups and healthy controls (P<0.0001). A similar result was observed with regards to the marker of neutrophil priming, CD16b-AAT complex, as significantly higher levels were detected in plasma of PWCF (P<0.0001). A positive correlation existed between PWCF serum levels of IL-8 and levels of CD16b-AAT complex. In serum samples collected from PWCF pre-and post-exacerbation, levels of IL-8 and CD16b-AAT complex decreased in individuals following successful antibiotic treatment (P=0.03). Furthermore a correlation was demonstrated between FEV1 percentage and IL-8/ CD16b-AAT serum levels in PWCF pre-and post-exacerbation. This study has demonstrated the potential use of serum levels of CD16b-AAT as a bioactive biomarker of the inflammatory status of PWCF. In the lung, Vitamin D plays an important role in pulmonary development, inflammation, host defense, and repair. Vitamin D levels are associated with lung function in adults with asthma and COPD. An investigation of Vitamin D status and lung function in patients with CF is needed. Methods: Data was used for patients ages 6-18.9 years during the years 2000-2010 from our local CF database. Models were created to investigate the association of Vitamin D 25-OH levels and lung function. Vitamin D 25-OH levels were introduced into these models as either continuous or categorical variables (> 30 vs. <30). Assessment of association between continuous variables was conducted using Pearson correlations. Descriptive statistics were calculated comparing categorical Vitamin D 25-OH groups (>30 vs. <30). Descriptive statistics are reported as mean ± SD. For evaluating the association of FEV 1 % predicted slope with relevant predictor variables, random intercepts and slopes mixed models were used, with an unstructured variance-covariance matrix. Results of mixed model regression are reported as mean +/-SE. Results: The number of patients with at least one Vitamin D 25-OH level measured was 228. Vitamin D 25-OH insufficiency was associated with older age (10.9+/-3.9 years vs. 9.5+/-3.3 years, p 0.01) and pancreatic insufficiency (p 0.0032). The correlation of serum Vitamin D levels with FEV 1 %, FVC%, and BMI-for-age Z-score was low and declined with age. For patients ages 6-12.9 years, the correlation of Vitamin D levels with FEV 1 % was r = 0.13 (p 0.003), with FVC% was r = 0.09 (p 0.05), and with BMI-for-age Z-score was r = -0.06 (p 0.2). For patients ages 13-18.9 years, the correlation of Vitamin D level with FEV 1 % was r = -0.01 (p 0.76), with FVC% was r = -0.02 (p 0.62), and with BMI-for-age z score was r = -0.09 (p 0.07). In a model of annual Vitamin D categorical status and annual FEV 1 % (FEV 1 % closest to Vitamin D measurement) as the response variable, there was no association between Vitamin D status and FEV 1 % (p 0.85) or FEV 1 % slope (p 0.65). Vitamin D sufficiency in this model was associated with a mean FEV1 1 % of 94.4+/-4.7% and FEV 1 % slope of -0.91+/-0.28%, while Vitamin D insufficiency was associated with a mean FEV 1 % of 93.8+/-4.3% and FEV 1 % slope of -0.80+/-0.38%. These results remained insignificant when Vitamin D levels were introduced as continuous variables. In a model assigning lifetime Vitamin D categorical status (averaging all values for a patient over time and categorizing as >30 vs. <30) with all FEV 1 % values as the response variable, there was an association of Vitamin D sufficiency with FEV 1 % (p 0.01) but no association with FEV 1 % slope (p 0.25). Vitamin D sufficiency in this model was associated with a mean FEV 1 % of 105.9+/-4.2% and FEV 1 % slope of -1.20+/-0.31%, while Vitamin D insufficiency was associated with a mean FEV 1 % of 95.0+/-3.2% and FEV 1 % slope of -0.77+/-0.20%. Conclusions: The correlation between Vitamin D 25-OH status and FEV 1 % is low in children with CF. In mixed model regression, Vitamin D 25-OH status was not associated with the rate of decline in FEV 1 % . Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) airway disease is linked to alterations in the properties of the airway surface fluid. While the ion and protein contents of CF airway fluid have prompted many studies, less is known about its metabolite content. Methods: Airway fluid was collected from 4 groups of subjects: (i) CF1, infants and toddlers with early CF disease, N=12; (ii) CF2, children and adults with chronic CF disease, N=14; (iii) DC, control infants and toddlers with diseases other than CF, N=5; and (iv) HC, healthy adult controls, N=3. After two spins (1500G, to remove cells, and 3000G, to remove debris), the airway fluid was submitted to column separation and derivatization according to the EZ:faast method (Phenomenex), which targets amino acid (AA)-containing metabolites. Samples were run in an Agilent 1100 chromatograph (Agilent) coupled to a Quattro Premier triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Waters) and metabolites were quantified using internal standard correction with the QuantLynx software (Waters). Results: Consistent with our previous observations, CF airway fluid contained high levels of total AA, reflecting intense proteolysis and loss of clearance (due to stasis and lack of re-uptake), starting early and intensifying with severity. GLY, THR were particularly high, as well as the anabolic AA, LEU and ILE. CF airway fluid was also enriched in MET, MET-SO, PHE and TYR, four metabolites known to trigger auxotrophic adaptation within the CF microflora. In addition, catecholamine derivatives of PHE/TYR, L-DOPA, dopamine -DA-and norepinephrine -NorEPI-, were markedly enriched in CF airway fluid. Early vs. chronic CF disease were similar with regards to the presence of high DA levels, but distinct with regards to L-DOPA and NorEPI, which were higher in early than in chronic disease. By contrast, the end product of the catecholamine pathway, epinephrine -EPI-, derived from NorEPI by a redox-dependent step, was lower in CF than in control airway fluid, consistent with the high oxidative stress present in CF airways. Conclusions: This study uncovers the presence in CF airway fluid of catecholamines, which are potent regulators of epithelial / neutrophil / microbial function. Notably, NorEPI favors S. aureus growth, while DA favors P. aeruginosa growth, and catecholamine pathway intermediates are used as melanin precursors by bacteria and fungi. Thus, catecholamines may play a role in triggering critical host and bacterial adaptations at various stages of CF airway disease. Specific objective of the study: The opportunistic fungus A. fumigatus (Af) colonizes a significant fraction of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, with some further progressing towards allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA). ABPA significantly impacts short-and long-term prognoses in CF, yet may be avoided by early diagnosis and treatment. However, the diagnosis of CF-ABPA is clinically challenging, due in large part to the absence of an objective biological test. Since blood basophils play a major role in allergic responses, we hypothesized that discrete changes on their surface activation pattern could discriminate CF patients with ABPA from those without. Method: We used a direct flow cytometry assay to measure surface CD203c and CD63 levels on blood basophils, at baseline and upon rapid in vitro activation with Af allergen, in 4 groups of subjects: (A) CF patients with Af colonization but without ABPA (N=10); (B) CF-ABPA patients (N=8); (C) CF-ABPA patients under anti-immunoglobulin E (omalizumab) treatment (N=2); and (D) healthy controls (N=8). Results: In the CF-ABPA group, basophil CD203c and CD63 levels increased significantly upon Af allergen stimulation (P<10 -2 for both, compared to the three other groups). This increase was Af allergen-specific, since stimulation with a non-offending allergen did not increase surface CD203c or CD63 levels in basophils from subjects in any of the groups. Basophil CD203c levels upon Af allergen stimulation provided excellent predictive value for discriminating CF-ABPA from CF patients with Af colonization but without ABPA (area under the receiver operating characteristics curve = 0.88, P<10 -2 ). Conclusion: These results support the notion that basophils play a role in the pathogenesis of CF-ABPA and can be used to diagnose and monitor this condition clinically with a simple and minimally invasive blood assay. Objective: We sought to determine if changes in the circulating proteome determined using SOMAmer technology correlate with clinical outcome measures (lung function, pulmonary exacerbation score) and with quantitative sputum culture in patients treated with IV antibiotics for a pulmonary exacerbation. Methods: CF subjects hospitalized for pulmonary exacerbation were evaluated at admission (day 0-2), discharge (day 6-14) and a follow-up clinic visit (1-3 months). Sputum and blood samples were collected along with lung function and pulmonary exacerbation score. Quantitative CF cultures were performed on sputum samples. Plasma samples were analyzed using a Multiplex SOMAmer Assay (1033-plex). Changes in circulating protein levels were determined between admission, discharge and clinic follow-up and compared to changes in lung function and pulmonary exacerbation score. Results: Nine CF subjects (median age 18.2 yrs, range 15.4-20.7) were enrolled, and 24 sputum and 26 blood samples were collected at three time points. Sputum culture on admission most frequently grew S. aureus (67%) and P. aeruginosa (44%). Admission FEV 1 (median, % predicted) was 67% (range, 40-102%) and median pulmonary exacerbation score was 9 (range, 6-14 with score ≥5 defined as exacerbation). Lung function improved at discharge with a mean increase in FEV 1 of 17.5% predicted ± 16.2%, but decreased at clinic follow-up by 15% predicted ± 16%. Pulmonary exacerbation score decreased compared to admission at both discharge and clinic follow-up visit. SOMAmer analysis found a non-significant decrease in 9 circulating proteins and increase in 14 proteins on discharge compared to admission, including several previously identified biomarkers in CF [Creactive protein (p=0.08), serum amyloid A (p=.28) and lipopolysaccharidebinding protein (p=0.08)]. At the time of clinic follow-up, circulating protein levels for these markers were approaching the level seen on admission, although no patients required hospitalization at the time of clinic follow-up. The circulating proteome differed between subjects with P. aeruginosa and S. aureus. Conclusions: Analysis of the circulating proteome using a multiplex SOMAmer assay detects changes following IV antibiotic treatment of a pulmonary exacerbation. These changes were not sustained at the time of clinic follow-up, and most subjects experienced a significant drop in lung function following discharge despite symptomatic improvement. SOMAmers may provide an early indication of worsening lung health. Airway defenses and mucus properties have been shown to be affected by the pH of the airway surface liquid (ASL). CFTR has been shown to contribute to ASL pH regulation in cell culture studies. The purpose of this study was to determine acid and base secretion in freshly excised human nasal tissues from ∆F508 CF patients. Human nasal mucosa was collected during sinus surgery from normal subjects and chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) patients with and without CF. Tissues were mounted in Ussing chambers and the mucosal equilibrium pH values and the rate of acid and bicarbonate secretion into the mucosal medium were determined using the pH-stat technique. Acid secretion was measured in bicarbonate free conditions at a mucosal pH of 8.0 (to increase driving forces) and base secretion was measured with 25 mM serosal bicarbonate/CO 2 and a mucosal pH of 6.0 (to inhibit H + secretion). The equilibrium pH of nasal epithelia from patients with CRS from ∆F508/∆F508 CF patients (pH=7.08±0.09, N=6) was significantly lower compared to nasal epithelia from CRS without CF (pH =7.33±0.06, N=5, p = 0.041) or normal subjects (pH=7.33 ± 0.06, N=7). The rate of HCO 3 secretion in CF nasal tissues (n = 4) was 11.8 ± 2.4 nmol•min -1 •cm -2 , which was significantly lower than normal (57.2 ± 9.2 nmol•min -1 •cm -2 , n = 5; p=0.004). HCO 3 secretory rate was further increased by forskolin by 16.1% in normal, but not in CF tissues. Our data suggests that CF patients exhibited significantly lower bicarbonate secretion by the nasal mucosa. We suggest that reduced HCO 3 secretion and the concomitantly reduced ASL pH in CF negatively affects epithelial functions. Distribution of equilibrium pH of freshly excised sinonasal epithelia. Individual equilibrium pH values are plotted and average values are shown as horizontal bars. Nasal epithelia from homozygous ∆F508 CF individual had significantly lower equilibrium pH (pH = 7.08 ± 0.09), compared to nasal epithelia from normal and CRS without asthma (p = 0.041). N refers to the number of tissue from different individuals. Error bars represent SEM (standard error of the mean); * denotes a significant difference (p < 0.05); •: normal nasal epithelia; ᭺: CRS; Ο: homozygous ∆F508 CF tissues. Introduction: CF newborn screening (NBS) has been universal in the UK from 2007 but little is known about the origin and progression of lung disease in such infants. We have observed significant abnormalities in lung clearance index (LCI) and forced expiratory volumes and flows (FEV 0.5 and FEF 75 ) by 3 months of age in NBS CF compared to healthy controls. 1 The AREST CF program has recently reported progressive decline in lung function in NBS CF infants by age 1 year. 2 Hypothesis: Lung function deteriorates between 3 months and 1 year of age in NBS CF infants. Methods: Multiple breath washout and raised volume techniques (to 30 cmH 2 O) were performed in NBS CF infants from 6 tertiary CF centres in London, UK and treated according to a standardized protocol. Healthy controls were recruited prospectively. Results: After adjustment for age, sex and body size there were no changes in any outcome over the 1st year of life in controls (Table) , whereas there were significant improvements in anthropometry, FEV 0.5 and FEF 75 z-scores in those with CF. LCI was higher in those with CF on both test occasions, but there was no significant change in LCI in either group over the first year of life. Conclusions: In contrast to previous reports and against our hypothesis, forced expired volumes and flows improved over time in NBS CF infants with our management, with no significant difference from controls by age 1 year. Results also emphasize the importance of recruiting contemporary controls and, for the first time, suggest that early diagnosis and treatment may change the progression of lung disease in infants with CF diagnosed by NBS. References Defects in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), including the ∆F508 mutation that impairs CFTR trafficking, are associated with increased activity of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) in the CF airway. This increased activity may result in the airway surface liquid depletion, decreased mucociliary clearance and increased bacterial colonization of the airway seen in CF patients (Matsui et al., Cell, 1998) . We hypothesize that restoration of proper airway surface liquid volume and mucociliary clearance in the CF airway will require both corrected CFTR function and decreased ENaC activity. Evidence suggests that CFTR and ENaC trafficking may involve similar mechanisms (e.g., Lang et al., Cell Physiol Biochem, 2003; Dieter et al., Obes Res, 2004; Wagner et al., Cell Physiol Biochem, 2001; Sato et al., Cell Physiol Biochem, 2001) , leading us to examine control of CFTR trafficking to better understand the regulation of ENaC trafficking. We are particularly interested in the influence of ∆F508-CFTR correctors on ENaC trafficking and functional expression. Previous work suggests that the prototype ∆F508-CFTR corrector, 4-phenylbutyrate (4PBA), can differentially alter the expression of highly homologous 70kDa heat shock proteins Hsc70 and Hsp70 (Rubenstein and Zeitlin, Am J Physiol Lung, 2000; Choo-Kang and Zeitlin, Am J Physiol Lung, 2001) . Furthermore, the 4PBA-mediated decrease in Hsc70 expression, and increase in Hsp70 expression could both promote correction of ∆F508-CFTR trafficking. Because of the similarities in trafficking between ENaC and CFTR, we hypothesized that ENaC trafficking is also regulated by Hsc70 and Hsp70. Our group's previous studies of ENaC regulation in Xenopus oocytes demonstrated that Hsc70 and Hsp70 had opposite effects on ENaC function and surface expression. Hsc70 overexpression decreased ENaC expression, while Hsp70 had the opposite effect (Goldfarb et al., PNAS, 2006 ). Here, we tested whether these findings were relevant in epithelial cells, and further probed the mechanism underlying these differential effects. We selected MDCK epithelial cells that stably express αβγ-ENaC and have tetracyclineinducible overexpression of Hsp70. We found that Hsp70 overexpression increased ENaC functional expression (amiloride-sensitive Isc) in Ussing chambers. This increase in functional expression correlated with increased surface expression of ENaC in biotinylation experiments, suggesting that the increased current resulted from an increase in ENaC channels at the apical surface. Hsp70 overexpression did not alter the rate at which functional ENaC was retrieved from the cell membrane, suggesting that delivery of channel to the membrane was responsible for the increased surface expression. In addition, in co-immunoprecipitation experiments, Hsp70 overexpression increased ENaC's association with the Sec24D cargo recognition component of the COP II ER exit complex. These data support the hypothesis that Hsp70 increases ENaC functional and surface expression in epithelial cells by promoting ENaC's exit from the ER and trafficking to the apical surface. This research is supported by grants T32 DK-07748 to RAC and R01 DK-58046 to RCR. The epithelial Na + channel (ENaC) is a key regulator of airway surface liquid. In the cystic fibrosis (CF) airway, hyperactivity of ENaC is hypothesized to cause impaired mucociliary clearance and portend bacterial colonization of the airway. In our group's studies of the correction of ∆F508-CFTR trafficking by 4-phenylbutyrate (4PBA), we identified a novel 29 kDa molecular chaperone in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), ERp29, that had increased abundance in CF epithelial cells after treatment with 4PBA, and that promoted trafficking of both WT and ∆F508 CFTR (Suaud, et al, JBC, 2011) . ERp29 is homologous to thioredoxin proteins, which are enzymes that catalyze the formation and rearrangement of disulfide bridges. However, ERp29 has only a single cysteine residue (C157) and lacks the C-X-X-C motif that is characteristic of the thioredoxins. We tested the hypotheses that ERp29 would regulate ENaC trafficking, and that its single cysteine, C157, would have a critical role in ERp29's regulation of ENaC. In Xenopus laevis oocytes, co-injection of ERp29 RNA with αβγ-ENaC RNA caused a ~2-fold increase in amiloride-sensitive whole oocyte current compared with oocytes injected with αβγ-ENaC RNA alone, suggesting that ERp29 can regulate ENaC functional expression. To further examine ERp29 function in epithelial cells, we selected ENaC-overexpressing MDCK cell lines with tetracycline-inducible expression of either WT ERp29 or ERp29 where C157 was mutated to serine (C157S ERp29). In Ussing chambers, induced overexpression of WT ERp29 caused an increase in amiloride-sensitive Isc, or ENaC functional expression. In contrast, overexpression of C157S ERp29 caused a decrease in amiloride-sensitive Isc. These opposite effects correlated with the influence of WT or C157S ERp29 on the whole cell expression of β-ENaC and the cleaved form of γ-ENaC. Overexpression of WT ERp29 increased whole cell expression of β-ENaC and the cleaved form of γ-ENaC, while overexpression of C157S ERp29 decreased whole cell expression of these species. In contrast, siRNA-mediated depletion of ERp29 decreased β-ENaC expression, but did not alter γ-ENaC expression. We also tested the influence of C157S ERp29 on the fraction of cleaved, higher Po versus uncleaved, lower Po ENaC at the apical surface by addition of trypsin in Ussing chambers. Application of 10 µg/mL trypsin to the apical surface of MDCK cells overexpressing ERp29 C157S cells caused a significantly greater fractional increase of amiloride-sensitive Isc compared to the control cells, suggesting that C157 influences ENaC cleavage. Finally, WT or C157S ERp29 overexpression increased the recovery of β-ENaC after immunoprecipitation of ERp29. These data support the hypothesis that ERp29 interacts with ENaC and can regulate its functional expression by regulating ENaC trafficking and/or subunit proteolysis and that C157 is critical for the regulation of ENaC by ERp29, but is not a determinant of ERp29's interaction with ENaC. This study was supported by grants from R01 DK58046 and R01 DK73185 to RCR. Luan, X.; Baniak, N.; Ianowski, J.P. Department of Physiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada Airway submucosal glands contribute most of the mucins and antimicrobial factors in the upper airways, which are important for the lung host defense. Airway submucosal glands are complex structures that consist of four parts: serous acini, mucous tubules, collecting duct, and ciliated duct. The serous acini express high levels of CFTR and generate most of the fluid secreted by the glands. In CF patients, secretion by the submucosal gland is abnormal. CF submucosal glands fail to produce mucus in response to vasoactive intestinal peptide and substance P and produce mucus that is more acidic and viscous. Thus, CF airways suffer from reduced delivery of antimicrobial factors and mucus, which would abate mucociliary clearance and facilitate infection with bacteria. However, the effect of inhalation of bacteria on submucosal gland mucus secretion is not fully understood. Inhaled pathogens trigger the release of proinflammatory signals including the cytokine interleukin (IL)-1β. Our objective is to study the effects of IL-1β on submucosal gland mucus secretion and the role of CFTR. The data show that IL-1β stimulates submucosal gland mucus secretion through CFTR-dependent mechanism. Stimulation with IL-1β (50 ng mL -1 ) increased mucus secretion rate from 60 ± 25 pL min -1 to 134 ± 30 pL min -1 . Incubation with CFTRinh172 (100 µmol L -1 ) reduced IL-1β-stimulated secretion rate to 80 ± 10 pL min -1 . Our data also show that IL-1β stimulation triggers a cAMP intracellular second messenger pathway. Inhibition of adenylate cyclase with the blocker SQ22536 (0.5 mmol L -1 ) reduced mucus secretion by IL-1β-stimulated submucosal glands from 134 ± 30 pL min -1 to 44 ± 6 pL min -1 while treatment with the phosphodiesterase inhibitor IBMX (1 mmol L -1 ) increased mucus secretion to 231 ± 41 pL min -1 . Moreover, our experiments show IL-1β stimulates ion transport across the serous acini. We directly measure the movement of Na + , K + , and Clacross the serous acini in isolated submucosal glands from swine using Scanning Ion-selective Electrode Technique (SIET). When IL-1β was applied the serous acini display an increased uptake of Na + and Clwhile K + flux was unchanged. The results indicate that IL-1β stimulates CFTR-mediated transport, suggesting that this response may be lost in CF airways resulting in reduced delivery of antimicrobial factors and facilitating infection. The data also show that IL-1β stimulates Na + and Cltransport across the serous acini of airway submucosal glands, thus driving mucus secretion. This is the first direct measurement of ion transport across a single anatomical domain of the submucosal glands. In the future, we plan to use the same technique to determine the role of the other segments of the gland and their possible role in modulating the ion composition of the secreted fluid. Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Canada. The imbalance in the oxidant/antioxidant (redox) of patients with bronchiectasis, both with cystic fibrosis (CF) and without cystic fibrosis, appears to be related to the severity of the clinical and inflammatory status. Cellular biomarkers could reflect the redox status in these patients better than plasma biomarkers. The study objective was to evaluate oxidative stress in adult bronchiectasis patients, with or without CF, by measuring new cellular biomarkers of oxidative stress. Design and measurements: We selected 90 adult bronchiectasis patients: 36 with CF, 15 with atypical CF and 39 without CF (non-CF), and 50 healthy controls. We measured biomarkers of cellular oxidative stress (in fresh) by flow cytometry (dual-laser FACSCalibur Becton Dickinson, Mountain View, CA) in total leukocytes, neutrophils, lymphocytes and monocytes. Measurements were made of the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), levels of superoxide, hydrogen peroxide and intracellular glutathione. Results: All groups of patients (CF, atypical CF and non-CF) had significantly higher levels of hydrogen peroxide (greater oxidative stress) in all cell populations studied compared with the controls, with no significant dif-ferences between the patient groups. Concerning intracellular glutathione (IG), the non-CF bronchiectasis patients showed significantly lower levels (increased oxidative stress) than the controls in all the cell populations studied, the atypical CF patients had lower levels in monocytes and lymphocytes, and the CF patients only in monocytes. The IG levels were significantly lower in the non-CF patients compared to the CF patients in neutrophils and total lymphocytes. Compared with controls, the non-CF and the atypical CF patients showed significantly higher levels (higher stress) of superoxide in all the cell populations studied and the CF only in monocytes and leukocytes; there were no significant differences between patient groups. Compared to controls, the levels of MMP were significantly lower (higher oxidative stress) in the atypical CF patients in monocytes and lymphocytes and in the CF patients in monocytes. MMP levels in monocytes were significantly lower in the atypical CF patients compared to the CF and non-CF patients. Conclusions: Cellular oxidative stress biomarkers are significantly elevated in patients with bronchiectasis compared to controls. Few differences exist between the different groups of patients. TGF-beta is a pleiotropic signaling molecule that regulates tissue response to injury, and has been demonstrated to modify the CF phenotype. The mechanism by which TGF-beta influences CF, however, is unknown. We hypothesized that TGF-beta may regulate Cltransport pathways relevant to CF, potentially providing a mechanism to modify the CF phenotype. We tested the effect of TGF-beta on the two dominant Cltransport pathways expressed in many CF affected epithelia, focusing on effects in colonic enterocytes (T84 cells) that both express CFTR and TMEM16A. Cells were grown to confluence on fibronectin-coated permeable supports (Costar Transwell filters) until they achieved high resistance (>1000 ohm.cm 2 ). Cells were then serum starved for 24 hours (MEM media + 0.1% FBS), and subsequently exposed to 5 ng/mL TGF-beta for 48-72 hours. Monolayers were studied in Ussing chambers under voltage clamp conditions. To activate CFTR currents, T84 cells were stimulated with forskolin/IBMX (10/100 µM) followed by carbachol (100 µM, serosal). Cells were then treated with CFTRinh172 (10 µM, mucosal) to confirm CFTR-dependence of currents. To activate TMEM16A, cells were stimulated with ionomycin (2 µM) , and all studies were performed in symmetric Ringers solution + 25 mM HCO 3 . Following completion of the functional studies, cells were lysed and stored in RNA later at -80 o C, and expression was quantified by real time RT-PCR. Primers for hCFTR or hTMEM16A were designed by using Primer3 software or from published data and purchased from IDT. TGFbeta treatment (5 ng x 48 hrs) reduced mean (SD) forskolin/IBMX currents from 44.85 µA/cm 2 (5.4) to 20.38 (2.81) µA/cm 2 , and forskolin/IBMX+CCh-stimulated currents from 172.12 (10.83) to 75.68 (11.02) µA/cm 2 (P<0.005 for both stimulated currents). TGF-beta treatment reduced TMEM16A currents from 122 µA/cm 2 (27) to 2 µA/cm 2 (42) (P=0.008). CFTR and TMEM16A transcripts in T84 cells were also reduced by TGF-beta treatment for 72-hour treatment (~90% and ~50%, respectively, P<0.001), and TGF-beta treatment also led to histone modifications. In control studies conducted in wtCFTR-transduced CFBE41o-cells (lentiviral transduction of cells with wtCFTR cDNA under control of the CMV promoter, with undetectable expression of chromosomal F508del CFTR), TGFbeta treatment had no effect on either transduced CFTR currents or CFTR transcript levels. The results indicate that TGF-beta treatment of polarized colonocytes expressing chromosomal CFTR and TMEM16A rapidly reduced expression and function of both Clchannels. The inhibitory effects were transcriptional and limited to native expression of both Clchannels, pointing towards TGF-beta regulation of CFTR and TMEM16A through promoter or chromatin modification. The CF lung expresses a profound proinflammatory phenotype, due to especially constitutive hypersecretion of IL-8 from airway epithelial cells in response to microbial infection. Since overproduction of IL-8 in CF ultimately contributes to massive bronchial infiltrates of neutrophils, identification of the pathways underlying IL-8 induction could provide novel drug targets for treatment of neutrophil-dominated inflammatory diseases such as CF. Recent reports indicate increased expression of IL-17A and its CD4 + T cell subset source, T helper 17 (Th17) cells, in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid and sputum from bacterially infected CF patients. IL-17A overproduction has been shown to be associated with the pathophysiology of multiple inflammatory diseases that involve induction of chemokines such as IL-8. In this study we evaluate whether IL-17A is responsible for neutrophil inflammation in CF airways during bacterial infection. The studies show that IL-17A and KC (an IL-8 homologue) were upregulated after a 24h intratracheal exposure to bacteria-derived peptidoglycan (PGN) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in homozygous Cftr mutant (F508del-CFTR)expressing mice (Cftr tm1eur BL/6) compared to their wild-type littermate mice (N=3-4, P<0.05). A positive correlation was observed between IL-17A and KC expression (N=24, R 2 =0.984, P<0.001). Further, neutrophil recruitment was increased in the PGN-or LPS-treated Cftr F508del/F508del mice compared to normal, suggesting that IL-17A may be a key molecule for the induction of bacteria-induced neutrophil-associated CF inflammation in vivo. Notably, IL-17A induced IL-8 expression in human airway epithelial cell lines derived from an F508del/F508del CF patient (CFBE41o-) and an F508del/W1282X CF patient (IB3), but not in human non-CF airway cell lines, 16HBE14o-and A549 cells, implying a CF airway-specific induction of IL-8 by IL-17A. Moreover, co-treatment of the CF airway cell lines with IL-17A and PGN or LPS significantly enhanced IL-8 expression. The synergistic effects observed appeared to be due to enhanced PGN-or LPSinduced phosphorylation of p38 MAP kinase (MAPK). Taken together, these studies provide evidence that IL-17A is a critical factor in increasing IL-8 expression in bacteria-infected CF airways possibly via a positive cross-talk with p38 MAPK. Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) is a noninvasive, radiation-free imaging technique, which can monitor both regional lung ventilation and tidal volume distribution, by measuring the electrical potentials at the chest wall surface. We hypothesized that due to disease-related airway obstruction, ventilation inhomogeneity in CF patients varies during forced respiration and it can be detected with EIT. Method: Three patients with CF (1 male and 2 female; body height, 180, 165 and 156 cm; body weight, 64, 58 and 55 kg; age at examination, 32, 35 and 30 years, respectively) and two healthy volunteers (2 male; body height, 178 and 168 cm; body weight, 62 and 60 kg; age at examination, 50 and 28 years, respectively) were investigated to the time point of abstract submission. All subjects were asked to breathe in as deep and exhale as hard as possible three times at the spirometer, according to standard ATS spirometry guidelines. EIT measurements were performed during spirometry tests. The global inhomogeneity index (GI) was applied to assess the degree of ventilation homogeneity. GI index has been described in previous studies [1, 2] . For every forced respiration, four difference images, which represent the respective differences of impedance between 25%, 50%, 75%, 100% of maximum inspiratory volume and inspiration begin (0%), were generated. The median value of the pixels in the lung area is calculated for each difference image. The GI index is defined as the sum of the absolute differences between the median value and every pixel value, which is normalized with the sum of the impedance values within the lung area. Results: Airway obstruction was detected in CF patients but not in healthy volunteers during spirometry tests. GI decreased as inspiratory volume increased in CF patients (0.59±0.20 at 25% and 0.39±0.09 at 100%, p<0.01, Mean±SD) while GI remained unchanged in healthy subjects (0.40±0.05 at 25% and 0.37±0.03 at 100%, p=0.31). Conclusion: Degree of ventilation homogeneity appears to vary during forced respiration in CF patients, but not in healthy volunteers. Lung function tests with spirometry or body plethysmography deliver only global information while EIT detects also regional ventilation. EIT is a practical method to measure the inhomogeneity of ventilation distribution and has the potential to be a routine diagnosis tool for CF patients. Background: Abnormal regulation of airway epithelium sodium channels (ENaC) result in surface dehydration which is a key contributor to the development of chronic bacterial infection seen in CF, through the build-up of retained airway secretions (mucus). Recently it has become abundantly clear that proteolytic processing of ENaC subunits by channel activating proteases (CAPS) is associated with dramatically stimulated channel activity. However, at present the role of CAPS on ENaC function is poorly defined in CF bronchial epithelium. To this end our group has developed active site-directed affinity probes which target trypsin-like proteases. As well as determining the effect of protease inhibition on ENaC activity the presence of a reporter group (biotin) on these affinity probes enables the detection, visualisation and affinity purification of the captured proteases. Objectives: Through the employment of our affinity based probes we aim to identify specific proteases with the potential to modulate ENaC activity in bronchial epithelial cells. Methods: Cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial cells (CFBE) or human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) were incubated in the presence or absence of 50 µM biotinylated trypsin-like inhibitor (QUB-TLI) for 1h before solubilisation with lysis buffer. Probed samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE and captured proteases visualised by streptavidin-HRP. Similar experiments were performed with concentrated cell-conditioned media (CCM) collected from HBE and CFBE cultures. Data: Preliminary studies confirm that QUB-TLI detects and inhibits recombinant proteases (trypsin and prostasin). Treatment of 1) intact HBE and CFBE cells and 2) CCM from cultured HBE and CFBE, with our broadspectrum QUB-TLI resulted in the visualisation of several trypsin-like species in each of our samples. At present we are working to identify these captured proteases and are performing studies to assess the impact of protease inhibition on ENaC subunit processing, not only in transformed epithelial cell lines but also in primary CF and non-CF nasal epithelial cells grown at air/liquid interface. Conclusions: Our broad-spectrum inhibitor has captured several trypsin-like proteases in non-CF and CF bronchial epithelial cells. This paves the way for characterisation of these proteases and an assessment of their effect on ENaC activity in CF bronchial epithelium. Acknowledgements: This work is supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Trust, UK. [∆F508] in the CFTR gene. The proinflammatory phenotype in the CF airway is driven, in part, by mutationdependent hypersecretion of the neutrophil chemokine Interleukin-8 (IL-8) from lung epithelial cells. We have previously reported that cardiac glycosides such as digitoxin and oleandrin potently and efficaciously block the process of IL-8 hypersecretion in cultured CF lung epithelial cells (Srivastava et al PNAS, 2004) . Furthermore, we have reported that the mechanism of this inhibitory effect is to block the interaction between TNFR1 and TRADD, which occurs when TNFα activates the TNFR1 Signaling complex formed by TNFα and TNFR1, and the intracellular adaptor proteins TRADD, TRAF2 and RIP (Yang et al, PNAS, 2005) . Consequently, the downstream activation of NFκB is inhibited, with consequent reduction in IL-8 expression. However, the details of how this process works in CF lung epithelial cells have yet to be fully understood. Results: We report here that both oleandrin and digitoxin potently inhibit hypersecretion of IL-8 from CF lung IB3-1 epithelial cells, as previously found. Furthermore, we find that oleandrin protects IκBα from TNFαactivated phosphorylation and degradation, when studied in either CF IB3-1, or [wildtype]CFTR-repaired IB3-1/S9 daughter cells. Thus, consistent with our earlier work, the downstream inhibitory effect on IκBα is independent of the mutation state of CFTR. In addition, in studies with a DNAbased NFκB reporter construct fused to luciferase, we find that TNFα-causes a profound increase in NFκB promoter activity, which is potently inhibited by both oleandrin, and digitoxin. Finally, we co-transfected IB3-1 cells with both the NFκB-reporter construct and plasmids expressing TNFR1, TRADD, and other canonical elements in the TNFα/NFκB signaling pathway. In this case, the most profound increases in NFκB signaling were found when the IB3-1 cells were transfected with TNFR1 and TRADD, both of which were profoundly and potently inhibited by either oleandrin or digitoxin. To identify the components of the TNFR1 Signaling Complex most affected by the cardiac glycosides, we treated CF IB3-1 and repaired IB3-1/S9 cells with exogenous TNFα, and immunoprecipitated the resulting signaling complex with anti-TNFR1. Analysis of the immunoprecipitates by Western blot show that the entire complex (TNFR1, TRADD, TRAF2, and RIP) could be identified in both cell types, and that both active cardiac glycoside drugs potently blocked complex formation. Conclusions: The present data are consistent with our previous report showing that oleandrin and digitoxin potently inhibit IL-8 secretion from CF lung IB3-1 epithelial cells. The drug mechanism, also as previously reported in a different cell type, depends on blocking formation of the TNFR1 Signaling Complex, very likely by interfering with interaction between the activated TNFR1 and the principal intracellular adaptor protein TRADD. References: Srivastava et al, PNAS 101:7693-7698, 2004; Yang et al PNAS 102:9631-9636, 2005. Kreda, S.M.; Jones, L.; Moussa, L.; Fulcher, L.; O'Neal, W.; Lazarowski, E.; Boucher, R. Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and Treatment Center, Univ North Carolina Chapel Hil, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Mucin secretion into the airway lumen is regulated by calcium-dependent exocytosis of specialised granules from epithelial goblet cells. Imbalance of mucin secretion leads to mucus accumulation in the airway lumen and the development of severe CF lung disease. Specific protein complexes are recruited to regulate the exocytosis of the mucin granule, but the SNARE exocytotic core have not been defined in airway goblet cells. In this study, we identify VAMP8 as one of the SNAREs regulating mucin granule exocytosis. VAMP8 mRNA was expressed in human airway tissues, lung, and airway epithelial cells, and deep-sequencing and expression analyses of airway epithelial cells revealed that the VAMP8 transcripts were expressed >10 times higher than other VAMP mRNAs. VAMP8 was immunolocalised mainly to goblet cell mucin granules in human airway epithelial cell cultures and freshly-excised tissues. The function of VAMP8 in airway mucin secretion was tested by RNA interference techniques. Three independent siRNAs and shRNAs targeting VAMP8, reduced mucin secretion induced by PAR agonists, neutrophil elastase, and ATP in two airway epithelial cell culture models. Basal (non-agonist elicited) mucin secretion was also reduced in these experiments. Notably, VAMP8 knockdown was effective in decreasing mucin secretion in airway epithelial cell cultures with induced mucous metaplasia/mucin hypersecretion. Unlike VAMP8 silencing, knockdown of VAMP2 or VAMP3 did not affect mucin secretion. Our data suggest that VAMP8 is an essential SNARE in airway mucin granule exocytosis. Reduction of VAMP8 activity/expression may provide a novel therapeutic target to ameliorate airway mucus obstruction in lung diseases. In previous studies, we showed that the ∆F508-CFTR mutation enhances the iron concentration inside CF-derived airway epithelial cells and in the apical medium of CF-derived airway cells, which stimulates the formation of antibiotic-resistant biofilms by P. aeruginosa on live human airway epithelial cells (1). To identify the mechanism(s) involved in enhanced iron accumulation and release observed in CF cells, compared to WT-corrected cells, we tested the hypotheses that the expression of DMT1, the major divalent metal transporter involved in human iron metabolism, and ferroportin, the only known iron exporter in human cells, were altered by the ∆F508-CFTR mutation. Western blot analysis revealed that CFBE+∆F508 cells and their isogenic WT-corrected counterpart (CFBE+WT) constitutively express an 80-90 kDa DMT1 isoform. Surprisingly, CFBE+∆F508 cells also express an additional DMT1 isoform with an apparent molecular mass of 70-80 kDa. Upon deglycosylation, the molecular masses of both isoforms shifted to ~50 ± 2 kDa, in accordance with the predicted masses of the (+)IRE and (-)IRE isoforms of DMT1. When the cDNA for the DMT1(+)IRE was expressed in CFBE+WT cells, DMT1(+)IRE located to the apical membrane, as shown by cell surface biotinylation, and resulted in enhanced intracellular iron accumulation compared with cells transformed with an empty vector (4.19 ± 1.17 vs 1.80 ± 0.67 µg/g respectively), as measured by ICP-MS. CFBE+∆F508 cells also constitutively express ~3 times more ferroportin protein than CFBE+WT cells. Overexpression of the DMT1(+)IRE isoform in CFBE+WT cells enhanced protein expression of ferroportin at the apical membrane and led to a 1.5-fold increase in iron release into the apical medium compared with cells transfected with an empty vector. Furthermore, overexpression of the (+)IRE isoform in CFBE+WT cells enhanced biofilm formation at the apical surface of these cells. The (+)IRE isoform expressed in CFBE+WT cells increased P. aeruginosa biomass compared to CFBE+WT cells expressing the vector alone (1.59 ± 0.10 vs 1.10 ± 0.09 µm3/µm2 respectively, P=0.0009). In conclusion, the ∆F508 mutation in CFTR induces the expression of the DMT1(+)IRE isoform and upregulates ferroportin expression. Both proteins are expressed in the apical membrane of polarized airway epithelial cells, and are accompanied by increased intracellular iron accumulation and release into the apical medium. The enhanced accumulation and release of iron stimulate the formation of antibiotic resistant P. aeruginosa biofilms, which are responsible, in part, for chronic airway infections in CF. Supported by the NIH (RO1-HL-074175, P20-RR018787, T32-DK-07301) and the CFF (STANTO97RO). (1) Moreau-Marquis S. et al. (2008) Abnormal mucus formation and consequent obstruction of the small airways is the foremost cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Since the discovery of Cl − impermeability, CF pathology has largely been recognized as a defect in epithelial Cl − transport. However, loss of bicarbonate (HCO 3 − ) transport also plays a major role, especially in the pancreas where the absence of HCO 3 − secretion leads to the destruction of the organ. In other organs, reduced HCO 3 − transport may cause pathological changes in CF. In duodenum, bile duct, small intestine, and female reproductive tract, CFTR also supports HCO 3 − secretion and in an early study, Smith and Welsh (1992) reported that HCO 3 − secretion is through an apical CFTR that is defective in CF cultured airway cells. However, whether HCO 3 − is secreted in native small airways is not known. We have developed a novel, micro-Ussing system to investigate the properties of HCO 3 − transport in native porcine small airways and shown that the small airways are capable of secreting HCO 3 − when stimulated with cAMP and Ca 2+ mediated agonists. We assayed HCO 3 − transport indirectly as the equivalent short circuit current (I sc eq ) with bilateral 25 mM HCO 3 − plus 125 mM NaGlu Ringers' in presence of amiloride (10 µM) in the lumen and stimulated with different agonists. With apical Fsk (10 µM) plus IBMX (100 µM), PGE2 (1 µM), UTP (100 µM), ATP (100 µM) and Isoproteronol (ISP,10 µM), increased I sc eq significantly by (mean ± S.E.) 13.8 ± 3.2 (n=10), 20.9 ± 5.7 (n=7), 8.3 ± 1.5 (n=5), 15.5 ± 3.2 (n=4) and 9.6 ± 1.4 (n=4) µA/cm 2 respectively (Table) . We tested for the inhibition by known blockers GlyH-101 (50 µM), DIDS (100 µM) and acetazolamide (100 µM) and measured the changes of transepithelial potential (V t ), conductance (G t ) and I sc eq . Since there is no permeable anion other than HCO 3 − , the changes in I sc eq following stimulation and effectively blocked by inhibitors provide strong indirect evidence of HCO 3 − transport in small airway epithelia (Table) . These results also suggested that HCO 3 − secretion is physiologically regulated, which may have a critical role in abnormal mucus clearance in CF affected organs (Quinton, 2010) . Supported by the Nancy Olmsted Trust, NIH (R01-HL084042) and Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Submucosal glands (SMGs) are a source of slow-cycling progenitor cells in the proximal airway, and in cystic fibrosis (CF) these structures have defective secretions due to a lack of functional CFTR chloride channels. Little is known about the biologic properties that regulate these nucleotide label-retaining (LRC) progenitor cells or how CFTR defects may influence homeostatic properties of this niche. We discovered that calcitonin generelated peptide (CGRP) activates CFTR-dependent SMG secretions and that this signaling pathway is hyperactivated in the absence of CFTR in humans, pigs, ferrets, and mice. Since CGRP expressing neuroendocrine cells are known components of distal airway progenitor LRC niches, we investigated whether dysregulated CGRP expression in CF SMGs might alter properties of progenitor cells in the glandular niche. In wild-type mice, transient induction of glandular CGRP following airway injury induced SMG progenitor cell proliferation, while maintaining glandular retention of LRC progenitors with a highly proliferative phenotype in vitro. By contrast, CFTRdeficient mice with persistent dysregulated CGRP expression failed to maintain glandular LRC progenitors and formed adaptive niches in the surface airway epithelium where the highly proliferative LRC progenitors resided. In vitro clonal analysis studies demonstrated that CGRP stimulates expansion of airway progenitors with limited potential for self-renewal at the expense of more highly proliferative progenitor cells. The CGRP receptor components (RAMP1 and CLR) were expressed in SMGs, but rarely localized to glandular LRCs, suggesting that CGRP acts to regulate slow cycling progenitors through paracrine effectors. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that CGRP-dependent pathways for CFTR activation are abnormally upregulated in CF SMGs and that the sustained mitogenic signals caused by elevated CGRP expression alters properties of the SMG progenitor cell niche in CF airways. This discovery may have important implications for injury/repair mechanisms in the CF airway. As a result of abnormal CFTR production/function there is limited chloride secretion into the airways of CF patients leading to dehydration of the pericilliary layer and the formation of thick mucus characteristic of the CF lung. However, other chloride channels exist which may be able to compensate for the defective chloride conductance seen in CF cells. One such channel, which is highly permeable to chloride, mediates the ubiquitous Volume Regulated Anion Current (VRAC), which is highly permeable to chloride. VRAC normally functions in cells to maintain cell volume through Regulatory Volume Decrease (RVD), in combination with other ion channels, but it can be activated independently of volume increase by receptor agonists (Zholos et al., 2005) . By exploiting the chloride secreting properties of VRAC, it may be possible to thus restore airway hydration in CF. This study aimed to identify and compare VRAC properties in normal and CF cells using the established cell models (HBE and CFBE cells, respectively) through the biophysical characteristics of the current, as well as with pharmacological tools. With patch clamp technology, using the whole cell configuration, it was possible to examine the VRAC current characteristics. A voltage step protocol was employed to test the steady state channel activity and kinetics at 10mV increments from -100mV and 120mV. To investigate the current-voltage relationship of the channel and the time course and concentration dependence of VRAC pharmacological modulation, a voltage ramp protocol of -100mV to 120 mV over 500ms was used at 20s intervals. A pharmacological profile of the VRAC current was then established using three different agents: 4,4'-Diisothiocyano-2,2'-stilbenedisulfonic acid (DIDS), 5-Nitro-2-(3phenylpropylamino) Benzoic Acid (NPPB) and oxy]butanoic acid (DCPIB). Both HBE and CFBE cells were found to be sensitive to changes in osmolarity, resulting in stimulation of the VRAC current. Analysis of the current density proved it to be similar in both cell types (HBE -130.2 ±85.6 pA/pF, n=7; CFBE -141.2 ±60.6 pA/pF at 120mV, n=10, p= 0.77). The current could also be inhibited by three different chloride channel blockers, and showed identical pharmacological profile in both cell types. Hyperabsorption of sodium across CF airway epithelium was identified over twenty years ago and is a key factor in the progression of airway disease. Much has been learned about mechanisms regulating the function of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), but why sodium transport is specifically increased in CF and how its regulation relates to CFTR function has remained largely elusive. Earlier data suggest that the presence of functional CFTR inverted the cAMP-PKA regulation of ENaC from positive regulation to negative regulation. We have recently reported that the loss of CFTR function triggers a feedback response in epithelial cells leading to increased cAMP signaling that results in cholesterol accumulation. We demonstrated in this work that the cAMP binding competitor Rp-cAMPS reverses cholesterol accumulation to wt distribution. Previous data demonstrating the impact of Rp-cAMPS on cholesterol processing in CF leads to the hypothesis that cholesterol processing contributes to hyperabsorption of sodium across CF airway epithelium. Given the broad impact of Rp-cAMPS in CF epithelial cells and mouse models on CF cell biology, we were interested in determining if Rp-cAMPS could influence amiloride-sensitive transepithelial potential difference (TEPD) in CF mice. Preliminary data demonstrate that treatment of Cftr-/-mice for 12 days with 5 mg/kg/day Rp-cAMPS via osmotic pump reduces amiloride sensitive transepithelial potential difference to wt levels. Baseline TEPD in Cftr-/-mice is reduced from -19.2 +/-2.7 mV in untreated mice to -7.7 +/-0.8 mV (n=6) in Rp-cAMPS treated mice (p < 0.001). The ∆amiloride is reduced from 10.8 +/-0.6 mV to 4.3 +/-0.8 mV (p < 0.01). Membrane cholesterol content in Rp-cAMPS treated mice is reduced to near wt levels, supporting a possible role of cholesterol in this phenotype. In cellular studies, statin treatment of primary renal collecting duct epithelial cells significantly reduces amiloride-sensitive base-line Isc from 28.9 +/-4.1 µA/cm 2 to 15.7 +/-1.8 µA/cm 2 (n=7, p < 0.01). The ∆amiloride is reduced from 25.0 +/-3.7 µA/cm 2 to 12.5 +/-1.2 µA/cm 2 (n=7, p < 0.01) in the presence of mevastatin suggesting sodium transport is being influenced. This reduction is reversible by adding back mevalonate. Studies examining Cftr-/-mice also lacking the cholesterol processing protein NPC1 (Cftr/Npc1 DKO mice) demonstrate a clear reduction in baseline TEPD compared to Cftr-/-mice. Baseline TEPD is reduced from -22.9 +/-1.7 mV in Cftr-/-mice (n=8) to -10.0 +/-0.6 mV in Cftr/Npc1 DKO mice (n=4; p < 0.001). These data demonstrate that secondary effects of the loss of CFTR function on cholesterol processing likely contribute to the phenotype of hyperabsorption of sodium. Supported by NIH/NHLBI grant HL104358-01. Ballard, S.T.; Cooper, J.L. Department of Physiology, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA Sputum from cystic fibrosis (CF) patients contains an unusually high percentage (≥10%) of non-volatile solids. This abnormally thick mucus is thought to be generated by excessively high rates of salt and water absorption across the airway surface epithelium. Because normal porcine tracheal epithelium and CF human nasal epithelium absorb Na + at very similar rates, we tested the hypothesis that porcine tracheas are capable of concentrating native mucus to similarly high percent solids as seen in CF sputum. Porcine tracheas were excised, cannulated, and mounted in a chamber where the tissues were kept in a warm (37°C), humidified atmosphere. Known volumes (87.3±3.9 µl) of mucus, collected the previous day from cannulated tracheas induced to secrete by acetylcholine treatment, were initially placed on the caudal luminal surface of the tracheas and later harvested from the cranial ends at 1 hr, 2 hr, and 4 hr intervals. To minimize mucous liquid secretion by the tracheas during the absorption experiments, these tissues were pretreated with bumetanide and dimethylamiloride, to respectively block transepithelial Cland HCO 3 secretion. Of the total initial mucus volume instilled, we observed that 66.9±4.2%, 62.5±3.8%, and 62.3±6.6% remained after 1 hr, 2 hr, and 4 hr, respectively. The percent solids of the collected mucus (initially 2.0±0.1%) were 3.0±0.3%, 3.5±0.3%, and 4.1±0.3% at 1 hr, 2 hr, and 4 hr, respectively. When the small quantity of basal mucus secretion was accounted for at each time point, the percent solids were 3.0±0.3%, 3.2±0.4%, and 3.5±0.4% at 1 hr, 2 hr, and 4 hr. When comparable instillate volumes (89.9±3.1 µl) of Krebs solution (which contained no biomolecular solids) were added to the tracheas, we observed that 43.1±0.6%, 32.1±5.5%, and 25.8±5.0% remained after 1 hr, 2 hr, and 4 hr, respectively. The residual Krebs instillate volumes were significantly lower than mucus instillate volumes at 1 hr (P<0.05), 2 hr (P<0.001), and 4 hr (P<0.001). The percent solids in the Krebs instillates (initially 1.3±0.4%) were 2.2±0.1%, 3.9±0.5%, and 5.7±0.5% at 1 hr, 2 hr, and 4 hr, respectively. The percent solids in the Krebs instillates increased during the incubations presumably from mixing with the existing mucus on the airway surface and from the basal mucus secretion. These findings suggest that the presence of biomolecules in airway mucus impedes the absorption of salts and water from the airway lumen. From our data, cessation of liquid volume absorption from native mucus appears to occur at about 4% solids. Thus, in porcine trachea, transepithelial absorption of liquid alone appears to be incapable of generating 10% solids mucus. (Supported by CFFT BALLAR07XX0). CF airways exhibit inflammation and mucus overproduction. Airway inflammation induces endoplasmic reticulum stress mediated by activation of Inositol Requiring Enzyme 1 (IRE1α or β). We have reported that IRE1α is functionally relevant for airway epithelial cytokine secretion. In contrast, we have shown that IRE1β is expressed in Clara cells and in mucous airway epithelial cells, but not in ciliated or alveolar type II cells, and regulates mucin production during airway inflammation (Martino, M. E. B. et al: Role of the ER stress transducer IRE1 beta in airway inflammation-induced mucin production. Pediatric Pulmonol. Suppl. 32, 259, 2010) . Utilizing Celsius, a gene expression tool (http://genome.ucla.edu/projects/UGET), we found that IRE1β gene expression is associated with the expression of mucin genes and genes involved in mucin glycosylation/mucin production. These findings led us to hypothesize that IRE1β is required for mucin production by airway mucous cells and regulates the transcription of mucin genes and/or genes involved in mucin glycosylation or mucin production. To test this hypothesis, we performed studies with Calu3 cells, an airway epithelial cell line that expresses mucous cells and secretes mucins. Calu3 cultures exhibiting IRE1β knock-down (via pSIREN IRE1β shRNA) were used to test the mechanism of IRE1β-regulated mucin production. In RT-PCR studies, IRE1β mRNA was up-regulated by interleukin-13 (IL-13), a response coupled to mucous cell metaplasia. Baseline and IL-13-induced IRE1β mRNA levels were knocked-down by ~ 50% in Calu-3 cultures stably expressing IRE1β shRNA, an effect coupled with inhibition of IL-13induced mucus cell metaplasia. While IL-13 up-regulated MUC5AC and MUC5B mRNA levels, and genes involved in mucin production (SAM pointed domain containing ets transcription factor and anterior gradient homolog 2) in control cultures, this effect was blunted in cultures expressing the IRE1β shRNA. Moreover, knock-down of IRE1β inhibited baseline and IL-13-stimulated MUC5AC and MUC5B protein production. To evaluate global effects of IRE1β-regulated gene expression, RNA microarray studies were performed in the two Calu3 cell lines. Knocking down IRE1β blunted IL-13-stimulated transcription of mucins and critical enzymes involved in mucin glycosylation (GALNT12, GALNTL2 and GCNT1). These studies also revealed that IRE1β is functionally coupled to down-regulation of cell cycle/mitosis genes, energy metabolism genes, and, notably, the CFTR gene. Additional studies showed that over-expression of IRE1β facilitates the production of MUC5AC and MUC5B protein in Calu-3 cells. Our findings corroborated the notion that IRE1β is a key regulator of mucin production during airway epithelial inflammation, and suggest that IRE1β stimulates mucin production, at least in part, via inhibition of cell cycle/mitosis genes involved in cell proliferation and stimulation of cell differentiation towards the mucous cell phenotype. Together with our observations that IRE1β is specifically expressed in airway mucous cells, these findings lead to the proposal that IRE1β is an ideal candidate for targeted therapy for airway mucin overproduction in CF. Supported by NIH and the American Asthma Foundation. Calcium-activated Clchannels (CaCCs) are widely expressed in epithelial and non-epithelial cell types, where they facilitate epithelial fluid secretion, smooth muscle contraction, neurosensory signaling, and other functions. TMEM16A (alternative name, anoctamin-1, ANO1) was identified as a CaCC, as its heterologous expression in oocytes and mammalian cells produced outwardly rectifying, Ca 2+ -sensitive Clcurrents. TMEM16A is expressed in epithelial cells in salivary gland, airways, intestine and other tissues, as well as in sensory neurons, smooth muscle and various tumors. Though TMEM16A knockout mice die just after birth because of tracheomalacia, electrophysiological measurements in the neonatal knockout mice suggested TMEM16A involvement in chloride secretion in salivary gland and airway epithelia. Evidence has also been reported for TMEM16A involvement in nociception, intestinal and vascular smooth muscle contraction, and bile formation. TMEM16A activators could be useful research tools for pharmacological dissection of TMEM16A function, and as potential drug candidates for treatment of cystic fibrosis, as well as salivary gland dysfunction, dry eye syndrome and other disorders associated with Clchannel dysfunction. Cell-based functional screening of ~110,000 compounds revealed compounds that activated TMEM16A CaCC conductance without increasing cytoplasmic Ca 2+ . By patch-clamp, Eact 'activators' strongly increased Clcurrent at zero Ca 2+ , whereas Fact 'potentiators' were not active at 0 Ca 2+ but reduced the EC50 for activation by Ca 2+ . Of 682 analogs tested, the most potent activator (Eact) and potentiator (Fact) produced large, sustained CaCC Clcurrents with EC50 of 3-6 µM, and Clconductance comparable to that induced transiently by Ca 2+ -elevating purinergic agonists. Analogs of both activator classes were identified that inhibited TMEM16A Clconductance, support action by direct binding to TMEM16A. Eact strongly increased CaCC conductance in airway submucosal gland epithelial cells, and IL-4-treated bronchial cells, and in human salivary gland epithelial cells. The potential clinical utility of TMEM16A activators was supported by demonstration of increased submucosal gland secretion in human bronchi, salivary gland secretion, and intestinal smooth muscle contraction. TMEM16A activators may thus be useful for drug therapy of cystic fibrosis, dry mouth and slow transit constipation, as well as for pharmacological dissection of TMEM16A function. Background:: Dysfunctional mucociliary clearance (MCC) and inflammation are hallmarks of many airway diseases, including cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS). Enhancing transepithelial Clsecretion in the upper airways by topical administration of Clsecretagogues represents a novel approach to treatment that has not been investigated previously, but could provide advantages over conventional therapies for sinus disease. Resveratrol, a natural polyphenol, is found in vegetables and fruits and has well-known anti-inflammatory properties attributable to the inhibition of NF-κB. Agents with an excellent safety profile that inhibit inflammation and promote epithelial Clsecretion could be of benefit to individuals suffering from mucus-obstructive airway diseases, including CRS. The objectives of the present study were to investigate whether resveratrol promotes transepithelial Cltransport and inhibits KC/IL-8 secretion in sinonasal epithelium. Primary murine nasal septal epithelial (MNSE) [wild type (wt) and transgenic CFTR -/-] and human sinonasal epithelial (HSNE) cultures were used to investigate a mechanistic rationale for an intervention of this type. Cultures were subjected to transepithelial ion transport measurements using pharmacologic manipulation in Ussing chambers. CFTR R-domain phosphorylation and cAMP levels were examined as a test of PKA-dependent activation. In vitro LPS-induced KC/IL-8 secretion was quantified and compared to a panel of intranasal steroids. Clsecretion was also measured in murine models in vivo by nasal potential difference (NPD). Results: Resveratrol (100µM) significantly increased CFTR-mediated Cltransport (change in short-circuit current, ∆ISC) in both MNSE [13.51+/-0.77 vs. 4.4+/-0.66 (control); p<0.05] and HSNE [12.28+/-1.08 vs. 0.69+/-0.32 (control); p<0.05]. Clsecretion across in vivo murine nasal epithelium was also enhanced [-4+/-1.8 vs. -0.8+/-1.7mV (control), p<0.05]. There was no increase in cellular cAMP attributable to resveratrol at the concentrations studied. R-domain phosphorylation, as judged by a biochemical gel shift assay of recombinant R-domain, was also unchanged. Resveratrol significantly inhibited KC/IL-8 secretion in a dose-dependent fashion (pg/mL) at 100, 200, and 500 µM of the compound in MNSE [181+/-39 (100µM) vs. 94+/-16 (200µM) vs. 16+/-22 (500µM) vs. 1195+/-355 (control); p<0.001]. The drug robustly abrogated KC/IL-8 secretion when compared to ciclesonide (765+/-139), triamcinolone (561+/-124), and budesonide (742+/-428), but had similar activity to fluticasone proprionate (65+/-47). Similar effects were demonstrated in HSNE [975+/-244 (100µM) vs. 1825+/-144 (control); p<0.001] with inhibition comparable to fluticasone proprionate (785+/-277). Conclusion: The observation that resveratrol stimulates transepithelial Clsecretion and inhibits IL-8 release indicates a topical formulation is likely to enhance MCC and provide therapeutic benefit following instillation for non-CF CRS. The same intervention could be used to activate residual CFTR activity (e.g. in the setting of F508del-CFTR pharmacologic correction) and ameliorate underlying mucus obstruction and airway inflammation in CF associated sinusitis. TRANSEPITHELIAL ION TRANSPORT THROUGH  CFTR AND TMEM16A IS SUPPRESSED IN HYPOXIC  SINONASAL Introduction: Normal respiratory epithelial mucociliary clearance (MCC) is dependent upon the biological properties of the airway surface liquid (ASL) and transport of ions, such as Cl -. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) represents a predominant Cltransport conduit within respiratory epithelial cells. Secondary Cltransport pathways through calcium-activated chloride channels (CaCCs) also contribute to airway surface liquid homeostasis and provide a potential mechanism to circumvent CF-related airway defects in mucus clearance. Sinus ostia closure from edema is thought to lead to hypoxia and a resultant propagation of sinusitis due to the development of mucus stasis and anaerobic infection. Hypoxic surface airway epithelium has been shown previously to develop acquired defects in CFTR-mediated anion transport, but a link to persistent, defective mucociliary clearance in chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) has yet to be elucidated. In the present experiments, primary murine nasal septal epithelial (MNSE) -wild type (wt) and transgenic CFTR -/and human sinonasal epithelial (HSNE) cultures were incubated under hypoxic conditions (1% oxygen, 5% CO 2 ). Cultures were mounted in Ussing chambers for ion transport measurements. ASL depth was monitored using confocal laser scanning microscopy. CFTR and TMEM16A expression were measured using quantitative RT-PCR. Protein expression and apical localization of TMEM16A protein was confirmed with immunoblot and immunofluorescence, respectively. Results: The change in short-circuit current (∆I SC (µA/cm 2 )) attributable to both CFTR (forskolin-stimulated) and TMEM16A (UTP-stimulated) transport was significantly decreased by hypoxia at 12 hours in both MNSE [CFTR, [5.3+/-0.9 vs. 8 .9+/-0.6 (control), p<0.05]. Western blotting confirmed that the TMEM16A channel protein was present in MNSE with apical localization verified at the base of cilia. Conclusions: Sinonasal epithelial CFTR and TMEM16A-mediated Cltransport, mRNA expression, and ASL were strongly decreased in an oxygen restricted environment. These findings indicate persistent hypoxia may lead to acquired defects in Cltransport and have broad implications for rescue strategies aimed at restoring CFTR and TMEM16A in both CF-and non-CF related CRS. The coordinated activity of protein kinases and phosphatases controls the phosphorylation state of CFTR and may play an important part in its physiological regulation. However, the role of tyrosine phosphorylation in CFTR function remains unclear as both genistein and sodium orthovanadate (tyrosine kinase and phosphatase inhibitors, respectively) are reported to increase CFTR function. The current study investigates the role of tyrosine phosphorylation in CFTR function through the use of the cell-permeable tyrosine phosphatase inhibitor sodium orthovanadate (Na 3 VO 4 ). Based on previous work using expression systems, it is hypothesised that Na 3 VO 4 [i.e. increased tyrosine phosphorylation] will increase the activity of CFTR, resulting in an increase in the CFTR inh172 -sensitive outward and inward conductances (G out and G in respectively), measured using the whole cell patch clamp technique. However, pre-incubating cells in 10mM Na 3 VO 4 prior to stimulation with 10µM forskolin/100µM IBMX resulted in a significant decrease in G out from 796 ± 154 µS/cm 2 to 220 ± 76 µS/cm 2 (P<0.005 unpaired t-test) and G in from 658 ± 127 µS/cm 2 to 200 ± 71 µS/cm 2 (P<0.005 unpaired t-test). We found 10mM Na 3 VO 4 also acted as a direct, reversible blocker of CFTR when applied directly to the bath solution after cAMP stimulation, causing a similar and significant decrease in G out and G in . The pre-incubation experiments were repeated at 1mM Na 3 VO 4 with no effect, suggesting that there may be a dose-dependent effect of Na 3 VO 4 on the function of CFTR. So far, these data suggest that, in 16HBE14o-cells, 10mM Na 3 VO 4 has an inhibitory effect on CFTR, potentially by maintaining the phosphorylation of CFTR itself or an associated regulatory protein. Further work is underway to shed more light on the role of tyrosine kinases and phosphatases in CFTR function. Funded by the BBSRC and The Wellcome Trust. We recently showed that store-operated Ca 2+ entry (SOCE) is elevated in CF human airway epithelial cells (hAEC) due to increased insertion of Orai1 calcium channels into the plasma membrane, and that SOCE is normalized by the trafficking of CFTR to the plasma membrane (Balghi et al., submitted) . Elevated Orai1 expression has also been implicated in the proliferation of smooth muscle and endothelial cells (Abdullaev et al., Circ Res.103:1289 -1299 , 2008 , and increased proliferation has been demonstrated in CF airways and the gastrointestinal tract of CF mice. Although mechanisms remain uncertain, the increased proliferation of CF cells is proposed to be a secondary consequence of inflammation, perhaps mediated by upregulation of EGFR signalling in basal cells. Increased proliferation could exacerbate CF symptoms, but it may also play a beneficial role during epithelial repair, therefore we examined the possible role of Orai1-mediated Ca 2+ influx in CF airway epithelial cell proliferation in vitro. Methods: SOCE-dependent proliferation was assessed using CFBE cells expressing WT-or F508del-CFTR. Cells were synchronized at the G1 phase of the cell cycle by incubation in low serum medium containing aphidicolin (0.4µg/mL). The number of viable cells was determined at four time points (24, 48, 72 and 96 h) , and cells were sorted by flow cytometry, immunostained for a marker of proliferation (the nuclear protein KI-67), and imaged by confocal microscopy as a parallel assay of cell proliferation. The dependence of cell proliferation on Orai1-mediated SOCE was determined using the Orai1 channel blocker 2-APB and also by silencing Orai1 gene expression using siRNA. Results: The proliferation of CFBE cells expressing F508del-CFTR was significantly increased compared to those expressing WT-CFTR when cultured for 48, 72 and 96 h in complete medium containing 10% FBS (increased by 25%, 75% and 45%, respectively). Confocal images of F508del-CFTR cells immunostained for KI-67 confirmed a larger proliferative cell population compared to WT-CFTR cells. Most importantly, the proliferation rates of CFBE cells expressing WT-CFTR and F508del-CFTR were both decreased significantly in the presence of the Orai1 blocker 2-APB (50µM). Conclusion: These results suggest: 1) proliferation of CF airway epithelial cells (CFBE) is increased compared to cells expressing WT CFTR, and 2) this increase in proliferation depends on abnormal calcium signaling (i.e. elevated SOCE) in CF cells. Orai1 has been identified as a potential target for anti-inflammatory drugs (Di Sabatino et al., J Immunol. 183:3454-62, 2009; Roberts-Thomson et al., Pharmacol Ther. 127:121-30, 2010) , however the present results show that Orai1 blockers can also inhibit airway epithelial cell proliferation, therefore new pharmacotherapies that target Orai1 in inflammation will need to be tested for adverse effects on epithelial repair. Supported by a Cystic Fibrosis Canada (CFC) fellowship to H.B. and grants from CFC (JWH) and CIHR (DYT, JWH). A prominent feature of cultured cystic fibrosis (CF) cells is perinuclear cholesterol accumulation. It is altered as a consequence of the loss of CFTR function, but exact mechanisms linking this accumulation to CFTR function are unknown. The hypothesis of this study is that loss of CFTR function alters microtubule (MT) structure impeding endosomal trafficking. Acute treatment of wt epithelial (9/HTEo-) cells with the CFTR inhibitor, CFTRinh172, results in a shortening of MTs as determined by immunofluorescent staining of alpha-tubulin. Dose and time curves reveal that 6 h exposure to 10 µM CFTRinh172 results in maximized MT effects that are stable through 24 h. Re-elongation occurs by 48 h posttreatment. Treatment of CF-model cells with CFTRInh172 has no effect on MT structure, supporting the hypothesis that acute inhibition of CFTR function has a direct impact on microtubules. To examine MTs in response to chronic loss of CFTR function, two cultured cell lines (IB3 and 9/HTEo-pCEPR) were examined for MT stability by assessing the level of MT acetylation. Immunofluorescent staining of both cell lines exhibit distinct reductions in MT acetylation with distribution in CF cells being centered near the nucleus in comparison to respective controls. To quantify alpha-tubulin acetylation and to provide an in vivo correlation to cultured cell studies, Western blot analysis of acetylated-alpha-tubulin was performed. Both IB3 cells and mouse nasal epithelium exhibit at least a two-fold decrease relative to controls. These data suggest that a loss of CFTR function has acute impact on MT structure, which has a chronic influence on MT stability markers. To address whether reduced MT acetylation has an impact on CF phenotypes, cholesterol accumulation and related signaling protein profiles were examined in response to the treatment of CF cells with the HDAC6 inhibitor, tubacin (10 µM). HDAC6 is a histone deacetylase family member that specifically deacetylates alpha-tubulin. HDAC6 inhibition results in restored distribution of acetylated MTs and increased acetylated-alpha-tubulin in CF model cells. CF cells treated with tubacin exhibit reduced cholesterol accumulation with a normalized distribution pattern. Increased expression of the signaling proteins RhoA and STAT1, characteristic of CF cells that we previously demonstrated, are related to cholesterol processing changes also exhibit wt levels of expression in response to HDAC6 inhibition. Restoration of wt profiles of RhoA and STAT1 expression levels offer further evidence that cholesterol processing is being restored in CF cells in response to tubacin. Reduced MT acetylation can reduce kinesin binding leading to a potential bias towards dynein-mediated retrograde transport. To begin testing this hypothesis, the effect of dynein inhibition with EHNA on cholesterol accumulation in CF cells was examined. EHNA alleviates cholesterol accumulation in a time and dose dependent manner. It is concluded from these studies that loss of CFTR function reduces MT stability, leading to reduced endosomal trafficking and increased cholesterol accumulation, which initiates downstream signaling events. Supported by NIH/NHLBI grant HL104358-01 and a grant from the CFF. Wallace, H.L. 1 ; Connell, M.G. 2 ; Wray, S. 1 ; Southern, K.W. 2 ; Burdyga, T. 1 1. Cellular and Molecular Physiology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom; 2. Child Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom Introduction: Recent data point toward changes in tracheal cartilage structure and altered airway smooth muscle (ASM) exacerbating respiratory dysfunction in cystic fibrosis (CF). To date, no clear role of altered contraction has been established and the possible mechanisms involved are unclear. We performed functional smooth muscle studies and morphological analysis to determine the extent and implications of ASM abnormalities in the CF mouse trachea. Methods: Smooth muscle function was measured using tracheal rings isolated from 6 week old heterozygous (+/-) and homozygous (-/-) cftr tm1Cam MF1/129 mice. Contractile responses to the agonist carbachol (CCh 50µm) in Ca ++ free solution were measured and normalised to a 40 second application of 120 mM high K + solution (100%). The role of Rho-kinase in contraction was determined by measuring changes in contraction after incubating rings with Rho-kinase inhibitor H-1152 for 15 minutes. For morphological analysis, whole tracheas were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, embedded in 5% gelatine and 20% sucrose and snap frozen. Seven micron cryosections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin and labelled with anti-actin, αsmooth muscle-Cy3 monoclonal antibody. Sections were observed and photographed under a fluorescent microscope. Results: The amplitude of contraction in response to CCh was decreased in CF mice compared to controls (89.6±5% (cftr -/-) n=6, 118.5±5% (cftr +/-) n=6, p<0.01). The duration of contraction after K + depolarisation was also decreased in CF mice after incubation with H-1152 compared to controls (30.2±6.3s shorter in cftr -/-, 10.7± 5.4s,(cftr +/-) p<0.01). Cross sectional areas of CF trachea were 25.2% smaller (p<0.01) and less circular than controls (0.73±0.02 (cftr -/-) 0.84±0.008 (cftr +/-) p<0.01). Trachea lumens were also smaller when normalised to cross sectional area (40.7±2.5% (cftr -/-) 48±1.7% (cftr +/-) p<0.01). Smooth muscle area was reduced in CF tracheas; however when normalised to whole trachea area, there was no significant difference between genotypes (2.88±0.18% (cftr -/-), 3.25±0.3% (cftr +/-). Conclusion: These data indicate a loss in contractile capacity of the trachea in Ca ++ free conditions. This suggests a reduction in the release of Ca ++ from the sarcoplasmic reticulum leading to a decrease in force. Data also suggest that the role of calcium dependent activation of Rho kinase in contraction may be elevated in the mouse CF airway. Morphological analysis showed that the reduction in ASM contractility is not due to a reduction in smooth muscle area, but is a consequence of altered ASM function. (CF) . One of these, VX-770, is now in Phase III clinical testing, and increases channel open probability (Po) in both G551D and wild type CFTR, resulting in enhanced anion transport. The potentiator VRT-532 is also thought to increase CFTR-mediated Cltransport by augmenting channel opening, while other molecules, such as the isoxazole UC CF -152, induce PKA-dependent phosphorylation of the CFTR R domain. Little information is available regarding the properties of CFTR modulators and their effects on ciliary beating, including ciliary beat frequency (CBF). In addition, although the ion transport properties of the nasal airways are a key testing site for CFTR potentiators (e.g. nasal potential difference measurement), the impact of potentiator agents on ciliary beat frequency in sinonasal epithelium -a crucial mechanism responsible for mucociliary clearance (MCC) of the sinus cavities -has not been tested previously. In the present experiments, we used a primary respiratory cell culture model of human sinonasal epithelium (HSNE) to compare stimulation of CFTRmediated Clconductance and ciliary beat frequency (CBF) by the potentiators VX-770, VRT-532, and UC CF -152. Results: HSNE cultures were examined in Ussing chambers using pharmacologic manipulation of ion transport (∆I SC , expressed as µA/cm 2 ). CBF was analyzed with high speed digital imaging following apical exposure and compared to controls (under submerged conditions). VX-770 activated CFTR-dependent anion transport (VX-770 16.52+/-1.95) in the absence of forskolin greater than VRT-532 (8.83+/-0.44, p<0.001), UC CF -152 (4.24+/-0.33, p<0.001) and DMSO vehicle control (0.82+/-0.03, p<0.001). Maximal stimulation of CFTR (potentiator + forskolin(100 nM) was similar between groups (VX-770: 28.44+/-2.11; VRT-532: 32.11+/-1.37; UC CF -152: 29.17+/-2.35) indicating a consistent ion transport phenotype between cultured cells. Blockade of I SC by CFTR INH -172 was robust in all groups, signifying CFTR dependence. All potentiators activated CBF compared to baseline and were significantly greater than cells treated with vehicle control (VX-770: 1.47+/-0.06 fold over baseline; (p<0.05); VRT-532: 1.38+/-0.16 (p<0.05); UC CF -152: 1.44+/-0.02 (p<0.05) versus DMSO: 1.27+/-0.01). Conclusion: VX-770 strongly activates transepithelial Cltransport and CBF in primary cultured sinonasal epithelium, indicating pronounced activity in a CF relevant tissue other than the lower respiratory epithelium. While anion transport varied across 3 different CFTR modulators, the degree of CBF stimulation did not depend on the magnitude of Clsecretion, suggesting a threshold of activation may be required to augment cilia beating. In addition, these studies establish a basis for clinical testing CFTR activators on markers of sinonasal mucociliary clearance. Introduction: Airborne pollutants are a considerable health concern and can worsen respiratory diseases such as cystic fibrosis (CF). We have previously described new synchrotron imaging techniques for examining the mucociliary transit (MCT) behavior of solid particulates in the nasal airways and trachea of anaesthetised mice. Our previous studies delivered particulates in a fluid bolus, however the presence of the carrier fluid perturbed the airway surface and would have altered both the manner of deposition and post-deposition MCT behaviour that we sought to measure. The aim of this study was to verify that synchrotron phase contrast X-ray imaging (PCXI) can be used to detect, monitor and compare the deposition and MCT behaviour of pollutant and marker particles after dry deposition into the trachea of live mice. Material and Methods: Intubated (flexiVent ventilation) C57Bl/6 mice (n=6) were imaged on the BL20B2 beamline at the SPring-8 synchrotron in Japan. Particles of fibreglass, quarry dust and lead ore (ground galena) as well as reference 14 µm hollow glass beads and tantalum carbide powder were delivered to the trachea via the ET tube using a DP-4 dry powder insufflator and AP-1 air pump (PennCentury, Wyndmoor, PA, USA). Images of the trachea with an effective pixel size of 0.45 µm were captured at a rate of one per breath (in an end-inspiratory pause) for five minutes using a highresolution camera. Images were enhanced post-experiment and assembled into movies showing particle motion. Results: The first movement of particulates appeared 2-3 minutes after delivery. As in previous studies the particle transit was heterogeneous: after deposition some particles did not move, while others transited the field of view rapidly. The large and heavy particles lead and tantalum moved substantially less than the other particulates after deposition. In addition, most particles did not follow a linear path along the airway: many followed seemingly random, tortuous paths. There was more movement of particles along the bottom quarter of the tracheal surface than the remainder of the trachea, possibly due to the quantity of fluid present and gravitational effects. In some animals we also saw radial and axial contraction of the tracheal airway throughout the imaging period. Conclusion: PCXI permits detection of particle transit via MCT along live mouse trachea after dry deposition. We are continuing with studies to improve our direct and non-invasive MCT assessment methods to assist our understanding and treatment of respiratory diseases such as CF. DUOX1 is an NADPH oxidase expressed apically in airway epithelial cells. DUOX generates intracellular protons, which are secreted into the airway surface liquid along a pH gradient that is thought to be maintained in vivo by bicarbonate secretion through CFTR. This study describes the effects of Ca 2+ agonists on DUOX function measured by intracellular acid production. We performed experiments on JME nasal surface cells loaded with the pH-reporter dye BCECF and examined by fluorescent microscopy. Experiments were done in nominally bicarbonate-free, HEPES-buffered solutions. A 3 to 5 point calibration was used to determine the pH and the intracellular acid production was calculated using the buffer capacity of JME cells. Baseline pH was 7.34 +/-0.08 (n = 23) in JME cells. The addition of 500 µM amiloride acidified pH i based on a cellular acid concentration increase of 91.5 nM. When 100 µM ATP or 200 nM ionomycin were added in the presence of amiloride to stimulate DUOX-dependent proton release, JME cells generated an additional 220 nM or 76 nM acid increase respectively. In the presence of 2 µM DPI (a DUOX inhibitor), JME cells generated significantly less protons. In separate experiments, JME cells loaded with the Ca 2+ reporter dye fura-2 exhibited [Ca 2+ ] i spikes averaging 600 nM and 300 nM over baseline intracellular levels when stimulated with ATP or ionomycin respectively. These data indicate that JME cells produce substantial intracellular acid when stimulated with Ca 2+ agonists. Approximately 80% of this acid is produced by a Ca 2+ -dependent DUOX mechanism. Funded by NIH/NHLBI HL86323, CF Foundation (FISCHE10G0), and the Beverly M. Folgers Foundation. In cystic fibrosis (CF), the role of tight junctions (TJ) in the binding and cytoxicity of P. aeruginosa to apical or basolateral membranes of airway epithelial cells (AEC) has been proposed, and the apical targeting of CFTR was shown to be controlled by the level of AEC polarization. However, the mechanisms underlying the relationship between alteration of the permeability in CF AEC, TJ, and CFTR remains uninvestigated. While investigating the role of Gα12 and Gα13, two heterotrimeric G proteins, in the development of TJ in AEC, we observed that treatment of confluent monolayers of normal (16HBE14o-) and corrected CFBE41o-(CFBE41o-wt), but not CF (CFBE41o-), AEC lines with AlF-4 (activator of heterotrimeric G protein α subunits) results in a 3-4-fold increase in transepithelial resistance (TER), a reliable indicator of TJ integrity. These results suggest a potential role of the G proteins in the airway TER. Using semi-and quantitative-PCR, and Western blotting, we found that CFBE41o-cell lines exhibit a marked increase in Gα12 and Gα13 and a decrease in Ecad and ZO-1 that has been corrected in CFBE41o-wt. These results were confirmed in non-CF and CF (∆F/∆F) freshly excised bronchus. By confocal microscopy we detected disrupted tight and adherent junction proteins with increased actin stress fibers in CFBE41o-compared to 16HBE14o-and CFBE41o-wt. We also showed that the interaction of Gα12 and Gα13 to ZO-1 and Ecad was perturbed in CFBE41o-cell line. Gα12 and Gα13 phosphorylations under chronic activation of PKC decreased the level of TER in CFBE41o-wt and 16HBE14o-. Down-regulation, using siRNA, of either Gα12 or Gα13 mRNA, or pharmacological treatment designed to inhibit the downstream activity of Gα12 and Gα13 increased the TER level in CFBE41o-. Compared with 16HBE14o-(high TER), the CFBE41o (low TER) and EGTA-treated 16HBE14o-monolayers were more susceptible to green fluorescent P. aeruginosa binding throughout the monolayer. Altogether these results showed that the increase of Gα12 and Gα13 expression observed in CF might be responsible for the loss of airway epithelial barrier. Expression of the recently discovered TMEM16A protein is associated with chloride channel activity (Ferrera et al., Physiology 25: 357-363, 2010) . Transfection of TMEM16A in null cells elicits the appearance of calcium-activated chloride channels (CaCCs) whose properties can be altered by site-specific mutagenesis of TMEM16A amino acid sequence. TMEM16A protein may represent a potential drug target in cystic fibrosis. Indeed, its pharmacological stimulation in airway epithelial cells may result in enhanced chloride secretion. However, it has been recently proposed that TMEM16A has a minimal role in calcium-activated chloride secretion in epithelial cells and that other channel proteins are instead more relevant (Namkung et al., J. Biol. Chem. 286: 2365 -2374 , 2011 . To elucidate this issue, we have analyzed the properties of TMEM16A protein in native and heterologous expression systems by functional (patchclamp, Ussing chamber) and biochemical assays. We have compared the endogenous calcium-activated chloride currents of pancreatic CFPAC-1 cells with the currents elicited by stable transfection of TMEM16A in FRT cells. The currents were similar in terms of calcium sensitivity, voltagedependence and requirement for intracellular ATP. In particular the half effective intracellular calcium concentration in whole-cell patch-clamp experiments was 140 and 160 nM in CFPAC-1 and FRT cells, respectively. Furthermore, CaCCs were equally abolished in both cell types when ATP was removed from the intracellular solution. Western blot and immunofluorescence experiments detected high levels of TMEM16A protein in CFPAC-1 cells. In primary cultures of human bronchial epithelial cells from CF patients and control individuals, TMEM16A protein was instead expressed at very low levels. However, treatment with IL-4 (10 ng/mL) for 24 hours caused a more than 10-fold increase in TMEM16A protein expression and a nearly 6-fold increase in calcium-dependent chloride secretion. Silencing of TMEM16A by siRNA caused a significant inhibition of chloride transport in both treated and untreated bronchial epithelial cells. Confocal microscopy confirmed the large increase in expression of TMEM16A protein after IL-4 treatment, with a predominant localization in the apical membrane. Our results suggest that TMEM16A protein works as a CaCC in CFPAC-1 cells and bronchial epithelial cells treated with IL-4. It is possible that another protein mediates CaCC function in untreated bronchial cells. Alternatively, it may be hypothesized that relatively low levels of TMEM16A protein in unstimulated cells are enough to support significant chloride secretion. Supported by Telethon Foundation, Italian Foundation for Cystic Fibrosis (FFC), and CFF. CF is characterized by defects in chloride, bicarbonate and fluid transport across epithelia, however the cellular mechanisms of secretion in some tissues remain poorly understood. We have examined the interdependence of Cland HCO 3 fluxes and their involvement in cAMP stimulated fluid secretion using the model human airway cell line Calu-3. To study anion transport in Ussing chambers we measured the short-circuit current (I sc ) under voltage clamp and calculated the equivalent short-circuit current (I eq ) under open circuit conditions. We quantified net HCO 3 -(J netHCO3-) and Cl -(J netCl-) transport using pH-stat and unidirectional 36 Clflux measurements, respectively. We measured the volume and composition of secretions aspirated from the surface of Transwells® under control conditions and following ion substitutions, and compared normal Calu-3 monolayers with CFTR-deficient cells. Forskolin stimulated I eq from 0.8±0.1 to 2.7±0.1 µeq h -1 cm -2 , and this CFTR-dependent current was accounted for by increases in J netCl-from 0.6±0.1 to 1.5±0.02 and J netHCO3-from 0.2±0.1 to 1.1±0.1 µeq h -1 cm -2 . Forskolin also stimulated fluid secretion from 1.9±0.3 to 45.1±2.7 µl day -1 cm -2 . Bumetanide reduced fluid secretion by ~20%, but had no effect on HCO 3 transport. Although forskolin-stimulated anion and fluid secretion were both abolished in Na + -free or HCO 3 --free solution, J netHCO3-was increased slightly in Cl --free solution. DIDS, which inhibits Na + ,HCO 3 cotransporters (NBC) and many anion exchangers, reduced I eq and J netHCO3in both normal and Cl --free solution. Using apically-permeabilized monolayers we demonstrated an exchange of intracellular HCO 3 for basolateral Clor NO 3 -, but not for basolateral gluconate, consistent with the selectivity of anion exchangers. Adding NO 3 to low-Clmedium restored fluid secretion, indicating an important role for the anion exchanger in fluid secretion. The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor acetazolamide reduced anion and fluid secretion by ~50%. Our data show that basolateral anion exchange plays an important role in Clloading and fluid secretion by Calu-3 monolayers. NBC mediates basolateral HCO 3 entry and carbonic anhydrase contributes significantly to the intracellular accumulation of HCO 3 -. Although HCO 3 is essential for fluid secretion, most intracellular HCO 3 that is accumulated by NBC and synthesis is recycled to the basolateral side in exchange for extracellular Cl -, and fluid transport depends on J netCl-rather than J netHCO3-. Na + ,K + ,2Clcotransporter contributes a small fraction of the Clloading in this preparation, which may be secondary to cell shrinkage. Finally, HCO 3 secretion persists in Cl --free solution and is sensitive to CFTR blockers, therefore apical HCO 3 exit is mediated by CFTR channels, not anion exchangers. Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Canada. Mechanical stimulation has long been known to play a significant role in lung physiology, beginning with alveolar type II cell surfactant release. In part, the effects in both alveoli and the airways have been attributed to a mechanically sensitive release of ATP and subsequent stimulation of P2Y2 receptors (P2Y2-R). Though mucin secretion has been suspected for being mechanically sensitive for nearly as long (e.g., Am J Physiol 284: L945-954, 2003; Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 163:208-213, 2008) , there has been no formal investigation of the phenomenon. Using HBE cell culture and perfused mouse trachea models, we have tested whether mucin secretion is mechanically sensitive, and have investigated its possible mechanism. In HBE cells subjected to a series of carefully applied luminal washes to removed accumulated mucus, the rate of mucin release during a subsequent incubation in the absence of exogenous agonist was dependent on the length of the incubation. That is, a short incubation yielded a much higher rate of mucin release than a long one, suggesting that the stress of the preceding luminal wash procedure stimulated mucin secretion. Further results revealed that mucin secretion declines exponentially after the luminal wash procedure, reaching static levels with a significantly low rate in 8 hours. Similarly, the rate of mucin release from mouse tracheas in the absence of exogenous agonist was higher in those that were perfused continuously, relatively to tracheas in which perfusion was stopped for a period, then restarted to wash out the secreted mucins. More interesting, in preliminary experiments this perfusion-induced mucin secretion was not diminished when using tracheas dissected from P2Y2-R knockout mice, suggesting that the mechanical sensitivity is not dependent on ATP secretion. The tracheas from OVA sensitized and challenged mice, which contain more mucin material, demonstrate higher rates of both baseline and mechanically-stimulated mucin secretion. Interestingly, basal mucin release under two different flow rates (10µl/min vs. 35µl/min) were similar, suggesting that mechanical sensitive mucin secretion has a threshold. Munc13-2, an important exocytotic protein regulating baseline mucin secretion, is not involved in mechanically-stimulated mucin secretion. In conclusion, mechanical stimulation induces mucin secretion from both mouse and human airway epithelium. This sensitivity likely plays an important physiological role in stimulating mucin secretion in the mechanically dynamic lung, both under 'basal' conditions and during work or exercise. The strength of basal mucin secretion appears to correlate with the amount of mucins stored in the airway epithelium, and mucin release may have a threshold. Finally, our results indicate that pathways regulating mucin release in response to mechanical stimulation may differ from known regulatory pathways, since two major mucin secretion mediators, P2Y2-R and Munc13-2, do not appear to be involved. These studies were supported by grants from the NIH (HL063756) and the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a chronic lung disease that is characterized by increased neutrophil elastase (NE) in the airways and lungs. We have previously reported that NE treatment increased expression of p27, a cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor, and cell cycle arrest. Importantly, cell cycle arrest can lead to senescence, a complete loss of replicative capacity. Objective: We propose that NE may trigger premature senescence in chronic inflammatory respiratory diseases, like CF. We hypothesize NE triggers epithelial senescence by upregulating expression of the senescence biomarker cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p16, which inhibits cyclin dependent kinase 4 (CDK4). We also evaluated a senescence biomarker and indicator of telomere dysfunction phospho-Histone H2A.X (γH2A.X), as well as phospho-Chk2, a protein kinase that is involved with cell cycle arrest and is activated in response to DNA damage. Additionally, we tested whether NE treatment increases p16 protein expression and correspondingly decreases CDK 4 activity in normal human bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells in culture. Methods: Sections from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded airway tissue from CF patients and corresponding normal subjects were obtained from Duke Pathology with appropriate IRB approval. Immunohistochemistry was performed with high temperature antigen retrieval and mouse monoclonal anti-human antibodies for p16 or γH2A.X, and a rabbit monoclonal antihuman antibody for phospho-Chk2. NHBE cells were grown in serum-free growth factor supplemented DMEM:F12 in air-liquid interface cultures. Cells were treated with NE (0, 200 and 500 nM) for 2-5 hours to induce visible injury. Total cell lysates were collected and then evaluated by Western analysis for p16 protein expression and CDK4 kinase activity. Results: Compared to normal controls, CF patients demonstrated increased p16, γH2A.X, and phospho-Chk2 expression in airway epithelial cells. Both 200 and 500 nM NE significantly increased p16 expression and decreased CDK4 kinase activity in NHBE cells. Conclusions: CF patient airways, which have chronic high levels of NE, have epithelial cells with increased p16, γH2A.X, and phospho-Chk2 expression. In addition, in vitro NE treatment of NHBE cells significantly increased p16 expression and decreased CDK4 activity. These results suggest that NE-induced epithelial injury triggers premature senescence in CF. This may cause abnormal airway repair as well as exaggerated inflammation in CF patients. Support: NIH, Alpha-1 Foundation, Duke School of Medicine. The thin liquid layer lining the alveolar space is essential for maintaining efficient gas exchange, surfactant homeostasis, and defense against inhaled toxins/pathogens. Airway epithelial cells actively secrete or absorb ions in response to local stimuli to coordinately regulate the liquid layer lining airway surfaces. However, it remains unclear whether the alveolar epithelium exhibits similar purinergic-mediated regulation of the alveolar surface liquid (AvSL) layer, and if so, what is the mechanism(s) of regulation. Since it has been difficult to achieve a unified understanding of the surface liquid physiology within the intact alveolus, in vitro studies were performed using primary human alveolar type II (AT2) cells. In marked contrast to primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells, β-agonists coordinately activate ENaC and CFTR in AT2 cells. This observation may suggest that these two channels reside in "separate" compartments at the surface and do not interact with each other as proposed for HBE cells. Preliminary immunoprecipitation data may suggest that CFTR and ENaC are not in the same "IP-able" compartment. Studies in other cell types have suggested P2YR/Gq/11 regulation of CFTR via PKC, activation of Ca +2sensitive adenylate cyclase cAMP, or PG synthase-PIP2/E2 autocrine stimulation of CFTR. In our studies, we demonstrate that UTP/ATP raises cAMP by a Ca +2 -dependent adenylate cyclase signaling pathway in human AT2 cells. The increase in cAMP activates CFTR-mediated Clcurrent that reflects both activation of P0, as well as an increase in apical membrane CFTR channel number (N). On the other hand, few studies have tried to partition P2YR regulation of ENaC into effects on P0 or N with no such data reported in AT2 cells. We observe P2YR/Gq/11 signaling through PLCβ/PKC to inhibit ENaC in AT2 cells. Furthermore, our preliminary patch and bioelectric data suggest Na + currents may be regulated by both P0 and N-dependent mechanisms. Therefore, our data demonstrates that UTP/ATP inhibition of ENaC is: 1) a relatively slow process [t 1/2 = 1-2 min]; 2) is equally effective with apical or basolateral administration; and 3) is BAPTA-and PKC inhibitor-sensitive. Understanding how this complex interaction of the purinergic signaling pathway and ion/liquid transport are integrated to maintain the delicate thin AvSL layer may aid in the design of more effective therapies to treat certain alveolar diseases. Huang, J. 1 ; Shan, J. 1 ; Alper, S.L. 2 The anion exchanger type 2 (AE2) carries out Na + -independent Cl -/HCO 3 exchange in non-epithelial cells and at the basolateral membrane of many epithelia, however its role in transport across airway epithelial cells is poorly understood. We have identified the splice variants AE2a and AE2b2 in the Calu-3 cell line, a commonly used model for human airway submucosal gland serous cells. To assess their physiological role, we targeted both variants using lentivirus-mediated RNA interference to generate a stable AE2 knock-down Calu-3 cell line (AE2-KD). AE2 mRNA expression was reduced by 87% according to real-time PCR (n=6), and Western blots revealed ~89% reduction in AE2 protein expression. Stimulation of fluid secretion by cpt-cAMP (200 µmoles/L) and forskolin (10 µmoles/L) was reduced by 60% in AE2-KD cell monolayers when compared with control monolayers (AE2-KD: 36.6±0.6 µL/72h vs Control: 95.8±5.3 µL/72h, n=6, p< 0.0001). Residual secretion by AE2-KD cells was 4-fold more sensitive to basolateral bumetanide (AE2-KD: ~39% inhibition, Control: 10% inhibition; n=6), suggesting a larger fraction of the basolateral Clentry was mediated by the Na + -K + -2Clcotransporter NKCC1. Forskolin stimulated transepithelial currents calculated under open circuit conditions were also attenuated in AE2-KD cells (1.15±0.27 µEq cm -2 h -1 vs 2.18±0.19 µEq cm -2 h -1 , n=3, p<0.0001). pH-stat measurements of basolateral HCO 3 flux in the absorptive direction (produced by imposing an apical-to-basolateral HCO 3 gradient and permeabilizing the apical membrane with 360µg/mL nystatin) indicated that basolateral Cl -/HCO 3 exchange in AE2-KD cells was negligible (0.01±0.01 µEq cm -2 h -1 ) compared to control Calu-3 cells (0.48±0.08 µEq cm -2 h -1 , n=3, p<0.0001). Thus AE2 appears to be the predominant anion exchanger mediating basolateral HCO 3 flux in these cells. Finally, suppressing AE2 levels increased the level of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein by 70% without altering expression of NKCC1 or the sodium bicarbonate cotransporter NBC1 (n=3), perhaps in response to alterations in intracellular pH. These results demonstrate that AE2 mediated Cl -/HCO 3 exchange contributes to basolateral Clentry and plays an important role in anion and fluid secretion by Calu-3 airway epithelial cells. Utilizing an in vitro model consisting of mucosal exposure of primary cultures of well-differentiated human bronchial epithelia (HBE) to supernatant from mucopurulent material (SMM) from CF airways, we have shown that SMM induces inflammation coupled to up-regulation of mucin gene and intracellular protein expression (Ribeiro et al, PLoS ONE; 4(6):e5806, 2009 ). The present study was performed to characterize the effects of SMM on HBE gene expression and production/secretion of MUC5AC and MUC5B protein. HBE exposure to SMM for 48 hr resulted in an up-regulation of MUC5AC and MUC5B mRNA levels in a dosedependent manner (1:0 > 1:3 > 1:10 > 1:30 > 1:100 SMM dilution) vs. control (PBS-exposed) HBE (n=4-5). Time course studies utilizing Western blots from agarose gels with whole cell extracts revealed that SMM at a 1:10 dilution significantly induced immature MUC5B at 16 hr, indicating an increased MUC5B synthesis. In contrast, SMM significantly increased mature MUC5B at 48 hr. Dose response experiments were next conducted to evaluate the effect of SMM on mucin protein production. Histological evaluation of 48 hr SMM-exposed HBE stained with alcian blue-periodic acid Schiff suggested that SMM increased both intracellular and secreted mucins in a dose dependent manner. Additionally, Western blots illustrated that SMM increased in a dose-dependent way both the immature and mature forms of MUC5AC protein (n=5). In contrast, while a direct correlation was found for the SMM-up-regulated immature form of MUC5B (1:0 > 1:3 > 1:10 SMM dilution), the increase in mature MUC5B was inversely related to the SMM concentration (1:10 > 1:3 > 1:0 SMM dilution). These findings indicated that SMM differentially affects MUC5AC and MUC5B. We next evaluated the effect of SMM on mucin secretion by ELISA utilizing an antibody that recognizes both MUC5AC and MUC5B. Similar to the findings from Western blots for SMM-induced MUC5B, mucin secretion was inversely correlated with the SMM concentration. These data suggested that SMM might play a role in degradation of secreted mucins. In agreement with this notion, 60 min incubation of HBE secreted mucins with SMM resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in mucin content, whereas addition of protease inhibitors to SMM prevented its degrading effect. These novel data 1) illustrate that HBE exposure to SMM provides a relevant model for CF airways disease typified by mucin overproduction and 2) demonstrate that the infectious and inflammatory milieu of CF airways induces an adaptive HBE response consisting of increased mucin production, which should contribute to the mucus obstruction in CF airways. Funded by CFF. Newborn cystic fibrosis (CF) pig airways exhibit a host of abnormalities including reduced tracheal diameter, cartilage ring defects, and abnormal appearing smooth muscle bundles. We hypothesize that the aforementioned abnormalities will affect airway compliance. Additionally, we hypothesize the airway narrowing to extend from the trachea into the airway tree. The objectives of this study were to develop an airway nomenclature to facilitate morphometric comparison across specimens, to quantitate CF and non-CF airway compliance, and to assess the extent of CF airway narrowing. To capitalize upon micro-CT's superior resolving power a single newborn pig lobe was scanned: the tracheal lobe (the porcine equivalent to a human's right upper lobe). Each excised tracheal lobe was cannulated and micro-CT scanned five times, each at a different inflation pressure including 0, 2.5, 5, 10, and 20 cm H 2 O. The airways were segmented with a custom designed, substantially-automated computer algorithm. Quantitative analysis was completed with the Pulmonary Workstation 2 software package. Measurements included airway inner major diameter and inner cross sectional area; both were attained perpendicular to the airway centerline. The CF tracheal lobe's main caudal and cranial bronchi had an inner cross sectional area that was as little as two-thirds of their non-CF counterparts. In conclusion, an airway nomenclature was successfully implemented, and the tracheal lobe airway narrowing was most pronounced in the main bronchi and tapered with additional airway generations. These findings may provide insight into the pathogenesis of CF lung disease. Airway disease and obstruction is the major cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF). To better understand the pathogenesis of CF lung disease, a porcine model of CF was recently developed. At birth, CF pigs developed airway structural abnormalities including a narrowed lumen, irregular appearance of cartilage rings and airway smooth muscle (ASM) bundles. The aim of this study was to determine if loss of CFTR affects ASM function in newborn CF pigs. Isometric force studies of contraction and relaxation were performed on tracheal ASM from newborn non-CF and CF pigs. Tissue segments were mounted in an organ perfusion bath/myograph system. Acetylcholine (ACh) and isoproterenol (ISO) were used to induce airway contractile and relaxation responses, respectively. Fifty percent maximal contractile response (EC50) and the half-maximal relaxation values were calculated. We first confirmed that ASM expresses CFTR by using RT-PCR. CFTR mRNA was detected in non-CF ASM, but was absent in CF ASM samples. We next performed isometric force measurements on isolated tracheal rings and found that the maximum isometric force generation in response to ACh was reduced by nearly 50% in specimens from CF compared to non-CF, but similar sensitivity to ACh was observed. A similar response to ISO was observed between the two groups. To exclude the possibility that the irregular cartilage found in the CF pig airway was contributing to the response, ASM bundles were isolated from tracheal rings and ASM strips were subjected to the same experimental protocols. Similar to that in tracheal rings, ACh-induced force generation was significantly reduced in CF ASM samples. However, a greater response to ISO was observed in CF compared to non-CF samples (~100% vs. 125% relaxation in response to ISO). These data suggest that CFTR is important for the normal ASM contractile and relaxation responses. Further, the reduced response to ACh, the enhanced relaxation response to ISO treatment, and the morphological appearance of the CF ASM bundles suggest that the CF ASM might be in a hyper-contracted state. The altered mechanical properties of ASM may have important implications in CF airway disease and contribute to the pathogenesis of the airway structural abnormalities observed in CF. Previous studies have demonstrated that CF patients have an increased risk for digestive tract cancers (Neglia et al., N Engl J Med 1995; 332:494-9) , a morbidity that is likely to have greater impact with increasing life expectancy. The cause of increased gastrointestinal cancer risk is likely multifactorial including pancreatic enzyme supplementation, disease stress, immune compromise and malnutrition, thereby complicating etiological studies in CF patients. Studies of Cftr-null mice have also shown increased intestinal epithelial cell proliferation (Gallagher and Gottlieb, Am J Physiol 2001, 281: G681-87) in mice which do not exhibit many confounding factors such as attendant pancreatic insufficiency and therapeutic intervention. However, Cftr-null mice demonstrate reduced motility, bacterial overgrowth with increased gram-negative species, abnormal Toll-like receptor signaling and low-grade inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. We questioned whether the intestinal hyperproliferation in the Cftr-null intestine is dependent on the abnormal endogenous environment or a property of the Cftr-deficient epithelium. Proliferation in the crypt compartment is largely dependent on canonical Wnt signaling, whereby extracellular Wnt signaling results in the accumulation of the transcription co-factor β-catenin to activate LEF/TCF genes of proliferation, so we first investigated the protein levels of β-catenin. In freshly isolated intestinal epithelium from WT and Cftr-null mice pairs, Western blot analysis demonstrated significantly increased βcatenin protein in the Cftr-null mice. To determine whether increased βcatenin signaling and epithelial proliferation were evident in the Cftr-null intestine in the absence of inflammation and systemic factors, crypt epithelium from WT and Cftr-null mice was cultured in a 3D gel system that enabled the development of self-organizing organoids which generate nascent crypts (termed 'enteroids'). Proliferation studies using EdU incorporation to identify cells in the S phase of the cell cycle revealed a marginal increase in proliferation in the Cftr-null enteroids relative to WT. However, when growth factors were removed from the medium, the Cftr-null enteroids showed ~50% greater proliferation than WT enteroids. Analysis of β-catenin showed significantly greater protein expression in the Cftr-null enteroids at a proportion similar to that measured in vivo. Since cell proliferation is facilitated by cell alkalinity and Cftr has demonstrated properties of HCO 3 export from epithelia, we compared intracellular pH (pH i ) between WT and Cftr-null enteroids using the pH-sensitive dye SNARF and confocal microfluorimetry. Cftr-null epithelial cells exhibited a significantly greater pH i (~0.2 pH units) relative to WT cells. We conclude that hyperproliferation in the Cftr-null intestine exists in the absence of the intestinal microenvironment. The findings are consistent with intestinal hyperproliferation as an intrinsic defect in the Cftr-null epithelium resulting from increased Wnt/βcatenin signaling and a cellular alkaline pH. Supported by CFF and NIH. Background: dF508 CFTR is the most common disease causing mutation in cystic fibrosis and has been extensively characterized in heterologous systems, animal models, and primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells. Other CFTR mutations, however, that also lead to end stage lung disease are not as well characterized. While genotype is largely responsible for determining the clinical phenotype, we investigated whether HBE cultured from individuals with dF508 and other CFTR genotypes differ in regard to their airway surface liquid (ASL) volume and electrophysiological properties. Given the high volume of lung transplants performed at our institution (>100 annually), we have the unique opportunity to examine the relationship between CFTR genotype and airway epithelial phenotype. Methods: HBE cells were cultured on an air liquid interface from excess pathological tissues following lung transplantation. The ASL volume was measured using a novel optical scanning method that capitalizes on light refraction as it passes though the liquid meniscus that surrounds HBE cultures. The short circuit (Isc) response was measured in an Ussing chamber. Thus far, several samples with different combinations of wild type, R553X, G542X, 1154insTC, dF508, D1152H, R117H, and S1235R CFTR have been studied. Results: The mean ASL volume was 9.6 ± 1.1 µL for non-CF and 2.8 ± 1.1 for CF HBE (p<0.001, n=16 non-CF and 15 CF tissue donors). CF HBE cultures with severe CFTR mutations had minimal forskolin stimulated Clsecretion and nearly undetectable ASL volumes. CF HBE cultures that had mild mutations occasionally had small forskolin responses and maintained an ASL volume that was greater than what was observed in cultures with severe mutations. In limited cases we observed an intermediate ASL volume; however, the development of ASL was typically an "all or none" event. Interestingly, HBE with R117H/S1235R displayed near normal forskolin responses and maintained a normal ASL volume. Conclusions and Future Directions: These findings suggest that partial activation of CFTR will increase the ASL volume, in agreement with recent corrector and viral rescue studies. We are in the process of determining whether factors other than Clsecretion contribute to the maintenance of ASL volume in HBE with mild CFTR mutations. Supported by the NIH, CFF. Introduction: Hypertonic saline (HS), as an inhaled osmolyte, has been shown to improve lung function in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. In CF, it has been suggested to reduce entanglements in the mucus gel by reducing cross linking and lowering mucus rigidity. It may also act osmotically by drawing water into the mucous gel and the periciliary layer, counteracting the primary physiological defect in CF, that being dehydration of the airway surface liquid layer. However, the action of HS is short-lived as salt balance across the epithelium is quickly restored after its administration. Lowmolecular weight dextran has also been shown to reduce mucus rigidity in CF sputum and improve clearance of healthy dog mucus. This action is not attributed to mucolysis, but rather to disruption of hydrogen bonding in the mucus gel. An osmotic effect of the dextran in the luminal mucosa could also cause the movement of water from the epithelial cells into the airway. Since dextran, a neutral saccharide, is too large to cross the cell membrane, its action in the airway may be prolonged compared to HS. HS is already being used in the management of CF, but other osmolytes with similar action may augment current treatment regimens. Hypothesis: For use in CF, we have compared the action of HS and high molecular weight dextran on mucus clearance time (MCT), mucus rigidity (Log G*), and cilia height (CH) as an indicator of changes in surface liquid depth under normal and fluid depleted (FD) conditions. Method: Experiments were conducted under normal (N) and FD conditions (created by ion channel blockade with bumetanide and amiloride) on the frog palate airway model. MCT, was the time for carbon particles to be moved 4mm on the palate, tissue for cilia height (CH) immediately following MCT measurement, and mucus for micro-rheology were taken at the end of each experimental period. All treatments were delivered to the palate in a chamber maintained at 100% humidity by constant nebulization of frog Ringers (FR), the drug-delivery vehicle. Results:TABLE.Group 1: 2%Saline, Group 2: 0.4% Dextran. Conclusions: In both Groups, MCT, after ion channel blockade, was dramatically decreased and CH reduced, consistent with a depleted surface liquid layer. With 2% saline, Log G* decreased from normal after blockade and increased after 2% saline, contrary to expectations whereas mucus rigidity was decreased with dextran after treatment. Cilia height was restored after saline and dextran following FD. Dextran was more effective than HS in restoring near normal conditions for mucociliary clearance in these experiments and warrants further investigations. Gentzsch, M. 1,2 ; Kota, P. 1,3 ; Dang, Y. 1 ; Dokholyan, N.V. 1,3 ; Stutts, M. 1,4 1. Cystic Fibrosis/Pulmonary Research and Treatment Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Cell and Developmental Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 3. Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 4. Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Hyperactivation of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) results in dehydration of airway surfaces. ENaC is known to be stimulated by limited proteolysis of the extracellular domains and this proteolytic cleavage is modulated by intracellular signals and extracellular conditions. Mutations in CFTR result in defective regulation of ENaC and consequent sodium hyperabsorption in human cystic fibrosis airways. ENaC is activated by limited proteolysis of extracellular domains of the αand γ-subunit. While the sites in αand γ-ENaC that are susceptible to proteolytic cleavage have been mapped, the accessibility of these sites to proteases is poorly understood. We applied scanning cysteine accessibility mutagenesis (SCAM) to study the exposure of the protease cleavage sites. First, we introduced cysteine residues into specific sites flanking the cleavage sites in γ-ENaC and modified these residues at the surface of intact oocytes, that were also expressing αand β-ENaC, with maleimide that was coupled to IR Dyes. Altering positioning of the cysteine residues in the extracellular domain of γ-ENaC resulted in label of either N-or C-terminal fragments at the cell surface. Introduction of a cysteine at residues 132 to 136 of rat γ-ENaC led to labeling of an N-terminal 15 kDa fragment known to be produced by cleavage mediated by endogenous proteases at or near the furin site. Introduction of cysteine at position 142 resulted in labeling of the 70 kDa C-terminal fragment. Besides these fragments, we detected a small proportion of ubiquitinated high molecular weight species of ENaC, but did not detect full length γ-subunits at the cell surface. However, mutation of the furin site or addition of protease inhibitors resulted in labeling of the full length protein. Homology models have provided structural insight into the organization of ENaC subunits, but the structure and orientation of the cleavage sites for multiple proteases is not known. Our future studies will provide structural information regarding the accessibility of various cleavage sites in ENaC. Cribb, J. 1 ; Vasquez, P. 2 ; Moore, P. 3 ; Norris, S. 4 ; Shah, S. 5 ; Forest, M.G. 2 ; Superfine, R. 1 1. Physics & Astronomy, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Applied Math, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 3. Boston University, Boston, MA, USA; 4. Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 5. UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA Understanding the mechanism of successful mucociliary transport and designing new therapies requires an understanding of the rheology of mucus in terms of its molecular properties. In addition, we need to characterize mucus at the length and time scales appropriate for phenomena such as cilia propulsion and cough clearance. These phenomena occur at shear rates that place mucus into a nonlinear, shear thinning regime. Our driven microbead rheology (DMBR) techniques allow us to apply cilia-like forces to a micronsized bead and measure its displacement through a polymer fluid. Bead motion under the applied force gives us information about its linear and nonlinear properties, both at steady state and as dynamic phenomena. While steady state shear thinning behavior would predict that a bead under high applied forces would experience a lower effective viscosity, we observe an initial stiffening of the polymer fluid before the bead reaches a steady state shear thinning regime. We model this phenomena as a nonlinear dynamic strain-thickening event (DSTE) that occurs experimentally for microspheres driven through mucus and other biopolymer systems and confirm its presence through fluid modeling. We employ a constitutive model that allows us to interpret the rheology in terms of the polymer and solution properties. The rate at which mucus deforms around the microsphere controls the presence or absence of the DSTE, with a higher shear rate predicted to undergo DSTE. Because probe size is inversely related to deformation rate we believe that cilia invoke the DSTE response in mucus propulsion and may be fundamentally important in its successful transport. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a lethal hereditary disease caused by mutations in a single gene encoding the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Loss of CFTR function in the respiratory tract ultimately leads to reduced mucociliary clearance, chronic airway bacterial colonization, and robust neutrophilic inflammation. Despite the high level of neutrophils in the CF airway, bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa thrive and evade neutrophil-dependent killing. Several pathways have been proposed to account for the survival of Pseudomonas, however the precise mechanisms remain incompletely characterized. One potential explanation is that Pseudomonas synthesize biomolecular factors that can cripple neutrophildependent oxidative pathways of host defense. Previous studies have revealed that Pseudomonas is capable of biosynthesizing cyanide (CN -), and it is thought that this species may be a relevant virulence factor. Recent studies have revealed extremely high levels of CN -(20-150 µM) in sputum obtained from CF patients, however, the compartmentalization and impact that CNhas on host-defense has remained uncharacterized. Based upon these premises and our preliminary data, we hypothesized that cyanide (CN -) produced by bacteria colonizing the CF airway compromises neutrophildependent host defense pathways by inhibiting myeloperoxidase (MPO). Herein, we demonstrate an optimized method for CNmeasurements in CF sputum, reveal that CNexists in both free and protein-bound forms in CF sputum from adult patients, and establish that CNin CF sputum inhibits MPO. Our studies have revealed that electrode responses in CF sputum overestimate actual CNlevels by as much as 2-fold. To more accurately quantify CNlevels in CF sputum, we have developed a novel method that utilizes excess hydroxocobalamin to sequester CNand unmask non-specific responses of the electrode. Using low molecular weight cut-off filters (3 kD), we have found that a significant quantity of CNin CF sputum is bound to proteins in CF sputum. Our data indicate that heme proteins are major targets of CNin CF sputum and have established, through various approaches, that MPO is the major heme protein responsible for sequestering CNin CF sputum, and that this important host-defense pathway can be inhibited by CN -. Our studies have demonstrated, for the first time, the impact that bacterial cyanogenesis may have on neutrophil oxidative host defense mechanisms. The data indicate that novel strategies aimed at targeting CNsequestration and/or detoxification may be useful for the treatment of CF, and other debilitating lung diseases associated with chronic Pseudomonas infections such as non-CF bronchiectasis. Kota, P. 1 ; Garcia-Caballero, A. 3 ; Dang, H. 2 ; Stutts, J. 2 ; Dokholyan, N.V. 1 1. Biochemistry and Biophysics, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. CF Pulmonary research and treatment center, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 3. Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Calgary, AB, Canada Limited proteolysis, accomplished by endopeptidases, is a ubiquitous phenomenon underlying the regulation and activation of many enzymes, receptors and other proteins synthesized as inactive precursors. Serine proteases are one of the largest and conserved families of endopeptidases involved in diverse cellular activities including wound healing, blood coagulation and immune responses. Heteromeric α,β,γ-epithelial sodium channels (ENaC) mediating marked increase in Na + absorption in lung epithelia of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, are irreversibly stimulated by type II transmembrane serine proteases (TTSP) and furin-like convertases. Channel activating protease-3 (CAP3) is one of the several TTSPs that potently activate ENaC. Despite identification of protease cleavage sites, the basis for enhanced susceptibility of αand γ-ENaC to proteases remains elusive. Here, we elucidate the energetic and structural bases for activation of ENaC by CAP3. We find a region near the γ-ENaC furin site that is previously unidentified as a critical cleavage site for CAP3-mediated stimulation. We also report that CAP3 mediates cleavage of ENaC at basic residues downstream of the furin site. Our results indicate that surface proteases alone are sufficient to fully activate uncleaved ENaC, and explain how ENaC in epithelia expressing surface-active proteases can appear refractory to soluble proteases. Our results support a model in which proteases prime ENaC for activation by cleaving at the furin site, and cleavage at downstream sites is accomplished by membrane surface proteases or extracellular soluble proteases. Based on our results, we propose a dynamics-driven "anglerfish" mechanism that explains less stringent sequence requirements for substrate recognition and cleavage by CAP3 compared to furin. Chronic bronchitis, defined as airway inflammation associated with muco-obstruction, is a characteristic manifestation of cystic fibrosis (CF) and other serious pulmonary diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Scnn1b-Tg mice overexpresses the Scnn1b gene (coding for the epithelial Na + channel subunit, βENaC) in airway Clara cells, resulting in increased Na + absorption, airway surface liquid depletion, mucus adhesion to airway surfaces, and, finally, airway inflammation. These mice provide an excellent animal model to investigate the pathogenesis of chronic bronchitis. The characterization of pathophysiology of lung disease in Scnn1b-Tg mice has revealed increased macrophage number, alterations in macrophage morphology, and persistent neutrophilic and transient eosinophilic infiltrates. Macrophages are thought to play a pivotal role in regulating the initiation, maintenance, and resolution of inflammation. However, the specific role of macrophages in the development of pulmonary disease in the Scnn1b-Tg mice is still unknown. We adopted a genetic approach (cre-lox system) to deplete macrophages in the context of the Scnn1b-Tg mice in order to evaluate the effect on disease development. The approach utilized macrophage-specific LyzM promoter to induce the expression of cre recombinase leading to diphtheria toxin-induced macrophage depletion. Preliminary studies using double reporter mice have shown that the LysM promoter activity is specific to the macrophage populations and that >75% macrophage depletion is achievable. Further, we have generated macrophage-deficient Scnn1b-Tg mice. These mice show no observable abnormalities at birth. However, in comparison to control littermates (macrophage-deficient mice without Scnn1b-Tg), macrophage-deficient Scnn1b-Tg mice show significant weight loss resulting in poor growth with high degree of mortality in the first 2 weeks of life. Analyses of cells from lung lavage (BALF) samples at birth and at the age of 5-7 days show profound neutrophilic infiltration with occasional giant cells. Microbiological evaluation of BALF shows micro-aerophilic bacterial growth similar to macrophage-sufficient Scnn1b-Tg mice. The small percentage of macrophage-deficient Scnn1b-Tg mice that survive past 2 weeks exhibit significantly lower weight gain and persistent neutrophils in BALF. Taken together, our data suggest that the macrophages play a critical role in the resolution of airway inflammation. Objective: A deficit in lung early clearance of bacteria, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P.a), is suspected to be key in cystic fibrosis chronic lung infections. Although Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 and TLR5 are implicated in the recognition of LPS and flagellin of P.a, very little is known about their roles in early bacterial recognition and phagocytosis by alveolar macrophages (AMs). We aimed here to study the molecular mechanisms underlying the recognition, phagocytosis, and killing of P.a by AMs. Methods: Bacterial strains used were either WT PAK (a wild-type P.a strain), ∆flic PAK (an unflagelled PAK strain) or PAKL94, a strain expressing a flagellin mutated into the TLR5-recognition site. PAK labelled with FITC were used for measuring bacterial uptake and phagocytosis. Cells used were either primary AMs from C57/Bl6 WT, TLR5-/-, TLR4-/-, Myd88-/-, AEP-/-mice or the AM cell line MH-S. In vitro: cells were infected with bacterial strains at a multiplicity of infection of 1 to 10. Cell lysates were used to measure bacterial killing (on LB agar plates); FACS analysis was used to determine AM phagocytosis of PAK-FITC strains; IL-1B maturation and secretion by AMs were measured by ELISA and Western blot analysis; asparagine endopeptidase (AEP) activation in AMs was measured by Western blot analysis, immunofluoresence and enzymatic hydrolysis of its specific substrate. Results: We showed reduced uptake of unflagellated or flagellin-mutated PAK in MH-S cells and primary AMs, when compared to WT PAK. Furthermore, primary AMs from TLR5-/-mice (but not from TLR4-/-mice) were unable to phagocytose and kill PAK, compared to primary AMs from WT mice. Moreover, TLR5-mediated PAK recognition and uptake by AMs were associated with high IL-1β synthesis, which was reduced with PAK mutants or with primary TLR5-/-AMs. We demonstrated that IL-1β release was associated with killing of WT PAK since adding IL-1β restored the capacity of AMs to kill mutant bacteria (PAKL94) and conversely, recombinant IL-1RA inhibited significantly clearance of WT PAK by AMs. We further dissected mechanisms by showing that IL-1β induced endosomal acidification, the latter being essential for activation of the endosomal protease AEP. Indeed, that protease was activated in the presence of WT PAK, but not with PAKL94, while adding IL-1β restored AEP activation in the presence of PAKL94. In accordance with this phenotype, primary AMs from AEP-/-mice were unable to kill WT PAK. Conclusions: We demonstrate for the first time that TLR5 plays a major role in the early clearance of P.a by AMs and that the flagellum-TLR5 interaction is required for effective phagocytosis of P.a and for the induction of IL-1β synthesis and activation of AEP. The discovery of this new pathway may provide new pharmacological targets in the context of cystic fibrosis. The authors thank 'Vaincre la Mucoviscidose' (VLM) for generous support. Introduction: Mycobacterium abscessus infections are increasingly detected, usually in settings of impaired host defense, including the CF airway. The organism demonstrates ability to survive (and perhaps exploit) the neutrophil-rich environment of the CF airway. Although macrophages are classically described in mycobacterial lesions, several pathologic reviews of tissue infected with rapidly growing mycobacteria suggest that the cellular reaction is often distinct from the granulomatous reaction manifested in mycobacterial infections caused by slow-growing organisms. Rather, a suppurative reaction characterized by polymorphonuclear neutrophils has been described in infections with rapid growers. We hypothesize that the human neutrophil response to M. abscessus infection is dysregulated and is associated with alterations in gene expression in key cell death pathways. Methods: M. abscessus (ATCC 19977) was propagated in 7H9 broth. Separate rough and smooth populations were identified visually, subcultured and maintained. Clinical isolate S. aureus was grown in tryptic soy broth as the control in all experiments. Neutrophils were isolated from healthy volunteers by the plasma Percoll method. Neutrophils were exposed to rough and smooth M. abscessus and S. aureus. Assays for superoxide anion release, apoptosis, necrosis and bacterial killing were analyzed within the same experiment. At 2 hours of infection, neutrophils were pelletized and resuspended in Trizol. RNA was isolated, and the neutrophil genome was characterized using the Affymetrix GeneChip Microarray (U133 Plus 2.0). Results: Human neutrophils failed to kill M. abscessus under conditions in which S. aureus killing was substantial. Necrotic neutrophil death in the presence of both rough and smooth M. abscessus was not different from untreated cells (p= 0.4375), while S. aureus induced increased necrosis (p= 0.0625). Neutrophils exposed to M. abscessus demonstrated levels of apoptosis similar to that of control neutrophils (p= 0.1563), whereas S. aureus exhibited an appropriate inhibition of apoptosis (p= 0.0313) in the setting of infection. Oxidative burst as represented by superoxide anion release, was significantly higher for all bacteria than for that measured in unstimulated neutrophils (p<0.05), suggesting that initiation of an injury pattern occurs with stimulation of neutrophils by M. abscessus. Analysis of gene array data is in progress. Preliminary data demonstrate a marked difference in multiple cellular pathways in M. abscessus infected neutrophils when compared to cells stimulated with S. aureus, including those related to inflammation and cell death. Conclusion: The neutrophil response to M. abscessus is characterized by an inappropriate level of apoptosis in the setting of acute infection. Despite an intact respiratory burst, there are low rates of mycobacterial killing and necrosis, suggesting that there is altered regulation in the neutrophil response to mycobacteria when compared with S. aureus. Gene expression data reflect the difference in the neutrophil response to M. abscessus infection when compared to S. aureus and control. Introduction: A20 (TNFAIP3) is an endogenous gene, found in constitutively low levels in most tissues and induced in response to bacterial or viral stimuli. A20 acts together with an adaptor protein called TAX1BP1 to inhibit NF-κB signalling by inactivating TRAF6. A20 cannot deubiquitinate and inactivate TRAF6 and cannot inhibit NF-κB activation in the absence of TAX1BP1 (Shembade et al. EMBO J. 2007) . A modeling derived hypothesis suggests that desensitized pathogen recognition is secondary to hyperactive TRAF6 signalling in chronic lung diseases (Zhang et al. PLoS One 2009) . In primary CF nasal epithelial cells (NECs), LPS stimulation provokes a reduction in A20 and TAX1BP1 mRNA expression (Kelly et al. Pediatr Pulmonol 2010; Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 ). Here, we assess the role of CFTR in the down-regulation of A20 and TAX1BP1 and determine if these genes are related to lung function (FEV 1 ) and could act as novel predictors of inflammation and disease severity. Methods: 16HBE41o-cells were transfected with CFTR siRNA (knockdown of 72 ± 5.34%, n=3). NECs from CF patients (F508del homozygous (n=8), or R117H/F508del heterozygous (n=7)) and agematched controls (n=8) were fully differentiated at air-liquid interface and treated with LPS (P.aeruginosa, Sigma) for 24h. Patients' demographics including FEV 1 were collected at time of sampling. A20, TAX1BP1 and p65 mRNA expression was assessed by qPCR and analysed by non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis Test. Results and Discussion: To determine a basic relationship between A20, TAX1BP1 and inflammation in CF, we assessed expression of p65 (NF-κB subunit) by qPCR. Following LPS stimulation, p65 expression was higher in F508del homozygotes than R117H heterozygotes (P<0.05). Therefore, A20 and TAX1BP1 expression appears to be inversely proportional to p65 levels. CFTR knockdown in 16HBE41o-cells confirmed a link between A20 and CFTR expression (43% reduction (P<0.001) in basal A20 expression), but basal TAX1BP1 levels were not altered. LPS exposure induced A20 and TAX1BP1 mRNA expression in control NECs, but expression was significantly reduced in CF-NECs (P<0.001). Furthermore, genotype specific differences were observed in the expression of A20 and TAX1BP1 following LPS stimulation. F508del homozygotes showed more pronounced reductions in the expression of both genes which were significantly (P<0.05) lower than in R117H/F508del heterozygotes. Finally, we assessed the relationship between A20 and TAX1BP1 mRNA expression and FEV 1 in our CF cohort. The median FEV 1 (% predicted) for the R117H/F508del heterozygous and F508del homozygous groups was 82.5% and 50.05% respectively. Therefore, the mRNA expression of A20 and TAX1BP1 are altered with CF genotype and are reduced in a manner that reflects FEV 1 . These genes may represent novel predictors of inflammation and lung function in CF. This work is supported by the CF Trust UK (PJ541). The epithelium plays an active role in host defense against inhaled pathogens through changes in chemokines expression, antimicrobial peptide secretion and ion transport. We previously demonstrated that interleukin-17A (IL-17), which is critical for lung host defense against extracellular bacteria, significantly altered airway surface pH in vitro. Using microarray analysis of normal human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells, we identified the electroneutral chloride/bicarbonate exchanger Pendrin (SLC26A4) as a potential mediator of this effect. These data were verified by real-time, quantitative PCR that demonstrated an approximately 50-fold increase in Pendrin mRNA in HBE cells treated with IL-17A for 48 h. Using immunoprecipitation followed by immunoblotting and immunofluorescence, we confirmed that Pendrin protein expression is increased in IL-17 treated HBE cells and that it is primarily localized to the mucosal surface of the cells. Functional studies using SPQ and SNARF-5 to measure intracellular chloride and pH are currently on-going to define the activity of Pendrin in HBE cells treated with IL-17. To investigate the expression of Pendrin in vivo we studied a pneumonia model in mice, and we studied human lung explants. Wild-type mice were infected with Klebsiella pneumoniae (Kp) and sacrificed at 18, 24, and 48 h. Consistent with the critical role of IL-17 in host defense against Kp in mice, Pendrin expression was significantly increased in the lungs of infected mice compared with control mice at each time point. Maximum mRNA expression was measured at 24 h, concomitant with neutrophil influx into the lungs as measured in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Finally, Pendrin mRNA in explanted lungs from non-CF patients, CF patients, and smokers was measured by quantitative PCR and was found to be significantly increased in the lungs from CF patients compared with non-CF patients. Interestingly, there appeared to be a subset of CF patients with elevated Pendrin expression and another subset with Pendrin expression comparable to non-CF patients, though no obvious correlation with genotype or bacterial colonization was apparent to explain this difference. Taken together, these data suggest a role for Pendrin in the immune response to bacterial lung infections. On-going studies of Pendrin deficient mice will be performed to determine the specific role of Pendrin in host defense against bacterial bronchopneumonia. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterized by progressive pulmonary decline as a result of abnormal chronic inflammation and recurrent pulmonary infections. Mainstays of therapy for CF include modalities aimed at the hyper-inflammatory response, airway clearance, and anti-infective medications. A novel therapeutic approach to inflammation is human mesenchymal stem cell (hMSCs) therapy. hMSCs have show profound antiinflammatory effects and regenerative capacity in other diseases such as asthma, stroke, infarct, spinal cord injury and heart disease. We hypothesize that hMSCs will provide a beneficial anti-inflammatory benefit in the δF508 murine model of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection and inflammation. Methods: C57BL/6 (WT) or Cftr tm1Kth (δF508 Cftr deficient) animals were infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa-impregnated agarose beads to mimic chronic infection and inflammation on day 1, given 10 6 hMSCs or PBS on day 2 and euthanized on day 4 post-infection (day 3-post-MSCs). At day 4 post-infection, mice were euthanized, followed by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). BAL fluid and cell pellets were separated. BAL fluid was saved for soluble cytokine analysis. Cell pellets were evaluated for total cell counts and differentials using H&E. Cell pellets were processed into RNA, followed by first strand synthesis (cDNA) for gene expression. Primers and probes for IL-6, IL-10, GM-CSF, TNFα, KC and IL-17 were purchased from Applied Biosystems Incorporated. Results: Although there was significant variability between the two sets of animals studies for these experiments, infection increased δF508 BAL pellet expression of IL-6 ( +1.04ddCt, +4.63ddCt, for δF508 cell pellet #1 and δF508 cell pellet #2 respectively), IL-10 (+15ddCt,+31ddCt), KC (+1.104ddCt, +4.63ddCt) while decreasing the expression of IL-17 (-8.29ddCt, -22.09ddCt) relative to the WT infected control. Treatment with hMSCs decreased IL-6 (to +0.01ddCt, +5.55ddCT for each #1 and #2 δF508 cell pellet), IL-10 (to +10.00ddCt, +20.34ddCt), KC (to -0.032ddCt, +1.44ddCt) while increasing IL-17 expression (to -24ddCt, -5.2ddCt.) again, relative to the WT infected control. δF508 BAL pellet expression of TNFα and GM-CSF, were comparable to the infected control with and without hMSCs. hMSCs did not significantly impact, the expression of these cytokine genes in the infected WT control. Conclusions: These data suggest that hMSCs can alter the inflammatory profiles found in BAL cell pellets of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infected δF508 Cftr defective mice. Furthermore, hMSCs are well-tolerated with no documented adverse events despite xenographic and allogeneic use in this animal model. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a multi-organ disease characterized by disordered inflammation with increased levels of pro-inflammatory mediators such as IL-1β, IL-8, TNF-α and anti-inflammatory IL-10 demonstrated in CF patients even in the absence of infection. Prominent bacterial threats to CF patients with disordered inflammation include members of the multi-drug resistant Burkholderia cepacia complex, due to their ability to cause rapid and severe inflammation and a persistently heightened inflammatory state. In particular, the highly transmissible and virulent B. cenocepacia, which prohibits infected CF patients from lung transplantation eligibility, is in need of new therapies due to high antibiotic resistance. Recently, we demonstrated that a murine model of CF had increased IL-1β release from macrophages in response to B. cenocepacia infection in comparison to normal controls. We hypothesized that human CF macrophages would have similar exacerbated pro-inflammatory responses to B. cenocepacia, in hopes of obtaining identifiable targets for anti-inflammatory therapies aimed at alleviating symptoms related to infections with Burkholderia species. Methods: Peripheral blood monocyte derived macrophages and alveolar macrophages were obtained from 17 CF and 17 non-CF donors at the Nationwide Children's Hospital, aged 2-46 years. Macrophages were infected with B. cenocepacia clinical isolate strains K56, J23 and XOA8, a mutant strain of K56-2 containing a truncated LPS oligosaccharide core, at an MOI of 10 and supernatants were analyzed for cytokines. Results: Human CF macrophages demonstrated an almost two-fold increase in IL-1β secretion in response to infection in comparison to non-CF controls along with a 1.7 fold increase in IL-10 secretion. There was no significant difference in IL-8 or TNF-α production. XOA8 infected human macrophages had significantly more IL-1β and IL-10 production in CF and non-CF patients than other clinical strains. In a smaller subset of CF patients acutely on prednisone 60mg daily at the time of blood collection, all 4 cytokines analyzed were significantly diminished in production in comparison to controls and other CF patients not on steroids. Conclusions: IL-1β and IL-10 are exaggerated in human CF macrophages, but not in non-CF macrophages in response to B. cenocepacia. Macrophages from both CF and non-CF patients have exaggerated IL-1β and IL-10 production in response to B. cenocepacia LPS mutant XOA8. Corticosteroids may have a role in blunting the heightened pro and subsequent anti-inflammatory response to B. cenocepacia infections, and will serve as a catalyst for further human studies into drug therapies aimed at regulating inflammatory responses to B. cenocepacia in CF. Additionally, directed anti-IL-1β therapies, which have already proven useful in certain auto-inflammatory and auto-immune diseases characterized by persistently heightened IL-1β secretion, may be an additional alternative to traditional antibiotic therapy for B. cenocepacia infections. Background: Recessive mutations of the cystic fibrosis (CF) gene cause airway destruction under combined epithelial dysfunction, bacterial infection and neutrophilic inflammation. In a recent study, ifrd1 (interferonrelated developmental regulator 1), a gene coding for an intracellular histone deacetylase-dependent transcriptional co-regulator (highly expressed in neutrophils, among other cells), was identified as a modifier gene for CF airway disease. However, the mechanisms underlying this process remain unclear. Methods: We collected blood and airway neutrophils from CF patients (N=26) at various stages of the disease and used intracellular flow cytometry to compare their expression levels of IFRD1, as well as of histone H4 citrulline 3 (H4cit3), cholera toxin B (CTB, a ligand for ganglioside M1, a phospholipid enriched in lipid rafts), and Ki67, which reflect chromatin decondensation, signaling platform assembly, and mitosis, respectively. Results: IFRD1 expression was higher in CF airway neutrophils than in their blood counterparts (median +59.9%, P < 10 -4 ). In airway neutrophils, IFRD1 expression was bimodal, delineating an IFRD1+ subset (comprised within the 99% confidence interval of IFRD1 expression in blood neutrophils) and an IFRD1++ subset (beyond this interval). IFRD1 expression in IFRD1++ neutrophils exceeded that in IFRD1+ neutrophils by a median of 334%. Significantly upregulated expression of H4cit3 and CTB, but not Ki67, was also seen in IFRD1++ vs. IFRD1+ neutrophils. These results suggest chromatin decondensation and increased signaling (without mitosis) in the IFRD1++ subset of CF airway neutrophils. Interestingly, CF patients clustered in 3 groups according to the % of IFRD1++ neutrophils (CF-Hi, above 50%; CF-In, between 20 and 50%; CF-Lo, below 20%). When corrected for treatment confounders, CF-In and CF-Lo cohorts differed significantly in levels of systemic inflammation (absolute count of blood neutrophils) and to a lesser extent, airway inflammation (absolute count of airway neutrophils). Conclusion: IFRD1 is expressed highly in a subset of live CF airway neutrophils and correlates with levels of inflammation. Changes seen in the chromatin-associated proteins IFRD1 and H4cit3 expression within a large subset of airway neutrophils, further suggest that neutrophils go through an active process of chromatin remodeling upon recruitment to CF airways. Taken together, these results support the notion that neutrophils are active, not passive, contributors to the CF airway ecosystem, alongside epithelial cells and bacteria. Results: Using mass-spectrometry to identify nuclear proteins, capable of binding to the NFkB-containing IL8 promoter, we identified TNFAIP3/A20, which limits inflammation by terminating TNF-induced NFkB responses. We also detected the ribonucleoproteins hnRNP-A1 and -A2B1, which are predicted (EBI) to bind to IL8 promoter near the NFkB and OCT1 sites. Gelshift experiments confirm direct occupancy of the IL8promoter by both hnRNPA2B1 and OCT1. These data suggest that hnRN-PA2B1 may interfere with the OCT1-inhibition of AP1/NFkB-activated IL8-transcription. Regarding two hnRNPA1-sites, the upstream hnRNPA1site overlaps with OCT1/AP1-sites. Therefore, hnRNPA1 may mediate opposing AP1 and OCT1 effects on the NFkB-mediated IL8-transcription. The downstream hnRNPA1-site overlaps with a second OCT1-site and an adjacent small nuclear snRNA-activating SNAP-site. These sites are located in the 5'UTR of IL8-001. However, they remain in the promoter of splice variants IL8-002 and IL8-003. OCT1 is known to activate the SNAP, which, subsequently, may upregulate the small non-coding IL8-003 RNA. As a result, by influencing OCT1/SNAP-mediated IL8 transcription, and by differentially binding to the 5'-end of IL8-transcripts, hnRNPA1 may regulate the IL8 splicing and nuclear export. The expected hnRNPA1-silencing of IL8 splicing is consistent with an experimentally determined 10-fold increase of the primary IL8-001 splice variant vs. the alternative IL8-002 splice variant in both CF-and control cells. Transfection with hnRNPA1 promotes baseline IL8 secretion, especially in [mutant-CFTR]IB3-1 with the initially reduced OCT1 and A20 mRNAs. Hence, in the IB3-1 cells, lacking the inhibition of NFkB-mediated IL8-transcription, the hnRNPA1, bound to the 5'-UTR-IL8-001, may preserve the major IL8-001 splice variant and promote its transport. Ultimately, this is expected to increase the secretion of corresponding IL8-peptide. By contrast, in the [WT-CFTR]S9 cells with upregulated SNAPC4 and non-coding IL8-003, alternative transcripts with no hnRNPA1-binding sites in their mRNA (IL8-002) may lack the hnRNPA1-mediated nuclear export. As a result, the translation and, subsequently, secretion of IL8 in S9 cells decrease. Summary: The IL8 transcription, splicing, and translation alterations by TNFAIP3/A20, and ribonucleoproteins hnRNP-A1 and -A2B1, can con-tribute to the pathophysiological basis for the IL8-dependent intrinsic inflammation in the CF airway. Introduction: New treatments are needed to improve the health of people with cystic fibrosis (CF). Controlling lung-damaging inflammation is likely to be beneficial but specific anti-inflammatory targets have not been identified. To design effective anti-inflammatory therapies, it is critical to understand the mechanisms underlying the exaggerated immune response to CF pathogens such as P. aeruginosa. Objective: Identify pathways responsible for the dysregulation of the pro-inflammatory immune response by CF airway cells. Methods: We performed gene expression arrays using the Illumina platform and compared the gene expression in CF (IB3-1) versus non-CF (C38) airway cells at baseline and 2 hours after flagellin stimulation. Pathway, Transcription Factor (TF) and Gene Ontology (GO) term over-representation analyses (ORA) were performed and a comprehensive network was built using Cytoscape. We used quantitative PCR (qPCR), Western blots and inhibitor studies to validate the activation of signaling pathways returned by the systems biology analysis. Results: Our computational analysis returned an intriguing signature of elevated stress levels in the CF cells compared to the non-CF cells, which was enhanced after flagellin stimulation. Specifically, GO terms indicating a role by MAP kinase pathways (GO:0032874, p=0.02; GO:0000165, p=0.03; GO:0000187, p=0.04) as well as TFs downstream of the p38 MAP kinase pathway were returned by the analysis. Western blotting confirmed an increased and prolonged activation of p38 MAP kinase in CF airway cells and treatment with a p38 MAP kinase inhibitor significantly reduced immune responses to flagellin (p=0.01). Conclusion: Our data indicates that CF airway epithelial cells experience increased levels of stress, potentially due to misfolded CFTR, oxidative stress, infection and other factors potentially unbalancing cellular homeostasis. Specifically, our data confirms reports by Berube et al. showing that p38 MAP kinase activity is dysregulated in CF cells. Understanding the mechanisms and pathways underlying MAP kinase dysregulation in CF airway cells may identify novel targets for anti-inflammatory therapy. Background: Vitamin D has recently been shown to have a role outside of its well known effect on mineral metabolism. An immunological role for VitD in pediatric infections is being increasingly recognized. Toll like receptors (TLRs) are part of the innate immune system and function as sentinels of the immune system. Activation of TLRs is associated with production of antimicrobial peptides such as cathelicidin and others which are regulated by VitD. Serum from individuals with low VitD has poor cathelicidin induction which can be normalized by correction of serum VitD levels. Children with CF are vulnerable to VitD deficiency from malabsorption of fat soluble vitamins and are at risk for recurrent/chronic respiratory infections. We hypothesized that CF patients with low levels of VitD are at risk for increased respiratory infections, worse severity score, and lower pulmonary function. Methods: With Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval, data was collected over a one year period on 79 children with CF aged 6 to 17 years. We analyzed the prevalence of VitD deficiency (<15 ng/mL) or insufficien-cy (15-30 ng/mL), and compared these vitamin levels to the frequency of antibiotic use, severity score per CF Pulmonary Guidelines, and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). We also analyzed the data using the new recommended VitD cut-off level of 20 ng/mL from Institute of Medicine (IOM). Statistical analysis was performed using SAS software. Results: There was significant correlation between serum VitD level and treatment with intravenous antibiotics (IVAbx) (p=0.036), worse severity scores (p=0.005) and lower FEV1 measurements (p=0.02). In the 3 group comparison using Kruskal-Wallis test between deficient, insufficient and normal VitD levels, children with CF and VitD deficiency were more likely to receive IVAbx (p=0.016), have worse respiratory severity scores (p=0.006) and lower FEV1 measurements (p=0.038). In 2 group analysis using Wilcoxan Rank Sum test with IOM cut-off of 20 ng/mL for VitD, children with CF and VitD deficiency had higher IVAbx use (p=0.009), worse respiratory severity scores (p=0.037) and lower FEV1 measurements (p=0.05). The results suggest that VitD may have a role in infectious and pulmonary complications in children with CF. Additional studies are needed to confirm our preliminary observations from this retrospective analysis. Until further literature becomes available, we must strive to maintain normal serum VitD levels in children with CF. The chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterized by biofilm mode of growth, making the infection tolerant to antibiotics and the host response. Instead, the induced inflammation and adaptive immune response is believed to contribute to the gradual lung tissue damage and loss of lung function in CF patients. However, the induced inflammatory response and lung tissue damage may depend on the distribution of the biofilm infection -whether the infection is located in the upper conductive or in the peripheral respiratory zone. To further investigate this we produced two distinct sizes (small beads (SB) 40 µm vs large beads (LB) 136 µm) of P. aeruginosa PAO579 containing seaweed alginate beads using an Encapsulation Unit -Nisco Var J30. In total 175 BALB/c female mice 12 weeks of age were infected with 0.04 mL of 0.7x10 9 CFU/mL. All mice received the same amount of bacteria and alginate, only the size of the beads varied between the two groups. Mice were sacrifized at day 1, day 2/3 or at day 5/6. At day 1, the quantitative bacteriology was significantly higher in the SB group as compared to the LB group (p<0.003) but no significant difference was observed at other time points. For all time points smaller biofilms were identified by alcian blue staining in the SB group (p<0.003). Likewise, the areas of the airways in which biofilms were identified were significantly smaller in the SB group at all time points (p<0.0001). The content of P. aeruginosa within the biofilms was confirmed using specific PNA-FISH staining. By histopathological evaluation a significant shift from exclusively endobronchial to both parenchymal and endobronchial localisation of inflammation from day 1 to day 2/3 was observed in the SB group (p<0.05) as well as a significantly faster resolution of inflammation at day 5/6 in the SB group (p<0.03). For both groups a polymorphonuclear neutrophil (PMN) inflammation and an increase in degree of inflammation from day 1 to day 2/3 was observed (p<0.01). Finally, both the PMN mobilizer G-CSF and the PMN chemoattractant MIP-2 were significantly increased at day 1 in the SB group (p<0.0001). Both cytokines decreased significantly during the study, but no further significant differences between the two groups were observed. In conclusion, we have established a model enabling studies of host responses to infection in different lung niches. The present study demonstrated a more effective recognition of infection and a more pronounced host response to infection in the peripheral lung zones, indicating increased lung damage in the respiratory zone. This supports the hypothesis that treatment of the chronic P. aeruginosa lung infection should primarily be directed at the peripheral lung niches by combined IV and inhalation antibiotic treatment. Introduction: A20 is an inducible zinc finger protein responsible for termination of NF-κB signalling in response to bacterial or viral stimuli. A20 inhibits Toll-like Receptor induced NF-κB signalling by inactivating TRAF6, but must form a complex with Ring Finger protein (RNF)11, the E3 ligase Itch and an adaptor protein called TAX1BP1 (Shembade et al. 2009 ). Previously we have shown that following LPS stimulation, NF-kB activation was prolonged in CF cells and that A20 expression fell below basal levels in CF primary nasal epithelial cells (NECs) and CFBE41o-cells, but not in control cells (Kelly et al. 2009 (Kelly et al. , 2010 . In CFBE41o -A20 did not interact with RNF11 or TRAF6, while both interactions were observed in 16HBE41o- (Kelly et al. 2010) . Here, we sought to investigate the underlying mechanism(s) for dysfunctional A20 in CF epithelium. Methods: Experiments used 16HBE41o-and CFBE41o-cell lines and primary nasal epithelial cells obtained from patients homozygous for F508del and age-matched controls. Cell lines were grown in submersion while primary cells were fully differentiated at air-liquid interface. All cells were stimulated with LPS (P. aeruginosa, Sigma) for 0-24h. The mRNA expression of A20, RNF11, Itch and TAX1BP1 was assessed in cell lines and primary cells by qPCR. To investigate why A20 expression is reduced in CF cells, cell lines were treated with inhibitors of E1 ubiquitin activating enzymes (PYR-41, CalBiochem) and the 26S proteasome (MG-132, Cal-Biochem) for 4h prior to LPS stimulation. In addition, expression of A20 was assessed by Western blot using specific antibodies against full length A20 and the C-terminal end of A20 (both Abcam). Results and Discussion: Following LPS stimulation A20, RNF11, Itch and TAX1BP1 mRNA expression was reduced (P<0.001) in CFBE41ocells but not in 16HBE41o-cells. These findings were confirmed in primary NECs. Pre-treatment of CFBE41o-cells with PYR-41 or MG-132 had no effect on the expression of A20 following 24h LPS stimulation, suggesting that the reduction in A20 expression in CF does not result from increased ubiquitination or proteasomal degradation. Western blot analysis confirmed a reduction of the ~80kD full length A20 protein in CF cells basally and after stimulation with LPS. Furthermore, an antibody against the C-terminal end (696-790 AA) showed an additional ~50kD band in both cell lines. Overall, CFBE41o-cells showed less A20 (full length and C-terminal) than 16HBE41o-cells, but the 50kD band was more prominent than the 80kD band in CFBE41o-, suggesting increased proteolytic cleavage of A20 in CF epithelium with the potential for therapeutic intervention with anti-proteases. A20 uses C-terminus located zinc finger (ZnF)4, to interact with other complex members and to terminate TRAF6 mediated NF-kB signalling. Reduced A20 and especially the C-terminal end in CF cells may explain the inability of A20 to terminate NF-kB activation in CF epithelial cells. This work is supported by the CF Trust UK (PJ541 Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients have mutations in the chloride transport protein gene CFTR which results in significant pulmonary morbidity and eventual mortality. Although dysfunctional airway clearance, mucous plugging and epithelial chemokine production are major contributors to CF pulmonary disease, the inability of the immune response to efficiently clear bacteria and attenuate the inflammatory response also contributes to CF disease pathophysiology. Mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), which are both anti-inflammatory and anti-bactericidal have the potential to be developed as alternative therapeutic strategy combating the infection and inflammation associated with CF lung disease. In our in vivo studies, CFTR deficient mice (congenic B6.129S6-Cftr tm2Uth ) and C57Bl/6 controls (WT) were chronically infected with 10 5 CFU Pseudomonas aeruginosa impregnated agarose beads followed 24 hours later by retro-orbital infusion of 10 6 hMSCs or vehicle (PBS). Mice were followed for either 3 days or 10 days post-hMSC administration with daily evaluation of clinical scores and weight loss. Cftr tm2Uth animals given Pseudomonas aeruginosa, had greater mortality, lost significant weight and remained sickly (high clinical score) compared to C57Bl/6 mice given the same batch and dosing of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (n=3 different experiments with n=5-8 animals/group). Cftr tm2Uth given 10 6 hMSCs retro-orbitally initially lost weight, but resolved weight issues by day 5, returning to values comparable to WT without infection (n=3 different experiments with n=5-8 animals /group, p<0.05). hMSC treated Cftr tm2Uth mice also had better survival compared to the Cftr tm2Uth infected mice. When the animals were assessed for clinical score, Cftr tm2Uth mice with infection but without hMSCs had significantly more variation in their clinical scores compared to animals receiving the hMSCs, which ultimately improved. When animals were sacrificed and evaluated for gross lung pathology, Cftr tm2Uth animals had greater focal lung consolidation and pathology scores compared to C57Bl/6 controls (p<0.05, n=5), which was resolved by administration of hMSCs. The hMSCs were well-tolerated in the Cftr tm2Uth and WT mice despite the xenographic source. To investigate how the hMSCs impact the murine model of CF lung infection and inflammation, animals were euthanized at 3 days-post-MSC administration followed by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) for total cell counts, differentials and cytokine analysis by Luminex multianalyte assays for MIP-1α, KC, IL-6 and IL-1β. hMSC treatment resulted in decreased KC (p=0.07) and IL-1β (p=0.06) and IL-6 (p<0.05). To investigate the effect of hMSCs on bacterial load in vivo, BAL aliquots and whole lung lysates from our in vivo model were cultured on TSA plates for 24 hours. hMSC administration in the Cftr tm2Uth animals significantly decreased BAL (n=3, p<0.05) and whole lung lysate (n=2, p<0.05) Pseudomonas aeruginosa CFUs. These studies implicate the potential utilization of hMSCs in CF lung disease due to both anti-inflammatory and anti-bactericidal properties. This work was funded by the George and Virginia Baldwin Fund, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and NIH: NIDDK 27651. Defects in CFTR result in diminished fluid secretion from submucosal glands (SMG) in the airways. Airway gland secretions (mucus) contains a variety of antimicrobial proteins and anti-proteases that help protect the airways from the environmental pathogens and toxins. It remains unclear if defense proteins are reduced or absent in CF glandular secretions. We took a proteomics approach to identify and quantify proteins from both non-CF (donor and disease control) and CF (disease) human SMG secretions obtained directly from gland orifices after stimulation with carbachol, which produces fluid secretion via pathways that are at least partially CFTR independent. LC-MS/MS analysis of the tryptic digests obtained from in-gel digestion of human SMG secretions identified various antibacterial and antimicrobial proteins. A total of 56 proteins had decreased levels and 132 proteins had increased levels in CF samples as calculated by the mass spectroscopy (MS) ion intensities. Among the proteins with decreased levels in CF samples compared to matching non-CF controls were lactoferrin, lysozyme and antichymotrypsin. In contrast peroxiredoxin, heat shock proteins, retinal dehydrogenase and cathepsin D were found to be higher in CF samples compared to non-CF controls. These results prompted us to further investigate SMG secretions by quantitative MS. Proteins in human SMG samples were quantified by using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ). A single injection of iTRAQ-labeled non-CF and CF sample after 2 hour LC gradient identified most of the proteins previously identified without labeling. Up to 70 iTRAQ labeled proteins were quantified from 3 repeated injections of the same sample. Fifty-eight of them did not differ between non-CF and CF, including Mucin-5B. Six of the quantified proteins were down regulated in the CF sample. The two most statistically significant reductions were in surfactant pulmonary associated protein A2 (SFTPA2) and lysozyme. There was an increase in a total of 8 proteins in CF sample but the increase was not statistically significant. Further analysis will be performed by fractionation of SMG samples before applying to MS to improve protein profiling and hence increase the number of quantified proteins. Our preliminary tests for pre-fractionation on unlabeled samples using a strong cation-exchange chromatography resulted in 3-fold increase in the number of total proteins identified. These results suggest that the protein composition of primary mucus from CF airway glands is altered. However, the present experiments were carried out with mucus obtained from glands in inflamed airways. It will be important to determine if altered protein composition occurs in CF mice, ferrets and pigs prior to the onset of disease. Background: Elevated free light chains have been described in several (auto-) immune diseases. By coincidence, we found elevated β-globulins in routine protein electrophoresis in several cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. To rule out lymphoproliferative disease further work-up was started. Methods: Seven patients (median age 32 years, m/f 3/4, FEV1 43 %) with mainly pulmonary manifestation of CF out of a total of 65 CF patients at our CF outpatient clinic were investigated. Sputum microbiology, κ-, λchains, α1-, α2-, β-, γ-globulins, CRP in serum, WBC in blood was measured. Immunofixation of serum, testing of urine for Bence-Jones proteins, and ultrasound abdomen were performed. Results: All patients were asymptomatic regarding B-symptoms, had no lymphadenopathy and a normal liver and spleen ultrasound (except patient 1: inhomogenous liver, mild splenomegaly and patient 7: mildly elevated liver echogenicity). Seventy-one percent of the patients were colonized with P. aeruginosa, 29% with MRSA, 71% with S. aureus, 43% with A. fumigatus and 14% with S. apiospermum. Median CRP was 11.4 mg/l (normal <3), WBC 8620/µl (3900-10200), κ-chains 4520 mg/l (2000-4400), λ-chains 3060 mg/l (1100-2400), free κchains 19.4 mg/l (3.3-19.4) , free λ-chains 25.4 mg/l (5.71-26.3) , α1-globulins 5 g/l (1.9-4.1), α2-globulins 10.1 g/l (4.5-9.7), β-globulins 12.1 g/l (5.4-10.8), γ-globulins 19.4 g/l (7.1-15.4). There was a negative correlation between lung function and CRP (r=-0.79, p<0.05) and α1-globulins (r=-0.92, p<0.05). There was a trend for a negative correlation between lung function and free κand λ-chains (both r=-0.77, p=0.072). There was a positive correlation between CRP and free κand λ-chains (both r=0.89, p<0.05), α1-globulins (r=0.94, p<0.05), γglobulins (r=0.89, p<0.05) and κ-chains (r=0.79, p<0.05). κand λ-chains correlated to each other (r=0.86, p<0.05). α1-globulins correlated to free κand λ-chains (both r=0.90, p<0.05), and γ-globulins correlated to κ-chains (r=0.97, p<0.05) and λ-chains (r=0.82, p<0.05). WBC correlated only to α2globulins (r=0.96, p<0.05) and not to any other globulin fraction. Interestingly, there was no correlation between levels of globulins and light chains and age and no correlation between β-globulins and light chains. A matched-pair analysis is pending. On immunofixation 2 patients showed monoclonal IgG κ, controls were negative. No patient had Bence-Jones proteinuria. The ratio of free κto λchains ranged from 0.53 to 1.6 (normal: 0.26-1.65) as a highly divergent ratio would be indicative of neoplastic disorder. Conclusion: It is known that there is polyclonal B-cell stimulation in chronic inflammation and autoimmune disease with consecutive increase of κand λ-chains. In our patients, chronic inflammation triggered by chronic bacterial infection could be the cause of a proportional increase in κand λlight chains. The level of κand λ-chains correlates with the severity of inflammation. Therefore, we suggest that an increase in κand λ-light chains is epiphenomena. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder resulting in CFTR abnormality leading to chronic pulmonary inflammation as well as mucoid impaction of the airways. Interleukin (IL) 10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine is produced at higher levels in non-CF bronchial epithelial cells (BEC) than CF BEC. Previous studies reported airway neutrophils did not inhibit IL-8 production with IL-10 exposure when compared to serum neutrophils. This study describes CF pulmonary migratory immune cells response to direct IL-10 exposure when compared to non-CF patients. Methods: Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid was obtained from 11 CF and 3 non-CF subjects aged 0-18 years and immediately centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes. Cell-free supernatants were removed and stored at -80°C. Cell pellets were washed in PBS and centrifuged again at 1000 rpm for 10 minutes. Supernatants were discarded and cells were resuspended in RPMI +10% fetal calf serum (FCS) to a final concentration of 1 x 10 6 cells/mL. Aliquots of the cells were incubated with 0, 10, 100, and 1000 ng/mL of recombinant human IL-10 (R&D Systems, Inc; Minneapolis, MN) for 24 hours at 37° in 5% CO 2 incubator. Supernatants were again obtained and stored at -80°C until enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) (R&D Systems, Inc; Minneapolis, MN) were performed for levels of IL-8, IL-1beta, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) cytokines. Results: IL-10 inhibition on CF migratory immune cells is present for IL-8, IL-1beta, and TNF-alpha across all concentrations of IL-10 exposure when compared to null IL-10. IL-8 inhibition is not as high in CF immune cells as it is for controls (47.2% vs. 85.9%). However inhibition of IL-1beta and TNF-alpha is higher in CF immune cells compared to control (54.8% vs. -0.8%, 61.2% vs. 37.4% respectively). Conclusion: When compared to controls, CF airway immune cell cytokines demonstrate an attenuated response of inhibition of IL-8 by IL-10. This may be due to the previously described airway neutrophil hypo-responsiveness to IL-10. Alternatively, differential inhibition of other proinflammatory cytokines by IL-10 reflect the potential of IL-10 targeted CF immune therapy. Speculation: IL-10 demonstrates variable in vivo inhibition of airway cell secretory cytokines. IL-10 pathways remain a potential augmentation treatment focus for development in CF therapeutics. Future correction of CFTR may be extrapolated better to incorporate IL-10 response in mitigation of airway inflammation. Background: BNP has natriuretic, diuretic and vasodilating properties and is released by cardiac ventricles in response to myocyte stretch. In patients with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension it serves as a useful marker of ventricular dysfunction and correlates well with the severity of haemodynamic impairment. It has been suggested that the measurement of serum BNP in patients with less advanced lung disease could provide a means of screening for the early development of cardiac complications. The hypothesis of this study was that levels of BNP would correlate with evidence of right ventricular dysfunction in patients with severe CF lung disease. Methods: This was a case controlled study of adults and children set in 2 specialist London CF centres. Using real-time cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, ventricular and haemodynamic flow images were obtained. Postimaging assessment of ventricular volumes, aortic, pulmonary artery and systemic vascular resistance, was made using commercially available opensource software with in-house plugins. Serum BNP and C-reactive protein (CRP) were measured in our clinical laboratory. Measurements were made during a period of disease stability. The normal range of serum BNP is between 1-4pmol/l. Patients with normal and abnormal levels were compared using the Mann-Whitney test and correlation using Spearmans coefficient. Results: Thirty-eight participants have completed the study protocol to date (Table) . Ten (26%) had an abnormally high serum BNP (median 9 pmol/l). There were no patients with CMR defined morphological features of pulmonary hypertension. There was no significant difference between the 2 groups in any right ventricular haemodynamic or pulmonary artery flow parameter. Patients with abnormal serum BNP levels had significantly lower systemic vascular resistance, lower FEV 1 , and raised levels of systemic inflammation measured by CRP. There was a small positive correlation between CRP and serum BNP (r 2 = 0.26 p=0.005). Conclusions: A significant number of this population had an abnormal serum BNP in the absence of CMR evidence of cardiac disease, despite more severe CF lung disease, manifest by reduced lung function and increased inflammation. It would appear that in this group of patients ventricular stretch plays a less important role in serum BNP levels, which may be affected by chronic inflammation and cytokine release. Cystic fibrosis (CF), primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), bronchiectasis and persistent bacterial bronchitis (PBB) are characterised by persistent neutrophilic inflammation. Persisting acute inflammation may be due to failure of mechanisms terminating neutrophilic inflammation. Differences in prognosis between childhood inflammatory lung diseases may be related to the ability to resolve inflammation. Annexin A1 (AnxA1), is an endogenous anti-inflammatory protein shown to be reduced in adult CF nasal epithelial cells and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). However, AnxA1 and its receptor ALX have not been studied in other neutrophilic airway diseases, or in children. Methods: Following ethical approval and informed consent, BAL and endobronchial biopsies (Bx) were obtained for research at clinical bronchoscopies in children with CF, PCD, bronchiectasis, PBB and controls (isolated upper airway disease). Samples were also collected from babies with CF diagnosed by newborn screening (CF NBS). CF NBS are generally well without signs of lung disease, although there is emerging evidence they have occult airway infection. However, they provide an opportunity to establish whether any differences in the CF group are due to the primary CFTR defect, or are secondary to chronic bacterial infection. RT-PCR analysis of AnxA1 and ALX mRNA levels was undertaken in Bx and BAL cell pellets. If overall group medians varied significantly (Kruskal-Wallis), analysis of inter group statistical differences was undertaken (Dunn's post test). Results: (Table) Levels of AnxA1 and ALX mRNA in BAL cell pellets were lower in all disease groups compared to controls; this reached statistical significance for a) AnxA1 in patients with PCD / bronchiectasis compared to controls (p<0.01) and b) ALX in patients with CF and PBB as compared to controls (p<0.01 and p<0.05 respectively). There was no significant difference in AnxA1 and ALX mRNA levels between patients with established CF and CF NBS. No differences were seen for either gene in Bx. No correlation was seen between AnxA1 and ALX mRNA levels and BAL neutrophilia (Spearman correlation). Of CF NBS, 2 had positive bacterial growth, 1 had BAL neutrophilia (15%) and 4 samples were too degenerate for a cell differential. Conclusions: Changes in AnxA1 and ALXR mRNA may be secondary to chronic bacterial infection and inflammation which overwhelm inflammatory pro-resolution mechanisms, irrespective of the underlying disease. Numbers were too small to correlate with BAL neutrophils. Since there are no differences in levels of AnxA1 and ALXR mRNA between CF and CF NBS patients, a primary CFTR-related mechanism may also be important. However, there was evidence of occult airway infection and inflammation in some CF NBS, which may go against this. An excessive neutrophilic inflammation, mainly orchestrated by the release of IL-8 from bronchial epithelial cells, leads to progressive tissue destruction in the airways of patients affected by CF. The anti-inflammatory drugs presently utilized have several limitations, indicating the need for identifying novel molecular targets, to open the way to more effective antiinflammatory drugs. CF bronchial epithelial cells play a pivotal role in translating the presence of infectious agents into the release of chemokines. However, the transmembrane signal transduction machinery implicated in the recruitment of leukocytes is characterized by redundancy, as inhibition of one of the multiple receptors recognizing bacterial components, of the different kinases, adapters, phospholipases, etc., could be bypassed by alternative signaling pathways. Thus understanding the real relevance of each single component as a therapeutic target is critical. We started addressing this issue by a candidate gene association study of 135 genes of the proinflammatory signal transduction machinery. The top ranking association with the progression of lung disease was found for a nonsynonymous SNP of the phospholipase C beta 3 (PLCB3) gene (Bezzerri et al., 2011) . Studies on the role of PLCB3 were performed in bronchial epithelial cells exposed to P. aeruginosa in vitro. Silencing the expression of PLCB3 reduced significantly the P. aeruginosa-dependent transcription and release of IL-8 in IB3-1 and in polarized CuFi-1 cells. This was associated with a parallel reduction of a) the sustained increase of cytosolic calcium, b) the activation of the classical calcium-dependent protein kinase C isoforms alpha and beta, c) the activation of NF-kB, one of the key nuclear transcription factors involved in IL-8 transcription, that were all induced by P. aeruginosa infection. We found that PLCB3-mediated pathway is dependent on the release of ATP in the extracellular milieu, upon interaction of P. aeruginosa with bronchial epithelial cells. Importantly, we found that the extracellular nucleotides/PLCB3 pathway is not sufficient to activate autonomously the transcription and release of IL-8 but acts by potentiating the Toll-like Receptors' signaling cascade. In this respect, PLCB3 can represent an interesting molecular target to attenuate the excessive recruitment of neutrophils without completely abolishing the inflammatory response. Bezzerri Group, Queens University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom; 3. Northern Ireland Public Health Laboratory, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom Background: The identification of filamentous fungi and/or yeasts in the airway secretions of individuals with CF is becoming increasingly prevalent. The frequency of Aspergillus fumigatus recovery from individuals with CF has been reported anywhere between 25-60%. Candida albicans, ubiquitous commensal dimorphic yeast, is the most common fungal pathogen of humans and accounts for more than 50% of all fungal systemic infections and is frequently isolated from the sputum of CF patients. Although previous studies using non-CF derived epithelia have shown Aspergillus fumigatus or Candida albicans infection can elicit a pro-inflammatory response, the effect of such infection in a CF setting remains very poorly defined. Objective: We aimed to determine whether Aspergillus fumigatus or Candida albicans modulates the pro-inflammatory response in CF epithelial cells. Methods: Candida albicans and Aspergillus fumigatus isolated from a female and male F508del/F508del CF patient respectively was co-incubated with cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial cells (CFBE) or human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) for 24h prior to the measurement of the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8 by ELISA. Data: Treatment of HBE or CFBE with Candida albicans whole cells did not alter cytokine secretion. However treatment of CFBE with Aspergillus fumigatus conidia resulted in a 1.45-fold increase in IL-6 (p<0.05) and a 1.65-fold increase in IL-8 secretion (p<0.01) in comparison to basal levels; an effect that was not apparent in HBE. Conclusion: Our data indicate that Aspergillus fumigatus infection modulates a pro-inflammatory response in individuals with CF while Candida albicans does not. Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the CF Trust, UK. Lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterised by chronic microbial colonisation and repeated acute exacerbations of pulmonary infection. Vitamin D has been shown to modulate the production of T helper type 2 (Th2) cytokines, IL-5/IL-13. The vitamin D receptor (VDR) a nuclear hormone receptor mediates the activity of vitamin D3. Low serum vitamin D levels were found in an allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) cohort of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) (1), the latter characterised by a heightened Th2 response. As the fungal pathogen Aspergillus fumigatus (A. fumigatus) in CF individuals leads to clinical deterioration of the lungs, the aim of this study was to investigate the effect of Aspergillus secreted gliotoxin on VDR expression in vitro, and in vivo in Aspergillus colonised patients with CF, pre-and post-anti-fungal drug treatment. The effect of A. fumigatus on VDR expression was investigated in vitro in CF bronchial and tracheal epithelial cells and in vivo, in CF bronchial brushings of A. fumigatus colonised individuals, employing qRT-PCR and Western blotting. The effect of the Aspergillus secondary metabolite gliotoxin, on VDR expression was also examined and levels of gliotoxin in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and culture filtrates were quantified by high-performance liquid chromatography on a reverse phase C-18 column. The Th2 cytokines interleukin 5 (IL-5) and IL-13 were quantified in BALF pre/post-itraconazole treatment by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). A. fumigatus culture filtrates or purified gliotoxin significantly downregulated VDR mRNA and protein expression (P<0.05). In vivo, analysis of bronchial brushings of Aspergillus colonised versus non-colonised patients with CF, revealed significantly reduced VDR gene expression in fungal colonised individuals (P<0.05). In addition, increased gliotoxin levels in BALF of Aspergillus colonised individuals correlated with diminished VDR expression. Post-anti-fungal itraconazole treatment, increased VDR gene expression correlated with decreased gliotoxin and lower IL-5/IL-13 levels in vivo. This data indicates that A. fumigatus secreted gliotoxin dose-dependently regulates VDR mRNA and protein expression in CF cells. Aspergillus colonised patients with CF are characterised by distinct down-regulation of VDR gene expression and elevated levels of gliotoxin in vivo. Via inhibition of VDR expression, Aspergillus may directly impact upon the Th2 cytokine (IL-5/IL-13) expression profile thereby altering the inflammatory response within the CF lung. Results indicate gliotoxin as a bona fide therapeutic target for resolution of inflammation. 1. Kreindler Objective: Filamentous fungi colonize airways of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF); A. fumigatus is the most prevalent, occurring in up to 50% of patients. Although the significance of A. fumigatus airway colonization is not clear, up to 7-15% of CF patients mount inappropriate Th2-immune responses to A. fumigatus leading to allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA). Whether colonization itself is a cause of dysregulated inflammation, or a result of deteriorated lung function, is controversial. Recent retrospective studies have generated conflicting conclusions regarding the role of fungus in evoking lung dysfunction. However, results of recent animal studies suggest that mutation and/or deletion in CFTR does cause dysregulated inflammatory responses, in part due to aberrant T cell responses. Relatively little is known about the interaction of airway epithelial cells (EC) and A. fumigatus. The goal of this study was to elucidate how CFTR mutations impact airway EC interactions with A. fumigatus. Methods: Bronchial epithelial cell lines (∆F508 IB3 and wild-type S9) and mouse tracheal epithelial cells (MTEC) isolated from CFTR -/and wild type (WT) mice (C57BL/6) were co-cultured with GFP-expressing A. fumigatus conidia (clinical isolate Af293). Binding/uptake and intracellular viability of conidia inside EC were examined after 3 and 7 hr, respectively. Conidial-induced apoptosis of EC was measured by M-30, PARP-1 and Annexin-propidium iodide (PI) staining. Secretions of cytokines/chemokines were measured from well-differentiated WT and CFTR -/-MTEC treated with heat-inactivated conidia, germ tubes (GT) and LPS by luminex assay after 24 h. Lung-cellular populations and histopathology were assessed in A. fumigatus-challenged CFTR -/and WT mice. Results: Fungal spores (conidia) were rapidly ingested by EC derived from bronchial cell lines and murine tracheas, supporting a role for EC in early airway clearance. Bronchial EC harboring CFTR mutations (∆F508) or gene deletion demonstrated impaired uptake and killing of conidia, and EC with the ∆F508 CFTR mutation or deletion underwent more conidialinduced apoptosis. Only germinated (hyphal) forms of the fungus evoked secretion of inflammatory mediators, with the CFTR deficiency resulting in increased secretion of MCP-1. After inhaled A. fumigatus delivery, CFTR -/mice, but not wild type mice, developed exaggerated Th2-biased pulmonary inflammation and lung injury. Conclusions: These data demonstrated a critical role for CFTR in mediating EC responses to A. fumigatus. Results also suggested that the fungus elicits aberrant pulmonary inflammation in the setting of a CFTR mutation. These findings support a therapeutic paradigm in which antifungal therapy may be efficacious in halting the progression of CF lung disease. This work was supported by a Cystic Fibrosis Foundation grant. Purpose: Inflammasome complexes mediate the production of interleukin-1β (IL-1β). IL-1β is a pro-inflammatory cytokine that has been implicated in CF disease pathogenesis as IL-1β is found at high levels in the CF lung and IL-1β gene (IL1B) polymorphisms may modulate the severity of CF lung disease. However, the relationship between CFTR-dependent chloride ion homeostasis and IL-1β production and its potential as a therapeutic target has yet to be examined. The transcription factor NFκB has emerged as a master regulator of inflammatory cytokine production and the current literature supports a role for NFκB dysregulation in driving an excessive inflammatory response in CFTR-deficient cells. This study will elucidate the relationships between the CFTR, NFκB activation, and the inflammasome in driving IL-1β production. Objective: To determine the interplay between the CFTR and NFκB activation in inflammasome-mediated IL-1β secretion. Methods: CF bronchial epithelial cell lines (S9/IB3-1 and Nuli/Cufi), healthy adult peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and the NFκB reporter Thp-1 X Blue cell line were stimulated with inflammasome stimuli including ATP and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Secreted and intracellular cytokines were analyzed by ELISA. NFκB activity and pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion was correlated using Thp-1 reporter cells. Caspase-1 activity was quantified by flow cytometry using FLICA, a cell-permeable fluorescent probe that stains active caspase-1. Results: Neither CF nor non-CF bronchial epithelial cells strongly increase caspase-1 activation or secrete significant amounts of IL-1β upon inflammasome stimulation. However, inflammasome stimulation in hematopoietic cells (PBMCs and Thp-1 cells) results in significant caspase-1 activation and secretion of large quantities of IL-1β (> 1000-fold over baseline) that reaches maximal levels at 6 and 24 hours, respectively. In both PBMCs and Thp-1 cells, the quantity of IL-1β secreted is dependent on the degree of NFκB priming. Prior stimulation with heat-killed P. aeruginosa and subsequent stimulation with live P. aeruginosa considerably increases IL-1β production over conditions without prior priming (p < 0.005). Similarly, chemical inhibition of NFκB diminishes IL-1β production to background levels (p < 0.005). Finally, treatment of Thp-1 reporter cells with a CFTR inhibitor (CFTRinh-172) does not result in an increase in NFκB activity or IL-8 production but seems to decrease the amount of IL-1β secreted. The mechanisms by which CFTR function influences IL-1β secretion are currently under investigation. Conclusions: Bronchial epithelial cells do not show a substantial increase in caspase-1 activity following incubation with P. aeruginosa or other stimuli and do not secrete significant amounts of IL-1β. Consequently, airway epithelial cells are unlikely to contribute to increased IL-1β levels detected in the CF lung. Conversely, hematopoietic cells produce substantial amounts of IL-1β that is dependent on the degree of prior NFκB activation which may be influenced by CFTR function. Neutrophils in cystic fibrosis (CF) are recruited to the site of infection, yet paradoxically fail to eradicate pathogens. Reports indicate that both inflammatory and intrinsic factors contribute to dysregulated neutrophil activity in CF. Current studies focusing on innate differences have illustrated delayed apoptosis, altered gene expression and increased extracellular release of proteases from primary granules. Degranulation of secondary granules is mediated by Rab27a and its effector protein Munc13-4, that regulates SNARE complex formation. The aim of this study was to provide support for additional intrinsic alterations by investigating the pattern and mechanism of degranulation of secondary and tertiary granules by CF neutrophils. Circulating neutrophils were purified from blood of patients with CF and healthy control individuals. The CF group included 31 clinically stable patients (mean age: 24 ± 1 yr, mean FEV1: 60 ± 6 %) and the control group included 31 healthy donors (mean age: 27 ± 1 yr). Degranulation assays were performed by exposing neutrophils to TNF-alpha (10 ng) for 0, 5, 10 and 20 min. The level of degranulated proteins in surrounding supernatants was determined by Western blot analysis and ELISA. In addition, surface expression of CD66b, a marker for release of secondary and tertiary granules, was determined by flow cytometry. Translocation of Rab27a and the vSNARE VAMP2 to the neutrophil membrane was analysed by Western blotting. For analysis of Rab27a activation, bound GTP was measured by employing a coupled enzymatic assay of immunoprecipitates. CF neutrophils released 50 % and 75 % less secondary and tertiary granules, respectively, post-TNF-alpha stimulation when compared to neutrophils of healthy controls (p<0.05). Furthermore, upregulation of CD66b to the cell surface was decreased by 40% on CF neutrophils (p<0.05). Rab27a and VAMP2 levels on membranes of healthy control neutrophils increased 2-fold at 5 min post-stimulation, whereas levels on CF neutrophils remained unchanged (p<0.05). In addition, levels of GTP-bound Rab27a in healthy control cells doubled after 1 min. In contrast, the observed maximum increase of GTP-bound Rab27a in CF neutrophils was 40 % and occurred after 4 min indicating decreased and delayed activation of Rab27a in these cells. In conclusion, dysregulated activation of Rab27a causes decreased degranulation of antimicrobial proteins from secondary and tertiary granules by CF circulating neutrophils. These results provide further evidence for an intrinsic alteration of these innate immune cells. Rab27a and its activation may represent an important therapeutic target in the treatment of CF.  Introduction: Chronic P. aeruginosa pulmonary infection is associated with a decline in clinical status and is the leading cause of morbidity in CF patients. To date there has been little agreement upon the clinical value of measuring serum antibody response against such pathogens. The initial humoral response to bacteria in the lungs is the production of secretory IgA by plasma cells in the pulmonary mucosa, followed if necessary by the systemic release of IgG. Specific antibodies against P. aeruginosa antigens increase when the infection becomes chronic and a poor prognosis has been shown to correlate with a high number of anti-Pseudomonas precipitins. In particular, an increase in IgG titre correlates with a decrease in lung function and longitudinal studies clearly associate the increase in IgG titre with poor clinical condition. Furthermore, it has been suggested that the ratio between IgA and IgG titre is more indicative of prognosis than individual measurements. Aims: To determine whether serum IgG or IgA antibody titre against P. aeruginosa in CF patients is associated with survival over 10 years. Methods: Serum samples were retrospectively analysed from 118 healthy volunteers and 103 CF patients from two Adult CF centres (Manchester (n=40) and Belfast (n=63)). Of these CF patients, 36 had no P. aeruginosa infection and 67 were chronically infected. IgG and IgA titre was measured by ELISA against P. aeruginosa antigens and antibody response was compared with a 10-year survival outcome. Results: A significant positive correlation was observed between IgG and IgA in all subgroups (r-value 0.5, p= <0.0001). In comparison to control patients, there was an increase in both IgG and IgA titre in patients chronically infected with P. aeruginosa (p=<0.0001). Whilst a significant difference was observed in IgG titre between P. aeruginosa negative patients and those with chronic infection (p= <0.0001) this was not detected for IgA (p=0.2). Antibody levels were compared between patients who were still alive and patients who had died within the last 10 years. There was a significant difference in IgG titre (p=0.013) between P. aeruginosa patients still surviving and those who died which was not detected for IgA (p=0.17). Comparing IgA:IgG ratio between all groups, a significant difference was only found between control patients and those with chronic infection (p=0.004). Conclusion: An increase in IgG titre was shown to be associated with mortality. Therefore, our results suggest that IgG, and not IgA, is a potential immunological marker of chronic infection and survival. Acknowledgements: This work was funded through a US-Ireland Project Partnership Grant by the Health and Social Care Research and Development, Public Health Agency, Northern Ireland. Background: CF is characterized by chronic pulmonary inflammation causing damage and repair mechanisms that lead to fibrosis. Inflammatory markers such as interleukin 8(IL-8), interleukin 1-β(IL-1β) and matrix metalloproteinase-9(MMP-9) have been shown to be increased in patients with CF compared to controls, as have fibrotic markers such as transforming growth factor-β(TGF-β). Azithromycin(AZM), a common therapy for patients with CF, has been shown previously by our lab to increase MMP-9 and decrease TGFβ expression in patients' sputa. IL-1β and IL-8 are both produced by macrophages during an inflammatory response -AZM has been demonstrated to affect macrophage production of inflammatory cytokines, as well as mediators of fibrosis in vitro and in mouse models. Because these are all important molecules in the immune response in CF, we decided to examine them in context of AZM therapy in human subjects. Objective: To determine whether AZM affects correlations between inflammatory proteins and fibrotic marker expression in sputum of patients with CF. Methods: Patients with CF between the ages of 8 and 48, not currently experiencing an exacerbation were enrolled from pulmonology clinics at UK Medical Center. Non-induced sputum samples were collected, processed, and supernatants isolated for protein analysis by ELISA and cytometric bead array. Clinical data at the time of the sputum sample, including current medications and pulmonary function, was also recorded. Results: Subjects receiving AZM displayed IL-1β protein expression that was positively correlated with both MMP-9 and TGFβ expression. MMP-9 and TGFβ expression were positively correlated to each other in the subjects receiving AZM. Overall, IL-1β was not correlated to FEV1, changed significantly by presence of AZM in these subjects. However, in the subset of subjects not receiving AZM, IL-1β expression was positively correlated to FEV1 and with TGF-β. IL-8 was not correlated with any marker in any of the subjects. Conclusions: Treatment with AZM eliminated the association of IL-1β and disease severity (FEV1), yet induced the correlation with TGF-β and MMP-9. Correlations of IL-1β to fibrotic markers could indicate a classic damage and repair cycle in these patients, whereby IL-1β is part of an inflammatory response causing damage, and TGF-β is upregulated in response to initiate repair mechanisms. Further, the fact that IL-1β and IL-8 are not correlated, in either AZM or non AZM patients, suggests a more complicated role for IL-1β than simple early inflammation. Rationale: Production of antimicrobials by airway epithelial cells and submucosal glands results in concentration-dependent antimicrobial activity in the airway surface liquid (ASL). The airways of cystic fibrosis (CF) pigs have a bacterial killing host defect at birth, before inflammation and infection become evident. The absence of CFTR has been proposed to impair production of airway antimicrobials under basal conditions and following stimulation of submucosal glands. In this study, we hypothesized that production of airway antimicrobials would be impaired in epithelial cells from CF pigs. Methods: Following methacholine stimulation, we collected ASL from the airways of newborn non-CF and CF pigs. Concentration of multiple antimicrobials was measured with Western blot. We also collected ASL from primary cultures of airway epithelial cells. Antimicrobial activity was measured in radial diffusion assays in agar and by direct incubation of diluted ASL with S. aureus and E. coli. Since airway antimicrobial activity is sentitive to pH and cation concentration, these parameters were adjusted in the assays to maximize function. The concentration of all antimicrobials tested was not significantly different between samples from non-CF and CF pigs. Moreover, the antimicrobial activity of ASL from non-CF and CF epithelial cells was similar in radial diffusion and direct incubation assays. Conclusion: These data suggest that absence of CFTR does not impair production of airway antimicrobials. The defect in bacterial eradication in the airways of CF pigs is therefore more likely to be dependent upon another abnormal mechanism. A hallmark of cystic fibrosis is the chronic colonization of the lungs with pathogenic bacteria. The persistent infection and consequent sustained immune and inflammatory responses result in damage to the lung tissue, loss of lung function and contribute to the high mortality of CF. Pathogenic bacteria utilize a variety of systems to adapt to, and remodel, their local environments to establish and maintain colonization of the host. Pseudomonas aeruginosa secretes multiple virulence factors that facilitate airway colonization and modulate virulence. Among these, several exoprotreases have been identified in the CF airway, including elastase and alkaline protease. Proteolytic cleavage of ENaC has recently emerged as a model for the regulation of ASL volume. Cleavage of the extracellular domains of ENaC results in the activation of the channel and increased sodium absorption, putatively resulting in decreased ASL volume. Local alterations in secreted fluid and ASL volume may, in turn, facilitate the adherence of pathogens in the lung by decreasing mucocilliary clearance. To evaluate the impact of Pseudomonas exoproteases on the regulation of ENaC, alkaline protease was purified and characterized for in vitro biochemical studies and electrophysiological studies using human bronchial epithelial cells. In vitro biochemical studies demonstrate that Ca 2+ and pH regulate protease activity and stability and that the purified protease has significant activity under physiological conditions of airway pH and Ca 2+ . In Ussing chamber experiments, current recordings of CF and non-CF human bronchial epithelial cells demonstrate a significant increase in ENaC (amiloride sensitive) current as a result of protease addition. The magnitude of activation is similar to that elicited by trypsin, though the kinetics of activation are slowed. These data suggest that one mechanism by which alkaline protease contributes to Pseudomonas colonization and virulence may be through the regulation of ENaC. Structural studies suggest that alkaline pro-tease adopts multiple structural conformations as a function of autoproteolysis. The resulting peptides are consistent with fragments identified in CF airway. These proteolytic products display distinct structural and biochemical properties from the full-length protein, producing highly ordered protein oligomers. From these data we present a model for the potential roles of alkaline protease in the colonization of the CF lung wherein multiple structural states of the protein contribute to bacterial adherence and virulence through distinct structural and functional activities. Aims: Peribronchial angiogenesis in cystic fibrosis is associated with increased expression of the angiogenic factor VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor)-A in airway epithelium. We hypothesized that CFTR dysfunction induced peribronchial angiogenesis via the expression of VEGF-A and its receptors. Methods: Airway epithelial NCI-H292 cells, which expressed functional CFTR and primary cultures of non-CF human nasal polyp epithelial cells, were treated with selective CFTR inhibitors (CFTR-inh 172 and PPQ-102, 10 µM). NCI-H292 cells were also transfected with a specific CFTR siRNA. VEGF-A concentrations were measured by ELISA in cell culture medium. Expression and localization of VEGF-A and its receptors (VEGFR1 and VEGFR2) and peribronchial vascularity were examined in Cftr-/-(C57BL/6J Cftrm1UNC) and homozygous F508del-CFTR (Cftrtm1Eur/ Cftrtm1Eur; FvB) mice and wild-type littermates, using immunocytochemistry and quantitative morphometric analysis. Results: CFTR inhibition using chemical inhibitors or siRNA induced a two-fold increase in VEGF-A synthesis in NCI-H292 cells (P<0.05 compared to Control). During the first week of culture, polyp epithelial cells expressed low levels of functional CFTR and produced high levels of VEGF-A protein. After three weeks, higher levels of functional CFTR correlated with a marked decrease in VEGF-A synthesis. At this latter timepoint, treatment with CFTR chemical inhibitors increased VEGF-A synthesis (P<0.05 compared to control). In both cftr deficient mice strains, VEGF-A expression was increased in airway epithelium as compared with wild-type littermates (P<0.01); VEGFR2 expression was also increased in epithelium (P<0.05) but not in the endothelium. No significant differences in VEGFR1 expression and peribronchial vascularity were found between cftr deficient or wild-type mice. Conclusions: CFTR dysfunction induced VEGF-A synthesis in airway epithelium in vitro and in vivo in mice. These changes were not sufficient to increase peribronchial vascularity in cftr deficient mice. Cantin, A.M.; Cloutier, D.; Bilodeau, G. Medicine, Pulmonology Division, University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada Introduction: Despite the continuous arrival of massive numbers of neutrophils, patients with cystic fibrosis are unable to avoid bacterial infections in their airways. The neutrophil is a professional phagocyte particularly effective at killing bacteria through oxidative and non-oxidative mechanisms. The paucity of systemic bacterial infections in CF suggests that the mucosal environment may be interfering with the neutrophil's bactericidal function. The resistance of Burkholderia cepacia to non-oxidative killing and the increased susceptibility of CF patients to this organism led us to hypothesize that the neutrophil oxidative burst may be defective in the local environment of the CF respiratory mucosa, and that such a defect is linked to secreted mucins. Methods: Neutrophils were isolated fro the peripheral blood of healthy volunteers. Mucins were purified from CF (dF508/dF508) sputum, saliva and from the saliva of non-CF volunteers. Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PAO1), B. cepacia (strain C5424 from Dr. David Speert), or Zymosan were opsonized with homologous serum and added to neutrophils in varied ratios for 2 h. Killing of bacteria was subsequently assessed by culture and colony counts. The respiratory burst was determined by chemiluminescence using luminol. The capacity of mucins to scavenge superoxide and hydrogen peroxide was determined using ferricytochrome-c and phenol red. Phosphorylation of the NADPH oxidase complex protein p40PHOX was determined by Western blot. Results: Neutrophils clearly ingested PAO1, C5424 and Zymosan particles and effectively killed all bacteria within 2 hours. However the addition of 2 mg/mL mucin to the bacteria completely inhibited the bacterial killing by neutrophils. Whereas chemiluminescence of neutrophils that had phagocytosed opsonized bacteria or Zymosan markedly increased within minutes, the presence of mucins from CF sputum, CF saliva and non-CF saliva each suppressed all chemiluminescence (p < 0.01). The suppression of chemiluminescence was also observed in the presence of pure sialic acid or sulfated aminoglycans. P40 PHOX phosphorylation was partially decreased by mucins after phagoctyosis of bacteria but not of Zymosan, suggesting that deficient NADPH oxidase cannot entirely explain the suppression of the neutrophil oxidative burst by mucins. Mucins did not scavenge superoxide or hydrogen peroxide, however sialic acid, a component of mucin that suppressed neutrophil chemiluminescence, is a known scavenger of hydroxyl radical. Conclusion: Mucins from CF sputum and saliva, and from non-CF saliva suppress the oxidative burst of neutrophils that have phagocytosed opsonized PAO1 or Zymosan. The mechanisms are likely related to the oxidant scavenging properties of mucins and their anionic sugars such as sialic acid. These observations may have potential relevance to repeated bacterial infections that occur in CF airways. Bagnat, M. Duke University, Durham, NC, USA Transport of chloride through the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) channel is a key step in regulating fluid secretion in vertebrates. Loss of CFTR function leads to cystic fibrosis, a disease that affects the lungs, pancreas, liver, intestine and vas deferens. Conversely, uncontrolled activation of the channel leads to increased fluid secretion and plays a major role in several diseases and conditions including secretory diarrheas and Polycystic Kidney Disease. Understanding how CFTR activity is regulated in vivo has been limited by the lack of a genetic model. Recently, using forward genetics in zebrafish we identified a mutation in the cse1l gene that leads to the sudden and dramatic expansion of the gut tube. We showed that this phenotype results from a rapid accumulation of fluid in the lumen due to the un-controlled activation of the CFTR channel. Analyses in zebrafish embryos and mammalian cells indicate that Cse1l is a negative regulator of CFTR-dependent fluid secretion. This work prompted us to carry out a new zebrafish forward genetic screen to identify more regulators of CFTR and fluid secretion. We have thus far identified 25 mutations causing excessive fluid accumulation in the gut (12), ear (2) and kidney (11). In addition, we are also using the zebrafish model to study the role of CFTR and fluid secretion in organ development and function. These approaches provide a new genetic model system for studying the regulation of the CFTR channel and fluid secretion. The polymorphic gel forming mucins, MUC5AC and MUC5B, play important roles in innate defense of the airways. Their over-secretion and dehydration has been implicated as important in CF, thus, MUC5AC and MUC5B are biologically relevant candidate gene modifiers for CF lung disease. Southern blots, to determine the length of the MUC5AC variable number tandem repeats (VNTR), were used to define the distribution of VNTR allele sizes by severity of lung phenotype, using F508del homozygous Caucasians at UNC/CWRU. MUC5AC VNTR allele lengths were highly polymorphic, ranging in size from 5.6 to 8.5 kb, with a bimodal distribution surrounding 6.3/6.4 kb and 6.9 kb. Although there was no indication that severity of CF lung disease was directly correlated with VNTR allele length, a highly significant association (p=0.0006 after Bonferroni correction) was discovered between the 6.4 kb allele and CF lung disease severity. In order to add relevance to this finding, it is now important to understand the nature of the MUC5AC polymorphisms on the risk and non-risk genotypes carrying the 6.4 kb VNTR allele. Additional SNP genotyping and development of linkage disequilibrium maps are being used to further characterize the genetic architecture. A MUC5B promoter polymorphism has recently been reported to associate with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (Seibold et al, NEJM, 364:1503 NEJM, 364: -12, 2011 , and preliminary results show association of this SNP with severity of CF lung disease in UNC/CWRU patients. However, understanding the detailed polymorphic structures of MUC5AC and MUC5B is hampered by the poor mapping of their genomic structures in widely used public databases, as exemplified by the incomplete mRNA sequence from RefSeq and the gapped partial genomic map in hg18 and hg19 assembly from the UCSC genome browser. To obtain a more complete genomic map around the MUC5AC gene, a full coding mRNA sequence was constructed from four partial nucleotide sequences. Search by BLAST from NCBI returned 99 genomic sequences and contigs from shotgun sequencing conducted during the development of human reference genome sequence. This, and other next-generation sequence data, will be used to assemble larger contigs of the MUC5AC gene than are presently available in public databases. The genomic contigs will then be used to retrieve high-coverage, longer paired-end sequencing reads from selected samples of the 1000 Genomes project that utilized the LS454 GS FLX sequencing platform. These longer sequences will be used to further refine the genomic assembly. Alignments of sequence reads from the 1000 Genomes samples to both the genomic contigs and coding mRNA of MUC5AC will help to elucidate the details of polymorphic structure, thus, providing the basis for identifying polymorphisms that are hypothesized to alter function and/or expression. Similar studies will be undertaken for MUC5B. These polymorphisms will then be tested in the larger gene modifier cohort to establish the link between the identified phenotypic association and the functional variants. A recently completed genome-wide association study (GWAS) has identified a highly significant genetic signal on chr11p13 associated with CF lung disease severity. The region is intergenic, lying 3' to two genes of potential relevance to CF biology, APIP, a regulator of apoptosis, and EHF, an epithelial-specific transcription factor with very high expression in human tracheal tissue. It is now critical to define the mechanistic link between the genetic variation in this region and the phenotypic lung consequences. Careful evaluation of the region suggests that it is regulatory, e.g., it contains highly significant regions of cross-species conservation, and regions of open chromatin identified by DNase seq and FAIRE, and methylated DNA. Analysis of ENCODE data from airway epithelial cells has also identified regions that suggest cell-type specific regulation of nearby genes. Deep sequencing across the entire region is being conducted to provide a complete picture of the risk and non-risk haplotypes. In other studies, analyses of mRNA expression levels from >750 lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) from the UNC/Case Western F508del cohort has identified a strong eQTL for APIP, suggesting that polymorphisms in the region are linked to alterations in APIP expression. Because EHF is not expressed in LCLs, it cannot be queried using this approach, but the potential for the polymorphisms to also regulate EHF is very real. Indeed, analysis of mRNA levels by realtime quantitative PCR from ~120 nasal scrape samples from CF GWAS patients demonstrate highly correlated gene expression between EHF and APIP. Additional preliminary analysis of the LCL mRNA expression data found that APIP is differentially expressed in severe versus mild CF patients, with higher levels associated with patients that have more severe lung disease. Because APIP is an "anti-apoptotic" protein, our results suggest that reduced levels of apoptosis are associated with increased severity. This concept is in line with the general understanding of apoptotic processes in CF lung diseases. Neutrophils from CF patients have been reported to have reduced apoptosis with reduced clearance and increased inflammation; plus, goblet cell metaplasia/hyperplasia, which is a consistent feature in the CF lung, is reported to occur upon inhibition of apoptosis. Since APIP is expressed in both airway epithelium and neutrophils, its potential to play a significant role in the chronic disease burden in the CF lung is high. Interestingly, apoptosis pathways are also significantly over-represented in Gene Set Enrichment analysis of LCL expression data. As this region is dissected, using a variety of in vivo and in vitro models, the mechanistic importance of APIP and other genes in the region will become clear and offer insights for therapeutic targets with a significant effect on CF lung burden. Supported by: CFF KNOWLE00A0; NIH HL068890; NIH HL071798; NIH HL094585; CFFPOLIN09F0.  Pa) and the mucoid form of Pa (MPa) are significant contributors to morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF). While the CFTR genotype and environmental factors are known to play a role in the acquisition of Pa, the relative contribution of host factors (i.e. modifier genes) is unknown. We therefore quantified the contribution of modifier genes to the variability in Pa infection and performed linkage to localize regions containing potential modifiers. Methods: Forty-four monozygotic (MZ) and 17 dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs with two CFTR class mutations I-III were included. Two definitions were created: first infection defined as the first positive culture for Pa or MPa; persistent infection defined as having 3 consecutive years of culture data with at least one positive culture in at least 2 of the 3 years. Genetic contribution to infection was estimated by subtracting the concordance in the DZ twins from the MZ twins and multiplying by 2. Logistic regression was also performed to account for age differences. Finally an age of onset phenotype was created for each definition using residuals calculated from Cox regression and adjusted for lung function and the number of cultures obtained per year for the subject. Non-parametric linkage analysis utilizing MERLIN was performed using 1726 subjects (siblings with CF and available parents) from 419 families enrolled in the CF Twin and Sibling Study. Genotypes were provided from the North American Cystic Fibrosis Modifier Consortium genome wide association study using the Illumina 610 Quad array. Results: Concordance for persistent infection with Pa was higher in MZ twins (0.83; 25 of 30 pairs) than DZ twins (0.45; 5 of 11 pairs) generating a heritability estimate of 0.76. Logistic regression adjusting for patient age corroborated genetic control of persistent infection with Pa. The correlation for age at persistent infection was higher in MZ twins (0.589; 95% CI: 0.222-0.704) than DZ twins (0.162; -0.352 -0.607) generating a heritability estimate of 0.85. Heritability was not evident for first infection with Pa, age at first infection with Pa, first infection with MPa or persistent infection with MPa. Linkage was performed utilizing persistent infection with Pa. For presence of persistent infection, one locus was suggestive of linkage with a LOD score of 2.1 at 16q24. Suggestive linkage was also found for absence of persistent infection at the following loci: 2q12-13 (LOD=2.2); 3p26 (LOD=2.2); 8q24 (LOD=2.9); 20p11-p12 (LOD=2.5). Finally for age at onset of persistent infection, 5 loci were found with suggestive linkage: 1q25 (LOD=2.6); 2q14-q21 (LOD=2.6); 7q36 (LOD=2.1); 8q24 (LOD=2.8); 20p11 (LOD=2.0). Conclusions: Modifier genes have a substantial role in the establishment and timing of persistent infection with Pa. Multiple loci contribute to this phenotype suggesting that several genes other than CFTR govern this trait and provide the basis for further investigation. Lack of chloride secretion, by itself, cannot explain the diverse biological manifestations observed in the CF patient. Gene modifiers and environment have been suggested as contributors to CF phenotypic variability. Another possible contributor could be transcriptional dysregulation as a response to CFTR's absence. Homeostatic mechanisms within the cell mobilize the transcriptional machinery to make more CFTR and in the process influence other genes. Furthermore, the complement of genes affected may be cell type specific, as transcriptional networks themselves differ between cell types due to tissue-specific transcription factors (TFs). We devised a strategy to identify elements of the transcriptional regulatory networks altered in CF. The strategy combines transcriptome data generated from specific tissues, with bioinformatics to sift through the transcript data to find common promoter elements in genes showing altered expression. This will be done first tissue-by-tissue and when data from several tissues are available we will look for regulatory elements common to most or all CF cells. Clinical relevance of the identified transcriptional networks will be assessed using the Gene Modifier Study. As a proof of concept, we started with liver as we have functional data from CF mouse liver that can be used to evaluate the physiological significance of our findings. RNA was extracted from livers of pristine 2-3-week-old ∆F508 female mice and their WT littermates, C57BL/6J background (4 mice per group). cRNA was amplified and hybridized to Illumina's MouseRef-8 v2 Expression BeadChip. Out of the 1,257 differentially expressed genes in the CF liver of young mice vs. their WT littermates, 634 were down-regulated and 623 were up-regulated. Functional analysis indicated that cholesterol biosynthesis was one of the Biological Go Terms over-represented in the differentially expressed genes. All of the cholesterol synthesis related genes present in the chip exhibited significant reduction in mRNA. This message reduction has functional consequences since de novo cholesterol synthesis was also significantly reduced in these mice. Cholesterol fractional synthesis in CF livers was 9.62 ± 0.85 vs. 37.64 ± 4.04 % synthesized/day in WT, p = 0.03 (mean ± SE, n=4). Genomatix software was used to identify TFs families over or underrepresented in promoters of genes down-regulated in CF livers. This analysis revealed that genes responsible for cholesterol synthesis clustered together in two main groups, and have an over-representation of 6 TFs, one of which V$ZF02, stood out. A member of this family Zfp202 (ZNF202 in humans) is a transcriptional repressor that binds to elements found predominantly in lipid metabolism related genes and a candidate for human dyslipidemia. Therefore, Zfp202 may be a good candidate responsible for the decrease in cholesterol synthesis observed in our CF mice. Zfp202, itself, was below the array detection levels, but 3 other members of the family showed a modest increase in message in CF liver: Zfp219, Zfp281, and Zkscan3. Our transcriptional profiling was able to accurately predict changes in cholesterol synthesis, therefore it may be effective in identifying other metabolic pathways altered in CF. Supported by NIH grant GM088823. Introduction: CF is a genetic disorder caused by mutations in the CFTR gene, and in which lung disease is characterized by chronic infection by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and is the major cause of morbidity and mortality among CF patients. While the median age of survival among patients with CF is only 38 years, there is a range of disease severity. We used a novel genomics approach to generate genome-wide expression profiles with the purpose of identifying non-invasive gene expression markers for CF severity. Transcription was induced by culturing peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with autologous serum (self-baseline control), allogeneic serums (healthy unrelated controls), serum of previously healthy individuals with newly acquired respiratory infections and CF patient serums. We chose this methodology because the serum assay generated a more robust signature than did directly profiling PBMCs, the technique currently used for expression arrays. Methodology: We completed expression profiling of RNA derived from the serum of 38 CF patients, 14 of whom have been diagnosed and followed as part of the Wisconsin Newborn Screening Project (WNBS), who possessed varying degrees of colonization status with P. aeruginosa (never, transient, intermittent or persistent) as well 11 patients with recently acquired respiratory tract infections for comparison. RNA was amplified and labeled using the GeneChip 3' IVT Express Kit (Affymetrix) and hybridized to Affymetrix HGU133plus2.0 array. RNA from each culture was independently analyzed. Image data were quantified with Affymetrix Expression Console Software and normalized with Robust Multichip Analysis to determine signal intensity using the autologous signal |log 2 ratio| as the baseline. ANOVA, false discovery rates (multiple testing using step-up method) and principal components analysis plots were conducted using Partek Genomics Suite version 6.2. False discovery rates (FDRs) were based on the ANOVA p-value. Differentially expressed probe sets were defined as those possessing an FDR <20% and |log 2 ratio >0.5| among comparison groups. Hierarchical clustering was performed using Genesis. Results: We identified differential expression in several sets of genes generated. Pathway analysis indicates that the most significant differences in gene expression among infection status include those involved with airway defense, antigen presentation, transcription, and intracellular trafficking. Conclusion: Our methodology consistently identified a number of genes that are unique to CF and for CF patients with differing P. aeruginosa infection status as targets for further study. Improved nutrition early in life is associated with better pulmonary function years later for CF patients. Nutrition and growth are affected by factors such as pancreatic insufficiency (PI) and meconium ileus (MI). We have also previously shown that genes independent of CFTR contribute to average lifetime nutritional status in CF (Blackman et al. 2008 . Ped Pulm 43(S31):271). This study investigated the influence of genetic and nongenetic factors on nutrition in young CF patients who experience the greatest changes in growth rates. Methods: Data from the CF Twin and Sibling Study and the CF Foundation Patient Registry were used to estimate the genetic effect on body mass index (BMI), a marker of nutritional status. Longitudinal height and weight data were collected for 1618 twins and siblings with CF from 800 families, totaling 120,245 clinic visits and 17,140 patient-years (average 10.6 years per patient). For each clinic visit, a BMI was calculated. Z-scores for height, weight and BMI were generated using CDC reference equations. Phenotypes were derived for each individual by averaging BMI Z-scores from 2 to 4 years (BMIZ 2to4) and 5 to 10 years (BMIZ 5to10). Results: The mean BMIZ 2to4 phenotype for 1282 individuals was 0.09 (SD 0.89) corresponding to the 54th CDC percentile. The mean BMIZ 5to10 phenotype for 1375 patients was -0.07 (SD 0.84) corresponding to the 47th CDC percentile. Both phenotypes correlated negatively with PI (decrease of 0.17 units for BMIZ 2to4 and 0.29 units for BMIZ 5to10) and history of MI (decrease of 0.13 units for BMIZ 2to4 and 0.2 units for BMIZ 5to10). BMIZ 5to10 correlated positively with lung function (average CF-specific FEV1 percentile from 6 to 10 years) with an increase of 0.11 units for every 10percentile increase in FEV1. Correlation for BMIZ 2to4 was high within 63 monozygous (MZ) twin pairs (r=0.80) and lower within 13 same-sex dizygous (DZ) twin pairs (r=0.55). One hundred thirty-two pairs of same-sex DZ twins plus same-sex siblings born within 3 years were used as a proxy for DZ twins and had a similar correlation (r=0.47). Heritability for this trait was estimated at 0.66. Similar results were obtained for BMIZ 5to10 (69 MZ pairs, 13 same-sex DZ pairs and 156 same-sex DZ plus sibling pairs) with a heritability estimate of 0.82. Heritability estimates remained high (BMIZ 2to4=0.83, BMIZ 5to10=0.93) when adjustments were made for PI and MI. Linkage analysis was performed on 474 families typed with a genome-wide array of 20,066 markers; genome-wide significance of p<0.05 corresponds to a log odds ratio (LOD) score>3. Linkage for BMIZ 2to4 was detected to a locus at chromosome 18q12 (LOD=2.66). Using BMIZ 5to10, evidence suggestive for linkage was also found for loci at chromosomes 5q33 (LOD=2.24) and 18q21 (LOD=1.64). We further investigated BMIZ 5to10, and the strength of the evidence was increased after adjusting for PI and MI (LOD=2.53 and 1.8 respectively). Conclusion: Both environmental and genetic factors contribute to the nutritional status of children with CF. Our study of twins and siblings suggests a substantial influence on two BMI traits by genes outside of CFTR, possibly including loci on chromosomes 5 and 18. Step (IRT/DNA/Expanded Genetic Analysis/Sweat Test) model. An initial panel of the 40 most common CFTR mutations from California CF patients is tested, followed by full gene sequencing. Children with 2 identified mutations are referred to a CF center for sweat chloride testing and clinical follow up. This model allows identification of children who carry rare and novel CFTR mutations. However, these mutations have uncertain clinical relevance, as children with rare mutations and negative sweat chloride have an unpredictable clinical outcome. Hypothesis: A negative sweat chloride concentration and specific genotype lead to a favorable clinical outcome for children with a positive NBS for CF. Methods: A retrospective study was conducted on 125 consecutive referrals received by Children's Hospital Los Angeles CF center from July 16, 2007 through July 1, 2010. Sweat chloride concentration and genotype were compared to clinical outcome parameters such as growth (weight for age Z score and weight < 10th percentile) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PSA) infection. Results: Of the 98 children who had a sweat test, 72 had sweat chloride < 60 mEq/L ("negative chloride") and 26 had sweat chloride ≥60 mEq/L ("positive chloride"). One hundred percent of the "negative chloride" group had fecal elastase > 200 mcg/g, indicating pancreatic sufficiency, compared to 14% of the "positive chloride" group (p< 0.0001). Average weight for age Z score was significantly higher in the "negative chloride" group compared to the "positive chloride" with pancreatic insufficiency group (p=0.003). The average Z score was similar for the "negative chloride" group and the "positive chloride" with pancreatic sufficiency group (p=0.183). The rate of PSA infection was significantly lower for the "negative chloride" group: any positive culture for PSA was 18% for the "negative chloride" and 50% for the "positive chloride" (p=0.0016) and persistent positive culture after eradication treatment was 1.4% and 15% respectively (p=0.005). Children who had positive sweat chloride were 4.5 times more likely to acquire PSA compared to those who had negative sweat chloride (p=0.002). Children with weight < 10th percentile and "positive chloride" were 5.3 fold more likely to acquire PSA (p<0.0001). In the genotype analysis, compared to children with 2 panel mutations (n=28), children with one panel mutation (n=72) had a lower proportion of sweat chloride ≥60 mEq/L (3% vs. 88%, p<0.0001), of positive culture for PSA (19% vs. 45%, p=0.007), of pancreatic insufficiency (1.4% vs. 64%, p< 0.0001), and of weight < 10th percentile (37% vs. 63%, p=0.003). Conclusion: Children with positive NBS for CF with only one mutation from the 40 panel and sweat chloride <60 mEq/L, are more likely to be pancreatic sufficient, have normal growth, and less likely to have PSA infection. Children with two panel mutations had a remarkably worse clinical outcome. We speculate that as these children are followed, it will become clearer which genotypes are most predictive of disease. These data may modify the definition of positive NBS for CF and thereby increase the positive predictive values of the 4 step model. Rationale: β-agonist bronchodilators are commonly prescribed in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) to improve airway clearance and reduce work of breathing. Previous research has demonstrated significant variability in the airway response to β-agonists in patients with CF, suggesting a genetic influence in drug response. Genetic variation of the β2 adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) at amino acid 16 is one of the common genetic variants that has been studied previously. Although one report explored the influence of this genetic variation on bronchodilation following inhaled β-agonist, spirometry was performed only five minutes following administration, which may not have allowed enough time for the drug to take full effect. We sought to determine the influence of genetic variation of ADRB2 on the airway response to albuterol in patients with CF when compared to matched healthy controls at baseline and at 60 minutes following the administration of albuterol (2.5mg diluted in 3ml normal saline). Methods: Baseline pulmonary function (forced vital capacity, FVC, forced expiratory flow in 1-second, FEV1, mid-maximal expiratory flow, MMF, and forced expiratory flow at 50% of the FVC) was assessed in 17 patients with CF and 31 healthy subjects. Results: As expected, the healthy group had higher baseline pulmonary function when compared to the CF group (FVC=97±3 vs. 83±5; FEV1=95±3 vs. 72±6; % predicted for healthy and CF, respectively, mean±SE, p<0.05 for all). Due to a low number of CF patients who were homozygous for Gly at amino acid 16 (n=2), and previous data by our group that has demonstrated that Gly16Gly and Arg16Gly subjects tend to have similar phenotypes, we compared Arg16Arg to Arg16Gly/Gly16Gly subjects. There was no effect of genotype on the response to albuterol in healthy subjects. However, in the CF group, we found that the Arg16Arg group (n=6) had an attenuated response to β-agonist when compared to the Glycontaining group (n=11) (FVC=0±0.9 vs. 6±3: FEV1=3±1 vs. 7±4: % change for Arg16Arg and Gly-containing groups, respectively, p<0.05 for FVC, p=0.06 for FEV1). Conclusion: These results demonstrate a differential response to β-agonists according to genetic variation of the ADRB2 at amino acid 16 in CF patients. Due to the differences in FVC and FEV1 but not in MMF, these data suggest that the genetic difference in airway function is primarily in bronchodilation of the larger airways. Introduction: To test the outcome of CF newborn screening in the Netherlands, a pilot was conducted in 2008 to 2011 in which families could voluntarily participate in CF newborn screening. This inevitably resulted in a group of patients with equivocal diagnosis, like the patients with R117H/F508del mutations. Since all R117H/F508del (7T) patients reported are pancreas sufficient (PS) and mainly CBAVD is seen in combination with the R117H mutation, the question was whether the impaired conductance and Po of R117H CFTR reduces transepithelial chloride transport across distal colon. Methods: There were 2 parallel screening protocols IRT-DNA-EGA and IRT-PAP. If one of these tests was positive, a sweat test was performed and with equivocal results newborns were scheduled for assessment of chloride transport properties in rectal suction biopsies by intestinal current measurement (ICM). We selected the patients carrying the R117H/F508del mutations for these analyses. Results: Ten R117H/F508del patients were detected. They had normal or borderline sweat test results. In order to determine chloride secretion in the intestinal tissues they were analysed further by ICM. The ICM results in these 10 newborns could be divided into 3 subclasses with different degrees of colonic chloride secretion. A group with clearly impaired chloride secretion (4/10), a subclass with subnormal secretory responses (3/10) and a group with normal chloride transport (3/10). Conclusion: Despite pancreatic sufficiency and borderline sweat test, 4/10 R117H/F508del patients showed a severe defect in colonic chloride secretion, approaching values in F508del homozygotes. In 1/4 of these patients, basal and carbachol-induced secretion, but not cAMP-induced secretion was severely impaired; in 3/4 both calcium-and cAMP-induced secretion were impaired. The variability in presentation of the CF defect in this group of individuals with identical genotype within the same tissue cannot be explained by impaired conductance of the R117H CFTR channel. Possible explanations could be 1) differences in CFTR protein expression, 2) differences in sensitivity to CFTR regulators, or 3) variable expression of non-CFTR, calcium and/or cAMP-sensitive apical chloride channels. Supported by ZonNW. Airway mucus clearance is an essential innate defense mechanism, and its failure is a primary trigger in the development of obstructive lung diseases. Experimentally, a pathologic imbalance in epithelial ion and water transport has been achieved by airway-targeted overexpression of the epithelial Na + channel β subunit (βENaC, encoded by the Scnn1b gene) in murine lungs, resulting in early onset airway mucus obstruction, inflammation, and air space enlargement. Congenic lines of this model have been generated, revealing a striking effect of genetic background on survival, ranging from 5 to 80% among strains (FVB/NJ < BALB/cJ < C3H/HeN < C57Bl/6N). At least as estimated by histopathological examination, airway mucus obstruction, inflammation and air space enlargement, were present in all Scnn1b-Tg strains, regardless of their survival rates. In mouse strains exhibiting extremely high mortality, selective pressure for survivors is common. We have isolated a substrain of BALB/cJ Scnn1b-Tg mice (Line B), originating from an N9 founder male, and identified as having increased survival (79±5% vs. 26±4% at 20 postnatal days, for BALB/cJ Scnn1b-Tg Line B vs. the original BALB/cJ strain, renamed BALB/cJ Line A, n>58). Scnn1b transgene Southern blot, mRNA and immunohistochemistry analyses reveal that the transgene is present and overexpressed in both Line A and Line B, suggesting that a large rearrangement in the transgene insertion site was not the cause of the phenotypic variation in these lines. However, as measured by Ussing chamber, ENaC hyperactivity was reduced in Scnn1b-Tg Line B vs. Line A in 3 and 10 day-old pups, but fully resumed in 6 week-old mice. As compared to Line A, the absence of early ENaC hyperactivity in Line B correlated with the absence of spotty airway epithelial necrotic degeneration, obvious mucus plugging and airway inflammation in 5 day-old mice (18.7±11 vs. 22.9±15 neutrophils/mL BALF×10 3 , WT vs. Scnn1b-Tg mice, n≥9), as assessed by morphometry and BAL. Preliminary data indicate that BALB/cJ Line B Scnn1b-Tg pups were also protected from spontaneous bacterial infection, typically associated with inefficient mucus clearance in neonatal Scnn1b-Tg mice. Further analysis revealed that the functional "reactivation" of ENaC hyperactivity in adult BALB/cJ Line B Scnn1b-Tg mice was associated with establishment of persistent neutrophilic inflammation (1.3±0.9 vs. 165±23 neutrophils/mL BALF×10 3 , for 4 week-old WT vs. Scnn1b-Tg mice, n≥6) and airway mucus plugging. However, adult BALB/cJ line B Scnn1b-Tg mice exhibited no evidence of air-space enlargement, as assessed by unbiased stereology, for the first time separating the chronic bronchitis phenotype from the alveolar phenotype in the Scnn1b-Tg lines. Collectively, these data suggest that: 1) neonatal lung inflammation/airway surface dehydration contributes to the emphysematous phenotype observed in Scnn1b-Tg mice; and 2) neonatal lesions are not necessary for the development of obstructive lung disease due to airway surface dehydration in this model. We have been investigating yeast Yor1-∆F670 as a genetic model for identifying novel factors that contribute to F508del-CFTR biogenesis. A quantitative high throughput cell array phenotyping (Q-HTCP) assay that measures shifts in growth kinetics elicited by inhibitory concentrations of oligomycin (extruded from the cell by Yor1) was used to search for genegene interactions (epistasis factors) that mediate ABC protein folding and maturation. Yor1-∆F was introduced into the genomic ordered array of yeast gene deletion strains. Strains that grew more robustly than expected in the presence of oligomycin suggested genes involved in ERAD and other prodegradation pathways, whereas strains that grew less well than matched controls indicated potential pro-Yor1-∆F biogenesis factors. Seven members (EMC1-6 and SOP4) of an evolutionarily conserved ER membrane complex (EMC), which was recently described in yeast but has not yet been characterized in human cells, exerted a similar pro-biogenesis effect on Yor1-∆F. The pattern of interactions suggests that the EMC complex, as a whole, could be involved in Yor1-∆F biogenesis, such that a deletion of any single component elicits an equivalent cellular response. Additionally, members of the EMC clustered together based on gene-drug interaction profiles that incorporated other classes of perturbation. Since EMC was identified by quantitative assessment of UPR activation, we considered whether upregulation of the UPR (i.e. non-specific effects on Yor1-∆F) could account for reduced Yor1-∆F biogenesis. However, we did not observe enrichment for UPR-activating functions among other gene deletions found to negatively impact Yor1-∆F processing. An alternative explanation-that EMC exerts a direct effect on Yor1-∆F maturation-was tested by pulse chase analysis. Deletion of SOP4 or other members of the EMC did not alter the half-life of Yor1-∆F, but reduced the initial protein pool, indicating an effect on Yor1-∆F production. We noticed from published work regarding the CFTR 'interactome' (Wang et al., Cell 2006, 127(4) :803-815) that a human ortholog of EMC2 (TTC35) was observed to bind F508del-CFTR but not the wild type protein. We therefore examined the effect of disrupting EMC2/TTC35 during temperature correction of F508del-CFTR. HeLa cells were transiently transfected with F508del-CFTR, co-transfected with control or TTC35-directed siRNA, shifted to 27 degrees, and monitored for expression of Band C. TTC35 knock down was demonstrated by quantitative RT-PCR and confirmed by Western blot. Consistent with the effect of knocking out yeast EMC genes during Yor1-∆F biogenesis, suppression of TTC35 resulted in loss of F508del-CFTR-associated Band C. Our findings establish the Yor1-∆F model in yeast as a means to discover new factors regulating the processing of WT and mutant CFTR. Future application of Q-HTCP will allow additional molecular targets for F508del-CFTR correction to be identified, and enable characterization of the gene interaction network that modulates ABC transporter biogenesis. This project is supported by CFF. CFTR FUNCTIONS DURING ZEBRAFISH ORGANOGENESIS Navis, A.; Bagnat, M. Cell Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA Cystic fibrosis is characterized by a loss of CFTR activity which leads to defects in the function of several organs including the lung, intestine, liver, and pancreas. The recent development of pig and ferret CFTR knockout models will greatly improve our understanding of CF pathophysiology; however, defining how CFTR functions during organogenesis requires a more accessible model. To address the role of CFTR during organ development we are using the zebrafish, a model that is genetically tractable, easily manipulated, and optically clear during development. Zebrafish Cftr shares high homology with human CFTR in key channel domains and is responsive to many activators and inhibitors of the human channel. In addition, previous work from our lab has introduced zebrafish forward genetics for the identification of new CFTR regulators. To better understand how CFTR functions during embryonic development and how its loss leads to defects in organ function, we have developed several tools that utilize the strengths of the zebrafish model. Using in situ hybridization, antibody staining, and transgenesis, we have observed that cftr is expressed in the developing gut, liver, and pancreas, similar to what has been reported for human CFTR. We have also developed transgenic zebrafish expressing a halide sensitive YFP to assay Cftr's chloride channel activity in these organs in vivo. To target Cftr channel activity we have used several methods, including antisense morpholinos, short hairpin RNAs, pharmacological inhibitors, and mutants. Loss of Cftr activity leads to early organogenesis defects in the liver and pancreas which are reminiscent of the pathology observed in patients with advanced CF. In addition, we have observed defects in organ laterality and in the embryonic axis which are specific to the zebrafish model. Altogether, our data suggest that the pancreatic and liver defects seen in cystic fibrosis may arise during embryonic development. The accessibility of the zebrafish will help advance our understanding of the role CFTR plays during organogenesis and the pathophysiology of CF. The incidence of cystic fibrosis (CF) bone disease is growing as life expectancy continues to increase. Cftr-null mice (Cftr S489X-/-mice, further identified as Cftr-/-) have reduced bone density, despite lack of lung or pancreatic disease, suggesting an inherent defect in bone metabolism. Defects in bone homeostasis in CF individuals and mouse models imply reduced bone formation. To further pursue mechanisms for reduced bone mineral density, we tested effects of CFTR, utilizing ex vivo osteoblast differentiation of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) from Cftr-/-and wildtype (Cftr+/+) mice. We collected BMSCs from femurs of Cftr-/-and Cftr+/+ mice at 8-9 wks of age. BMSCs from two female mice, of each study group, were pooled to develop osteoblast cultures for 3 independent experiments. Cellular growth was documented at day 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14 by imaging. Staining for alkaline phosphatase activity was performed to examine osteoblast differentiation. Using RNA collected from the cultures at 7, 14, 21 and 28 days, a detailed cellular environment was described. CFTR expression in osteoblast was determined by mRNA analysis and immunostaining. During the osteoblast proliferative stage, Cftr-/-BMSCs displayed reduced proliferation at 6, 8 and 10 days, compared to Cftr+/+ cells. There was greater expression of Osterix and Runx2 in Cftr-/-BMSCs, during this phase, which is consistent with a more differentiated state of the cells. Furthermore, increased BMPr1b expression was found, which contributes to increased levels of Runx2 and Osterix. In the differentiation phase, alkaline phosphatase staining was also reduced in Cftr-/-cultures compared to Cftr+/+. Increased levels of collagen 1a1, a bone matrix protein were detected during early differentiation, but Cftr-/-cultures fail to mineralize by day 28. This reflected a delayed induction of osteocalcin, a bone marker protein of calcified matrix formation. Cftr message was detected in murine primary osteoblasts by mRNA analysis. CFTR protein expression by immunostaining was also detected in osteoblasts, but was not localized to the cell membrane characteristic of epithelial cells. CFTR staining appeared to be contained in the cytoplasmic compartment. Expression of cytoplasmic CFTR in osteoblasts suggests a contribution not limited to cell membrane function. Ex vivo CFTR-deficient osteoblasts exhibit reduced growth rate and osteogenic differentiation. Reductions in cellular proliferation may be related to the increased levels of Osterix and Runx2, which are consistent with a more committed cell, instead of an early progenitor cell. Discordant inductions of osteocalcin and collagen 1a1, in the differentiation and mineralization phases, are consistent with delayed maturation of osteoblasts, noted in the reduced alkaline phosphatase staining. This mechanistic profile lends evidence to findings of reduced bone formation seen in CF bone disease. Cystic fibrosis related diabetes (CFRD) is a common co-morbidity in cystic fibrosis which worsens prognosis. Pancreatic endocrine disruption and dysregulated insulin responses are features of CFRD. We have developed a CFTR knockout ferret model that demonstrates abnormal glycemia at birth prior to pancreatic destruction. In this study, we focused on defining both the structural and functional characteristics of the newborn CF and non-CF ferret endocrine pancreas at birth, a time point when only minimal histopathology is observed, limited to acinar duct swelling. Structural characterization involved quantitative morphometry of insulin (beta cells) and glucagon (alpha cells) expression by immunohistochemistry, while glucose tolerance tests (GTT) and L-arginine tolerance tests (ATT) were performed to assess endocrine pancreatic function. The percentage of lobular pancreatic area expressing insulin or glucagon, which included the total cellular area of exocrine and endocrine tissue, was not significantly different between CF and non-CF pancreata. However, newborn CF pancreata had fewer large islets (>100µm in diameter) with significantly more islet cell clusters (<100µm in diameter) and individual insulin positive cells as compared to non-CF pancreata. Although the number of large islets was significantly decreased in newborn CF pancreata, the average diameter of this population of islets was not significantly different between genotypes. To compare betacell replication, neonatal CF versus non-CF pancreas sections were dual stained with insulin and PCNA to calculate the percent proliferation. This showed no significant difference in beta cell proliferation. The results of these studies demonstrate morphologic differences in size and number of islets in the newborn CF pancreas without significant differences in overall insulin and glucagon expression. By contrast, progressive loss of insulin and glucagon staining was observed as CF animals aged (21-32 days), associated with extensive exocrine pancreas pathology classic for CF. To evaluate whether functional abnormalities in the endocrine pancreas exist prior to overt histopathologic disease, GTT and ATT assays were performed in newborn animals. The CF kits demonstrated significantly elevated peak blood glucose levels during GTT as compared to non-CF kits. This was associated with a 4-fold blunting of first phase insulin secretion in the CF newborns, determined 2 minutes after intraperitoneal arginine administration. By contrast, in CF newborns second phase insulin secretion was elevated 4-fold as determined at 2 hours during the GTT. These findings suggest that early abnormalities in endocrine pancreas function may occur in CF prior to overt exocrine pancreas destruction. Future studies utilizing the CF ferret model should aid in understanding the multiple factors that contribute to the development of CFRD. In order to better understand cystic fibrosis (CF) disease pathogenesis, a porcine model of CF was recently developed. CF pigs display many of the same features as humans with CF including meconium ileus, exocrine pancreatic destruction, focal biliary cirrhosis, micro-gallbladder, vas deferens abnormalities, and airway disease. In contrast to humans, there is a 100% penetrance of meconium ileus in both CFTR-/-and CFTR∆F508/∆F508 newborn piglets. Features of the CF pig meconium ileus closely replicate that observed in humans with CF including distal bowel obstruction, atretic intestinal segments, and microcolon. In this study, we hypothesized that transgenic expression of CFTR in the intestinal epithelium of CF pigs would reduce or alleviate the meconium ileus phenotype. We generated CFTR-/pigs expressing CFTR under the control of the rat intestinal fatty acid binding protein (FABP) promoter (hereafter called CFTR-/-;TgFABP-pCFTR). Using somatic cell nuclear transfer, five different transgenic CFTR-/-;TgFABP-pCFTR lines were generated. From the lines studied, piglets from 2 lines (1a and 1e) had a favorable intestinal phenotype at birth. In these animals, there was a relatively normal-appearing small intestine, no evidence of atretic intestinal segments, and a normal-sized spiral colon. In contrast, piglets from the other three lines (1b, 1c, 1d) had evidence of severe meconium ileus at birth. Both ileal CFTR mRNA levels and CFTR-mediated Cl− transport were greater in the intestines of lines 1a and 1e, compared to 1b, 1c, and 1d. In all of the lines studied, we observed a similar degree of pancreatic destruction, micro-gallbladder, and focal biliary cirrhosis compared to CFTR-/-pigs suggesting that the pathogenesis of meconium ileus is not dependent upon abnormal pancreatic or gallbladder function. Importantly, in Ussing chamber studies there was no evidence of CFTR-mediated Cl− transport in either freshly excised tracheal tissue or cultured tracheal and nasal turbinate epithelial samples. Similar to older CFTR-/-and CFTR∆F508/∆F508 pigs, the older gut-corrected pigs in this study also developed varying severity of CF-like lung disease. These data demonstrate a successful non-surgical approach to correction of meconium ileus in CF pigs and provide valuable insight into the underlying pathogenesis of meconium ileus in CF. These gut-corrected CF pigs may be a useful model to study CF lung disease pathogenesis over time and the effects of therapeutics. Primary cultures of human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) grown at airliquid interface (ALI), retain many features of the native tissue: a pseudostratified structure composed of basal, ciliated and goblet cells, functional cilia and ion transport capabilities to maintain fluid homeostasis on the airway mucosa. Although an elegant and powerful model system, ALI cultured cells require growth on a permeable support (e.g. Transwell) that is both expensive and limits throughput. The aims of the present study were to: 1) establish whether HBE could be cultured in 3D, and 2) to characterize the phenotype and function of the 3D structures that formed. Normal (non-CF) HBE were established to be p63+ITGA6+NGFR+, markers of basal cells. Cells were seeded in Matrigel (growth factor reduced) in 384 well glass bottom plates and were cultured for 14-21 days. Within 12h of seeding, spherical, multi-cellular structures had formed that developed a central lumen during days 8-14. By day 11, functional cilia could be observed on the cells lining the surface of the central lumen. Staining of the 3D spheroids, "bronchospheres," revealed p63+ITGA6+ cells in the basal position, with acetylated α-tubulin+ and MUC5AC+ cells lining the central lumen. MUC5AC+ and MUC5B+ material was also observed in the lumen of the bronchosphere. These data were consistent with HBE forming a pseudostratified, polarized epithelial structure in 3D, composed of basal, ciliated and goblet cells, similar to that of ALI cultures and the native tissue. Importantly, these structures could be cultured in high throughput in 384 well plates. We next examined the genesis of the central lumen. We hypothesized that the lumen formation was due to the CFTR-mediated secretion of Clat the apical membrane. To test this, normal bronchospheres were cultured for 6 days before the addition of pharmacological modulators of airway ion transport. On day 9, 26.5±3.7% of vehicle treated bronchospheres contained an observable central lumen whilst this had increased to 46.2±1.0% in bronchospheres treated with forskolin (5µM), a manipulation that enhances CFTR-mediated apical Clflux in ALI cultures of HBE (P<0.05). Conversely, Inh172 (30µM) and bumetanide (60µM), agents that block CFTR-mediated anion transport, attenuated lumen formation by 100.0±0.0% (P<0.05) and 56.0±8.1% (P<0.05) respectively. p63+ITGA6+NGFR+ HBE from 5 F508delCFTR homozygote donors were next seeded into Matrigel and were also observed to form bronchospheres. In contrast to the normal HBE-derived bronchospheres, lumen formation was delayed by approximately 7 days. For example by day 10, 37.0±0.9% of normal bronchospheres (n=3 donors) had developed a lumen that compared with 5.0±2.7% (P<0.001) in the CF bronchospheres (n=5 donors). By day 21, there was no statistically significant difference in lumen formation between normal and CF bronchospheres. Together, these data illustrate that HBE can be cultured in a 384 well plate-based assay format and retain several of the key phenotypes of both the native epithelium and ALI cultures, including CFTR-mediated ion transport. This system is now being used to study the regulation of airway epithelial function in a high throughput modality. Background: TGF-β is a genetic modifier of CF, with increased protein levels associated with lung disease severity. Histopathologic evaluation of end-stage CF lung tissue demonstrates prominent TGF-β signaling, myofibroblast differentiation and airway remodeling. Whether these findings are a consequence or contributor to CF lung disease pathogenesis is uncertain. Hypothesis: Increased TGF-β production from bronchial epithelial cells stimulates myofibroblast differentiation in cystic fibrosis. Methods: TGF-β production from primary airway epithelial cells (AECs) and established airway cell lines was measured with a TGF-β bioassay and real-time RT-PCR. CFTR siRNA was used to reduce CFTR expression in 16HBE cells. Primary AECs were grown on permeable supports with an underlying fibroblast layer to assess cell communications. IHC of neonatal porcine lung tissue (CFTR +/+ , CFTR +/and CFTR -/-; Exemplar Genetics) was used to identify TGF-β staining, signaling and myofibroblast differentiation. Flow cytometry quantified myofibroblast differentiation based on positive staining for α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA). Results: TGF-β transcription was increased >2 fold in F508del CFBE41o-cells compared to both wtCFTR CFBE41o-and 16HBE cells (p < .01). TGF-β protein levels were increased in cultured media from F508del CFBE cells (1620 ± 170 pg/mL) compared to wtCFBE (354 ± 77 pg/mL, p < .005) and 16HBE cells (174 ± 25 pg/mL, p < .005). CFTR knockdown increased TGF-β production from 16HBE cells vs siRNA scramble controls (910 ± 31 pg/mL vs. 234 ± 23 pg/mL, p <.005). In primary human AECs, TGF-β in the CF epithelial:fibroblast culture media was increased compared to wt controls (210 ± 44 pg/mL vs. 69 ± 22 pg/mL, p < .05). In neonatal porcine lung tissue, IHC detected enhanced TGF-β staining and signaling (pSmad2) in bronchial and bronchiolar epithelial cells, with prominent myofibroblast staining in the alveolar interstitium. Early passage lung fibroblasts from CFTR -/pigs released more TGF-β compared to CFTR+ controls (314 ± 20 pg/mL vs. 90 ± 8 pg/mL, p<.005). TGF-β activity was not detectable in CFTR+ culture media but was significantly increased in CF pig fibroblast cultures (150 ± 8 pg/mL, p<.005). In early passage primary porcine lung fibroblasts, an increased proportion of CF pig lung fibroblasts had undergone myofibroblast differentiation compared to controls following 10% FBS exposure (0.72 ± .02 vs. 0.54 ± .01, p < .005). Conclusions: CF airway epithelial cells appear to be an important source of TGF-β as determined by cell culture and in vivo model systems. Myofibroblast differentiation is an early feature of cystic fibrosis in pigs, with lung fibroblasts demonstrating increased myofibroblast differentiation compared to CFTR+ controls. Future directions will explore the mechanisms through which CFTR dysfunction alters TGF-β transcription and the mechanisms through which fibroblast phenotype is altered in the porcine model of cystic fibrosis.  To understand the basic biology of ABC transporter biogenesis and identify potential sources of epistasis underlying CF disease variability, a yeast model system was developed to screen for deletion of genes that alter oligomycin sensitivity after a mutation corresponding to F508del-CFTR was placed within the first nucleotide binding domain of the CFTR ortholog, YOR1 (yor1-∆F670). Yor1-∆F was expressed in the genomic library of 5000 haploid yeast single gene deletion strains. The potential role of each gene as a Yor1-∆F biogenesis factor was assessed individually by growth curve analysis to quantify gene-gene interactions as a function of growth on oligomycin, a toxin that is extruded from the cell primarily by Yor1. The genomic collection of Yor1-∆F / yeast gene deletion double mutants were evaluated for gene-gene interactions, using a method developed by our laboratory for growth analysis termed quantitative high throughput cell array phenotyping (Q-HTCP). The method quantitatively identified evolutionarily conserved biogenesis factors that might have been missed if analyzed using a less sensitive assay. The Princeton Protein Orthology Database was used to map mammalian orthologs to yeast genes. The overall results indicate that yeast phenomic (genome-wide assessment of phenotype) analysis of Yor1-∆F can facilitate understanding of the gene interaction networks modulating F508del-CFTR biogenesis. Multiple conserved genes in protein families that contribute to ABC protein biogenesis were found to modulate the analogous misfolded proteins including chaperones, including Rab-related protein trafficking genes, syntaxins, and components of the ubiquitination and proteasome pathways. The power of the system moving forward is to ascertain a hierarchy of potential targets for F508del correction by evaluating epistasis deriving specifically from the ABC protein maturational phenotype. RNAi-based strategies have been used in mammalian cells to identify potential drug targets that might enhance CFTR biogenesis. A high degree of concordance was found in our genome wide analysis between orthologs previously established to act as gene modifiers of CFTR processing and shown here to increase Yor1-∆F biogenesis in yeast. Modifiers were also discovered by our analysis that promote transport of misfolded Yor1-∆F protein to the plasma membrane, since gene deletion worsened the processing defect. Yeast is appreciated as a genetic model for understanding the biogenesis of integral membrane and secreted proteins. However, the relevance of Yor1-∆F gene interactions to modulation of F508del-CFTR processing appears greater than previously recognized. Given conserved ∆F-biogenesis factors, the power of yeast genetics may expedite identification of 3-way gene interactions that could help further explain CF disease variability, lead to the discovery of novel genetic network modules regulating ∆F protein biogenesis, and facilitate development of novel combinatorial therapeutic strategies. The project is supported by CFF. Al-Nakkash, L.; Batia, L. Physiology, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ, USA The major route for cAMP-mediated chloride (Cl) secretion across the intestinal epithelial apical membrane is presumed to be via the CFTR chloride channel widely known to be activated in vitro by genistein. We have previously shown that a 1-2 week period of daily injections with genistein (600 mg/kg body weight, 600G) mediates significant increases in basal intestinal Cl secretion (Isc, µA/cm 2 ) in both male and female C57BL/6J wild-type mice, when compared to DMSO control injected mice (0G). This study aimed to determine whether 600G-induced increases in intestinal Cl secretion were attributed to changes in intracellular signaling mechanisms using basolateral application of: MDL-12330A (adenylate cyclase inhibitor, 10 µM), KT-5720 (PKA inhibitor, 1 µM), LY-294002 (PI3K inhibitor, 20 µM) and PD-98059 (MAPK inhibitor, 10 µM). In female 600G mice, basal intestinal Isc was 215.9±13.1 µA/cm 2 (n=15), and application of forskolin (10 µM, bilateral) significantly increased Isc to 316.6±23.4 µA/cm 2 after 1 week of injections. There was no effect of KT-5720 (n=8), LY-294002 (n=12), or PD-98059 (n=8) on the basal or forskolin-stimulated Isc. Application of MDL-12330A, significantly decreased (n=8, P<0.05) both basal Isc by 27% (from 215.9±13.1 to 157.0±22.9 µA/cm 2 ) and forskolin-stimulated Isc by 39% (from 316.6±23.4 to 192.6±19.1 µA/cm 2 ). In male 600G mice, basal intestinal Isc was 186.6±7.6 µA/cm 2 (n=5), and application of forskolin significantly increased Isc to 259.8±17.7 µA/cm 2 after 2 weeks of injections. There was no effect of KT-5720 (n=7), LY-294002 (n=11), PD-98059 (n=7) or MDL-12330A (n=11), on the basal Isc or forskolin-stimulated Isc. These data suggest that gender differences exist in how genisteinmediated increases in intestinal Isc are mediated: via adenylate cyclase in wild-type female mice but not in male mice. Supported by NIH (1R15DK071625-01A2). Airway mucus hypersecretion, overproduction and obstruction are pathophysiological characteristics of severe lung diseases including CF, asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Despite the enormous impact of these disorders, there is only limited murine model that reproduces the mucous-related airway obstruction. Increasing evidence suggests that these pulmonary phenotypes are due to increased airway Na + absorption mediated by the amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na + channel (ENaC), which results in depletion of airway surface liquid (ASL). Interestingly, a recent report showed the mice, which overexpress epithelial Na + channel β subunit (βENaC) in the lower airway, as a possible murine model of CF lung disease (Mall et al., Nat. Med. 2004 ). However, these mice mostly die within 4 weeks after birth due to severe airway obstruction, which limits potential to further analyze the pulmonary phenotypes of these mice. In the present study, a low-mortality βENaC-transgenic (Tg) mouse line was established by crossing commercially available βENaC-Tg mice (Jackson Laboratories, Bar Harbor, ME) and C57/BL6 mice for 3 generations. Consistent with the previous finding, mucus hypersecretory, airway inflammatory and emphysema-like phenotypes were observed in our low-mortality βENaC-Tg mouse line by the analysis of fucose concentration and number of immune cells (leukocytes, neutrophils, lymphocytes, eosinophils) in BAL fluid (BALF), number of Alcian blue/PAS positive cells in lung tissue, expression of goblet cells-and mucin-related genes (Clca1, gob5, MUC4, MUC5AC and MUC5B) and inflammatory cytokine genes (KC, TNFα, IL-2, IL-13) in lung tissue, and alveolar mean linear intercept (MLI). Notably, DNA microarray analysis by the "3D-Gene" mouse oligo chip 24k (Toray Industries, Kanagawa, Japan) further confirmed the pulmonary phenotypes observed in our Tg mouse line. Lastly, clinically acceptable respiratory parameters, such as elastance (E), compliance (C = 1/E), hysteresivity (eta; characterizes the ratio of energy dissipation to energy conservation in the lung tissues), forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in 0.1 second (FEV0.1) and FEV0.1% (FEV0.1/FVC), were analyzed by invasive lung function measurements using the flexiVent (SCIREQ Inc. Montreal, Quebec, Canada), which is known to result in relatively precise and physiological variables. Importantly, airway elastance was decreased and compliance and hysteresivity were increased in the Tg mice compared with their wild-type littermate mice, and FEV0.1/FVC, a marker of airflow obstruction during expiration, was significantly decreased in this Tg line, suggesting the impaired pulmonary mechanics in our established βENaC-Tg mice. Taken together, the studies establish a low-mortality βENaC-Tg mouse line that stably exhibits mucus hypersecretory, inflammatory and emphysema-like phenotypes, which may be useful for further evaluation of mucous-overproducing lung diseases such as CF and COPD. Airway mucous obstruction and depletion of airway surface liquid (ASL) are the important hallmarks of severe lung diseases including CF, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Recently, others and we demonstrated that the mice which overexpress amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na+ channel β subunit (βENaC) in the lower airway, show key abnormalities of CF, including mucus hypersecretory, inflammatory and emphysema-like phenotypes, due to increased airway Na + absorption mediated by the ENaC, which results in depletion of ASL (Mall et al., Nat. Med. 2004; Ono et al., unpublished data) . Although these suggested that the βENaC-transgenic (Tg) mice might serve as useful animal models for CF, therapeutic evaluation by drugs that control channel-activating proteases (CAPs), positive regulators of ENaC activation, has not been performed. Here, we evaluated the effect of camostat mesilate (CM), a trypsin-like protease inhibitor that is shown to inhibit ENaC activity in vitro and in vivo on the pulmonary phenotypes in our βENaC-Tg mice. Our data demonstrated that oral administration of CM twice daily for up to two weeks in βENaC-Tg mice reduced the fucose concentration in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and the expression of goblet cells-and mucin-related genes (Clca1, gob5, MUC5AC and MUC5B), but not inflammatory cytokine genes (KC, TNFα, IL-2, IL-13) in lung tissue, indicating the improvement of mucus hypersecretory phenotypes by CM treatment. Furthermore, oral treatment of CM significantly reduced the alveolar mean linear intercept (MLI), suggesting that CM also improves emphysema-like phenotype. Lastly, invasive lung function measurements using the flexiVent (SCIREQ Inc. Montreal, Quebec, Canada), which is known to result in relatively precise and physiological variables, demonstrated that CM treatment also improves clinically acceptable respiratory parameter FEV0.1% (FEV0.1/FVC; forced expiratory volume in 0.1 second/forced vital capacity), a marker of airflow obstruction during expiration, in our βENaC Tg mice. Taken together, the studies demonstrate that CM improves the mucus hypersecretory and emphysemalike phenotypes in the airway-specific βENaC-Tg mice, and our data expand the potential usefulness of the βENaC-Tg mice for therapeutic evaluation of pulmonary phenotypes of CF. Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) affect the functioning of multiple organs in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), but it is the progression of disease in the lungs that is fatal. In the respiratory tract, CFTR is most highly expressed in the submucosal glands (SMG) where it localizes to the apical surface of ductal and serous cells. In addition, CF glandular acinar cells specifically account for the aberrant physiological functioning of ion fluid in CF glands. Since CF mucus has decreased microbicidal activity and glandular cells are the predominant source of innate immune mediators, we hypothesized that expression and secretion of innate immune mediators is altered in CF glandular acinar cells of the respiratory tract. To test the hypothesis, an in vitro three-dimensional acinar model that we had developed with primary human bronchial epithelial cells (Wu X. et al. 2010 ) was extended to three sets of life-extended CF (∆F508/∆F508) and non-CF human bronchial epithelial cell lines (Fulcher M. et al. 2009 ). The cells were differentiated into glandular acini on a basement membrane matrix. No significant difference was detected (student's ttest) between the average diameters of acini formed by three CF and three non-CF cell lines on day 13, demonstrating reproducibility between cell lines. Fluorescent immunostaining and confocal microscopy demonstrated formation of a polarized mature lumen by day 15 in CF and non-CF acini. Expression of MUC5B mucin (mucous cell marker) and lysozyme (serous cell marker) on day 17 was also demonstrated in non-CF acini, while the ciliated cell marker β-tubulin IV was not detectable on day 17. The same markers are being used to characterize CF acini. Proteins in basal and apical secretions will be compared between CF and non-CF cohorts using proteomic technologies. Differentially identified proteins will be further analyzed using bioinformatics techniques to better understand the pathophysiology of the disease. (Supported by Children's National Board of Vistors grants to XW and to MCR.)  In recognition of the need for more efficacious molecules the search for a second generation of correctors has become the focus of several CF drug discovery programs, and the main goal at Flatley Discovery Lab is the identification of molecules with the desired efficacy. To that end, we use an approach that combines functional cell based assays with mechanistic and biochemical cell-free assays to identify active compounds that directly interact with CFTR, our target protein. Hit compounds are prioritized for those that show i) significant corrector activity in primary human bronchial epithelial (hBE) cells obtained from CF patient lungs; and ii) increase NBD1-F508del thermal stability towards wild-type levels. Greater thermal stability has been reported to be a facilitator of CFTR mutant protein rescue. Follow-up assays to a primary screen of a chemically diverse library of 100K compounds led to the identification of a few promising leads with the desired profile. After 24 h incubation at 10 micromolar concentration one of these compounds achieved a significant 100 percent current increase over DMSO and 50 percent of reference corrector C18 (CFTR compound program by CFFT) current with respect to the CFTR inhibitor (CFTRinh-172) specific response in Ussing chamber recordings from CF hBE cells. The compound is also able to increase the melting temperature of mouse NBD1 F508del by 5-6 degrees C, and preliminary SAR has been established. These early successes suggest that our assay platform will enable the identification of additional novel leads from the continuously ongoing primary screening. Supported by CFFT and the Flatley Foundation. A major bottleneck in drug development for the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF) has been the electrophysiological evaluation of compounds in primary cultures of human bronchial epithelial (hBE) cells. Demonstrating efficacy in CF hBE cells is considered critical in the drug development pathway. Several recent developments in the procurement of CF lung tissue, airway cell harvesting and cell expansion without loss of transport phenotype now allow for the greater use of CF hBE cells. These advancements come largely from CF Foundation initiatives and sponsorship. Here we report the development of an automated electrophysiological workstation to measure transepithelial equivalent currents (Ieq) in primary cultures of CF hBE cells. Until now current measurements have been limited to the Ussing chamber format where both voltage clamp short circuit current (Isc) and current clamp Ieq studies have been in routine use for over 50 years. When utilized properly the Ussing chamber format provides robust reliable results. Unfortunately with the Ussing chamber format the through-put for drug testing can at best be considered modest and then only after significant investment in equipment, technical training and recurring labor costs. To overcome these limitations we have made use of CF hBE cells grown on 24 well Costar filter plates at an air/liquid interface. We designed a 24 channel transepithelial current clamp and a 24 channel electrode manifold to measure transepithelial voltage (Vt) and conductance (Gt) from all 24 filters simultaneously. Ieq was calculated using Ohm's law where Ieq = Vt × Gt. Up to six 24 well plates were measured at 2.5 min intervals on a robotic platform. To validate this approach CF hBE cells homozygous for F508del-CFTR were treated for 48 hours with 6 µM CF-106951 (CFFT panel compound C18) or an equivalent amount of DMSO. Measurements were made in culture media at 36°C. CF-106951 had no effect on the benzamil-sensitive Ieq. However, as expected for the improved expression of F508del-CFTR, CF-106951 increased the Ieq in response to forskolin and VX770 stimulation and this increase was inhibited by bumetanide and Inh-172. Well-towell and plate-to-plate variations in the responses were remarkably low with coefficients of variation (CV) of less than 10% and Z'-factor values of greater than 0.75. Automated Ieq measurements with this 24 well format can now be used to evaluate up to 500 compounds per week in CF hBE cells further accelerating the discovery of drugs for the treatment of CF. Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics BRIDGE07XX0 and Cystic Fibrosis Foundation BRIDGE05G1. While cystic fibrosis (CF) produces lesions in multiple organs, the pancreas is prone to disease and has the highest genotype to phenotype relationship. In humans, pancreas lesions begin in fetal life. To study the sequential changes during early disease pathogenesis, we morphometrically studied early fetal development of CF pig pancreas in CF and non-CF pigs. We examined fetal pig pancreas from day 41-82 of gestation (term ~114 days) in CF and non-CF groups. As early as day 41, both CF and non-CF groups had detectable amphiphilic to eosinophilic, slightly fibrillar material within lumens; however, CF pancreata had an increased incidence of this material within lumens compared to non-CF pancreata (P<0.01, unpaired T-test). This increased incidence in CF pancreata remained significant through the time course. By day 54, CF pancreata had detectable increases in mean lumen diameter (P<0.05, unpaired T-test) with rare detection of dilated acini overtly filled with eosinophilic material. Lumen size remained significantly larger in CF acini through the remainder of the time course. CF pancreata had increased lumen to whole acinus ratio, first detected at day 60 (P<0.01, unpaired T-test) and this continued through the remainder of the time course. Our data together with previous work shows that accumulation of luminal material is one of the earliest observed changes in the CF pig pancreas and this begins as early as day 41 of gestation. Furthermore, this early change (at day 41) was not qualitative in nature, but rather a quantitative change detected only through morphometry. Interestingly, the accumulation of luminal material leading to dilated acini at early time points preceded detection of well differentiated acini, goblet cells in ducts or leukocyte infiltration. As has been speculated in humans, this suggests that altered luminal secretions are likely a primary lesion in the pathogenesis of CF pancreas disease. The luminal material leads to obstruction and sequential pathologic changes including secondary inflammation, mucous cell change and duct proliferation. Future studies will work to define the composition of this lumen material as well as the environmental conditions and cellular processing in acini that may further contribute to its formation. Background: In vitro and in vivo evidence suggests a possible connection between the mechanisms underlying pathogenesis of cystic fibrosis and polycystic kidney disease (PKD). Cysts in ADPKD (autosomal dominant PKD) have been reported to develop in a CFTR dependent fashion (Sullivan et al, 1998) , and a similar etiology has been implicated for the autosomal recessive PKD phenotype (Nakanishi et al, 2001) . Individuals with ADPKD and CF may exhibit less severe disease, including absence of hepatic cyst formation, fewer renal cysts and improved residual kidney function (O`Sullivan et al, 1998; Xu et al, 2006) . Objectives and Methods: Based on these earlier findings, we bred the hypomorphic Ift88 TG737RpW PKD murine strain onto CFTR tm1Unc /J mice to investigate whether homozygous recessive PKD animals that also possess CFTR mutations would exhibit a milder renal phenotype than PKD mice with wild-type CFTR. Results: Autopsy of PKD heterozygous/CF heterozygous mice revealed no signs of either CF or PKD, and no gene dosing effect was discernible at the level of carriers for either mutant allele. PKD homozygous/CF heterozygous animals demonstrated PKD findings similar to PKD mice with two functioning CFTR alleles. In addition, CF mice with one mutant PKD allele exhibited a very similar CF phenotype to conventional CFTR -/-animals. Notably, from among 338 mice genotyped at 3 weeks, we observed no double homozygous mice on either the Balb/C or C57BL/6 backgrounds, although approx. 6.25% incidence would be expected. Timed mating experiments, genotyping of newborn pups and analysis of mice in utero confirmed that double homozygous animals die either during embryonic life or by postnatal day 1. Histopathology from double homozygous embryos will be presented. Conclusions: CFTR has recently been suggested to participate in human airway wound healing (Schiller et al, 2010) and prenatal tracheal maturation in pigs (Ostedgaard, Meyerholz et al, 2011) . Taken together with earlier studies, our findings support the notion that CFTR serves a crucial role during embryonic development. Our results point to a new murine model for testing the influence of CFTR and Ift88 during in utero growth, and suggest epistasis between two distinct pathways mediating epithelial integrity. Supported by CFF and NIH. been limited data about its timing and onset. In addition longitudinal radiologic studies of humans are difficult. The CFTR -/pig provides a unique opportunity to investigate the paranasal sinuses in a CF animal model beginning at birth. Methods: We harvested sinus epithelia from newborn CFTR -/and WT pigs, detected CFTR expression by RT-PCR and localized CFTR by immunohistochemistry. We then grew in vitro cultures of CFTR -/and WT pig sinus epithelia in an air-liquid interface, and investigated ion transport by Ussing chamber studies. We performed CT scans of the sinuses of newborn CFTR -/and WT pigs and 3-dimensional volumetric analysis of the sinus and skull. We followed CFTR -/pigs longitudinally to assess for the development of sinus disease. We assessed for disease by established radiologic criteria including mucosal thickening and sinus opacification. We supplemented our findings with necropsy results, and when available, microbiologic studies of infected sinuses. Results: We identified both respiratory and olfactory epithelia in the sinuses, and there were no obvious differences on histopathology between CFTR -/and WT pigs at birth. As expected CFTR mRNA was not amplified from the CFTR -/pig sinuses, but did amplify in the WT pig sinus. We investigated the localization of CFTR in pig sinus epithelia by immunocytochemistry. Similar to the lower airways in pigs, CFTR in WT pigs was localized apically in sinus airway epithelia and was absent in CFTR -/pig sinus airway epithelia. We were able to grow well-differentiated pseudostratified ciliated airway epithelia from sinus tissue of CFTR -/and WT pigs. Electrophysiology studies confirmed the absence of chloride transport in CFTR -/in sinus cultures. At birth, we also found that CFTR -/pigs had smaller sinuses than litter-matched WT pigs, without any differences seen in skull size. Longitudinally, CFTR -/pigs developed sinus disease evident on radiologic sinus CT scans and by gross necropsy. On histopathology, diseased CFTR -/sinus epithelia displayed airway remodeling and mucus production from goblet cells and submucosal glands. On microbiology, two pigs were infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Conclusions: We have shown that CFTR is present in the sinuses of WT pigs but not CFTR -/pigs. At birth, CFTR -/pigs have smaller sinuses than WT pigs. We have previously reported that CFTR -/pigs also have smaller tracheas than WT pigs. This exciting finding suggests that CFTR can influence both bone and cartilage development. In addition, CFTR -/pigs spontaneously develop sinus disease that presents similar to human CF sinus disease. This may allow us to answer the long-standing question of the relationship between sinus and lung disease in CF. Carpenter, J. 1 ; Lynch, S. 2 ; Kylstra, S. 3 ; Millard, M. 5 ; Superfine, R. 4 1. Curriculum in Applied Sciences and Engineering, Univ North Carolina Chapel Hil, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Biological and Biomedical Sciences Program, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 3. Mathematics, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 4. Physics and Astronomy, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 5. Medicine, Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, MO, USA In vitro models play a critical role in both understanding the mechanisms of mucociliary clearance and developing/improving treatments. Postural draining therapy (PDT) is an important treatment in assisting with clearance for cystic fibrosis patients, but existing cell culture models are not capable of measuring mucus clearance as a function of gravity. We present a novel cell culture model capable of measuring mucociliary clearance at a variety of angles, ranging from flat to vertical. In our model we grow primary human bronchial epithelial cells in a bilayer fluidics channel. The separate enclosed compartments allow us to perfuse the system basally while the system is tilted. We have successfully grown well-differentiated, wellciliated cultures and characterized the transport in our system with particle image velocimetry (PIV). By coupling our microscope to a custom-built rotating platform, we gained the ability to rotate the entire optical path of the scope while maintaining the same field of view. This innovation enabled us to perform PIV over a specific region of the culture and then repeat the measurement at varying tilt angles. Additionally, access ports in the apical channel made it possible to not only sample and characterize the endogenous airway surface liquid (ASL), but to entirely replace the ASL with exogenous mucus, or mucus mimics that simulate specific rheological and biochemical properties of mucus. We have measured transport rates as a function of tilt angle and in fluids that range from buffer to pathological mucus, such as the types found in CF and bronchiectasis. Understanding the effects of gravity on mucus clearance gives us insight into the mechanisms and limitations of PDT. Furthermore, our system provides a platform to examine how pharmacological agents modify the efficacy of the treatment. taken orally 3 times a day on airway inflammation in CF patients. 70 subjects were recruited to provide 80% power to detect a difference between groups. Randomization stratified by study site, FEV1, age, gender, chronic azithromycin, inhaled aztreonam or TOBI, and ibuprofen use. Primary objective: to determine the effect of NAC on chronic airway inflammation as measured by the change in the logarithm of HNE activity measured in sputum from enrollment to the end of the trial. Secondary objective: to determine the effect of NAC on neutrophil infiltration, lung function, pulmonary and sinus exacerbations, as measured by: change in sputum neutrophil count, change in IL-8 concentration in sputum and plasma, change in glutathione in whole blood, incidence of pulmonary exacerbations, number of and time to first pulmonary exacerbation, incidence and number of antibiotics for any reason, change in FEV1. PRO were measured by the CFQ-R and CFRD. Safety objectives to evaluate the potential of NAC to promote the development of pulmonary hypertension in subjects with CF were assessed with both clinical and molecular studies performed at 6-week intervals. The panel included level of NAC measured in whole blood, βFGF and VEGF in plasma and urine, and in a sub-cohort, levels of S-nitrosylated NAC (SNOAC) in whole blood, HIF-1α in blood cells, ECHO and DLCO tests were reviewed by the CFF DSMC for safety prior to proceeding to initiation of all other sites. Results: Safety criteria were met, and there was no evidence of the development of PH. The dataset will be locked June 30, 2011. Further results will be provided at the time of poster presentation. Supported by the CFF. The nebulisation of multiple doses of a non-viral gene therapy formulation to the lungs of individuals with CF is being considered as a treatment for chronic CF lung disease. The success of such a strategy depends on the selection of a formulation capable of CFTR expression that is high-level, sustained, and can be repeatedly administered. Plasmid pGM169 is free of CG dinucleotides and contains the novel synthetic hCEFI promoter specifically designed for long-term expression of CFTR in the lung; when complexed with cationic liposome GL67A (supplied by Genzyme) CFTR expression lasts for several months in the mouse lung after a single nebulised dose (Hyde et al 2008 Nature Biotech 26:549). A clinical trial to assess the safety and CFTR expression of a single nebulised dose of pGM169/GL67A in 35 CF patients has just been completed (separate abstract). In order to progress into multiple-dose studies a GLP toxicology (separate abstract) and biodistribution study was performed in mice to evaluate the CFTR expression profile of up to 12 doses of pGM169/GL67A. Mice were exposed to aerosolised pGM169/GL67A at 2 weekly intervals for 0.5, 2 or 6 hours (Low, Medium and High dose groups respectively); mice exposed to air for 6 hours were used as controls. Groups of mice (males and females; n=4-10) were sacrificed after one, six and 12 doses and organs (lung, cervical lymphnodes, spleen, gut (proximal ileum), liver, kidney, testes/ovaries, and blood) analysed for the presence of plasmid DNA and/or vector-specific CFTR mRNA using quantitative RT-PCR. A significant dose-response was observed between duration of inhalation and the quantity of plasmid DNA present in the lungs 1 day after delivery of one, six and 12 doses (p<0.0001; Spearman correlation). Plasmid DNA remained detectable in the lungs of animals for up to 21 weeks after the final (High) dose. Levels of plasmid DNA in non-target organs were several orders of magnitude lower than the lungs at day 1. When CFTR mRNA was measured in the lungs, low levels were detected after a single dose in the Low and Medium groups, with increased signal in the High group (p<0.001; equivalent to ≥100% endogenous levels). Importantly, after 12 doses, a cumulative treatment effect was noted such that high mRNA levels were observed for all animals in all treatment groups. Robust levels of CFTR mRNA remained in the lung for at least 21 weeks after the final exposure. This is the first time that multiple nebulised doses of a lipid-based formulation have been shown to achieve a long-lasting and cumulative CFTR expression that can build with successive doses; importantly this confirms our clinical strategy to deliver multiple doses in order to maximise CFTR expression. In conclusion, these studies further support progression into our planned multi-dose clinical trial designed to generate clinical benefit in CF patients. This work was funded by the Cystic Fibrosis Trust. In preparation for a multi-dose clinical trial (MDT) of CFTR gene therapy, we undertook a study to assess safety and dose-ranging with a single nebulised dose of pGM169/ GL67A [a CpG-free human CFTR plasmid with a CpG-free CMV enhancer and human elongation factor 1 alpha (hCEFI) promoter complexed with Genzyme Lipid 67A]. We also assessed transgene expression in the lung and upper airway with QRT-PCR on airway brushings and nasal and bronchial potential difference measurements. Thirty-five adult patients with a baseline FEV1 of at least 60% predicted received a nebulised dose of 20 mL (n=17), 10 mL (n=10) or 5 mL (n=8). A short-lived, dose-related drop in FEV1 was observed over the next 6 hours (mean [SD]: 20 mL 25.7[10.2]%; 10 mL 17.7[9.9]%; 5 mL 13.0 [4.4] %); this was well-tolerated, not accompanied by desaturation, showed a restrictive pattern and was unresponsive to bronchodilators. Subjects also experienced a systemic inflammatory response, the symptoms of which responded well to anti-pyretics. This was similarly dose-related and limited, in general, to the first 24-48 hours post-dosing. A significant correlation between the magnitude of the FEV1 drop and the rise in white blood count, suggests that the former may be an inflammatory phenomenon. A cohort of 6 patients (4@10 mL; 2@5 mL) received 4 g paracetamol over an 18 hour period postdosing; none of these patients developed a fever. Intriguingly, these subjects also appeared to have reduced systemic inflammatory responses. Ten patients underwent pre-and post-dosing bronchoscopies, the latter at either day 6 or day 14 post-dose. Molecular (mRNA) evidence of gene transfer was observed in some individuals. The majority of the patients' zero chloride isoproterenol responses increased towards non-CF values after gene therapy. Nineteen patients received a 2 mL nasal dose. Based on an a priori definition of a 'positive response' as a chloride secretory response outside the range of their personal pre-dose measurements, 11/19 patients responded. The plasmid has been engineered to produce slow onset of transgene expression, but with extended duration. Interestingly, PD was notably more frequently positive when measured at later, rather than earlier time points. In the two most positive individuals, maximal zero chloride responses exceeded 10 mV (ie. in the normal non-CF range) and persisted to days 63 and 91 respectively. In conclusion, we consider the pulmonary and systemic side effects after 20 mL nebulised dose are excessive for repeated application. Those at 10 mL were more acceptable, whilst 5 mL produced only small changes. Symptoms are amenable to simple antipyretic treatment and the MDT will use either 5 or 10 mL. Gene expression was confirmed in both the lower and upper airways, and restoration of CFTR function in to the non-CF range has been observed out to 13 weeks following a single dose to the nose. These data, together with our preclinical toxicity packages (see abstracts) support progression of this agent to the multi-dose clinical trial. We hypothesized that ICM performed on human rectal biopsies would quantify CFTR function ex vivo, discriminate between CF and non-CF subjects, detect partial CFTR function, and test CFTR modulators in patientderived tissues. Fifty-seven subjects (45 non-CF controls, 12 CF adults) were enrolled in a prospective trial across three sites. Common voltage clamps, tissue mounts (Physiologic Instruments, San Diego, CA), buffer conditions, and tissue dissection were used. Biopsies were warmed to 37°C and gassed with 95%O 2 /5%CO 2 in RPMI 1640 media + 25 mM HCO 3 . Tissues were voltage clamped to continuously monitor short circuit current (Isc) and resistance. Tissue was treated with 10 µM indomethacin (20 min) followed by amiloride (100 µM, 15 min). CFTR currents were stimulated with 10 µM forskolin + 100 µM IBMX (20 minutes), followed by carbachol (100 µM, serosal) to activate basolateral K + channels and further potentiate CFTR-dependent Isc. Serosal bumetanide (100 µM) was then added to block Cltransport. The mean (SD) amiloride-sensitive currents in CF and non-CF subjects were -12.5 (34.75) and -21.4 (27.79) (p=0.005). The mean (SD) forskolin/IBMX-stimulated currents in CF and non-CF subjects were -3.6 (11.57) and 99.5 (71.84) (p<0.001). The mean CCh-stimulated currents in CF and non-CF subjects were 6.9 (8.96) and 102.2 (69.21) (p<0.001). The mean forskolin/IBMX + CCh-stimulated currents in CF and non-CF subjects were 3.4 (16.77) and 201.7 (131.98) (p<0.001). The mean bumetanidesensitive currents in CF and non-CF subjects were 9.6 (8.53) and -35.8 (31.35) (p<0.001). Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analysis indicated that the current changes in response to cAMP/forskolin, CCh, cAMP/forskolin + CCh and bumetanide all had good discrimination between CF and non-CF subjects, with Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) ranging from 0.94 to 0.98. Biopsies from one F508del/F508del demonstrated residual CFTR function (forskolin/IBMX + CCh-stimulated Isc = 31.80 µA/cm 2 +/-12.27; or 15.8% of normal response). Ex vivo gentamicin treatment (200 µgm/mL, 18 hours) of rectal biopsies from an E60X/621G-T CF patient was associated with new CFTR-dependent currents. Pre-treatment forskolin/IBMX + CCh-stimulated Clcurrents in biopsies were < 0.20% of wt control Isc. After 18 hours of ex vivo exposure in chambers, control Isc (no gent) was 1.79 µA/cm 2 (0.25), and Isc in gentamicin-treated biopsies was 12.43 µA/cm 2 (0.90). These represented 0.89% and 6.21% of wtCFTR Isc, respectively. Ex vivo treatment of biopsies from a F508del/S945L pancreatic sufficient CF subject with Vrt325 + corr4d (10 µgm/mL each, 18 hours) increased the forskolin/IBMX + CCh-stimulated Isc >6-fold (from 25.66 µA/cm 2 to 171.53 µA/cm 2 ). The results indicate that multicenter analysis of ICM segregates CF from non-CF subjects with excellent discrimination, and can detect residual CFTR function in F508/F508 subjects, subjects with partial function mutations, and following ex vivo exposure to CFTR modulators. Supported by CFF and conducted through CFF-TDN. Rationale: Diagnosis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) infection based on specific serum antibodies is being developed as an adjunct to oropharyngeal (OP) culture in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Objectives: To assess the repeatability and reproducibility of three ELISAs with different Pa antigens in different laboratories. Methods: The Mediagnost® ELISA (alkaline protease, elastase, exotoxin A), an ELISA using components of the type III secretion system (PopB, ExoS), and a PA01 whole-cell lysate ELISA were used. Serum samples were derived from German CF patients with no documented history of infection (n=25), intermittently infected (n=23), and chronically infected (n=26). Patient information was blinded to each lab. For the Mediagnost® panel, a titer above 500 indicates borderline positive and above 1250 indicates positive. For the other antigens, a titer above 100 indicates positive. Results: Repeatability appears good for all six antigens (Kappa range 0.86-1.00, Pearson correlation range 0.98-1.00). Reproducibility across laboratories appears good (Kappa range 0.88-0.95, Pearson correlation range 0.89-0.97), although one of the two labs tended to produce higher titer estimates for all three antigens. Conclusions: This study provides repeatability and reproducibility information for an expanded panel of pseudomonal antigens. This panel will be used in two recently completed and one ongoing study to assess serum antibody response and to establish a cutpoint for positivity using up to six antigens. Currently, there are limited objective measures available to evaluate lung function in patients with CF with mild lung disease. While spirometry (e.g., FEV 1 ) is the most widely used lung function test, a significant proportion of patients with "normal" lung function have lung disease based on other test modalities. Lung clearance index (LCI) derived from inert gas multiple-breath washout (MBW) testing is a technique being evaluated in early lung disease. LCI has detected abnormalities in a high percentage of children with CF with normal spirometry (Aurora et al, Thorax 2007), and the technique has been shown to predict the presence of structural abnormalities, such as bronchiectasis in patients with CF (Gustafsson et al, Thorax 2008). In addition, two interventional studies with hypertonic saline and dornase alfa suggest that LCI can sensitively detect a treatment effect in patients with mild disease (Amin et al, Thorax 2010, Eur Respir J 2011). The current study explores LCI as a potential measure of lung function changes in response to an investigational CFTR modulator, VX-770. This multicenter study is a Phase 2, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. Patients with CF aged 6 years and older with the G551D mutation on at least one CFTR allele are being enrolled at 8 sites in both Europe and North America. Multiple breath washout measurements are performed using 0.2% sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) as a tracer gas and an open circuit Innocor system (Odensa, Denmark) . Measurements performed at the local centers are analyzed centrally using the UK CF Gene Therapy Consortium algorithm by one of the investigators (HS). Subjects are required to have a screening FEV 1 >90% predicted and an LCI >7.4, which is above the 95% confidence interval of healthy individuals. VX-770 150 mg or placebo is administered every 12 hours for two 4-week periods with a 4week washout period in between. To date, 18 subjects have been screened and 10 have been enrolled. The mean age of the subjects was 13.3 years (range: 8-33). Screening FEV 1 values ranged from 91-125% predicted (mean: 97.4%). Of the 10 subjects enrolled, 5 were female. Of the 18 subjects screened, only 3 subjects were not enrolled due to a screening LCI of ≤7.4. An additional 4 subjects were excluded due to an FEV 1 <90% predicted and 1 subject was not enrolled due to a non-CF-related illness on the first day of treatment. Screening LCI values for enrolled patients ranged from 7.8 to 12.89 with a mean of 9.37. Study recruitment is ongoing and expected to be completed at the time of the meeting. These preliminary data support previous single center data that LCI is abnormal in the majority of patients with CF with normal spirometry and support the feasibility of using LCI as a measure of lung function abnormality in a multicenter interventional study. Results from this Phase 2 study will help guide the design of future studies utilizing LCI in infants and children with CF. Supported by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. Background: CFTR dysfunction is the underlying defect in CF disease. Loss of CFTR function disrupts salt sodium and chloride transport across affected mucosal epithelia. Measurements of potential difference across the nasal mucosa (NPD) are used as a biomarker in trials of CFTR modulators, reflective of CFTR-dependent sodium and chloride transport. Methods: Standardized NPD testing was recently evaluated in two multicenter, placebo-controlled trials of 14 to 28-day treatment of subjects with CF with either VX-770, an investigational CFTR potentiator, or VX-809, an investigational CFTR corrector. Eight subjects who had the G551D-CFTR mutation on one allele in the VX-770 study and 17 subjects who were homozygous for the F508del-CFTR mutation in the VX-809 study were randomized to placebo. All subjects had documented CF disease with sweat chloride values above 60 mmol/L. Results: NPD was applied using a uniform protocol in the VX-770 study. Due to the cross-over design of the first cohort of subjects in the VX-770 trial, 12 observations were available at baseline and study Day 14. The mean (SD) average basal potential difference, a measure of sodium transport, was -34.7 mV (6.9) at baseline and -34.6 mV (11.8) at Day 14; the mean change from baseline using a linear effects mixed model was -1.8 mV (9.3). The mean zero chloride plus isoproterenol response, a measure of CFTR-mediated chloride transport, was 1.5 mV (3.3) at baseline and 1.8 mV (3.3) at Day 14; the modeled mean change was -0.33 mV (5.7). The amiloride plus zero chloride plus isoproterenol response, or total Delta PD, was 30.9 (9.3) at baseline and 28.6 mV (10.2) at Day 14; the modeled mean change was 1.2 mV (11.3). Based on the experience in the VX-770 study, the NPD protocol was modified for the larger VX-809 trial. In this study NPD was an optional assessment, and data was available for 13 placebo subjects. The mean (SD) average basal potential difference was -27.5 mV (9.4) at baseline, -24.8 mV (8.9) at Day 14, and -23.4 (11.2) at Day 28; the change from baseline to Day 28 using ANCOVA was 4.8 mV (13.0). The mean zero chloride plus isoproterenol response was 1.2 mV (4.6) at baseline, 1.1 mV (4.1) at Day 14, and 0.27 mV (4.6) at Day 28; ANCOVA change from baseline to Day 28 was -1.0 mV (4.0). The total Delta PD, was 21.4 (8.4) at baseline, 23.2 mV (10.6) at Day 14, and 18.0 mV (10.6) at Day 28; ANCOVA change from baseline to Day 28 was -6.0 mV (11.4). Conclusions: NPD evaluations in placebo-treated subjects from CFTR modulator studies showed consistent results over time. Analyses of combined data from the two trials will be presented. These studies were sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals with support from Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics. The VX-770 study was also supported by a grant from the FDA Office of Orphan Products Development. Background: VX-770 has been shown to improve FEV 1 , respiratory symptoms, pulmonary exacerbation risk, and weight gain compared to placebo in subjects with CF greater than 12 years of age with the G551D-CFTR mutation with safety comparable to placebo. Since earlier treatment may offer the greatest potential for long-term benefits, this study was conducted to evaluate the efficacy and safety of VX-770 in younger patients with the G551D-CFTR mutation. Methods: This was a Phase 3, two-part, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter study of orally administered VX-770 in subjects with CF 6 to 11 years of age and the G551D-CFTR mutation with an FEV 1 of 40-105% predicted. Fifty-two subjects with CF were randomized to receive VX-770 150 mg every 12 hours (n=26) or placebo (n=26) for 48 weeks. Data through 24 weeks of treatment are reported here. Results: Baseline characteristics were similar between the groups. The mean age of the subjects was 8.9 years in both the placebo (SD: 1.9) and VX-770 (SD: 2.0) groups. In the placebo group, baseline mean (SD) FEV 1 was 83.7% predicted (20.4%) as compared to 84.7% predicted (15.8%) in the VX-770 group. Baseline mean (SD) sweat chloride was 104.8 mmol/L (8.9) and 104.3 mmol/L (14.5) in the placebo and VX-770 groups, respectively. In the placebo group at baseline, the mean (SD) weight was 30.0 kg (7.2) as compared to 31.8 kg (9.9) in the VX-770 group. The mean absolute change from baseline in percent predicted FEV 1 , the primary endpoint, was 12.57 percentage points in the VX-770 group compared to 0.04 percentage points in the placebo group (treatment effect: 12.52%; p<0.0001). The mean relative change in FEV 1 was 21.7% and 4.3% in the VX-770 and placebo groups, respectively (treatment effect: 17.4%; p<0.0001). In the VX-770 group, the mean absolute change in sweat chloride, a biomarker of CFTR chloride transport activity, was -55.53 mmol/L compared to -1.21 mmol/L in the placebo group (treatment effect: -54.32; p<0.0001). The mean absolute change from baseline in weight was 3.69 kg and 1.79 kg in the VX-770 and placebo groups, respectively (treatment effect: 1.90; p=0.0004). The mean absolute change from baseline in the CFQ-R respiratory domain score was 6.31 in the VX-770 group, which exceeded the MCID of 4, compared to 0.25 in the placebo group (p=0.1092). Adverse events were comparable between treatment groups. The most commonly reported adverse events included cough, headache, CF pulmonary exacerbation, throat pain, and vomiting. Pulmonary exacerbations were uncommon regardless of treatment arm. No discontinuations occurred due to adverse events in either group. Conclusions: Compared to placebo, VX-770 demonstrated a substantial and statistically significant improvement in pulmonary function, CFTR activity, as measured by the sweat chloride biomarker, and weight through 24 weeks in patients who are younger and healthier compared to previously studied populations. A clinically meaningful trend towards improvement in respiratory symptoms was also observed. The improvements and safety noted in this interim analysis were consistent with those determined in adolescent and adult patients with CF with a G551D-CFTR mutation. Supported by Vertex. FEV 1 is currently the most widely accepted measure of lung function in pulmonary diseases such as CF, COPD, asthma, and alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. However, FEV 1 has limited applicability in young patients and is not sensitive to early pathological changes in the lung. Hyperpolarized helium-3 MRI provides high spatial and temporal resolution images of lung ventilation in pediatric and adult patients during a single short breath-hold following inhalation of the non-radioactive, inert gas. In contrast to images from healthy controls, images from patients with CF show numerous "ventilation defects" -areas of the lung into which inhaled gas does not flow due to airway obstruction. Ventilation defects appear to correlate with disease severity. Clinical studies have demonstrated the safety profile of VX-770, an investigational CFTR potentiator. VX-770 has also previously been shown to improve FEV 1 in patients with CF and the G551D-CFTR mutation. This single-center, Phase 2, single-blind, placebo-controlled study was designed to evaluate the effects of VX-770 on ventilation as revealed by helium-3 MRI in subjects with CF who have the G551D mutation and assess the utility of helium-3 MRI as a biomarker of lung disease in clinical trials. Subjects must have FEV 1 ≥40% predicted to enroll and receive VX-770 150 mg every 12 hours for 4 weeks and matching placebo for a total of 4 weeks. To date, 4 subjects have completed the study. The mean age of the subjects at study entry was 20.3 years. Screening FEV 1 values ranged from 62-100% predicted (mean: 80.0%). Substantial ventilation defects were observed at baseline in all subjects, including those with high FEV 1 . A consistent pattern of change in response to VX-770 was observed in both FEV 1 and helium-3 MRI for 3 of 4 subjects. In the representative subject shown, the response observed by helium-3 MRI appeared to be of greater magnitude than that observable by FEV 1 . Additionally, different spatial patterns of pathology were observed in different subjects. Algorithms for quantification of lung defects detected using helium-3 MRI are being refined through this work. These results suggest that helium-3 MRI may be a sensitive measure of lung dysfunction and therapeutic response in CF and other pulmonary disorders. Supported by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. Design: This was a Phase 2, randomized, double blind, placebo controlled, parallel group study (Part A) with an open label extension (Part B) of orally administered VX-770 in subjects with CF. The primary objective was to evaluate the safety profile of VX-770 in the F508del-CFTR homozygous population. Evaluating the efficacy of VX-770 in this population was a co-primary objective. VX-770 was evaluated in subjects who have CF and a G551D-CFTR allele in another study. A total of 140 subjects ≥12 years were enrolled in Part A and received VX-770 150 mg (n=112) or placebo (n=28) every 12 hours for 16 weeks. Of these, 38 subjects (33 treated with VX-770 in Part A and 5 treated with placebo) met predefined FEV 1 or sweat chloride change criteria and were enrolled in Part B where they received VX-770 150 mg every 12 hours for up to 96 weeks. Data through 40 weeks of treatment are reported. Results: The most common adverse events in Part A were cough (21.1%), pulmonary exacerbation (21.1%), upper respiratory tract infection (21.1%), and nasal congestion (15.8%). The most common adverse events in Part B were pulmonary exacerbation (44.7%), cough (21.1%), abdominal pain (10.5%), bronchitis (7.9%), and nausea (7.9%). Most were mild or moderate in severity. Through 16 weeks, the frequency of serious adverse events was 13.4% and 21.4% in the VX-770 and placebo groups, respectively. Through 40 weeks, 13 subjects (34.2%) had serious adverse events. Discontinuations due to adverse events were similar between the VX-770 (2.7%) and placebo (7.1%) groups through 16 weeks. One subject in Part B discontinued due to adverse events. In the VX-770 group, the adjusted mean absolute change in % predicted FEV 1 from baseline through Week 16 did not demonstrate a statistically significant change compared to placebo; estimated treatment difference of 1.7% (95%CI: -0.6, 4.1; P=0.15). No improvement in FEV 1 was observed with VX-770 treatment from Week 16 to Week 40 in Part B (mean absolute change of -3.5% predicted). There was no change in the CFQ-R respiratory domain score nor was there an increase in weight during either part of the study. From baseline through Week 16 of Part A, sweat chloride in the VX-770 group decreased slightly, while there was effectively no change in the placebo group; estimated treatment difference was -2.9 mmol/L (95%CI: -5.6, -0.2; P=0.04). This difference was not sustained through Week 40 for the population of subjects who continued on VX-770 in Part B; mean change from Week 16 to Week 40 was 2.2 mmol/L. However, sweat chloride levels remained below baseline through Week 40 for 3 of the 4 subjects who entered Part B on the basis of sweat chloride improvements ≥15 mmol/L on Day 15 and Week 8 of Part A; the other subject discontinued. Conclusions: This study extends the safety profile of VX-770. Potentiation with VX-770 alone yielded no apparent clinical benefit in F508del-CFTR homozygous subjects at the dosage studied. The optimal therapeutic approach for patients with CF and the F508del-CFTR mutation requires further exploration. Supported by Vertex. Despite its residual channel function, the F508del-CFTR protein has severely impaired traffic to the surface of epithelial cells and a highly decreased stability at the plasma membrane (PM). Our goal was to assess the impact of small GTPases, namely RhoA, Rac1 and Cdc42 in the late stages of CFTR traffic, so as to further understand the mechanisms of its PM stability. Using dominant negative and constitutive active variants of those 3 small GTPases, we found that both RhoA and Rac1 (but not Cdc42) small GTPases have a key role in the regulation of CFTR cell surface expression and activity in mammalian cells. Moreover, using biochemical, physiological and confocal imaging approaches, we found that both Rac1 and RhoA endogenous signalling are required for proper, NHERF-1-mediated CFTR expression at the PM. However, whereas RhoA acts through ROCK kinase to promote stress fibre-mediated recycling of CFTR-containing vesicles to the PM, Rac1 signals enhances Ezrin-mediated anchoring of CFTR to (F)actin and its consequent retention at the PM. Our data also reconcile previous findings that NHERF-1 rescues F508del-CFTR to the cell surface by showing that this effect is abrogated in the absence of active Rac1, thus suggesting a novel overall model for the regulation of CFTR cell surface expression. Most significantly, our data leads to the proposal of a novel ther-apeutic approach for CF, based on the induction of an epithelial morphogenesis factor that activates endogenous Rac1 signalling. We show that the physiological stimulation of the correct signalling cascades is sufficient to increase and stabilize F508del-CFTR at the PM of human airway cells, rescuing CFTR-mediated ion transport to levels comparable to those achieved by wt-NHERF-1 overexpression. Importantly, this physiological stimulator is already in clinical trials for other pathologies. At these exciting times when CFTR modulators start to emerge as feasible therapies, but still stall in providing clear outcomes, such novel physiological approaches, to be plausibly used in combination with existing CFTR modulators, may certainly bring an important contribution to the field. Work was supported by the Ciência2007 and BioFig Pluriannual Funding programmes from FCT (Portugal). The most severe defect caused by ∆F508 is the mistrafficking of CFTR that remains trapped in the endoplasmic reticulum and is subsequently degraded. The trafficking defect can be rescued by molecules called correctors, that are able, in different cell models, to restore the function of the mutant CFTR protein. However, the efficacy of these compounds, on human bronchial cells derived from CF patients, is reduced. Indeed, it has been shown that activity of ∆F508-CFTR correctors is largely influenced by cell background. The development of new drugs requires a better understanding of the cellular processes responsible for the fate of the mutant protein and its possible rescue. To identify key proteins involved in the processing of ∆F508-CFTR we adopted a functional genomics approach, using a siRNA library. We generated a list of ~150 relevant targets to be silenced with siRNAs. We included proteins with known interaction with CFTR like RMA1, CHIP, Derlin-1, p97/VCP, and CAL. The list was further expanded by adding proteins of the quality control system and trafficking like ubiquitin E3 ligases, heat shock proteins, and proteins of the vesicular transport system. In addition, we considered also data obtained by microarray analysis of human bronchial epithelial cells under control conditions, and treated with low temperature or different correctors of ∆F508-CFTR trafficking defects, like corr-4a. For the screening, we used the CFBE41o-cell line, with stable expression of ∆F508-CFTR and the halide-sensitive YFP. CFBE41o-cells were derived by immortalization from the bronchial epithelium of a CF patient homozygous for ∆F508 mutation. The established conditions for highthroughput siRNA transfection in 96−well format were as follow: CFBE41o-cells were reverse transfected using 10 nM siRNAs and lipofectamine 2000. After 48 hours, the functional YFP-based assay was performed to determine the extent of ∆F508−CFTR activity in the plasma membrane. The results have highlighted RMA1, AHA1 and Derlin-1 as targets whose silencing causes a significant ∆F508-CFTR rescue in CFBE41ocells (65-95% increase relative to control-transfected cells). In addition, silencing of Ubc9 (the main SUMO E2 conjugating enzyme), CBX4 and PIAS3 (two SUMO E3 ligases, together with RanBP2) was also effective (45-65% increase relative to control-transfected cells). These data suggest that sumoylation has a role in ∆F508-CFTR processing. Indeed, microarray analysis of human bronchial epithelial cells treated with corr-4a showed an upregulation of a number of genes that seemed to be connected to the SUMO pathway. Interestingly, we also found that silencing of NHERF1 prevents CFTR rescue in CFBE41o-cells incubated at low temperature. The possible existence of other proteins with equal or even greater importance remains to be elucidated. Therefore, our studies will be continued with an unbiased siRNA screening to identify novel targets for ∆F508-CFTR rescue, using a Human Druggable Genome siRNA library. Supported by CFFT, Italian Ministry of Health, Telethon Foundation, and Italian Foundation for Cystic Fibrosis. Tait Proteostasis is the biological folding system responsible for generating and maintaining protein stability and function in the cell. Cystic fibrosis (CF), and other protein misfolding disorders, arise as a result of an imbalance in the capacity of the proteostasis environment (the proteostasis network or PN) to handle the reduced energetic stability of misfolded mutant proteins, an effect detrimental to normal human physiology. CF is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. The majority of CF patients have a deletion of phenylalanine 508 (∆F508) on at least one allele. This mutation results in disruption of the energetics of the protein fold leading to defective trafficking of CFTR to the plasma membrane and a concomitant loss of cell surface chloride channel activity resulting in dysfunctional cellular ionic homeostasis (Cl -, Na + , HCO 3 -) and airway surface hydration. Restoring the proper folding energetics of ∆F508 CFTR can be achieved by targeting mutant CFTR itself by a small molecule that binds and stabilizes the protein or by altering the cellular folding environment with proteostasis regulators that manage the folding capacity of the PN. We performed high throughput screens (HTS) to identify modulators of proteostasis pathways including: heat shock response (HSR), unfolded protein response (UPR), and oxidative stress. The active compounds from these screens were subsequently analyzed in ∆F508 CFTR expressing CFBE41ocells. Our results have identified proteostasis modulators exhibiting significant benefit to ∆F508 trafficking and function. The most effective compounds exhibited a channel activity resembling that seen with suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) and temperature correction (Hutt et al. (2010) Nat. Chem. Biol. 6:25). Our data serves as a proof of principle that small molecule modulators of the PN can be beneficial in the correction of ∆F508 CFTR trafficking and function, and likely other misfolding diseases. The F508del mutation impairs CFTR maturation and trafficking to the plasma membrane, resulting in a partially functional anion channel which is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum and degraded. We previously developed a robust and sensitive BHK cell-based F508del-CFTR trafficking assay to identify novel families of small molecule correctors. This assay was used to screen diverse compound libraries (total 107,310 compounds), and yielded 185 strong hits (defined as >15% trafficking correction compared to wild type BHK cells). We then implemented validation and optimization steps to evaluate hit compounds from the screens. Here we present studies of a corrector called GSK339A, which was identified using a 3D similarity searching tool (Cresset) based on one of the hits. We compared its efficacy with the known correctors corr4a and VRT325, GSK281 (equivalent to VX-809), and GSK47-1 (similar to VX-809) in-vitro and in-vivo. After 24 h, exposure to GSK339A partially corrected F508del-CFTR processing and increased its surface expression in BHK cells to ≈44% that for wt-CFTR, comparable to the other correctors mentioned above. The rescue of F508del-CFTR-mediated anion transport was confirmed in two cell lines expressing heterologous F508del-CFTR (FRT and CFBE41o-) and in well-differentiated human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) from CF patients. Despite robust correction of the short-circuit current (Isc) response to forskolin and genistein in CFBE cells, GSK339A gave little or no correction in FRT cells or primary cultures of HBE cells from 5 CF patients (Table 1) . To study correction in-vivo, mice homozygous for F508del-CFTR were treated with correctors twice per day for 2 days. GSK339A (10mg/kg) restored salivary secretion rates to ≈6.7% of wild-type littermate controls, comparable to GSK281 (≈6.4%) and GSK47-1 (≈5.5%), and this rescue was abrogated in cftr (-/-) null mice. On the other hand, exposing CF mouse ileum ex-vivo to 1-10µM GSK339A for 4h did not increase the Isc response to forskolin and genistein, although it was partially restored by GSK281 and GSK47-1 (8.6 and 9.6% of wt respectively). These results emphasize intriguing differences between the corrector efficacy in different cell and animal models and suggest that GSK339A requires further medicinal chemistry to exceed the potency of GSK281. This work was supported by the CFC and CIHR. RR and CGW participate equally to this work. Background: Restoring dysfunctional CFTR-mediated ion transport is a potential treatment for cystic fibrosis (CF). VX-770 is an investigational CFTR potentiator shown in a Phase 2 study to improve CFTR activity and FEV 1 in subjects with CF who have a G551D-CFTR gating mutation. Methods: This Phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial evaluated the efficacy and safety of VX-770 in subjects at least 12 years of age with CF and a G551D-CFTR allele. Subjects received VX-770 150 mg every 12 hours (n=83) or placebo (n=78) for up to 48 weeks. Results: Absolute change from baseline through Week 24 in percent predicted FEV 1 (primary endpoint) for VX-770 was 10.6 percentage points higher than placebo (P<0.0001), and 10.5 percentage points higher through Week 48 (P<0.0001) (Figure 1 ). This corresponded to a relative treatment effect for VX-770 over placebo of 16.7% (P<0.0001) through Week 48. FEV 1 in predefined subgroups (<70 or ≥70 percent predicted FEV 1 at baseline), age group (<18 or ≥18 years of age at baseline), and gender increased significantly in each subgroup compared to placebo. Through Week 24, change from baseline in sweat chloride levels in the VX-770 group was -48.7 mmol/L compared to -0.8 mmol/L in the placebo group. This treatment effect (-47.9 mmol/L) was statistically significant through 24 weeks (P<0.0001) and maintained through 48 weeks. Through Week 24, change from baseline in the VX-770 group versus placebo was +8.1 points in the CFQ-R respiratory domain (P<0.0001) and this change was maintained through Week 48. Subjects taking VX-770 gained on average 2.7 kg more than those taking placebo at Week 48 (P=0.0001) and had a 55% risk reduction for pulmonary exacerbation compared to placebo through Week 48 (P=0.0012). The incidence of adverse events through Week 48 was similar between groups, with a lower rate of serious adverse events in VX-770 compared to placebo (13.3% versus 33.3%, respectively; the difference being due primarily to a higher rate of pulmonary exacerbations in the placebo group). Conclusions: VX-770 resulted in statistically significant improvements in FEV 1 , respiratory symptoms, pulmonary exacerbation risk, and weight gain compared to placebo over 48 weeks. Mean sweat chloride levels were reduced below the diagnostic cutoff limit for CF of 60 mmol/L. The safety profile of VX-770 was comparable to placebo. Supported by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. The F508del mutation affects folding and trafficking of the CFTR protein, resulting in little or no CFTR at the epithelial surface and defective gating. VX-809 is an investigational CFTR corrector designed to enhance trafficking of F508del-CFTR. Addition of the investigational CFTR potentiator VX-770 to VX-809-corrected F508del-CFTR increased chloride transport in vitro. Methods: In this Phase 2, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-center, cohort study, subjects in the first cohort received VX-809 200 mg qd alone or placebo for 14 days followed by VX-809 200 mg qd together with VX-770 at either 150 mg or 250 mg q12h or placebo for 7 days. Primary endpoints were safety and change from Day 14 to Day 21 in sweat chloride, a biomarker of CFTR function. Change from Day 14 to Day 21 in FEV 1 was the key secondary endpoint. Results: Sixty-one of 62 (98.4%) subjects completed dosing. At baseline, the 62 subjects had a mean age of 29.1 years, predicted FEV1 of 66.9% (range 32.8-117.1), and sweat chloride of 101.9 mmol/L (range 87.5-121.0). From baseline to Day 14, there was a significant reduction in sweat chloride in the combined group of subjects receiving VX-809 alone. At Day 21 there was an approximate 2-fold greater reduction in sweat chloride over Day 14 levels in the subjects receiving VX-809 coadministered with 250 mg of VX-770, but not when coadministered with 150 mg VX-770. At Day 21, a within-group improvement (3.5 percentage points) in FEV 1 was seen in the VX-770 150 mg group, but not in the VX-770 250 mg group. Versus pretreatment baseline (Day 0), the VX-809 plus 250 mg VX-770 combination led to a total sweat chloride change of -13.2 mmol/L. Of subjects in this arm with evaluable data, 8/17 (47%) had a change > -15 mmol/L and 4/17 (24%) had > -20 mmol/L. No clinically important differences were seen among groups in the frequency or type of adverse events. Overall, 82.9% of subjects on drug and 85.7% on placebo had an adverse event; most (50%) were respiratory and none was serious. Conclusions: VX-809 coadministered with the 250 mg dose of VX-770 led to >2-fold reduction in sweat chloride compared to VX-809 alone. A slight increase in lung function was evident in the VX-809 plus 150 mg VX-770 group, but not for 250 mg VX-770, though the small sample size challenges interpretation. The safety profile was comparable between groups. These early data support the hypothesis that the coadministration of VX-770 plus VX-809 can significantly improve CFTR function compared to VX-809 alone in patients homozygous for F508del-CFTR and supports further clinical investigation. Sponsored by Vertex. To determine the accuracy and reliability of sweat gland potential difference (SPD) measurements in comparison to the classic sweat test. Methods: We ascertained healthy controls (HC), obligate heterozygotes (Hetero), patients with CFTR-related disease (CFTR-R), and pancreatic sufficient (CFPS) and pancreatic insufficient (CFPI) CF patients as surrogates for different levels of CFTR function. SPD measurements were performed following: a) cholinergic and b) sequential cholinergic + beta-adrenergic sweat stimulation. Sweat [Cl -] was determined concurrently using the Wescor® method. Tests were repeated 3 times for CFTR-R, CFPS and CFPI. Results: Preliminary results showed good group discrimination for cholinergic induced SPD, similar to the discrimination achieved with sweat [Cl -] (Table) . Sequential cholinergic+β-adrenergic sweat stimulation induced a more positive SPD (∆SPD) in CF (p<0.001) ), but not in HC or Hetero. Within subject variability for SPD was higher among CFPI, whereas it was higher for sweat [Cl -] among CFPS. Conclusions: SPD is an accurate and reliable test to detect different levels of CFTR function compared to the classic sweat [Cl -] test. Real-time monitoring of sweat PD may serve as a practical diagnostic tool in settings where laboratory sweat [Cl -] determination is problematic. Further, SPD shows promise as a realtime technique to measure outcome in CFTR-rescue therapies. Table 1 *Statistically significant between neighboring groups. # Statistically significant difference compared to HC and Hetero. The important role of glutamine in immune cell function and glutathione (GSH) generation has made the potential therapeutic benefits of supplementation a target for study in many disease states. Previous work has shown some benefit in trauma and burns victims, low-weight neonates and bone marrow transplant patients in terms of infection (specifically Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA)), sepsis, pneumonia and survival. Glutamine has been shown to have specific anti-PA action in mouse models of infection [1] . The mechanism by which glutamine mediates this activity is unknown. It may be by promoting the host immune response or via activity on antioxidant pathways by increasing GSH levels. The concept that supplemental glutamine may be of benefit in CF is supported by the observation of depleted neutrophil glutamine levels in CF patients [2] , possibly as a consequence of poor absorption or increased metabolic activity and pulmonary inflammation. We hypothesised that supplemental glutamine may have a beneficial effect on neutrophil function, antioxidant balance in the lung and may have a specific effect upon PA resulting in improved clinical and inflammatory markers. Study design: Double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel study Study population: Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust and Birmingham Heartlands Hospital. Intervention: 21g/day oral glutamine or matched placebo (isonitrogenous asparagine/glycine). Recruitment: We aimed to recruit 44 individuals to the study with the assumption of an 80% completion rate. Inclusion criteria: age 14-60yrs, FEV1 25-80%, chronic PA infection. Exclusion criteria: Lung transplant, pulmonary exacerbation or change of pulmonary therapy in prior 4 weeks, recently diagnosed or uncontrolled DM, liver failure (>3x normal LFT or cirrhosis), inclusion in another clinical trial, pregnancy, breastfeeding, lack of informed consent. We recruited 45 participants from two ECFS Clinical Trials Network centres; 36 participants have completed the study. Endpoints: Primary outcome measure: Change in induced sputum neutrophil count. Secondary outcome measures: Induced sputum neutrophils, levels of elastase, IL8, IL6, TNFα and IL1β. Serum CRP and IL8. Infectious load of PA -quantitative microbiology. Systemic blood neutrophil activity in sub-set of patients. FEV1. Clinical score [3] . Quality of life (CFQ-R). Sputum and serum total and reduced GSH. Change in body weight. Acceptability of supplement. Study power: Using the placebo group as a control with 36 individuals providing data, the study has over 80% power to detect a 75% reduction in sputum neutrophil count [4] . Ethical Neutrophil elastase (NE) plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of CF lung disease due to its proteolytic and proinflammatory functions. So far, these damaging effects have mainly been attributed to the soluble form of the enzyme, which is secreted in high amounts by activated neutrophils into the airway surface liquid. However, little is known about the contribution of cell surface bound NE and suitable tools for detection of cell surface associated NE activity are missing. Therefore, we aimed to develop NE specific Foerster resonance energy transfer (FRET) reporters targeting the plasma membrane of airway neutrophils via lipidation. FRET reporters, consisting of a NE specific peptide target sequence, coumarin 343 and carboxytetramethylrhodamine as fluorophores and palmitic acid as lipid anchor, were synthesized on solid phase, mass-verified and purified by HPLC. For evaluation of FRET reporter performance, nonlipidated counterparts were tested in vitro for sensitivity and specificity with NE and other lung disease related proteases, proteinase 3 (Pr3), cathepsin G, several matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and trypsin. Lipidated FRET reporters were first tested on liposomes. Live cell-microscopy with cultured RAW macrophages and HeLa cells was performed to visualize insertion of the lipidated FRET reporter into the plasma membrane and subsequent reporter cleavage upon addition of NE. As a model of neutrophilic airway inflammation, we treated Wt and NE deficient (NE-/-) mice with 20 µg lipopolysaccharide (LPS) by intratracheal instillation. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed after 4 hrs and BAL cells were incubated with lipidated FRET reporter to determine NE activity. In vitro studies using non-lipidated FRET reporters demonstrated that soluble NE but not the closely related Pr3 was detected in subnanomolar concentration. The lipidated FRET reporter inserted into the plasma membrane of RAW macrophages and HeLa cells and was cleaved by NE. Further, NE activity was detected on the surface of LPS stimulated Wt neutrophils, but not NE-/-neutrophils. By image analysis FRET donor/acceptor ratio change upon reporter cleavage was calculated. We conclude that our novel FRET reporters allow detection of NE activity on the cell surface of biological samples including BAL cells. We expect that this novel tool will allow elucidating the role of membrane bound NE in the pathogenesis of CF lung disease. Cell surface associated NE may serve as a pool of NE less prone to inhibition by excess of anti-proteases present in the lung and thus may become useful as biomarker and therapeutic target in CF lung disease. Supported by BMBF-DZL-011 and the EU (7FP research project LIVI-MODE). Objective: To evaluate the number of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) infection who achieved specific levels of improvement in FEV1 % predicted in response to AZLI (Cayston®) 75 mg TID vs. TIS (TOBI®) 300 mg BID over 3 intermittent treatment courses in a randomized, active comparator trial. Background: Use of chronic, intermittent inhaled antibiotics is standard of care for patients with CF and PA infection. In a six month randomized trial of 3 on/off courses of AZLI vs. TIS, AZLI demonstrated superiority to TIS at 28 days as well as over 3 treatment courses in improvement in lung function (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00757237). An alternative method of assessing efficacy is to evaluate the number of patients in each treatment group who achieve meaningful improvement in lung function. Methods: This responder analysis used levels of 8% and 12% improvement in FEV1 % predicted to compare results of treatment with AZLI vs. TIS. Results: Significantly higher percentages of AZLI-treated vs. TIS-treated patients had improvements from baseline in FEV1 % predicted of greater than or equal to 8% and 12%, respectively, at the end of each 28-day treatment course. Conclusion: A significantly higher percentage of AZLI-treated patients had relative improvements in FEV1 % predicted of 8% and 12% at the end of each treatment course compared to TIS-treated patients. These findings support the superiority results in the primary endpoint analyses in this active comparator study. Supported by Gilead Sciences. Note: Patients with missing data were included as Non-Responders; p-value based on Fisher's exact test. Background: Nasal potential difference (NPD) measurements are now used routinely as an endpoint in clinical trials of correcting the basic defect in CF. However, this test has its limitations particularly the age of the subject. Intestinal Current Measurement (ICM) measured ex vivo on a rectal biopsy has been used to study CFTR function. This methodology may be used especially in small children as a treatment marker but has not been compared to NPD in adults and children. Aim: To evaluate the potential usefulness of ICM as a surrogate marker of CFTR function measurement. These results were compared to NPD results from the same subject. Methods: ICM and NPD were performed on healthy controls and CF patients in adults and children. Results: In adult patients, ICM measurements demonstrated a median (interquartile range) carbachol response in healthy control subjects (n=29 subjects; 40 analyzable biopsies) of 11.1 (7.9, 20.75) µA/cm 2 , histamine response of 8.7 (5.0, 12.9) µA/cm 2 , and a forskolin response of 3.9 (2.3, 7.4) µA/cm 2 . These responses were inverted in CF subjects (n=8, 10 analyzable biopsies) with a mean carbachol response of −2.5 (−4.8, −1.6) µA/cm 2 , histamine of −1.0 (−1.6, 0) µA/cm 2 , and no forskolin response. Similar to ICM, NPD measurements distinguished between healthy controls (n=7) and CF patients (n=8). In non-CF children similar results were observed: carbachol 9.5 (6.2, 14) µA/cm 2 ; histamine 7.4 (2.65, 17.7) µA/cm 2 , forskolin 6 (3.5, 12) µA/cm 2 and normal NPD. In CF the ICM and NPD were abnormal. Correlation tests and Wilcoxon rank tests showed the comparatibility of ICM and NPD. Conclusion: ICM is equivalent to NPD in the ability to distinguish CF patients from controls in adults and children. ICM, like NPD, allows measurement of CFTR mediated chloride transport which has the potential for use as a therapeutic endpoint in drug trials. This is of particular importance in evaluating young children who are less likely to tolerate several NPD tests as part of a treatment protocol. Nasal potential difference (NPD) measurement evaluates changes in chloride transport through respiratory epithelia of CF subjects induced by novel treatments. The poor reproducibility hampering the usefulness of the measurement could be improved by measurement over a larger area on a fixed place. A new catheter was designed with a 360° contact area over 2 cm. NPD was measured using a 8Fr catheter with a side hole positioned on the most negative spot on the nasal floor. In the other nostril, the large surface catheter was placed at 3 cm depth. NPD was repeated after a median of 2 days (range 1-60). Twenty subjects completed 2 measurements. Correlation between first and second measurement for total chloride secretion was significantly better with the large surface than with the sidehole catheter (R=0.108 vs -0.689, p = 0.038), as were within-subject variance (26.7 mV 2 vs 220.1 mV 2 ) and mean coefficient of variation (35.2 % vs 59.7 %, p=0.042). Power calculations for a double-blind placebo controlled study with change in total chloride secretion as primary endpoint favors the use of the large surface catheter (nnt = 20 vs 40 for a correction to 33% of the chloride secretion in normal subjects). Measurements with the conventional catheter resulted in more negative NPD during perfusion with Ringer ( 13.5 mV +/-7.2 mV vs 10.0 mV +/-4.4 mV, p= .004), larger amiloride response (+8.0 mV +/-6.0 mV vs +4.8 mV +/-2.6 mV, p= .003), and larger total chloride secretion (-21.5 mV +/-15.9 mV vs -14 mV +/-9.1 mV, p= .011). Measurements of NPD with a large contact area on a constant place, have a better reproducibility than measurements done with the small routinely used sidehole catheter. Macrolide antibiotics prolong survival in patients with diffuse panbronchiolitis, a condition that shares features with cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease. It has been considered that immuno-modulatory properties of macrolides could mediate their therapeutic effects. Previous findings from our laboratory are in accord with this notion. For example, we have reported that exposure of primary cultures of well-differentiated human bronchial epithelia (HBE) to supernatant from mucopurulent material (SMM) from CF airways up-regulates inflammatory and defense response genes. Utilizing a prophylactic protocol, we showed that pretreatment with the macrolide azithromycin (AZT) prevents the SMM-induced up-regulation of genes relevant to airway inflammation, such as MMP9 and MUC5AC (Ribeiro et al, PLoS ONE; 4(6):e5806, 2009). The present study utilized a therapeutic protocol to further the understanding of anti-inflammatory effects of macrolides on expression of inflammatory genes. We tested whether the novel fluoroketolide, solithromycin (SOLI, CEM-101) modulates the inflammatory responses of HBE exposed to SMM in a similar manner as compared with AZT. In addition, because telithromycin (TELI), a macrolide that is a ketolide, has been shown to inhibit LPS-or Chlamydophila pneumoniaeinduced MUC5AC in airway epithelia, we also compared the effects of TELI with those from SOLI and AZT. HBE were mucosally exposed to 30 µL SMM for 24 hr, followed by serosal exposure to 5, 15 or 30 µg/mL SOLI, TELI or AZT in presence of SMM. PBS served as a control for SMM-induced effects. SMM-induced matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) mRNA was inhibited (p<0.05) by all doses of AZT, by 5 and 15 µg/mL TELI, and slightly inhibited (p=0.07) by 15 µg/mL SOLI. In contrast, SMM-induced interleukin-8 mRNA was not affected by AZT (in agreement with our published data) or SOLI and only decreased by 20% after 15 µg/mL TELI. We next evaluated the effect of the macrolides on SMM-upregulated mucin mRNA levels. AZT and SOLI blunted SMM-induced MUC5AC mRNA in a dose-dependent manner, whereas the effect of TELI was only significantly inhibitory at 30 µg/mL. On the other hand, all three macrolides exhibited a dose-dependent significant inhibitory effect on SMM-increased MUC5B mRNA levels. As we have previously shown for AZT, preliminary studies with alcian blue-periodic acid Schiff-stained HBE suggest that the inhibitory effect of the macrolides on SMM-induced mucin genes corresponded to decreases in mucin protein expression. Time courses are being currently performed to further evaluate the anti-inflammatory action of the macrolides. Our findings demonstrate that macrolides inhibit the airway epithelial gene expression of MMP9 and mucins in a model relevant to CF. The inhibitory effect on MUC5AC and MUC5B is a novel finding for SOLI. Because CF airways are characterized by chronic inflammation and overproduction of mucins, these effects are likely relevant to the clinical activity of these compounds. Particularly, understanding the mechanisms behind SOLI-dependent gene expression changes should help direct the use of this drug for therapeutic purposes in CF patients. Funded by Cempra Pharmaceuticals. Preliminary studies indicate that chronic P. aeruginosa infection is characterized by a predominant Th2 immune response, which is associated with poor lung function. The objective of this study is to evaluate the contribution of clinical variables as well as inflammatory cytokines on severity of pulmonary function in the context of Th1/Th2 response. Methods: A cross-sectional study was conducted in 46 stable CF patients and 9 healthy volunteers. Patients were excluded if on NSAIDs or systemic corticosteroids. Patient demographics and clinical variables including CFTR genotype, sputum cultures, FEV1, key pharmacologic therapies and co-morbidities were collected. Peripheral blood samples were collected and cultured for 24 hours with or without LPS, and the supernatant was harvested. A multiplex ELISA assay was used to quantify cytokines. Simultaneous-quartile regression was used to determine association between clinical variables and cytokine response. Results: CF patient demographics (mean±SD): Age 30.1 (8.4) years, BMI 24.4 (3.6), and FEV1 54.5% (22.2). The Th2 response in CF was indicated by a trend toward higher IL-4/IFN-γ (p=0.09) vs. healthy controls. FEV1 was found to be significantly correlated with Th1 immune response: IFN-γ (r 2 = 0.52; p=0.0.01) and IL-12p70 (r 2 =0.46; p=0.03) in CF patients. Quartile regression of inter-patient variability revealed no significant interaction between age, BMI, genotype, CFRD, depression, key therapies, and individual biomarkers. A weak association was identified between IL-1β in unstimulated blood and the presence of mucoid PA (CI: -1279.9 to -51.4), (r 2 =0.18; p=0.04). Cytokine covariates explained a much greater percentage of effect on the dependent cytokine: IL-10 (r 2 =0.40; p=0.007) on IFN-γ at Q3, IL-10 (r 2 =0.57; p=0.03) on TNF-α at Q1, and IL-10 (r 2 =0.57; p=0.003) on GM-CSF at Q3. No difference was noted in unstimulated blood samples for TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-12p70, and IL-10, while MCP-1 approached significance (p=0.06). In LPS stimulated samples no difference was noted for CXCL-8, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-12p70, GM-CSF, IL-1β, IL-10, and MCP-1. Conclusions: Despite key pharmacological therapy CF patients exhibit a significant systemic inflammatory response, as well as intrinsic TNF-α hyper-responsiveness to LPS challenge. In addition, our results confirm the association between Th1 response and improved pulmonary function. New findings include the association of IL-10 with IFN-γ and GM-CSF hyperproducers and TNF-α hypo-producers indicating its potential importance in regulating immune response. Mazurek, H. 5, 13 ; Antipkin, Y. 6,13 ; Feketeova, A. 7,13 ; Senatorova, 58.3%. Overall, Arikace ® 560 mg administered once daily for 6 cycles was well tolerated and demonstrated adverse effects consistent with those expected in a population of CF pts. Available data from 6 cycles show an average increase from baseline in FEV 1 (%) of 11.7% at the end of treatment for the 6th cycle (p<0.0001) and sustained increase in FEV 1 of 5.7% 56d off drug at end of the 6th cycle (p=0.0001). Significant reduction in Pa density has also been seen, and there has been no significant shift in MIC 90 . Analysis of complete data, including PRO measures will be available at the 2011 NACF Conference. Conclusion: Arikace ® 560 mg given once daily for 28d for 6 cycles was well tolerated in CF pts. An increase in FEV 1 (%) significantly above baseline is observed during the treatment period of each cycle which was sustained during the 56d off study drug period, indicating prolonged drug effect. Phase 3 studies are underway. Background: Many patients with CF receive potentially nephrotoxic agents as part of their treatment regimen, including antibiotics and high dose ibuprofen. While most centers routinely prescribe systemic and inhaled aminoglycosides (AG) as CF treatment, there has been hesitancy to adopt the use of high dose ibuprofen (IBU). There is evidence that the use of IBU in young patients may slow the decline of lung function over a 4 year period, and that this effect is sustained. Only 3.6% of eligible patients were prescribed this therapy based on 2009 CFF Registry data. Our center has routinely prescribed IBU in our young, healthy patients (46.7% of eligible patients in 2009). Acute and chronic renal injury and gastrointestinal adverse effects are cited as reasons not to prescribe this treatment. Since serum creatinine is a late marker of kidney injury, the use of more sensitive markers of acute kidney injury may be more relevant. Specific Aim: To examine the association of IBU with markers of early kidney injury. Secondary aims examined the effects of IV AGs and the effect of CF related diabetes on kidney injury. Methods: Patients between ages 3 and 25 years were approached for participation. A single urine specimen was collected in the clinic setting or prior to institution of parenteral antibiotics in the hospital. A total of 52 patients provided samples (mean age 11 years, range 3-24 years). Specimens were analyzed for kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase (NAG) and protein, normalized for urine creatinine. Analyses were performed to examine the association of KIM-1, NAG levels and protein with IBU treatment, IV AGs (0, 1-4 and 5 or > courses), lung function, presence of CF related diabetes and gender. Results: Twenty six patients (50 %) were prescribed IBU. Fourteen (27%) had received no IV AGs, 22 (42%) received 1-4 courses, and 16 (31%) had 5 or more courses. Median lung function was 87% predicted FEV1 in patients old enough to perform spirometry. Six patients had CFRD or impaired glucose tolerance. There were no significant differences for KIM-1 (p=0.34), NAG (p=0.09), and urinary protein levels (p=0.45) between IBU and non-IBU treated groups based on analysis by t-test. KIM-1 and NAG levels were not significantly different for patients treated with 0, 1-4 or more than 5 systemic AG courses, although protein levels were higher in patients never treated with AGs (p=0.04). Comparison of medians (Mann Whitney U test) for all groups did not reveal any differences. Univariate analyses demonstrated increased protein levels for males on IBU, as well as increased NAG levels for all patients on IBU (p= 0.01), but again this effect was pronounced in males. IBU treatment and increasing numbers of IV AG courses were associated with higher NAG levels (p=0.04). Conclusions: There was no significant evidence of acute or chronic renal injury in our patients on IBU. There may be an effect of gender on kidney biomarkers with respect to IBU treatment. Further exploration of the concomitant effect of IBU and IV AGs on acute kidney injury is warranted. Taylor Internal Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; 2. Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; 3. Diagnostic Radiology, Chonbuk National University Medical School, Jeonbuk, Republic of Korea; 4. Radiology, University of Yamanashi, Chuo City, Japan; 5. Diagnositc Radiology, Kiel, Germany; 6. Radiology, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; 7. Radiology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany Background: As a result of improvements in clinical care, survival rates have increased and the rate of decline of lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) has slowed substantially. Thus, physiologic measurements (FEV 1 ) are insensitive to clinical changes in small cohorts. Therefore, a major challenge in the evaluation of new therapies in CF is to identify appropriate outcome measures. Although resolution of lung Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is inferior to that of chest Computed Tomography (CT), the lack of ionizing radiation makes MRI appealing as a repeated measure in clinical care and research. Hypotheses: 1) There will be good correlation between MRI scores by different radiologists. 2) Clinical parameters in subjects with CF will correlate with lung MRI score. Methods: Twenty adult patients with mild to severe CF lung disease (FEV 1 and FVC range 27%-103% and 41 to 111% predicted, respectively) were enrolled. Subjects underwent chest MRI with images obtained on a 1.5T Siemens Avanto MRI scanner with optimized proton MRI pulse sequences for the assessment of lung disease without contrast media. Images were scored by two sets of radiologists blinded to subjects' lung function. Each lobe of each subject's lung was scored (as described by Eichinger et al European Congress of Radiology, 2010) for the presence of bronchiectasis/wall thickening, mucus plugging, abscesses/sacculations, consolidation, and additional findings. Scores for the selected pulse sequence [T2-Fast spin echo (FSE)] were assigned as follows: No disease involvement in lobe-0, 1-50% lobe involvement-1, and >50% lobe involvement-2. Baseline FEV 1 and FVC (% predicted) were calculated as a mean of available measurements since 2007, with an average of 12.4+5.2 studies over 931+145 days of follow-up per subject. Correlations were calculated using JMP software V 8.0.1. Results: MRI studies have been scored by each duo of radiologists. Correlation between the scores of experienced readers was excellent, (R 2 0.76, p=0.005) and correlation between the scores of newly trained readers was good (R 2 0.66, p=0.001). Baseline FEV 1 and FVC correlated with the mean MRI score for the T2-FSE image. Correlation of lung MRI score with other clinical parameters including bacterial colonization, CFQ-R score, genotype and gender will be evaluated. Conclusions: There was good correlation between readings by radiologists with varying levels of experience, although correlation was best between radiologists more experienced in proton MRI imaging of the lung. Semi-quantitative scoring of images correlated with baseline FEV 1 and FVC. Lung MRI appears to be a useful tool for the evaluation of structural lung disease in CF without radiation exposure. Taylor Background: Phosphodiesterase inhibitors such as sildenafil, may have several benefits in cystic fibrosis (CF) including as an anti-inflammatory, as a cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) modulator, and as a therapy for secondary pulmonary hypertension. However, pharmacokinetics following oral administration of medications often differ in patients with CF. Therefore, the pharmacokinetics of two dosing regimens of sildenafil are being evaluated in subjects with CF. Hypotheses: 1) The pharmacokinetics of sildenafil will be equivalent in subjects with CF compared to that in normal subjects. 2) Concomitant administration of oral sildenafil with food and pancreatic enzymes will result in improved absorption in subjects with CF. Methods: Adult subjects (mean age 25.9 years) with mild to moderate CF lung disease (mean FEV 1 79%) were enrolled. Eight subjects received sildenafil 20 mg p.o. t.i.d. on an empty stomach, then returned to the research clinic 6±2 days after initiation of sildenafil, at which time the morning dose of sildenafil was administered, and blood samples were drawn.* [*30 minutes, 1 hour (h), 2h, 4h and 6h post-dosing] Subsequent subjects received sildenafil 20 mg p.o. t.i.d. for the first week of the study, followed by an increase to 40 mg p.o. t.i.d. during week two. Subjects were instructed to take all doses with food and pancreatic enzymes. Subjects returned to the research clinic 6±2 days after dose escalation of sildenafil at which time the morning dose of sildenafil was administered, and blood samples were drawn.* Plasma sildenafil levels were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography. Results: Fifteen subjects have been enrolled in the study to date. Plasma sildenafil levels have been determined on 9 subjects. Mean time-to-peak concentration (Tmax) in CF subjects receiving sildenafil 20 mg p.o. t.i.d. was 1.2 hours, similar to that reported for non-CF subjects (Br J Clin Pharmacol 2002) (P = 0.66). Maximum plasma concentration (Cmax) and area under the curve (AUC) were compared between the 8 subjects with CF and 224 subjects without CF. Cmax was significantly higher in subjects with CF than in those without CF (159 ± 62 CF versus 84 ± 80 ng/mL non-CF; P = 0.01). AUC was similar in subjects with CF and those without CF (398 ± 281 CF versus 464±175 ng-h/mL non-CF; P = 0.53). For the subject who received sildenafil 40 mg p.o. t.i.d. with food and enzymes, Tmax was 1 ± 0 hour, Cmax was 4.25.47 ± 20 ng/mL and AUC was 1553.24 ± 43 ng-h/mL. Conclusions: Although absorption of sildenafil in subjects with CF is increased compared to that of subjects without CF, on average Tmax and AUC were similar in subjects with CF and without CF. Therefore, standard pulmonary hypertension dosing of sildenafil may be adequate to achieve treatment effect in subjects with CF. Collection and analysis of samples for subjects receiving a higher dose of sildenafil with concomitant administration of food and enzymes is ongoing and will be reported. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator molecule (CFTR) and characterized by chronic pulmonary inflammation and infection. Our data on cystic fibrosis mice demonstrate a change of the sphingolipid metabolism in these mice with a massive accumulation of ceramide in the lung, trachea and gut of CF mice. Ceramide mediates increased cell death, release of DNA in bronchi, chronic inflammation and increased infection susceptibility of CF mice to pulmonary P. aeruginosa infections. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition of ceramide formation employing amitriptyline in lungs of CF mice normalizes all of these pathologies. Amitriptyline inhibits the acid sphingomyelinase and thus, ceramide release. A first clinical study with 4 and a second phase IIa study with 19 CF patients revealed a significant increase of lung function after treatment with amitriptyline for 2 and 4 weeks. To evaluate the positive data of the phase IIa trial, we initiated a phase IIb randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in 2009 with parallel group design. Forty patients were treated with a maximum of 2 x 25 mg amitriptyline for 28 days. The primary endpoint was the change of the lung function parameter FEV1 % predicted between baseline and 4 weeks under verum and placebo. Secondary endpoints were change of the lung function parameter FEV1 % predicted relative to baseline, decrease of ceramide concentration, pulmonary P. aeruginosa counts, mucus composition and proand anti-inflammatory cytokines in sputum. Special attention was kept on safety. Here we present preliminary data. Amitriptyline was well received in the patient group and only one SAE was reported at the end of the 28-day-course. Two well-known AEs of amitriptyline, i.e. xerostomia and tiredness, were different between placebo and the amitriptyline treatment group, but occurred only transiently. We found in 37 out of 40 patients remarkable differences in the intention-totreat analyses. After 28 days of treatment, the primary endpoint FEV1 % predicted was higher compared to placebo (FEV1 difference 6.3% (±11.45); p = 0.08). Eleven of the 40 patients did not fulfil the criteria for the per protocol (PP) analysis. After 28 days of treatment, in the PP analysis the endpoint FEV1 % predicted value was higher compared to placebo by 7.2% (9.3%); p = 0.04. The Intention-to-treat and per protocol analyses showed a remarkable primary endpoint difference of FEV1 % predicted after 28 days of treatment. These data confirm the findings of the previous studies. Altogether, the results from the three studies support the notion of a positive anti-inflammatory effect of amitriptyline therapy in CF patients. These encouraging results will be verified in a larger sample-sized phase III study. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, which encodes a cAMPstimulated anion channel in the plasma membrane of epithelial cells. The F508del mutation impairs CFTR maturation and trafficking to the plasma membrane, resulting in a partially functional anion channel which is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum and degraded. We previously developed a robust and sensitive BHK cell-based F508del-CFTR trafficking assay to identify novel families of small molecule correctors. This assay was used to screen diverse compound libraries (total 107,310 compounds), and yielded 185 strong hits (defined as >15% trafficking correction compared to wild type BHK cells). Amongst the confirmed hits, we recently identified glafenine, an anthranilic acid derivative with analgesic properties as a novel F508del-CFTR corrector and validated its activity in various biological assays(1). Here we present the SAR studies as well as our medicinal chemistry efforts to optimise the ability of glafenine analogues to rescue the F508del-CFTR-mediated anion transport in human airway epithelial cells. ( 1) Previously, we reported that beta-sitosterol (bss), extracted from N. arvensis seeds, was able to inhibit the expression of the pro-inflammatory chemokine IL-8 in IB3-1 CF bronchial cells exposed to the P. aeruginosa laboratory strain PAO1 [1]. Chemically, bss is steroid-like and recent in vitro and clinical studies have shown that plants containing such steroids are anti-inflammatory agents, also in respiratory inflammatory pre-clinical models [2] [3] . In the present study bss was tested in the human CF airway epithelial cell line CuFi-1 exposed to PAO1 for 4 h. CuFi-1 cells seeded on semipermeable filters, are capable of forming polarized differentiated epithelia that exhibit transepithelial resistance and maintain the characteristic CF defect of ion transport. CuFi-1 cells were pre-treated for 20 h with 100 nM bss. Total RNA was extracted and quantitative transcription of 92 target genes involved in the first line of response against pathogens and critical in chronic inflammatory diseases of the airways, were quantified by TaqMan Low Density Array. Among the PAO1 induced genes, bss showed an anti-inflammatory acitivity inhibiting the overexpression of IL-8, GROalpha and GRO-beta genes. No changes in cell proliferation have been observed with high concentration of bss (up to 150 mM). To exclude that the inhibition of the P.aeruginosa-dependent induction of the three genes was due to an indirect anti-bacterial effect on P.aeruginosa, we performed an anti-bacterial array following the procedure for the Minimum Inhibitory Concentration. In conclusion, we have explored the anti-inflammatory effect of bss in a model of CF cell lines finding that bss is able to inhibit selectively the expression of the pro-inflammatory chemokines IL-8, GRO-alpha and GRO-beta. Recent mounting evidence suggesting that bss acts as antiinflammatory molecule warrants further mechanistic studies to determine the full extent of its action. Introduction: Biomarkers are mainly used in Phase I or II clinical trials and are useful for gaining information on mechanism of action and for identifying treatment responders. Current Phase III trials in CF that are using biomarkers as endpoints include VX-770 and Ataluren, which are using nasal potential difference (NPD) and sweat chloride concentration. These new therapies that address the basic defect may be most suitable for people with early or mild lung disease. Traditional endpoints are not always feasible in young children, require larger sample sizes and extended observation periods. When the small size of the population of people with CF is considered it is apparent that alternatives are required. Aim: To review the literature on reliability, validity and responsiveness of nasal potential difference (NPD), sweat chloride, and intestinal current measurement (ICM). Methods: As part of the work of the ECFS-CTN Standardisation Committee, data on clinimetric properties were collected for each biomarker and reviewed by an international team of experts. The literature search was limited to full text original articles, from 1980 onwards. Data on reliability, validity and responsiveness were tabulated. In addition, narrative answers to 4 key questions were discussed and agreed by the team of experts. Results: Data collected demonstrated the reliability, validity and responsiveness of NPD. Fewer data were found on reliability of sweat chloride and none for ICM, however validity and responsiveness were demonstrated for both. Norm values were collected for all three endpoints. Further research requirements were proposed for each endpoint. Conclusion: This body of work adds useful information to support the promotion of CFTR biomarkers to surrogate endpoints. ON BEHALF OF THE ECFS-CTN CFTR BIOMARKERS STAN-DARDISATION COMMITTEE. Background: Airway nitric oxide (NO) is deficient in cystic fibrosis (CF) which may have potential negative effects on airway obstruction and bacterial infection. L-arginine is not only a substrate for nitric oxide synthases, but can also be metabolized by arginases, enzymes that form ornithine, the precursor of polyamines which may contribute to airway remodeling. A single inhalation of nebulized L-arginine has been shown to transiently improve the fraction of exhaled NO (FENO) and pulmonary function in patients with CF (Grasemann et al., AJRCCM 2006) , but the effects of longer term treatment has not yet been defined. Objective: To assess the safety and efficacy of repeated inhalations of nebulized L-arginine in CF patients. Methods: This study was designed as a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled crossover treatment trial of twice daily inhalation of 500 mg L-arginine for two weeks compared to inhalation of saline solution (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT00405665). Both solutions were matched by tonicity and were indistinguishable by taste. FENO and pulmonary function testing were obtained before first inhalation and on the day following discontinuation of the study medications, respectively. Expectorated sputum samples were obtained at all study visits and assessed for markers of airway inflammation as well as L-arginine metabolites. Results: Twenty patients with CF and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection were recruited and 19 patients (11 males, 8 females) completed the study. The mean age was 23 (range 13-52) years and mean FEV1 was 2.25 (0.83-3.37) liters or 81 (51-113) % of predicted values at baseline. Overall, inhalations were well tolerated without significant adverse events. FENO increased from baseline after 14 days of arginine inhalation (p=0.03). FEV1 increased by an average of 56 mL after L-arginine compared to -8 mL after placebo, but this difference did not reach statistical significance. Sputum arginine after 14 days of inhalation was increased in the L-arginine (p<0.05) but not in the placebo group. Ornithine, the product of arginase activity, was also increased after L-arginine inhalation (p<0.01), but there was no change in sputum levels of the polyamine spermine after arginine or placebo inhalation. The concentration of the endogenous NOS inhibitor asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) was also increased after L-arginine inhalation (p<0.03) whereas ADMA and FENO did not change in the placebo group. Inhaled L-arginine did not result in a change in inflammatory markers in sputum including neutrophil cell counts, interleukin-8 levels and neutrophil elastase activity. Conclusions: Fourteen days of twice daily L-arginine inhalation was safe and well tolerated in CF patients. Inhaled L-arginine resulted in an increase in airway NO production despite an increase in the concentrations of the NOS inhibitor ADMA in sputum. Inhaled L-arginine also resulted in increased sputum ornithine but not polyamine concentrations. There was no evidence for increased airway inflammation in CF patients. This study was funded by the Canadian CF Foundation and the Irwin Family Foundation. Methods: This two site, open labeled, unblinded non-randomized study is a phase 1 safety and pharmacokinetic (PK) study using a 5 day IV infusion of gallium nitrate at two different doses (cohort 1: 100 mg/m 2 /day and cohort 2: 200 mg/m 2 /day) in patients with CF infected with PA. A total of eighteen CF subjects (nine in each cohort) will be enrolled. Inclusion criteria include age 18 years and older, FEV 1 > 30% of predicted, no evidence of renal disease (creatinine < 2.0 mg/dl or < 1.5 the upper limit of normal), nor osteoporosis and an ionized calcium level > the lower limit of normal. The primary endpoints of the study are to evaluate both safety and pharmacokinetics of IV gallium in CF. Safety is evaluated by laboratory assessments and collection of adverse events. PK is assessed to establish steady state levels and also to evaluate sputum gallium levels. Secondary endpoints include lung function, quantitative sputum microbiology and respiratory symptoms as assessed using the CF Respiratory Symptom Diary. Results: To date, nine subjects completed cohort 1 after screening 15 subjects. Mean age was 32.2 yrs (± 11.4 SD), 56% female, with a mean FEV 1 of 2.19 liters (± 0.57 SD). There were 31 adverse events (AE's) with 5 deemed related to study treatment. No serious AE's were noted. Study agent was not interrupted due to AE's. Creatinine did not change from the start of infusion to day 8: mean change 0.026 (95% CI: -0.04 to + 0.07). Mean change in FEV 1 at day 14 after dosing was +61 cc (95% CI: -79 to +203) and at day 28 +107 cc (95% CI: -7 to +221). Mean sputum density of PA change at day 14 was -93 million CFU per gram (95% CI:-256 to +71). Conclusions: IV gallium appears safe and shows encouraging trends on both FEV 1 and PA density results in the first cohort of this clinical trial. Additional results from the higher dose cohort (cohort 2) will be presented. IV gallium offers a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of chronic lower airway infection with P. aeruginosa in CF. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has put increasing emphasis on endpoints for drug approval that elicit health status directly from the patient based on how the patient feels or functions with respect to his or her health condition. The primary goal of this proposal is to assess the responsiveness and validity of a novel patient reported outcome measure (PRO) in pediatric patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), the CF Respiratory Symptom Diary (CFRSD). Methods: This is a non-randomized observational study assessing the responsiveness of the CFRSD to the 14 day treatment of an acute pulmonary exacerbation in children ages 6-18 years. Subjects had a confirmed diagnosis of cystic fibrosis, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of greater than 25% of predicted, and a physician-diagnosed acute pulmonary exacerbation requiring treatment with oral, inhaled or intravenous antibiotics. Subjects or their parents (if less than 12 years of age) completed the CFRSD questionnaire at study entry and daily for 14 days. They also completed spirometry at the time of initiation of antibiotics and after 14 days of antibiotic treatment. Results: Fifty-one subjects were enrolled. Fifty-five percent were females. The average age was 13.2 yrs (± 3.1 SD)(range 7-18). Mean FEV 1 % of pred. was 74.8% (± 4% SD). FEV 1 % pred. improved by 7.6% (95% CI: 4.5-10.7%; p<0.001) liters with treatment. Only 6 subjects (12%) experienced an adverse event (none of which was associated with study procedures). Of the 765 possible diaries, 670 (87.6%) were completed. The mean number of respiratory symptoms from the CFRSD decreased by 1.5 (95% CI: 1.1-2.1; p<0.001) (Figure 1 ). The mean respiratory frequency score decreased by 0.43 (95% CI: 0.33-0.62; p<0.001) on a scale of 0-4. Conclusions: Evaluation of the CFRSD demonstrates feasibility and responsiveness of a novel outcome measure in pediatric CF clinical trials and supports continued validation of this instrument. Supported by the National Institutes of Health (UL1 RR025014-03S5) (UL1 RR025014) (UL1 RR024153) (UL1RR025747), Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics Inc. In ~10% of patients with CF, the causative defect in the CFTR gene is a nonsense mutation that truncates CFTR protein production by introducing a premature stop codon into the CFTR transcript. Ataluren is an investigational drug that is designed to induce readthrough of premature stop codons to produce full length, functional CFTR in patients with nonsense mutation CF (nmCF). Pharmacological proof-of-concept was demonstrated in a mouse model of CF and Phase 2a open-label clinical trials. This Phase 3, randomized, double blind, placebo controlled study being conducted at 36 sites internationally is the largest clinical trial to date in the nmCF subpopulation; baseline data from this study provide insight into the phenotypic characteristics of patients with nmCF. Methods: Age ≥6 years, body weight ≥16 kg, sweat chloride >40 mEq/L, FEV 1 ≥40% and ≤90% of predicted, and presence of a nonsense mutation in at least 1 allele of the CFTR gene as documented by gene sequencing were required for entry. Patients receive ataluren 10 (morning), 10 (midday), 20 (evening) mg/kg or placebo daily for 48 weeks. Outcome measures include spirometry, frequency of pulmonary exacerbations as assessed by the Exacerbation of Chronic Pulmonary Disease Tool (EXACT), frequency of coughing as assessed by the LifeShirt, health-related quality of life, nasal potential difference, and sweat chloride. EXACT total score is derived from 14 questions that capture information on attributes of exacerbation and can range from 0 (best) to 100 (worst). Results Background: Decreased arylsulfatase B (ARSB) activity has been reported in the cultured airway epithelial cell lines with CFTR function. We have reported an increase in the ARSB activity after the deficiency in CFTR was corrected. Since the neutrophils play a key role in the airway inflammation in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), we hypothesized that there is decreased activity and expression of ARSB in peripheral leukocytes of CF patients and correction of ARSB deficiency may have therapeutic implications. Methods: Blood samples were obtained from 16 CF patients and 22 non-CF patients (10 asthmatics and 12 non-asthmatics). Blinded quantitative determination of ARSB in peripheral leukocytes, including neutrophils and monocytes was done by standard method using 4-methylumbilliferyl sulfate as substrate. The interleukin-6 (IL-6, a marker of inflammation) was measured by ELISA (R&D, Minneapolis, MN). Leukocyte separation was performed by Polymorphprep (AXIS-SHIELD, Oslo, Norway). Statistical analysis was done using one-way ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer post-test for multiple comparisons. Results: The ARSB activity was significantly lower in the neutrophils and mononuclear cells from patients with CF compared to non-CF controls. The results are summarized in the Table. Conclusions: The ARSB activity was significantly less in the neutrophils and monocytes-lymphocytes of CF patients compared to non-CF controls (asthmatic, non-asthmatic, and the total control groups). The asthmatic patients have significantly lower ARSB activity in their mononuclear population compared to non-asthmatics. The IL-6 activity was significantly higher in the CF patients than in the total control group, the asthmatic control group, or the non-asthmatic control group. There was no association between ARSB activity and CF genotype, pulmonary function, sputum cultures, age, or gender of the patients. Since recombinant ARSB is used clinically in treatment of mucopolysaccharidosis VI, replacement therapy with ARSB may have a potential role in the clinical management of CF. Funded in part by Clinical and Translational Sciences Award ULRR029879 from National Center for Research Resources to the University of Illinois at Chicago. *** for p<0.001, * for p<0.05, one-way ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer post-test for multiple comparisons, for differences between CF patients vs. total controls, asthmatics, or non-asthmatic controls. ### for p<0.001, # for p<0.05 one-way ANOVA with Tukey-Kramer post-test for multiple comparisons, for differences between asthmatic group and non-asthmatic controls Results: One hundred pts (AZLI: 48, PBO: 52) were randomized and treated. Mean age (yrs) AZLI: 28.0, PBO: 24.7; (83% >18 yrs). Mean baseline FEV 1 57% predicted (range 16%-115%). B. cenocepacia (40%) and B. multivorans (27%) were the most common of the 9 Burk spp identified at baseline. Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) was isolated in 30% of pts. Primary endpoint (relative change from baseline in FEV 1 % predicted, measured by Conclusions: This is the largest randomized controlled trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of aerosolized antibiotic treatment in Burk-infected CF pts. Baseline lung function varied widely in the study population. No difference was seen in change of FEV 1 % predicted for AZLI vs. PBO. Both treatment groups received substantial amounts of additional Abx for respiratory indications. AZLI pts received numerically fewer additional Abx for respiratory indications and events, and greater time to need for additional Abx, but the differences from PBO pts were not statistically significant. Additional analyses from the PBO-controlled phase of the trial are ongoing, including an evaluation of subsets of patients exhibiting favorable FEV 1 responses, in an attempt to identify predictive factors for response. Results from the open-label phase are pending. Supported by Gilead Sciences. Introduction: The primary cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is progressive obstructive lung disease associated with chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) infection, periodic endobronchial infection and an intense neutrophilic inflammatory response. Ciprofloxacin is a fluoroquinolone known to exhibit bactericidal activity against Gram-negative bacteria, including Pseudomonas spp. Ciprofloxacin dry powder for inhalation (DPI) is a drug-device combination with ciprofloxacin formulated using Novartis' PulmoSphere™ technology and a small, handheld dry powder inhaler. Objective: This phase IIb study was designed to assess the safety and efficacy of 28 days of ciprofloxacin DPI in clinically stable CF patients chronically colonized with PA. Methods: Patients 12 years of age or older with a documented diagnosis of CF were recruited. Patients were stratified according to long-term macrolide antibiotic use and randomized to ciprofloxacin DPI 32.5 mg, 48.75 mg or matching placebo bid for 28 days followed by a 28-day followup. Patients had an FEV 1 of ≥35% to ≤80% of predicted value, a stable regimen of standard treatment and a chronic colonization with PA defined as a positive respiratory tract culture within 12 months prior to screening. The primary objective was change in FEV 1 from baseline to day 28 (end of treatment). Secondary endpoints included change in PA density in sputum, incidence of ciprofloxacin-resistant PA, time to first pulmonary exacerbation requiring any antipseudomonal intervention and patient-reported outcomes (Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised, CFQ-R). Interim results: The total number of randomized patients was 288, with 286 being included in the intent-to-treat (ITT) population. The mean respective baseline characteristics of the ITT population for ciprofloxacin DPI 32.5 mg (n=93) and matching placebo (n=65) were: age, 27.7 and 31.6 years; BMI, 22.27 and 22.84 kg/m 2 ; FEV 1 , 55.0% and 54.8% of predicted value; and macrolide use, 70% and 72%. The mean respective characteristics for ciprofloxacin DPI 48.75 mg (n=93) and matching placebo (n=35) were: age, 29.2 and 29.1 years; BMI, 21.71 and 21.58 kg/m 2 ; FEV 1 , 54.7% and 52.7% of predicted value; and macrolide use, 71% and 54%. Overall, ciprofloxacin DPI was well tolerated. Data analysis is ongoing and the abstract will be updated to include the clinical results. Mannitol is an osmotic agent that increases water content of the airway surface liquid and improves mucociliary clearance. Two 6 month Phase III studies with 600 patients (mean FEV1 62.9% (±16.07SD)) assessing the efficacy and safety of inhaled dry powder mannitol (400mg bid) or control (50mg mannitol bid) daily have been performed. 1, 2 Results: Efficacy and safety data from two randomised, double-blind, controlled studies demonstrated a FEV1 change of 5.8% ±2.3 (p<0.05) from baseline. Pooling the two studies optimizes exploration analysis of subgroups based on age. The mean age (±SD) of children (6-11yrs), adolescents (12-17yrs) and adults (≥ 18yrs) were 9.2 yrs ±1.57, 14.2 yrs ±1.69 and 28.5 yrs ±8.63 at the start of the study. Their corresponding FEV1 was 72.5% ±14.0, 64.5% ±15.6, and 59.2% ±15.7. In each of the three age groups, mannitol (400 mg bid) demonstrated a significant change from baseline (Table 1) . There was greater variability in the children and adolescents control arms. The improvement from baseline in FEV1 in younger control patients may have led to a conservative effect estimate if due to control (mannitol 50mg bid) having some activity. The serious adverse events (SAEs), treatment related SAEs (TSAEs) and AEs were not changed by pooling the studies. Overall AEs and SAEs were similar between the mannitol and control groups across all age groups. The two most common TAEs (>5%) in any group (mannitol vs. control) were cough (12.1% vs. 6.0% adults, 9.1% vs. 6.3% adolescents and 6.0% vs. 0% children) and haemoptysis (5.8% vs. 3.0% adults, 5.7% vs. 0% adolescents, 3.0% vs. 0% children). Discussion: Mannitol 400mg bid shows significant improvement in FEV1 from baseline across all age groups. While inadequately powered to draw conclusions, efficacy was less apparent in adolescents, with greater variability in the smaller subgroups under 18 yrs. The safety profile was similar across the groups, though with slightly more mannitol related cough and hemoptysis reported in adults. Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in the lungs of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients are characterised by bacterial overproduction of alginate or extracellular polysaccharide (EPS). OligoG is a defined alginate oligomer comprised of blocks of α-L-guluronic acid which disrupts the EPS of bacterial biofilms and potentiates antibiotic treatment in vitro; being proven safe in preclinical animal and phase I human-volunteer studies (1). In potential application for the treatment of CF patients with OligoG, we characterised the ability of OligoG to modulate the viscoelastic and rheological properties of CF sputum in vitro. Specifically, we measured the elasticity (G'), loss modulus (G'') and phase angle of sputum. Non-induced CF sputum samples were collected from adolescent patients at the Cystic Fibrosis Unit at the Children's Hospital for Wales. Sputum aliquots (2.5 mL) were prepared and gently inverted for 30 s with the following test agents: dornase alfa (Pul-mozyme®; 2.5 µg mL -1 ), saline and the test agent OligoG at <2% (in dH 2 O). Combinatorial effects of the agents with OligoG were studied, with control samples treated with dH 2 O alone. Samples and test agents were incubated for 4 h at 37°C prior to testing. Rheological measurements were conducted using an AR-G2 Controlled Stress Rheometer (TA Instruments, UK) fitted with a parallel plate geometry; the lower plate being maintained at 4°C. Frequency sweep tests were employed over a range of frequencies (0.1-10 Hz) to provide viscoelastic data. Results showed that treatment with OligoG resulted in an 8.7-66% decrease in log 10 sample elasticity compared to the control over the range of 0.1 Hz-4 Hz. In these experiments, the value of the phase angle of the treated samples was approximately three-times greater than that of the control. OligoG treatment also decreased the elasticity of Pulmozyme®-treated samples, although this failed to reach the levels observed with OligoG alone. These studies demonstrate the ability of Oli-goG to effectively disrupt CF sputum in vitro, reduce elasticity and potentiate the action of Pulmozyme®. The potential of OligoG in the treatment of CF patients in vivo is under investigation in a phase IIa study. Supported and funded by Algipharma AS. In preparation for a multi-dose clinical trial to assess whether 12 monthly doses of the CFTR gene can improve CF lung disease we have conducted two toxicology studies (TS). In addition to a GLP-mouse TS study (outsourced to a CRO) we also performed an in-house study in sheep. Mice received 12 doses of pGM169 (a plasmid carrying the CFTR gene) complexed to Genzyme lipid GL67A at fortnightly intervals by inhalation; exposure to the complex was for 0.5 (low= ~5x human dose), 2 (mid= ~ 20x human dose) or 6 hr (high dose=~60x human dose). Controls were exposed to air for 6 hr. In addition to standard non-invasive assessments at regular intervals and post-mortem toxicology undertaken 2 weeks and 3 months after the last dose, molecular analyses were performed to assess gene expression and biodistribution (separate abstract). Approximately 600 mice were included in the study. Anesthetised sheep (n=8) received 9 doses (consistent with EMEA guidelines) of aerosolized pGM169/GL67A at monthly intervals. Similar assessments were made as for the mouse TS, in addition to lung function measurements and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) at intervals throughout the study. The amount (mg/kg) of pGM169/GL67A delivered to sheep approximately mimics the proposed human dose. Anesthetised controls (n=8) received air only. Results: All mice tolerated the treatment well. In the high dose group (~60x human dose) small increases in lung weight and circulating neutrophils were seen 2 days after the last dose, but not in the cohort sacrificed 14 days after the last dose. Histology showed scattered alveolar macrophages in the low and mid dose groups 2 weeks after administration of the last dose. In the high dose group multifocal alveolar foamy macrophage accumulations and occasional inflammation were noted. The presence of fat in macrophages was confirmed by Oil Red O staining. There was no evidence of structural remodelling. All other organs were unremarkable. Three months after administration, findings in the low dose were not different from baseline, but were still observed in the mid and high dose. All sheep tolerated treatment well. In contrast to mice, haematology 2 or 14 days after dosing did not show any treatment related effects. Neutrophils were transiently increased in BAL fluid 2 days after administration, but had returned to baseline after 15 days. Observed changes in lung function or gas transfer measurements were mild and not test item related. There were no test item related histological findings in any organ. Conclusions: All animals tolerated the treatment well. The transient and dose-related systemic inflammatory responses and drop in lung function observed in the single-dose phase 1 trial (separate abstract) were not replicated in non-CF sheep and non-CF mice only developed mild systemic inflammation at the highest dose (~60x human dose) possibly highlighting species-specific differences or an increased response to the lipid/DNA complexes in the inflamed human CF lung. Both TS support progression into a multi-dose CF gene therapy trial. Rationale: Until now, involvement of the upper airways and paranasal sinuses in CF did not receive much attention as only three decades ago the inherited disease led to premature death in preschool age. However, in computed tomography almost 100% of CF paranasal sinuses are pathologic and only 7% of CF patients did not reveal clinical or cytological signs of rhinosinusitis. Recent studies showed, that chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) impairs quality of life and overall health in CF to a much higher extent than expected. In this regard, the upper airways were detected as a site of primary and persistent pathogen colonization. Cross colonization between airway levels was proven, as we previously identified 96% of P. aeruginosa pairs from the upper and lower airways of CF patients as identical by genotype. Whereas conventional aerosols do not reach the paranasal sinuses the new method of sinonasal inhalation with vibrating aerosols (Pari Sinus™) was proven by in vitro and in vivo studies to deposit drugs in this segment. We present the first studies on sinonasal inhalation with the device in CF patients with CRS applying mucolytics (1.) or antibiotics (2.) . 1. In a DBPC-cross over study 23 CF patients inhaled dornase alfa and isotonic saline for each 28 days. After a wash-out period of 28 days they crossed over to the alternative treatment (each 2.5mL, once daily). 2. In a DBPC-parallel group pilot study 9 patients with chronic sinonasal P. aeruginosa colonization inhaled tobramycin 80mg per day (6) or isotonic saline (3) for 28 days. Results: Sinonasal inhalations of dornase alfa and tobramycin were well tolerated except in a few patients, who suffered self limiting nasal bleeding. 1. Sinonasal symptom scores (SNOT 20 GAV), the primary endpoint in the mucolytic study, improved significantly with verum, compared to placebo (p=0.019). Surprisingly pulmonary function also improved significantly with verum but not with isotonic saline (p=0.024). 2. The primary endpoint 'reduction of P. aeruginosa counts in nasal lavage' was reached more frequently in the verum group of the antibiotic trial (n.s.). Discussion: 1. The novel method of sinonasal inhalation of dornase alfa significantly reduced sinonasal symptoms in patients with CF. Additionally, a positive interaction between upper and lower airway segments was proven by the effects of sinonasal therapy on pulmonary function. 2. Sinonasal inhalation of tobramycin 80mg per day was well tolerated. The method appears promising for reduction of pathogens in chronically colonized patients. According to the results of our preceding studies upper airway assessment should be implicated in routine care to detect new P. aeruginosa colonization and in order to improve chances of Pseudomonas eradication. This could be effective by sinonasal inhalation of antibiotics but this approach as well as the overall sinonasal involvement in CF require further investigation. Background: The CFQ-R is a validated HRQOL measure for CF that contains both generic and CF-specific scales. The CFQ-R includes 12 domains: Physical Functioning (PF), Role Functioning (RF), Vitality (V), Emotional Functioning (EF), Social Functioning (SF), Body Image (BI), Eating Disturbances (ED), Treatment Burden (TB), Health Perceptions (HP), Respiratory Symptoms (RS), Digestive Symptoms (DS), and Weight (BW). AZLI significantly improved RS vs PBO, as has been reported previously, but the non-respiratory domains have not yet been explored. Results: A total of 268 subjects were treated three-times daily with either PBO (N = 122) or AZLI (N = 146). At day 28 of the PBO-controlled studies, statistically significant differences (p<0.01) in mean change from baseline between treatment groups were observed at day 28 for 7 of 12 domains: PF, V, EF, ED, HP, RF, and RS. RS and EF were associated with increased scores in the AZLI group, whereas significant AZLI-PBO differences in the other domains were largely based on stable domain scores with AZLI vs declining PBO scores. When evaluated over 18 months of open label AZLI use, mean change from baseline in domain scores varied as a function of AZLI treatment, with improvement at the end of AZLI treatment and worsening at the end of the off-AZLI periods. Notable responses to AZLI treatment were observed for RS and BW, with scores remaining above baseline at all visits during the 18 month study. V, HP, and DS were consistently above baseline values following AZLI and occasionally following off-periods. Other domains were less affected by treatment, with PF, RF, EF, SF, BI and TB trending lower through the study. PF, RF, V, HP, RS, and BW consistently increased during 28 day AZLI period and fell during each offperiod. Regardless of changes in magnitude, the directional changes in domain scores consistently increased during the 28 day AZLI period and declined during the off period in most domains. These trends and their consistency suggest that AZLI affects the patients' experience of CF, however the clinical meaningfulness is not clear because the minimal important difference has not been defined for non-RS domains. Conclusion: These results suggest that there were detectable benefits of a single treatment cycle of AZLI on CFQ-R domains other than RS. The effects observed after 28 days of treatment were persistent over an 18 month period of chronic intermittent AZLI. Acknowledgements Background: Cystic fibrosis arthropathy (CFA) remains among the least understood manifestations of CF. CFA is generally characterised by transient bouts of mono-or polyarthritis that are usually recurrent, often severe and occasionally debilitating. Currently there is little understanding of its aetiology, pathogenesis or sequelae. CFA has been hypothesised to be a reactive arthritis, a HLA-associated arthritis or even an enteropathic arthritis. We studied the simultaneous presence of fourteen cytokines in the serum of six patients (all female; age 22 -43 years) with a known diagnosis of CFA. Serum samples were taken during an acute flare and convalescence. CRP and an auto-antibody screen were also collected at the time of an acute flare. Serum samples were screened using Millipore (Billerica,MA) Luminex cytokine beads that assay Eotaxin, IL-1a, IL-1b, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-13, IL-17, MIP 1α, MIP 1β, TNFγ and TNFα. Results: IL-6, IL-8, MIP-1β and TNFα levels appear to be significantly elevated in selected patients with CFA during an acute flare in comparison with convalescent and normal CF controls. ILa, ILb, IL4, IL-5, MIP-1a were not detected. IL-10 and IL-13 were detected in Patient 3 acute and convalescent sera. See the Table for demographic data and results of auto-antibody screen. The raised pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the acute sera are consistent with the clinical status of the patients. They do not shed light on the immunopathology of CFA. Further studies are ongoing as biomarkers are urgently needed to aid the investigation, diagnosis and management of CFA. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common life-limiting recessive disease in the U.S. and Europe, and is due to mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. CF mutations, of which the most common is ∆F508-CFTR, cause a massive pro-inflammatory phenotype in the lung arising from profound expression of inflammatory genes, including interleukin-8 (IL-8). We have previously reported that IL-8 mRNA is stabilized in CF lung epithelial cells, and that IL-8 protein expression is concomitantly massively over-expressed. However, the mechanistic link between mutations in CFTR, and acquisition of the pro-inflammatory phenotype in the CF airway, has remained elusive. We have hypothesized that specific microRNAs might mediate this linkage. To identify the potential link, we have screened a miRNA library for differential expression in ∆F508-CFTR and WT-CFTR lung epithelial cell lines. Of the 22 differentially and significantly expressed miRNAs, we find that expression of miR-155 is more than 5-fold elevated in CF IB3-1 lung epithelial cells in culture, compared to control daughter IB3-1/S9 cells, repaired with WT-CFTR. Clinically, miR-155 is also highly expressed in lung epithelial cells, and circulating CF neutrophils biopsied from CF patients. Our data indicate that elevation in miR-155 expression is closely tied to failure of CFTR channel activity. We report here that high levels of miR-155 specifically reduce levels of SHIP1, thereby preventing Akt from being activated by the PI3K pathway. However, raising the level of SHIP1 in CF cells, either by an expression SHIP1 vector, or by an anti-sense antagomir-155, results in destabilization of IL-8 mRNA and reduced expression of IL-8 protein. Finally, we find that phospho-AKT levels are elevated in CF lung epithelial cells, and are specifically lowered by either antagomir-155, the antisense construct for miR-155, or elevated expression of SHIP1. We therefore suggest that elevated miR-155 contributes to the pro-inflammatory stabilization of IL-8 mRNA in CF lung epithelial cells, by lowering SHIP1 expression, and thereby activating the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. These data suggest that miR-155 may play an important role in the activation of IL-8 dependent inflammation in CF lung epithelial cells. The efficacy of antagomir-155 will thus be further analyzed in primary cells, both lung epithelial and circulating neutrophils, obtained from CF patients. Recent studies have shown that N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) retinamide (4-HPR) can modulate fatty acid levels, including PUFAs, in the plasma of CF mice. The exact mechanism by which 4-HPR exerts its effect is still largely unknown. In this study, we hypothesize that 4-HPR corrects fatty acid imbalance in a cultured bronchial CF cell model through modulation of desaturation and/or elongation of fatty acids. Methods: Cell culture experiments were carried out in 16HBEo-human bronchial epithelial cells stably transfected with the first 131 nucleotides of human CFTR expressing either sense (CFTR wild-type) or antisense (CFTR-negative) partial CFTR transcripts. Cells were treated with varying concentrations of 4-HPR for 24 hours, and then fatty acids were extracted and measured by gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS). Results: In 4-HPR-treated cells, LA was increased and AA decreased to wild-type levels in CFTR cells, indicative of decreased LA to AA metabolism. In contrast, the n-3 pathway showed increased linolenic acid (LNA; 18:3n-3), but higher eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA; 20:5n-3) levels and DHA levels were unchanged. This pattern may have resulted from suppressed LNA to EPA metabolism, and increased retroconversion of DHA to EPA. The degree of these changes is greater in CFTR-negative compared with wild-type cells. Conclusions: These data indicate that 4-HPR can at least partially reverse the fatty acid imbalance in CFTR-negative cultured bronchial epithelial cells. The mechanism by which 4-HPR exerts this effect is under investigation. Acknowledgements Previous studies demonstrated that the flavanoid quercetin enhances CFTR dependent ion transport in surface localized F508del in vitro. We hypothesized that the perfusion of quercetin during nasal potential difference (NPD) testing would improve detection of F508del CFTR at the cell surface and thus better detect CFTR activity of rescued protein following corrector therapies. We performed a three center open-label study to determine if perfusion of quercetin activates mutant CFTR including surface localized F508del. A secondary goal was to assess safety of quercetin perfusion during the NPD procedure and to determine whether quercetin stimulated Clconductance is associated with CFTR expression. Among 49 subjects screened, 32 F508del homozygotes and 14 with surface mutations were included in the analysis. One subject had an excluded mutation and 2 others withdrew consent. The mean age was 27 years in F508del homozygotes and 31 years in surface mutation subjects. Females were 38% and 43% of the study group, respectively. Mean FEV1 was 70.3% predicted and 62.6% predicted, respectively. The change in NPD with quercetin (20 mcg/mL) perfusion following activation of chloride conductance with chloride-free plus isoproterenol in subjects homozygous for F508del was +0.3 ± 0.4 mV (p=ns within subject), and +0.2 ± 0.3 mV in subjects with surface mutations (p=ns). There was no difference in quercetin between genotype groups. Traditional chloride conductances (chloride-free plus isoproterenol) were in the expected range: +1.4 ± 0.4 mV and +1.8 ± 1.3 mV, respectively. Of the F508 homozygotes, 3 (9.3%) had a change in chloride free + isoproterenol + quercetin of ≤ -5mV, reflective of residual CFTR function outside of the normal CF range. CFTR mRNA levels of nasal curettage specimen determined by real-time RT-PCR were 6.1% and 4.3% (compared to Calu-3 cell standard) in F508del and surface mutation subjects respectively. mRNA levels were correlated with CFTR activity following quercetin perfusion (r=-0.36, p<0.05). Quercetin was well tolerated upon nasal potential difference perfusion. One adverse event occurred and was unrelated to quercetin. The mean change in total nasal symptom score (4 point scale) following quercetin was +0.23 and +0.71, and the mean change in nasal examination rating (4 point scale) was +0.44 and +0.14 in F508del and surface mutation subjects, respectively. No changes were statistically significant. The results indicate that quercetin perfusion is safe by nasal perfusion, but does not strongly activate mutant CFTR in F508del homozygotes or individuals with surface mutations without prior CFTR correction, although residual CFTR activity was identified in 9% of F508del homozygotes. Change in PD induced by quercetin perfusion was linearly related to CFTR mRNA expression, suggesting potential for quercetin to augment CFTR detection following protein rescue or other interventions that increase expression. Supported by CFF and NIH. Cigarette smoke extract (CSE) inhibits CFTR activity in human bronchial epithelial cell cultures, engendering reduced CFTR-mediated anion transport. Cigarette smoke exposure is also associated with reduced CFTR activity in healthy smokers in vivo, suggesting an acquired form of CFTR dysfunction. VX-770, a CFTR potentiator, rescues Cltransport in CF but has not been evaluated in acquired forms of CFTR dysfunction. We examined the effects of CSE exposure on mucus transport and tested whether a CFTR potentiator can ameliorate effects in vitro, while demonstrating in vivo effects of smoking on COPD airways. WT human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) were exposed to CSE (2%) for 24 h and mounted in Ussing chambers to measure transepithelial Clconductance. Nasal potential difference (NPD) studies measured in vivo Clconductance with KCl calomel electrodes and 3% agar catheters. Lower airway potential difference (LAPD) was performed similarly and under conscious sedation. HBE data showed that 2% CSE exposure for 24 h reduced CFTR-dependent cAMP-mediated current in HBEs (65% of control, P<0.05) without altering transepithelial resistance. Western blots confirmed reduced CFTR, as did relative mRNA expression by real-time RT-PCR (0.66 CSE vs. 1.07 control, P<0.01). CSE reduced MCT measured by particle tracking (0.17 µm/sec vs. 2.4 control, P<0.05) and was associated with increased mucus expression by histologic analysis. NPD-derived Clconductance was reduced in healthy smokers (-8.0 mV, P<0.005, n=14) and in COPD smokers (-6.3 mV, P<0.005, n=12) but was normal in former smokers (-17.6 mV, n=11) compared to healthy controls (-18.0 mV, n=14). CFTR-dependent Clconductance measured by LAPD was also reduced in healthy smokers (-6.8 mV vs. -10.8 mV, P<0.05, n=6/group). VX-770 augmented WT CFTR-dependent current in HBE (4.4 µA/cm 2 VX-770 vs. -0.1 control, P<0.001). In CSEexposed cells, VX-770 rescued Isc, increasing CFTR activity from 72.7% of WT following CSE treatment to 185.8% of WT with VX-770 (P<0.05). VX-770 also augmented forskolin (100 nM)-dependent Isc in human trachea explants (4.7 µA/cm 2 VX-770 vs. 1.4 control, P<0.05), including those from smokers (10.1 µA/cm 2 vs. 3.3, P<0.05). Augmented ion transport also increased ASL depth (11.7 µm CSE+VX-770 vs. 8.0 µm CSE, P<0.005) and MCT (0.085 mm/min vs. 0.009, P<0.005). Cigarette smoke exposure is causally related to reduced MCT in COPD by inhibiting CFTR activity and enhancing mucus expression. CFTR potentiators may represent a therapeutic strategy to address acquired CFTR dysfunction in smoking-related lung disease. Examination of intestinal ion transport characteristics in human rectal biopsies represents a flexible means to monitor CFTR function ex vivo, and may provide a means to quantitate restored or partial CFTR function in patient derived tissues. We investigated the capacity of real time tissue conductance monitoring during intestinal current measurements (ICM) to quantitate CFTR activity in non-CF controls compared with CF patients possessing two severe CFTR mutations. Sixty-three subjects (45 non-CF controls, 15 CF adults) were enrolled in a prospective trial across three study sites using common equipment and SOPs. Data from 44 controls and 13 CF subjects were suitable for analysis. Common voltage clamps, tissue mounts (Physiologic Instruments, San Diego, CA), buffer conditions, and tissue dissection were used. Biopsies were warmed to 37°C and gassed with 95%O 2 /5%CO 2 in RPMI 1640 media + 25 mM HCO 3 . Tissues were voltage clamped to continuously monitor short circuit current and resistance. Tissue was treated with 10 µM indomethacin (20 min) followed by amiloride (100 µM, 15 min). CFTR currents were stimulated with 10 µM forskolin + 100 µM IBMX (20 minutes), followed by carbachol (100 µM, serosal) to activate basolateral K + channels and further potentiate CFTR-dependent Isc. Serosal bumetanide (100 µM) was then added to block Cltransport. The change in conductance during the different reagent conditions were compared between the CF and non-CF subjects, and data was analyzed as percent of wildtype CFTR conductance observed in the CF patients (12 F508del/F508del, 1 E60X/621 G-T). Tissue slope conductance for the entire tracing for the CF patients (percent of wildtype) was 21.42% (±36.5, SD). The slope conductance following indomethacin and amiloride was 14.67% (±30.8), 11.24% (±27.7) following stimulation with forskolin/IBMX, and 11.62% (±39.7) following treatment with the Na/K/2Cl tranporter blocker bumetanide. The largest separation in slope conductance was seen following CCh stimulation, with CF tissues achieving only 3.24% (±47.4) of wtCFTR controls. The %wtCFTR conductance coefficient was calculated as the ratio of CF to non-CF responses for each aligned time point. We used a linear mixed model to assess changes in %wtCFTR over time overall and during post-Amil, -Bum, -CCh and -cAMP. The overall %wtCFTR conductance decreased over time by 0.0042±0.0023%/sec (p=0.0410). We observed significant rates of change in %wtCFTR conductance post-Bum (0.0127±0.0019%/sec), post-CCh (0.0391±0.0081%/sec), and post-cAMP (-0.0207±0.0015%/sec); all p<0.0001. The %wtCFTR conductance was fairly constant post-Amil. The results indicate that monitoring transepithelial conductance after stimulation of CFTR (apical membrane) and K channels (basolateral membrane) by the combination of forskolin/IBMX and CCh in the presence of amiloride and indomethacin provided the greatest mean separation between CF and non-CF controls, and related analysis may represent a valuable electrophysiologic tool to assess and quantify partial function or restoration of mutant CFTR function in patient tissues ex vivo. Supported by CFFT. To date, all previous studies of PCT have excluded patients with CF; therefore, no normative data exists in this group. Moreover, a marker of acute bacterial infection in CF patients experiencing exacerbation would be useful. The purpose of this study was to determine the baseline PCT levels in patients with CF. Moreover; we sought to determine the ability of PCT to serve as a biomarker of acute pulmonary exacerbation. Methods: We performed a single center, prospective, observational study of PCT in patients with CF. Demographic and clinical information was obtained in conjunction with PCT levels at baseline (n=32). A subset of patients with pulmonary exacerbation (n=7) requiring hospitalization had PCT levels measured daily throughout the hospitalization. Baseline PCT levels in patients with CF were compared to historical controls. Comparisons of baseline PCT and exacerbated levels were made. Results: The mean PCT in non-exacerbated cystic fibrosis patients was 0.057±0.012ng/mL (range 0.011 to 0.118ng/mL). The serum PCT concentration in healthy persons is below 0.05 ng/mL; this is not different from the mean PCT in non-exacerbated CF patients. The mean PCT in patients with exacerbation was 0.078 ±0.028 ng/mL on day 1. PCT value trended down within the first 24hrs. There was a 61.2 ± 13.2% decrease in PCT after initiation of antibiotics in hospital compared to baseline. Although PCT was increased during exacerbations, values never reached the recommended values needed to initiate antibiotics >0.2ng/mL. On the basis of serum procalcitonin concentrations during COPD exacerbation and lower respiratory tract infection, use of antibiotics was discouraged when PCT was between 0.1 and 0.25 mcg/L and encouraged with PCT >0.25 mcg/L. Conclusions: Our finding demonstrated low baseline PCT levels in people with CF during routine office visits; comparable to baseline PCT levels in general populations in the absence of bacterial infections. During exacerbation, PCT levels doubled but did not reach the recommended value to initiate antibiotic therapy in septic patients. Elevated level of PCT is an independent predictor of vesicoureteral reflux in children with a febrile urinary tract infection. Furthermore, PCT allows early assessment of pancreatic infections and stratification of patients at risk to develop major complications if PCT is above 3.5 mcg/L. Based on our results, pulmonary exacerbations of CF may not generally be "systemic enough" to drive an increase in PCT. However, as there was universally a decrease in PCT levels in association with antibiotic therapy with concomitant clinical improvement, this biomarker may provide a signal in improvement in pulmonary exacerbations in patients with cystic fibrosis. Further study is required to determine the time course of PCT in association with treatment of pulmonary exacerbation. Mortality in cystic fibrosis is most commonly a result of persistent bacterial infection in the lungs due to reduced mucociliary clearance. The bacteria found in chronically infected CF lungs have been observed to have undergone genetic changes over time that lead to adaptation to the lung environment. Here we present a model of chronic infection using a mucus simulant and mice overexpressing the β subunit of the epithelial sodium channel scnn1 (βENaC) that produces spontaneous mutation of Pseudomonas. In this model chronic, stable airways-specific infections can be established and maintained for up to three weeks. The bacterial load in this model does not significantly change over the course of the experiment and leads to a chronic mucopurulent obstructive inflammatory response in the airways characterized by neutrophil and lymphocyte infiltration, as well as mucus overproduction leading to obstruction of the airways. Bacteria cultured from these mice are observed to form phenotypically distinct colonies. These distinct colony morphologies persist through passage, indicating that the changes are genetic in nature. Among the colony morphologies found was a mucoid phenotype, which was then found to possess a mutation in the mucA repressor, a common mutation leading to mucoidy in bacteria found in CF lungs, and associated with exacerbation in CF patients. To address the role mucoidy and other phenotypes play in CF exacerbations, various Pseudomonas mutants, including the mucoid mucA22 strain, were instilled in C57/Black6 mice with mucus simulant at a dose that is completely cleared within 14 days when control strain PAK Pseudomonas is used. However, mucA22 infected animals fail to clear infection and become rapidly moribund. Furthermore, Pseudomonas possessing mutations that promote pathways responsible for biofilm formation are capable of establishing chronic infections in wild type mice using mucus simulant. Most CF infections are clonal, meaning that the infecting population is composed of the progeny of a single isolate. In preliminary studies, we found that infecting P. aeruginosa strains evolve to produce genetically diverse (but clonally-related) subpopulations during the course of infection. Furthermore, these evolved subpopulations differ in traits known to affect host inflammatory and injury responses. The mechanisms that drive and sustain genetic diversity within the airway are poorly understood. One hypothesis is that the presence of heterogeneous conditions within the CF lung creates unique selective pressures in different anatomic regions. This effect, combined with the geographic isolation of bacteria caused by their encasement in viscous mucus, could generate and maintain diversity. To test this hypothesis, we obtained secretions from the major lobar divisions of explanted CF lungs using a technique that minimized contamination from adjacent anatomic areas. Several hundred P. aeruginosa isolates from each major lobar segment were subjected to a battery of phenotypic tests, which when used in combination, could identify distinct subpopulations. DNA fingerprinting studies confirmed that these subpopulations were the progeny of an ancestral strain. These experiments showed that unique P. aeruginosa subpopulations inhabit specific anatomic regions of the CF lung. In some cases, different regions contained mixtures of isolates that differed in composition. In other cases, certain regions were dominated by a single P. aeruginosa subpopulation that differed from the bacteria present elsewhere. Future studies defining the functional characteristics of P. aerugi-nosa subpopulations and the environmental conditions that differ in lung segments, could increase our understanding of the mechanisms driving the evolution of P. aeruginosa diversity during CF infections. Recent work indicates that during infection, P. aeruginosa evolves to produce a diverse population within CF airways. However, the effect of this infecting population diversity on disease manifestations is not well understood. Experiments in laboratory and natural ecosystems show that diverse populations thrive over a greater range of conditions as compared to homogeneous populations. In addition, diverse populations can undergo changes in the relative abundance of subpopulations, and these changes could affect population functioning. Here we tested two hypotheses about the effect of P. aeruginosa population diversity on CF infections. First, we hypothesized that increases in the relative abundance of specific subpopulations may sustain the infection during periods of antibiotic treatment. Second, we hypothesized that changes in subpopulation abundance occur during pulmonary exacerbations and may contribute to these events. To test these hypotheses we collected sputum samples from CF patients when they were clinically "well," at the onset of an exacerbation, and during antibiotic therapy. Several hundred P. aeruginosa isolates from each clinical period were subjected to a battery of phenotypic tests that measured heritable traits. These experiments showed that each CF patient harbored a diverse population of P. aeruginosa isolates evolved from a single unique ancestral strain. Furthermore we found marked changes in P. aeruginosa subpopulation prevalence during transitions from the "well" state, to exacerbation onset, and during antibiotic treatment. To better understand the functional effects of these infecting population changes, we compared the proteomes of isolates from dominant subpopulations when patients were "well," in exacerbation, and under treatment using reverse phase LC/MS/MS. This analysis identified significant functional changes in the bacterial population. Studies of additional patients may reveal bacterial mechanisms that could explain the pathogenesis of exacerbations, and mechanisms that lead to treatment resistance. Infection with bacteria belonging to the Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC) in cystic fibrosis (CF) is marked by an unpredictable clinical course that can range from an almost asymptomatic colonisation to a rapidly fatal necrotizing pneumonia known as 'cepacia syndrome.' A distinguishing feature of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in CF is initial infection with nonmucoid isolates, which upon establishment of chronic infection, subsequently convert to a mucoid phenotype through the elaboration of copious quantities of exopolysaccharide (EPS). Conversion to the mucoid phenotype in P. aeruginosa is generally considered to be associated with in an increased decline in health. BCC are also capable of EPS production, although until recently the prevalence of the ability to produce EPS in clinical isolates of BCC bacteria was not fully appreciated. We have shown, through a retrospective analysis of isolates from patients attending the Vancouver clinics, that although EPS production is common in clinical isolates of BCC bacteria, the more apparently virulent isolates were nonmucoid. When an EPS phenotype switch occurred in a chronic infection it was usu-ally from mucoid to nonmucoid. Importantly, there was also an inverse relationship between EPS production and both lung function decline and survival. Furthermore, transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of a clonal pair of mucoid/nonmucoid isolates revealed an overexpression of factors known to be associated with virulence in the nonmucoid isolate. Therefore, our working hypothesis is that in BCC infections the mucoid phenotype is associated with chronic and persistent infections, whereas the nonmucoid phenotype is more aggressive and results in a worse outcome for CF patients infected with BCC. Here we present data on the contribution of the mucoid phenotype to virulence in human cellular models of infection. We also show there is no apparent link between serum resistance and the mucoid phenotype. Background: Chronic Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection is a risk factor for pulmonary exacerbation in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients but its impact on subsequent clinical outcomes is unknown. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of chronic S. maltophilia infection and associated antimicrobial therapy on the recovery of forced expiratory lung volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) following pulmonary exacerbation. Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study of patients with CF followed at the Hospital for Sick Children and St Michael's Hospital from 1997-2008. The primary outcome was the difference in FEV 1 % predicted from baseline to follow up after a pulmonary exacerbation. Secondary outcomes for the effect of antimicrobial therapy included time to subsequent exacerbation. Results: There were 1,667 pulmonary exacerbations in 440 CF patients. Patients with chronic S. maltophilia infection did not recover their baseline FEV 1 following 31% of exacerbations and had an overall mean FEV 1 decline of 1.84% predicted after exacerbation. Older (p=0.02), female (p=0.02) patients with lower BMI z score (p=0.002) and B. cepacia complex infection (p=0.005), but not chronic S. maltophilia infection (p=0.86), had a greater decrease in follow up FEV 1 % pred compared to baseline (Table 1 ). The number of days of antibiotic therapy against S. maltophilia during a pulmonary exacerbation was not associated with a significant difference in the FEV 1 recovery (p=0.69) or with a longer time to subsequent pulmonary exacerbation (p=0.56). Conclusions: Although CF patients experience significant decline in lung function following exacerbation, chronic S. maltophilia infection and associated antimicrobial therapy does not affect subsequent lung function recovery. Biofilm populations are known to harbor great diversity, but the importance of this diversity is not fully understood. For example, during chronic infections Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) commonly diversifies into genetically distinct colony morphologies from a single, founding clone. To study this process we experimentally evolved three populations founded by strain PA14 under conditions favoring a regular cycle of biofilm formation and dispersal (Poltak, S.R. and Cooper, V.S., ISME Journal 2010) for 90 days. Each population evolved extensive ecological diversity, likely in response to the lifestyle switch from planktonic to biofilm growth and reflecting distinct strategies within the biofilm. Heritable colony phenotypes commonly associated with CF infections and biofilm formation (small colony variants) arose in each population; such mutants also associated with changes in the regulation of virulence factors, autolysis, and auto-aggregative behavior. Moreover, this diversity is critical for fitness of the biofilm community: subtraction of single variants reduced fitness of the diverse community, and the loss of certain, rare variants caused large reductions in fitness and biofilm productivity. These results suggest that the synergy of diverse biofilms depends on a balance of ecotypes. Diversity appears to be maintained by variation in the temporal dynamic of biofilm assembly, whereby early founders in the 24h growth cycle create substrates for attachment of later types. To probe the molecular basis of evolved biofilm diversity, we manipulated concentrations of the molecule cyclic-di-GMP that underlies the switch from planktonic to biofilm life at elevated concentrations. A plasmid encoding an inducible phosphodiesterase (PDE) to degrade cyclic-di-GMP was added to each of seven different members of this community. The fitness of mixed populations containing a single ecotype expressing the PDE, lacking an ecotype, or unaltered, was then quantified. Although some individual mutants were more fit when expressing the PDE, community fitness always declined, and usually to the extent observed when mutants were removed entirely. This result demonstrates that cyclic-di-GMP contributes to the fitness of populations as well as individuals and suggests a novel testable mechanism for how mutants interact in biofilms. In summary, synergistic benefits of diversity may evolve in PA biofilms owing to niche partitioning that is partly defined by varying levels of cyclic-di-GMP. Certain rare variants appear to disproportionately influence biofilm fitness and hence targeting these types may substantially reduce biofilm resilience. This experimental model can be used to rapidly and consistently generate diverse biofilm communities that can elucidate mechanisms involved in the adaptation of pathogens to a chronic biofilm lifestyle. Supported Background: Serologic analysis to detect antibodies in the blood against Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) could potentially serve as an adjunct to oropharyngeal culture in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) to detect early infection and response to therapy. Aim: Evaluate role of Pa serology to predict Pa eradication and evaluate response to therapy. Methods: A Pa antigen panel was chosen based on an international collaboration between Pa serology researchers. Serum samples were taken from the EPIC-001 clinical trial whose patient population had recent Pa infection at baseline. This panel included the Mediagnost® panel (alkaline protease, elastase, exotoxin A), and the "Wisconsin" panel (PopB+ExoS, PA01 whole-cell lysate, exotoxin A). There were 304 subjects aged 1-12 years with at least one positive culture. All subjects had initial eradication therapy and a maximum of four serum samples collected at weeks 0, 22, 46 and 70. A total of 975 samples across 303 participants had complete serology results and corresponding culture. Seropositivity for a panel of antigens was defined as at least one or more of the antigens being positive. Using a "modified Leeds criterion," participants were classified by whether at the end of the study they were "free" from further Pa positive cultures, had less than half of all cultures Pa positive (intermittent), or had more than half of all cultures Pa positive (chronic). Results: Serology antigen titers were significantly higher for all six antigens for samples corresponding to culture positive visits than culture negative visits. ROC analysis indicates that all six antigens perform similarly, with area under the ROC curve (AUC) ranging from 0.66 to 0.70. Respiratory culture showed an initial sharp drop in Pa positivity whereas seropositivity was slower to decline. In this study population with recent infection at baseline, Pa serology offered little benefit over culture to detect early Pa infection. However, both serologic panels demonstrated high NPV's (0.89 for both panels with titer cutpoint of 100), suggesting utility as part of routine surveillance to exclude infection. Chronically infected participants had considerably higher log 10 titer values than patients classified as "free" of infection (AUC ~ 0.80), indicating that persistence of high titers correlates with chronic Pa infection. Pa serology was also useful to predict risk of Pa recurrence in participants. If the Mediagnost panel of antigens was utilized and culture positivity was followed from week 10 onwards, seropositivity at baseline was found to increase the risk of Pa recurrence (H.R=1.68, 95% C.I =[0.96, 2.95], p-value=0.07). Conclusion: In the EPIC clinical study, positive initial serology identified patients at higher risk for re-infection with Pa after eradication and serial serology was helpful in identifying individuals who failed to clear Pa infection. Further evaluation to better define Pa serology's role to detect early Pa infection is underway utilizing the EPIC observational study population. It is unknown what predisposes certain CF patients to clear the organism without treatment or to remain culture positive while asymptomatic or with progression to NTM disease. The objective of this study was to retrospectively identify characteristics of those with positive NTM cultures at a large CF center. We hypothesized that the majority of CF patients with a first positive NTM culture do not progress to NTM disease and that increased frequency of positive NTM cultures is associated with worse clinical course. Methods: Clinical data was obtained from database review of the CF program at the University of Colorado from 2000 to 2010. For those with a first positive NTM respiratory culture after 2000 and at least one year of follow-up data available, demographic information, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV 1 ), and microbiologic data were collected. For subanalysis, subjects were placed into three phenotypic groups based on NTM culture patterns: Group 1: One positive NTM culture only. Group 2: Multiple positive NTM cultures without evidence of disease. Group 3: Persistently positive NTM cultures requiring treatment for NTM disease. Results: Forty-four pediatric and 31 adult patients with CF were identified with at least one positive respiratory NTM culture. The average age of first positive culture was 14 years in children and 41 years in adults. The average FEV 1 % predicted at time of first positive culture was significantly higher in children than in adults (87% versus 73%, p<0.01). The majority of subjects (57%) had cultures positive for M. avium complex (MAC), 16% had M. abscessus and 23% had more than one NTM type isolated (typically MAC and M. abscessus). More than 70% of pediatric subjects were coinfected with methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Aspergillus, and more than 60% were co-infected with mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa, H. influenzae and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. Analysis of change in FEV 1 around the first positive NTM culture revealed that among pediatric patients, Group 3 had a statistically significant lower FEV 1 % predicted at time of first positive culture (78% versus 96% and 94%, p<0.05) as well as an accelerated rate of decline compared to Groups 1 and 2 (-6%/yr versus -0.7%/yr and +0.7%/yr, p<0.001) for 3 years of follow-up. Adults had similar FEV 1 % predicted at time of first positive culture and similar trends following first positive culture for all Groups. Conclusions: Over 50% of our CF patients with at least one positive NTM culture did not progress to NTM disease requiring treatment. The majority of positive NTM cultures were MAC in our Colorado population. Pediatric subjects with persistent positive cultures and NTM disease experience an accelerated rate of decline in FEV1 in comparison to those with one or multiple positive cultures without NTM disease. Background: Aspergilllus fumigatus (AF) is frequently found in the airways of children with cystic fibrosis (CF) and recent evidence suggests this may be clinically important. (Chest 2006; 130:222, Ped Pulm 2007; 42:785) Aims: In this retrospective study, we hypothesised that children with CF who have AF seen on direct staining of bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) will have a worse clinical state than both those who only culture AF (positive controls) and those with no isolation (negative controls). Primary outcome was FEV1; secondary outcomes included BMI, IgE, IV antibiotics, steroids and antifungals. Methodology: A list of all paediatric patients with AF seen on direct staining of their BAL was obtained and two control groups identified from records of direct staining examination of BAL samples. Both control groups had negative direct staining for AF and the first control group had AF isolated on MC&S and the second had no AF present. Patients were identified and data was then collected on these three groups. Data was collected from electronic notes and electronic laboratory results system and then collated and analysed. Results: The mean age of the patient group was 110 months (range 4-179) and 103 months (range 3-211) and 100 months (range in the positive and negative control groups respectively. There were less males in the patient group (n=7, 27%) compared with the positive and negative control groups (n=14, 44% and n=22, 49%). In the year prior to bronchoscopy (FOB), the groups were similar in terms of body mass index (BMI) centile, IV antibiotics received and FEV1. Two years post-FOB, the groups with AF in their BAL, on cytology or microscopy, had a lower FEV1 despite receiving more IV antibiotics and antifungal therapy ( Table 1) . The group without AF had an overall increase in FEV1 whilst the controls groups had an overall decrease. The AF negative group had greater BMI centiles in the follow-up period with BMI centile equal or greater than 50% for 37%, 31% and 57% of patient group, positive and negative controls respectively. The results add to the growing evidence that AF in the airways of children with CF is associated with a worse clinical state, whether identified on direct smear or culture. Results: One hundred pts (AZLI: 48, placebo: 52) were randomized and treated. B. cenocepacia (43%) and B. multivorans (33%) were the two most common species, followed by B. gladioli (8%), and B. dolosa (6%). Emergence of other pathogens was similar or greater in placebo subjects compared to AZLI pts: 45%, 39% and 39% of all pts were co-infected at least once during the 6 month study with PA, MRSA and MSSA, respectively. Suppressive effects on BURK sputum density were not observed in either study group. Both groups received substantial amounts of additional antibiotics for respiratory indications. Changes from baseline in the BURK and PA MIC 50 of 5 antibiotics were similar between groups except for the BURK MIC 50 of aztreonam which increased 4 fold from baseline at the end of study in AZLI subjects (Table) . Conclusions: Continuous AZLI therapy did not reduce the BURK sputum density, nor did it lead to emergence of respiratory pathogens. Continuous AZLI did not appear to compromise the susceptibility of the most active agents, meropenem and ceftazidime, and except for BURK susceptibility to aztreonam in AZLI subjects, changes in microbial susceptibility to other agents was similar to placebo pts. Supported by Gilead Sciences. Background: Respiratory tract colonization is an important determinant of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Several studies have linked respiratory colonization of methicillin-resistant Staphyloc-cous aureus (MRSA) with lower lung function and worse prognosis. Recent research also suggests an increase in the prevalence of MRSA in CF patients, and this CF center has observed a steady rise in MRSA colonization rates. An MRSA eradication protocol was initiated among pediatric CF patients at our center approximately three years ago. We have evaluated the effectiveness of this protocol by examining clearance rate achieved and comparing this rate with those obtained by similar studies. Method: A retrospective chart review was performed and data was collected on 55 pediatric CF patients at this center who had positive MRSA culture results. The data spanned from 1997-2009. The patients who had been colonized with MRSA were arranged into two categories for analysis: patients not treated for MRSA colonization and patients treated using our MRSA decolonization protocol. The decolonization protocol included treatment with oral and topical anti-staphylococcal antibiotics for 7 days, hexochlorophene or bleach washes, and replacement of disposable respiratory care equipment at the beginning and end of the treatment period. Cultures of nose, groin, and airway or sputum were obtained after completion of the protocol and re-treatment initiated if still positive for MRSA. Patients were considered to be cleared of MRSA if they had 2 negative airway cultures and 2 negative nasal/groin surveillance cultures with no cultures positive for MRSA over a 6 month time period following the last isolation of MRSA. The clearance rate was obtained for each group. Group differences for treatment protocol were determined using Fisher's Exact test for categorical data and a two-group T-test for continuous data. Results: Significantly more patients who received the treatment protocol were cleared (53%) of MRSA than patients who were not treated (20%) (p=0.014). There were no statistical differences in age, lung function, BMI, Pseudomonas colonization, or use of pulmozyme, azithromycin, or hypertonic saline between patients who successfully cleared MRSA using the treatment protocol and patients who failed to clear with treatment. Conclusion: This study shows that the decolonization protocol studied is effective in clearing pediatric CF patients of MRSA. Given the association between persistent MRSA colonization and increased rate of decline in lung function, eradication of MRSA using a protocol such as the one studied here may be an important clinical strategy in promoting long-term lung health. Background: Twenty percent of CF patients (pts) admitted for antibiotic IV treatment develop an immediate adverse reaction to the medication(s), and it may sometimes be difficult evaluating if a proper desensitisation protocol may be needed before using the drug again. Desensitisation is a complex, time-consuming and high-risk procedure, and it is ideally performed in an intensive care unit. Besides, complications potentially connected with desensitisation may be more difficult to manage in patients with severe lung disease, as is often the case in CF. We performed skin tests in order to differentiate IgE-mediated reactions and possibly non IgE-mediated reactions. In the latter group the antibiotic which had given the reaction was gradually reintroduced according to a protocol which did not implicate desensitisation. Material and Methods: We skin tested 20 CF patients (M/F 7/13, mean age at reaction 29 yrs, min 10 max 43) with a history of immediate reactions to one (8 pts) or more (12 pts) antibiotics. Reactions included: acute dyspnea (8 pts), erythema (8 pts), hives (9 pts), angioedema (5 pts), anaphylaxis (2 pts), rush (4 pts), perioral paresthesias (2 pts), pruritus (2 pts). Skin tests were performed at least one month after the acute event. Patients whose skin tests were negative for the antibiotic they had reacted to were candidates for a Graded Challenge (GC) procedure. This involves the administration of consecutive and increasing IV doses of the antibiotic, spaced 30 minutes one from the other. The doses administered were: meropenem 6 mg, 30 mg, 150 mg, 600 mg, 1200 mg, piperacillin-tazobactam 6 mg, 30 mg, 150 mg, 600 mg, 2000 mg, 4000 mg, ceftazidime 5 mg, 50 mg, 150 mg, 300 mg, 500 mg, and tobramycin 0.2 mg, 2 mg, 20 mg, 200 mg. Fourteen patients resulted negative to the antibiotic panel used, 5 positive to at least one of the antibiotics, in 1 the test results were inconclusive. GC was suggested for 24 antibiotics (18 pts), and it was performed in 14 cases (13 pts). Eleven GCs (11 pts) were well tolerated, and followed by a full antibiotic course without any complications; 3 GCs (3 pts) were poorly tolerated, 2 resulting in immediate reactions (throat tickle in 1 pt, bronchospasm in 1 pt), 1 in a delayed reaction (erythema 12 days after the beginning of normal course of the antibiotic). None of these reactions were particularly severe. Conclusions: In CF pts with a history of reactions to antibiotics, skin tests should be performed, and, if negative, they should be followed by GC. Full doses may be administered if GC is well tolerated. Desensitisation should be used in a subset of cases with proven allergic reactions, when skin tests are positive and no alternative antibiotics are avaiable. Chronic pulmonary disease is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Increasing evidence has demonstrated that CF airways harbor a diversity of species and that airway community composition is highly correlated with pulmonary health status. However, the dynamics of airway microbiome and host immune response during distinct clinical states (e.g. pulmonary stability and acute exacerbation) remain unknown. To explore microbiota dynamics and host response, we examined temporal sputum samples collected from four CF patients experiencing distinct pulmonary states. Bacterial communities were profiled using a phylogenetic microarray (16S rRNA PhyloChip), and for two of the patients we performed parallel high-resolution metaproteomic analyses of their samples (n = 10). Our results demonstrate subtle shifts in gross bacterial community composition upon onset of acute pulmonary exacerbation, followed by dramatic changes upon antibiotic treatment, and an eventual return towards a baseline community 1-3 months post-treatment with concomitant lung function recovery. Ordination analysis of the metaproteomic profiles of 2 patients revealed distinct clustering of protein expression profiles from stable or exacerbation samples, irrespective of patient or antibiotic administration. This suggests that a number of distinct and definable host responses, including S100, myleoperoxidase and defensin proteins are differentially expressed in stable and exacerbation states. This research establishes an effective global strategy to investigate the dynamic relationship between airway microbiota and host response in CF patients. Background: Pulmonary exacerbations are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in CF. The CF airway contains complex polymicrobial communities that likely contribute to pulmonary exacerbation; however, little is known about the airway microbiome during treatment of a pulmonary exacerbation. Objective: We sought to determine the CF airway microbiome present during pulmonary exacerbation, and the relationship between airway bacte-rial communities, biomarkers of lung inflammation and injury, and lung function. Methods: Expectorated sputum was collected at three time points during hospitalization for a pulmonary exacerbation: admission, mid-treatment and discharge. Spirometry was performed at all time points. Sputum was analyzed with standard CF culture, parallel pyrosequencing and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) for a panel of aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Biomarkers of inflammation (IL-8 and neutrophil elastase, NE) and lung injury (sputum desmosine) were measured. Results: Twenty-four CF subjects (median age 17 years, range 6-37) were enrolled, and 57 sputum samples collected. P. aeruginosa (67%) and S. aureus (33%) were the most frequently cultured bacteria on admission. Parallel pyrosequencing of sputum detected 165 bacterial genera, although most genera (80%) were present in low abundance (<1%). On admission, Shannon Diversity was positively associated with FEV 1 (p=0.01) and negatively associated with sputum IL-8 (p<0.01) and NE (p<0.01). At least one CF pathogen was identified in all admission samples by sequencing, but was not the dominant organism in 38% of admission samples. Admission sputum bacterial communities dominated by Pseudomonas were less diverse than those dominated by Staphylococcus or anaerobic bacteria (Prevotella, Veillonella, Porphyromonas and Leptotrichia). Quantity and relative abundance of P. aeruginosa by qPCR and sequencing were positively associated with IL-8 (p<0.01) and NE (p < 0.01), whereas relative abundance of Prevotella and Veillonella were negatively associated with sputum inflammatory markers. Sixteen subjects provided sputum on both admission and discharge. Bacterial communities in these subjects did not change significantly, although P. aeruginosa quantities decreased by qPCR (p<0.01) and trended down by sequencing (p=0.12). Conclusions: Lower bacterial diversity is associated with decreased pulmonary function and increased airway inflammation at the time of CF pulmonary exacerbation. A substantial number of patients have airway bacterial communities dominated by anaerobic bacteria. Bacterial communities do not change significantly during treatment of pulmonary exacerbation. Supported by: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (LAGUNA06A and ZEMANI08A0) and the National Institutes of Health (1U01HL081335-01 and M01RR00069). Background: Molecular, culture-independent techniques have greatly enhanced the characterization of the microbial communities in the lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), and have helped to identify new potential pathogens. We hypothesized that specific changes in microbial diversity, evenness, and species abundance would correlate with changes in clinical status. Methods: Respiratory samples (swab, sputum, and bronchoalveolar lavage) from CF patients ages 0 to 20 years are being collected prospectively at every clinical encounter. Data on the current clinical status including FEV1, clinical findings, and use of chronic medications such as azithromycin, inhaled tobramycin, aztreonam, pulmozyme and acute antibiotic treatment are documented. We use two different small subunit rDNAbased, culture-independent techniques (Sanger sequencing and 454 pyrosequencing) to carefully characterize, and cross-validate the microbial diversity in samples. Every sample is also compared to duplicate culture data obtained from our clinical microbiology laboratory. Results: To date, 150 patients have been enrolled in the study with 150 initial isolates and over 500 repeat specimens. We expect to enroll 160 patients who will be followed for 3 years with a projected total of >900 specimens. We have completed 16S sequencing for 90 samples. Preliminary data suggests that exacerbations are associated with only modest changes in microbial diversity with microbial communities remaining relatively stable. Our results underscore the importance of anaerobic bacteria in cystic fibrosis. Greater than 92% of specimens are positive for organisms from the genus Prevotella, and greater than 89% are positive for Veillonella. By comparison, only approximately 40%-50% are positive for Pseudomonas or Staphylococcus species. These data suggest that anaerobes are abundant and important members of the CF respiratory microbiota. These findings have fundamentally altered understanding of CF lung disease. However, sampling lung secretions in living subjects requires that expectorated specimens or collection devices pass through the oropharynx, which harbors extensive microbial diversity. Thus, contamination could confound results. Here we directly sampled CF lungs removed at the time of transplantation and used non-culture based analysis of lung secretions to compare throat and sputum samples obtained several hours earlier. To date we have sampled ten lungs, seven having paired sputum and/or throat swab samples. We found that CF lungs with advanced disease contained relatively homogenous populations of typical CF pathogens, whereas upper airway specimens from the same patients showed markedly higher levels of microbial diversity. Furthermore, sputum samples exhibited significant day-today variation in microbial composition, consistent with varying levels of oropharyngeal contamination. These findings highlight the importance of sampling procedures for microbiome studies, and suggest that new methods are needed to validate data when DNA-based methods are used on specimens prone to contamination. In addition to the well-known facultative anaerobic bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, or Burkholderia cepacia complex bacteria, also a variety of obligate anaerobes are found in sputum of children and adults with CF. The derivation of the bacteria remains unclear. Here, we investigated if periodontal pockets may present a potential source for obligate anaerobes, if the bacteria can already be found in young CF children, and if the bacteria in the lung and the oral cavity are related. Twenty-six CF adults, 18 CF children, 30 healthy adults, and 3 healthy children participated. Dental pockets were explored using sterile paper tips. Bacteria in sputum and/or dental pocket smears were identified using the Crystal® (Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany), the Vitek® (Bio-Mérieux) and the Rapid AnaII® (remel, Lenexa, KS, USA) identification systems. Antibiotic susceptibility was investigated using e-tests (AB Biodisk, Solna, Sweden). In dental pockets of all CF adults and all CF children (the youngest 18 months of age) at least one obligate anaerobic species was found. In 17 out of the 24 CF adults producing sputum (70.8%), 22 pairs of identical anaerobes (S. saccharolyticus, Peptostreptococcus prevotii, Clostridium butyricum, Veillonella spp.) were detected in both sputum and dental pocket smears. In 5 out of the 6 CF children (aged 5 to 16 years) with sputum production (83.3%), S. saccharolyticus was found in both compartments. In the dental pockets of the control group (age 8 to 37 years), the same obligate anaerobes were identified as in CF dental pockets and sputum. Highest percentages of resistant anaerobes were found in both CF patients and controls for ceftazidime (67.6 vs. 62.3%), lowest for clindamycin (8.4 vs. 1.9%). Obligate anaerobes represent the standard colonization of dental pockets in CF patients and healthy controls already early in life. Identical obligate anaerobic species in sputum and periodontal pockets of CF patients suggest a correlation between both compartments. Possibly, periodontal pockets may represent a bacterial reservoir for CF lung infection. Introduction: Respiratory viruses are common in children with CF and have been associated with increased respiratory symptoms, lung function decline and possible acquisition of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. To date, no large prospective study of respiratory viruses in adults with CF has been performed and the frequency of respiratory virus infection during clinical stability is unknown. We began a year-long, prospective observational study in December 2010 to determine the incidence and clinical impact of respiratory virus infection in adults with CF. Here we report data from the first 4 months of the study. Methods: One hundred adults with CF were recruited between December 2010 and March 2011. Patients were seen every two months and additionally at the onset of new respiratory symptoms. At each visit a sputum sample, nose-and throat-swab were taken and analysed with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays to test for six respiratory viruses: adenovirus, influenza, metapneumovirus, parainfluenza, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and rhinovirus. Pulmonary exacerbation was defined according to Fuchs et al 1994. Upper respiratory tract infection (URTI) symptoms were recorded using a previously described 27-point score (Johnston et al 1993) . Spirometry, white cell count and C-reactive protein (CRP) were measured at each visit. Results: Mean (SD) characteristics at baseline were: age 30 (8.7) years; BMI 21.8 (2.9) kg/m 2 and FEV1 59 (22) % predicted. Forty-eight percent were male, 60% F508del homozygous and 73% chronically infected with P. aeruginosa. There were 88% who received the 2010/11 influenza vaccine. A total of 202 study visits took place of which 78 (38.6%) met the criteria for pulmonary exacerbation. Overall, 23.8% of visits were positive for a respiratory virus; 37.2% of exacerbation visits were positive for a virus compared with 15.3% of non-exacerbation visits (p=0.0006). Virus-positive exacerbations had a significantly higher URTI score (11.9 vs 7.4; p=0.002) and a trend to higher CRP levels (44.3 vs 25.1; p=0.07). There was no significant difference in pulmonary exacerbation score, fall in FEV1 or white cell count between virus-positive and virus-negative exacerbations. For non-exacerbation visits, identification of a respiratory virus was not associated with a significant difference in any of these variables. The most common virus identified in this cohort was rhinovirus (66.7%) followed by metapneumovirus (12.5%), influenza A (10.4%), influenza B (8.3%), RSV (4.2%) and adenovirus (4.2%). Dual viral infection was detected in 3 cases (6.3% of positive visits). Sputum had the highest overall positivity rate of the three sampling methods at 17.3% compared with 12.0% for nose swabs and 8.9% for throat swabs. Conclusions: Respiratory viruses are identified more frequently at pulmonary exacerbation than during clinical stability amongst adults with CF. Respiratory viruses are associated with a spectrum of clinical presentations, from asymptomatic patients through to severe pulmonary exacerbations. Completion of this year-long observational study will reveal the overall incidence of respiratory virus infections and provide greater insight into their clinical impact. Background: Chronic sinus disease is a common condition in cystic fibrosis (CF) and symptomatic patients may require functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) for treatment. At Nationwide Children's Hospital CF Center, flexible bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is frequently performed during general anesthesia for FESS to obtain surveillance cultures from the lower respiratory tract. However, the clinical usefulness of obtaining these BAL cultures is unknown. Methods: A retrospective chart review was performed on all CF patients who underwent combined FESS and BAL procedures between January 2009 and October 2010. All cultures including bacterial, fungal, and acid fast bacillus (AFB) obtained from BAL and from sinus aspiration were collected. The BAL and sinus aspiration culture results were compared to all sputum and oropharyngeal (OP) cultures obtained from the year prior to FESS/BAL. Clinical records following FESS/BAL were evaluated to determine if BAL culture results subsequently altered clinical management. Results: A total of 77 patients underwent FESS and BAL during the study time period. The mean patient age was 12.5 years (range 2 to 29) with mean FEV1 86% of predicted (range 33 to 128%). Patients averaged 6.5 (range 1 to 13) sputum or OP cultures in the year prior to surgery. Bronchoscopy and BAL during FESS was well-tolerated by all patients. BAL was performed in a single lobe 62% of the time, with the right middle lobe being the most frequent location (68% of all single lobe lavages). BAL bacterial cultures identified a new, previously undetected bacterial species in 15 of 77 patients (19.5%). These results led to an immediate change in antibiotic treatment in two patients, and five received altered antibiotic regimens during subsequent respiratory illnesses. BAL fungal cultures identified new, previously undetected fungal species in 32 of 77 patients (42%). Eight of these patients were subsequently started on antifungal therapies. BAL cultures for AFB were positive in two patients, both of whom had prior growth on prior sputum samples. Sinus aspiration cultures identified new, previously undetected bacterial species in 16 of 77 patients (20.8%) and new, previously undetected fungal species in 13 of 77 patients (16.9%). Conclusions: Surveillance BAL during FESS was well-tolerated and frequently identified new bacterial and fungal species which had not been previously detected by sputum or OP cultures. Furthermore, BAL cultures yielded new microbial findings more frequently than sinus aspiration cultures. The identification of new bacterial species by BAL resulted in a change in antibacterial treatment in nearly half of cases, while the identification of new fungi resulted in the initiation of anti-fungal treatment in 25% of cases. This data supports the use of BAL during FESS as a means of surveillance for CF airway pathogens. A prospective, randomized study comparing BAL/FESS to the use of standard surveillance with sputum or OP cultures is warranted to further determine the clinical benefits of this procedure. Introduction: Recent microbiological surveillance using molecular typing (genotyping) has provided compelling evidence for P. aeruginosa cross-infection at many cystic fibrosis (CF) centres around the world. The transmissible strains responsible for this cross-infection pose an increased risk for acquisition of infection for patients currently free of P. aeruginosa. As transmissible strains are often resistant to multiple antibiotics they may also be more difficult to eradicate, at present there is a paucity of evidence regarding this. The objective of this study was to assess the success rate of eradication for transmissible strains of P. aeruginosa. Methods: At our unit all new isolates of P. aeruginosa are genotyped. We retrospectively reviewed all cases of new acquisition of P. aeruginosa between January 2000 and January 2011 and identified those involving a transmissible strain. Results: Six patients were found to have acquired a transmissible strain as their first isolate of P. aeruginosa; 4 were identified as the Manchester strain and 2 as the Liverpool Epidemic strain. The median age at acquisition was 30.5 years. The median forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) at acquisition was 2.8 (range 0.55-2.95) litres and the median forced vital capacity (FVC) was 3.5 (range 0.9-3.95) litres. All isolates had a nonmucoid phenotype and exhibited in-vitro resistance to one or more antipseudomonal antibiotic. Five patients acquired P. aeruginosa following an in-patient admission, suggesting cross-infection as the source of the isolate. These all occurred prior to the full infection control measured being introduced at our unit in 2004. The source of one patient's infection is unknown as this occurred in 2009 and there had been no recent hospital admissions or contact with other CF patients. Two of the patients were pregnant at the time of isolation. Despite aggressive treatment with a combination of intravenous, nebulised and oral antibiotics, only one of the 6 patients (17%) had the transmissible strain of P. aeruginosa successfully eradicated. Conclusions: The low rate of eradication success for transmissible strains of P. aeruginosa is in contrast to that for sporadic strains which is around 80%. This implies that multi-resistant transmissible strains of P. aeruginosa present an increased risk to patients with CF through both the increased risk of acquisition and the subsequent increased progression to chronic infection secondary to eradication failure. Prevention can only be achieved by the implementation of infection control measures and the success of these measures should be judged by continued microbiological surveillance. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a well known genetic disorder that significantly decreases life expectancy. Patients become chronically infected with bacteria which are major contributors to lung tissue destruction, bronchiectasis and decrease in lung function. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is one of the most clinically relevant chronic colonizing pathogens found in the lungs of CF patients. Biofilms have been identified as an important step in the progression of chronic diseases and Pseudomonas has been shown to form biofilms within the lungs of CF patients. Biofilms are a group of bacteria that grow in a community and are encased in a self-produced polymeric matrix. The matrix serves to protect the bacteria from environmental stresses including host immune defenses and therapeutic modalities. It is very important to understand biofilm structure in order to develop better methods to prevent bacterial infection as well as to develop novel therapeutics for the treatment of CF. There has been much research to date to identify components of biofilm matrices that may be targets for future therapies and potential vaccines. Recent work highlights extracellular DNA (eDNA) as a key component common to many pathogenic biofilms. The DNABII family of proteins is known to bind to DNA and one of these proteins, IHF, has been shown to exist extracellularly. We hypothesize that the binding of IHF to the eDNA within the bacterial biofilm might provide structural stability to the biofilm matrix present within the lungs of patients with CF and thereby provide a potential target for future therapies. To that end, we first wanted to determine whether IHF was present in solids recovered from sputum of CF patients. We enrolled 24 patients in the study and obtained informed consent to obtain an additional sample beyond their regularly collected sputum clinic sample. Their initial sample was sent to the microbiology lab for culture and sensitivity. The second sample was transported to our lab for immediate study. Each sample was frozen in OTC embedding medium and stored. The frozen samples were then sectioned and stained for IHF using rabbit anti-IHF antibody. Of the 22 samples ana-lyzed to date, 18/24 (75%) were culture positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 20/22 (91%) were positive for IHF staining. Data obtained in this proof of concept study support further investigation of IHF as a potential therapeutic target for patients with CF. In vitro studies conducted in our laboratory have shown that antibodies directed against IHF can debulk biofilms and even work synergistically with treatment modalities such as dornase alfa (Pulmozyme) and traditional antibiotics. Collectively these observations suggest the possible therapeutic potential of anti-IHF in the treatment of CF. This work was funded by discretionary funds to LOB and SDG. Purpose: Evidence has shown that once-daily dosing of tobramycin in pediatric cystic fibrosis (CF) patients is equally efficacious and no more toxic than multiple-daily dosing regimens. Therefore, many institutions have incorporated once-daily tobramycin (ODT) into standard practice for the pediatric CF population. At Texas Children's Hospital (TCH), pharmacists manage aminoglycoside pharmacokinetics for the CF population. For years, the standard of care at TCH was to utilize conventional aminoglycoside therapy (CAT), or every eight hour dosing. Our conventional protocol resulted in difficult therapeutic drug monitoring as evidenced by frequent dose changes and numerous blood draws for serum aminoglycoside (AG) concentrations. Therefore, a pharmacist-managed ODT protocol was developed with the hypothesis that it would reduce the number of dose changes and decrease the time from therapy initiation to the first documented therapeutic peak concentration. Methods: Pediatric CF patients who received ODT at TCH were matched one-to-one with their own CAT during a previous admission at TCH. Inclusion criteria were: diagnosis of CF; treatment with ODT between October 2010 and March 2011; age greater than 5 years; creatinine clearance greater than 60 mL/min/1.73m 2 ; and previous admission with CAT. Data was collected via a retrospective review of electronic medical records for both ODT and CAT groups and included: duration of treatment, serum creatinine, number of dose changes, number of serum AG samples processed, time of the first therapeutic peak concentration. Continuous variables were analyzed using a student's t-test; nominal data was analyzed using a Fisher's exact test. Results: Twenty-five treatment courses of ODT administered to 21 patients with CF were compared to 25 treatment courses with CAT. Due to the study design, the age (years) at ODT treatment was greater than that of CAT (13.1±4.7, 11.9±4.9, p<0.001). When comparing ODT to CAT, the number of treatment days (11±5.8, 11.9±5.8, p=0.59), baseline creatinine clearance (170±34, 163±33 mL/min/1.73m 2 , p=0.3), and change in serum creatinine from baseline (0.02±0.12, 0.03±0.12 mg/dL, p=0.59) were similar. When comparing ODT to CAT, ODT decreased the number of dose changes required per treatment course (0.5±0.5, 2.5±1.6, p<0.001), decreased the number of AG concentrations ordered per treatment course (4.8±1.8, 8.8±4.4, p<0 .001), increased the percentage of patients who achieved a therapeutic peak with first dosing regimen (64, 12, p<0.001), and reduced the time (hours) from therapy initiation to the first documented therapeutic peak concentration (13±22, 98.6±58.7, p<0.001). Of note, four patients in the CAT group never achieved a therapeutic peak concentration during the entire treatment course (mean treatment duration 9 days) as compared to one patient in the ODT group (treatment duration two days). Conclusion: Implementation of a pharmacist-managed ODT protocol in CF patients reduced the number of dose changes needed, decreased the number of AG concentrations required, and shortened the time to a therapeutic peak concentration when compared to CAT without compromising renal function. (1, 2) . Such data would provide a context for corresponding data from CF children. Objectives: In a cohort of healthy children, to estimate the prevalence of upper airway colonization with P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, and H. influenzae and describe the distribution of serum Pa antibody titers. Methods: Healthy children ≤ 18 years undergoing a clinical procedure requiring anesthesia and intravenous line placement were recruited. An OP swab and blood sample were collected from each participant. Swabs were cultured for P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, and H. influenzae. Serum IgG antibody titers were evaluated against a range of Pa antigens by quantitative ELISA with a commercial kit (alkaline protease, elastase, exotoxin A: Mediagnost, Tubingen, Germany) and an in-house assay (exotoxin S/Pop B, whole cell lysate: University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI). Results: A total of 100 children were enrolled. Mean (SD) age was 8.6 (5.5) years. Ninety-five OP swabs were collected; 48 OP cultures grew S. aureus (including 4 MRSA), 47 grew H. influenzae, and 1 grew P. aeruginosa (not mutually exclusive). Seventy-five cultures grew at least one of these organisms. Ninety-four serum samples were collected. Antibodies at titers above the limit of quantitation were detected among 13 (14%) for alkaline protease, 34 (36%) for elastase, 58 (61%) for exoA, 44 (46%) for exoS/popB and 81 (85%) for whole cell lysate. No children had positive (>1:500) serology for alkaline protease or elastase, while 2 had + exoA titers (>1:500), 2 had + exoS/popB titers (>1:100) and 21 had + whole cell lysate titers (>1:100). Conclusion: Isolation of Pa from the oropharynx is rare in healthy children, while isolation of S. aureus and H. influenzae is common. The Pa serology results provide control values for corresponding results in CF patients, particularly those who are Pa negative by respiratory culture. Current cut points for + titers for alkaline protease, elastase, exoA and exoS/popB clearly distinguish healthy controls from Pa + CF patients. However, 22% of healthy controls had + Pa whole cell lysate titers, suggesting the possible need for refinement in the definition of a + titer for Pa whole cell lysate in patients with CF. Supported by the US CF Foundation. Chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infections in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality. P. aeruginosa forms airway biofilms in CF patients and produces a battery of exoproducts and virulence factors in a population-density dependent manner, a process called quorum sensing. In P. aeruginosa, quorum sensing is mediated in part by the transcription factor LasR. Although LasR is required to activate expression of a number of virulence functions in P. aeruginosa, mutations of LasR can be frequent among P. aeruginosa isolated from CF patients with chronic infection. Such mutations are not generally seen in other acute infections. There are several possible explanations for why LasR mutants evolve in the CF lung environment. For instance, some, but not all, LasR-mutant strains have been shown to grow more effectively in high-nitrate conditions or with phenylalanine as the sole source of carbon and energy. These LasR mutant strains may also be "social cheaters" that benefit from the secreted and excreted products made by wildtype bacteria without incurring the metabolic cost of their production. We wondered why a small percentage of the genes controlled by LasR coded for cellular enzymes needed for growth on transported solutes. For such carbon and energy sources the functional benefit is restricted to the cell in which the enzymes are produced. We hypothesized that one consequence of maintaining a few such activities under LasR control would be to restrain the emergence of LasR mutants in P. aeruginosa populations. We focused our investigations on the LasR-dependent nuh gene product, a cellular enzyme required for growth on adenosine. Consistent with previous reports, we found that growth of P. aeruginosa on sodium caseinate as the sole carbon and energy source requires LasR-quorum-sensing-controlled exoprotease production, and that LasR mutants emerge during prolonged growth on caseinate. The social cheaters reach a stable equilibrium of about 25-40% of the population under the conditions of our experiments. LasR mutants did not emerge when we included adenosine as an additional carbon and energy source. As a control we substituted glucose (glucose metabolism is not dependent on quorum sensing) for adenosine and the emergence of social cheaters was not restrained. When a stable population of LasR mutants and wildtype bacteria growing on caseinate alone was transferred to a combination of caseinate and adenosine we observed a strong selection against the LasR mutants, which fell rapidly to undetectable levels. Together, these results demonstrate that LasR regulation of transported-solute catabolism can prevent the emergence of LasR mutant social cheaters. That is, there is a genetic basis for the capability of the group to eliminate encroaching social cheaters. These laboratory findings about P. aeruginosa ecology further our understanding of the factors that may encourage or discourage the emergence of LasR mutations in P. aeruginosa-infected CF patients. Background: The occurrence of highly prevalent clones of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in patients with cystic fibrosis has been widely reported. Besides patient-to-patient transmission, increased persistence is another possible factor in the success of such clones. We aimed to study whether the recently discovered Dutch highly prevalent clone was associated with increased persistence over a nine-year period. Furthermore, we aimed to study whether infection with this clone was associated with adverse clinical outcome. Methods: We performed a follow-up study of a 2001 study on P. aeruginosa transmission during a CF summer camp. Participants still alive in 2010 were invited to send sputum or cough swab samples. Isolates from 2001 and 2010 were typed using multi locus variable-number tandem-repeat analysis (MLVA) and clinical data from 2001-2010 were collected. The risk of lung transplantation or death was investigated using a Cox proportional hazard model and lung function decline was investigated using a linear mixed model analysis. Results: Of the 80 participants in 2001, 66 patients were alive in 2010 and 41 participated in the study. P. aeruginosa isolates belonging to the clonal complex 27 (CC27) were dominant and were found in 18 patients (44%) in 2001 and in 20 patients (49%) in 2010. Persistence of CC27 isolates was significantly higher than of other isolates (83% and 48% respectively, p=0.018). CC27 was not associated with an increased risk of lung transplantation or death (adjusted HR 1.01, 95% CI 0.41 -2.49), and there was no significant difference in lung function decline when comparing patients persistently infected with CC27 and other patients. Conclusions: This study shows that the Dutch highly prevalent P. aeruginosa clone displays increased persistence over a nine-year period when compared to other sporadic clones. However, infection with this clone is not associated with adverse clinical outcome. Funding: This study was supported by the Dutch CF Foundation. Background: The use of inhaled tobramycin has become the mainstay of treatment in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients chronically infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The follow-up time of tobramycin inhalation trials is limited and thus the effect of inhaled tobramycin on aminoglycoside resistance after long-term treatment is not clear. We aimed to study the effect of tobramycin inhalation on aminoglycoside resistant P. aeruginosa in a cohort of CF patients who were followed for up to eight years. Methods: A retrospective cohort study including patients from the Utrecht CF centre was performed between 2002 and 2009. Patients were included if they had P. aeruginosa positive sputum cultures during the observation period and if they started inhaled tobramycin after the first P. aeruginosa positive culture. A Cox proportional hazards model was used to study whether tobramycin inhalation was an independent risk factor for the development of aminoglycoside resistant P. aeruginosa. A linear mixed model was used to study the difference in lung function decline before and after occurrence of resistance. Results: In total, 210 patients met the inclusion criteria. Aminoglycoside resistant P. aeruginosa was cultured in 50 (24%) patients. In the Cox proportional hazards analysis tobramycin inhalation showed an independent association with aminoglycoside resistance (adjusted HR 3.38 [95% CI 1.78 -6.16]). There was no significant difference in lung function decline before and after the resistant P. aeruginosa was cultured. Conclusions: The long-term use of inhaled tobramycin in CF patients is an independent risk factor for aminoglycoside resistant P. aeruginosa. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients develop chronic bacterial infections and Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most common bacterial isolate that persists in the CF lung contributing to declining lung function. The inability of CF patients to resolve airway infections clearly points to dysregulated innate immune defenses. Since iron is essential for bacterial growth but not freely available, bacteria secrete iron-chelating small molecules known as siderophores. As a host defense strategy, mammals have evolved the ability to limit bacterial growth by producing antibacterial iron-depleting innate immune defense proteins such as neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) that specifically scavenge bacterial siderophores, therefore preventing bacteria from establishing infection. P. aeruginosa produces fluorescent siderophores (pyoverdines) found to be important for biofilm development and bacterial virulence. It is not known if P. aeruginosa strains persisting in CF lungs evade NGAL recognition. The aim of this work is to determine if pyoverdine binds to the antibacterial protein NGAL. Methods: The binding of siderophores, pyoverdine from P. aeruginosa and enterobactin from E.coli, to the recombinant NGAL protein was determined using the tryptophan fluorescence quenching method. Results: We found that pyoverdine did not bind to NGAL either in apo form or when complexed with iron. We used enterobactin as a control, and as expected, enterobactin bound to NGAL causing strong tryptophan quenching. The data indicate that the major siderophore of P. aeruginosa, pyoverdine, evades NGAL recognition therefore dysregulating host ironlimiting innate defenses. We then investigated whether pyoverdine modulates other innate immune defenses such as respiratory burst. Upon phagocytosis of invading pathogen, respiratory burst is triggered as a defense mechanism that leads to reactive oxygen species (ROS) release which is important for the oxidative killing of invading pathogens. We observed that pyoverdine decreased ROS release when added at the peak of the respiratory burst in THP-1 cells primed with P. aeruginosa LPS (10 pmol/mL) and detected using the chemiluminescent probe lucigenin. The data suggest that pyoverdine dampens the respiratory burst possibly by scavenging released ROS to spare the oxidative killing of invading P. aeruginosa. Taken together, our data suggest that pyoverdine is a stealth siderophore and a virulence factor that helps P. aeruginosa evade the ROS mediated oxidative killing. Conclusions: P. aeruginosa persists in the CF host by evading both the iron-limiting innate defenses and the oxidative killing by macrophages. Cohen, T.S. 1 ; Ernst, R.K. 2 ; Prince, A. 1 1. Columbia University, New York, NY, USA; 2. University of Maryland-Baltimore, Baltimore, MD, USA Bacterial activation of the type I interferon (IFN) pathway has been demonstrated to be important in the clearance of mucosal pathogens. In Gram negative infections the LPS/TLR4/TRIF signaling pathway is a major inducer of the type I IFN cascade. The immunogenicity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa changes over the course of colonization of the CF lung due to alterations in virulence factor expression, therefore we hypothesize that alterations in LPS structure reduces bacterial activation of the type I IFN cascade. Our hypothesis was tested by stimulating (4 hours) human immune (primary dendritic cells (DC) and THP-1) cells and epithelial (BEAS-2B) with P. aeruginosa strains isolated from single CF patients at early (3 or 5 months) and late (14 years) stages of colonization. Analysis of the strains by random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD) confirmed that early and late isolates shared a common genetic background. Activation of NFκB (IL-8) and IFN (IFNβ) signaling was measured by RT-PCR in DCs and THP-1 immune cells, or luciferase reporter and ELISA in the BEAS-2B epithelial cells. Stimulation with the early isolate induced higher levels of NFκB signaling activation in DC (9.81 and 3.81 fold of unstimulated) and THP-1 (5.26 and 2.62 fold of unstimulated) immune cells compared with late isolates, however similar induction levels were observed in BEAS-2B (6.10 and 7.89 fold of unstimulated) cells. NFκB signaling in the BEAS-2B was confirmed by ELISA analysis of IL-8 in the supernatant of cells stimulated with early and late isolates (113.9 and 215.6 pg/mL). Induction of IFN signaling by the early isolate was also higher than that induced by the late isolate in DC (10.10 and 3.86 fold to unstimulated) and THP-1 (4.98 and 1.85 fold to unstimulated) cells. Interestingly, IFN signaling induction by the early isolate was also higher in the epithelial BEAS-2B line compared to levels induced by the late isolate (14.14 and 8 fold to unstimulated). This data demonstrates that during colonization P. aeruginosa loses its immunostimulatory capacity in a host cell type and pathway dependent manner. To support our hypothesis that alterations to LPS are responsible for the reduction in P. aeruginosa immunostimulatory capacity we stimulated murine nasal epithelial cells with the different P. aeruginosa isolates. Unlike human TLR4, activation of murine TLR4 is unaffected by alterations in LPS structure. We observed no difference in NFκB (21.73 and 22.71 fold to unstimulated) or IFN (228.1 and 278.2 fold to unstimulated) signaling by RT-PCR in murine epithelial cells. Therefore we concluded that modifications in P. aeruginosa virulence factors, most likely LPS, reduce the immunogenicity of the organism resulting in reduced activation of the type I IFN pathway, a potential mechanism by which the pathogen evades clearance by the host. Jin, L.; Novak, K.J. Department of Pharmacy, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA Purpose: The use of voriconazole has become more prevalent over the years to treat cystic fibrosis (CF) patients with allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) failing itraconazole therapy or with invasive fungal lung disease. However, voriconazole pharmacokinetic data are lacking in CF patients, and little is known on the optimal dosage of voriconazole in pediatric patients. A small group of CF patients have undergone voriconazole therapeutic drug monitoring over the past 6 years at our institution. The objective of this study is to retrospectively assess whether standard doses of intravenous and oral voriconazole yield therapeutic concentrations in CF patients. Methods: Electronic medical records and laboratory data were used to identify CF patients who underwent voriconazole therapeutic drug monitoring since January 1, 2004. Patients younger than 2 years of age and who did not have a definitive diagnosis of CF were excluded from this study. The following data were collected: patient age, gender, ethnicity, results from fungal cultures, liver function tests, IgE levels, indication for voriconazole use, dose of voriconazole administered, duration of voriconazole therapy, and serum level of voriconazole. Concomitant use of medications known to be contraindicated with voriconazole use, reported adverse events associated with use of voriconazole, and overall clinical outcome of patients were also evaluated in this study. Doses of voriconazole used in CF patients included in this study were compared to standard doses of voriconazole. Voriconazole therapeutic levels were also compared to current therapeutic goals in treating ABPA and other invasive fungal lung infections. Results: The study included 15 patients (mean age 22.3 ± 9.6, range 4-36, years) receiving 21 treatment courses. The most common indication for voriconazole use was for treatment of positive respiratory fungal cultures in post-lung transplant patients (11). Other indications included prophylaxis for fungal infections in post-lung transplant patients (2), treatment of positive respiratory fungal cultures in non-transplant CF patients (3), empiric coverage of respiratory fungal infections in non-transplant CF patients (3), and treatment of ABPA (2) . The mean voriconazole dose used was 207.9 ± 76.7 mg (4.8 ± 2.3 mg/kg), and the mean serum voriconazole level obtained was 1.9 ± 1.7 mg/L. The mean voriconazole dose used in this population was near the standard flat voriconazole dose in adult patients but at a higher mg/kg than in an average adult population. Only 57% of patients in this study achieved a therapeutic serum voriconazole level of ≥ 1 mg/L. Two patients had LFT increases ≥ 3 times the upper normal limit. Three patients were on medications contraindicated with concurrent voriconazole therapy; however, no toxicity was observed. Conclusions: Serum voriconazole concentrations were unpredictable in our CF population. Patients with CF may require higher than standard voriconazole doses to yield therapeutic voriconazole levels, and therapeutic drug monitoring may be a useful tool for individualized dosing in CF patients. The Intermountain CF Pediatric Center utilizes ticarcillin-clavulanate 400 mg/kg/day div q 6 hours, (max 24 grams/day). This dosing strategy is higher than the FDA approved package labeling. We simulated in model the microbiological efficacy of this dosing regimen. The primary objective of this study was to use PK/PD models to estimate the likelihood of achieving bacteriostatic and bactericidal effects against a range of P. aeruginosa minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values using a higher than FDA approved dose of ticarcillin-clavulanate. Methods: This was a population-based PK/PD modeling study of pediatric CF patients admitted from 01/01/05 to 12/1/09 who received the dosing regimen for ≥7 days. Population PK and PD models were used to estimate PK and PD parameters. Serum ticarcilin concentration levels were modeled using published PK parameters. A 10,000 patient Monte Carlo simulation was performed to estimate the target time in which free drug concentrations exceeded the MIC of the infecting organism. The two PK/PD MIC breakpoints used included ≥30% for bacteriostasis, and ≥50% for bactericidal effects of ticarcillin-clavulanate at higher than FDA approved doses. Results: A total of 127 patients met inclusion criteria. Predicted intermittent ticarcillin peak concentrations were 288±93.4 mg/L. The model predicted the probability of target attainment (PTA) of MICs for P. aeruginosa with a near-maximal bactericidal PK-PD MIC breakpoint of 16 mcg/mL, and a bacteriostasis PK-PD MIC breakpoint of 32 mcg/mL. (See Table. ) Conclusions: In our simulation, higher than FDA approved doses of ticarcillin-clavulanate are effective in achieving bactericidal effects among pseudomonal isolates with MICs below 16 mcg/mL. Bacteriostatic and bactericidal effects were not frequently achieved among P. aeruginosa isolates with MICs above 32 mcg/mL. Objectives: In a 6 month randomized, active comparator trial of three 28-day on/off courses of AZLI (Cayston®, Gilead Sciences) vs. tobramycin inhalation solution (TIS) in 268 CF patients (pts) with chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) infection, AZLI was superior to TIS at 28 days and over 3 treatment courses in lung function (FEV1) improvements. A single-arm extension phase (EXT) of this study evaluated the safety and efficacy of AZLI for 3 additional 28-day on/off treatment cycles (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00757237). Methods: CF pts ≥6 yrs old with chronic PA infection, baseline FEV1 ≤75% predicted, and stable pulmonary disease were enrolled in the randomized, active comparator phase of the trial (RAND). EXT was open to European pts completing ≥1 course of AZLI or TIS during RAND. Pts were off antibiotics for 14-28 days prior to starting RAND. All pts in EXT received AZLI 75 mg TID via the Pari Investigational eFlow® Nebulizer System for 3 treatment courses (28 days on/28 days off). Mean % changes from RAND baseline in FEV1 % predicted at the end of each of the 3 EXT courses were calculated using a mixed-model repeated measures analysis. Results: Of 174 European pts in RAND, 133 (76%) enrolled in EXT; 65 TIS-treated pts in RAND switched to AZLI in EXT (TIS/AZLI); 68 AZLItreated pts in RAND continued AZLI in EXT (AZLI/AZLI). Mean % changes from RAND baseline in FEV1 % predicted: At RAND week 20 after 3 treatment courses: AZLI: +7.2% vs. TIS: -2.4% At the end of each of the 3 AZLI treatment courses in EXT: TIS/AZLI: +3.9, +3.4 and +1.0; AZLI/AZLI: +5.6, +3.7 and +4.2. Body weight remained above baseline for AZLI/AZLI pts through all 6 AZLI treatment courses. TIS/AZLI pts had weight loss during RAND while on TIS, but gained and maintained weight above baseline values after switching to AZLI in EXT. No new safety issues were noted. Conclusions: CF pts treated with AZLI demonstrated FEV1 improvements after each of 6 treatment courses. CF pts showed no FEV1 improvements after 3 courses of TIS but had favorable lung function responses after switching to AZLI in EXT. In addition, AZLI but not TIS treatment was associated with weight gain above baseline. Supported by Gilead Sciences. (Bb) is a gram-negative coccobacillus typically found in domestic animals such as dogs, horses and cats. It occurs as a commensal or pathogenic organism. In dogs, it causes an infectious tracheobronchitis commonly known as "kennel cough." Despite frequent contact with domestic animals, it is rarely reported in humans and typically occurs in immunocompromised hosts. The role of this organism as a pathogen or colonizer is poorly understood, in part due to a challenging and labor intensive process to isolate it. We describe isolation of Bb on twenty-three occasions in seven children with cystic fibrosis (CF). Our experience suggests that Bb may play a potential pathogenic role in CF. Methods: A retrospective, descriptive study was conducted of our center's CF patient population between 1991 and 2011. The CF center currently cares for approximately 130 active patients per year. Patients were included if they had Bb isolated on one or more occasion. Patient charts were reviewed for demographics, CF diagnosis, lung function, nutritional status and exposure to domestic animals. In addition, data on previous or concurrent airway cultures, organism sensitivities, signs and symptoms of pulmonary exacerbations, hospitalizations, treatment, and response to therapy one year before and after first Bb isolation were reviewed. Results: Seven patients (female N=5) between ages 1-20 with CF had Bb isolated in airway cultures on 23 occasions. Of these, four patients grew Bb once and three on multiple occasions. All patients had one copy of the ∆F508 mutation and four were homozygous ∆F508. On one occasion, Bb was initially identified as an organism called CDC-IVc-2, which is a short to medium rod that closely resembles Bb. Six patients experienced increased cough within one month prior to first isolation, and four had additional pulmonary symptoms. Four patients required hospitalization. All patients isolated methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) either historically or concurrently with Bb. None of our patients were colonized with Pseudomonas aeruginosa mucoid although two patients isolated Pseudomonas aeruginosa matte intermittently. All patients had documented contact with domestic animals. Two patients were exposed to animals with a veterinarian-diagnosed case of "kennel cough." Conclusion: As successful targeted therapies improve the care of patients colonized with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, other potential pathogens have emerged. While its significance as a respiratory pathogen is unclear, our experience suggests Bb may act as a pathogenic organism in CF. Laboratory isolation and identification of Bb can be challenging, suggesting that it may be more common than previously reported. Close laboratory scrutiny of unusual isolates in culture is recommended. In addition, we suggest routine environmental history to include contact with and immunization of domestic animals that potentially carry Bb. Methods: Strain: PAO1. Intracellular (intracell.) activity: phagocytosis was allowed for 2 h (bacteria/cells ratio: 10), extracellular (extracell.) bacteria were eliminated by incubation with gentamicin, and infected cells incubated over a wide range of concentrations (conc.) of antibiotics for 24 h. Activity against bacteria in broth was measured in parallel. Activity was expressed as change from the initial inoculum, and pharmacodynamic parameters [Emax, EC50 and Cstatic (see definition in Table) ] were calcutated from the Hill equation of the dose-response. Combinations: Fractional Maximal Effect (FME) method was used, where AB conc. to be tested are calculated from EC50 and Emax to obtain 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9-fold the Emax. Activity measured for combinations at conc. of AB1 and AB2 giving rise to 0.1:0.9, 0.3:0.7, 0.5:0.5, 0.7:0.3; 0.9:0.1 effect ratio (AAC 2009 (AAC , 53: 1443 . FME (observed/theoretical effect) for synergy > 1; additivity ~ 1; indifference: < 1; antagonism: < effect of best AB alone. Results: The table shows that while all antibiotics were bactericidal in broth (Emax > -3 log CFU), their Emax were markedly reduced towards intracell. PA, with fluoroquinolones being the least affected. Cstatic remained close to the MIC except for aminoglycosides and CST (10-20-fold increase). Moreover, all combinations tested were synergistic against extracell. PA (FME > 1) but additive or indifferent against internalized PA. Conclusions: Antibiotics are considerably less active against intracell. forms of PA compared to bacteria in broth. Combining antibiotics may prove useful to act upon intracell. PA though to a lesser extent than upon extracell. bacteria. Intracell. niches may contribute to the difficulty of eradicating PA in vivo, and marked differences between antibiotic classes could be expected in this context. Frequent infections lead to pulmonary exacerbations (PE) and deteriorating lung functions. Most infections are related to bacteria, but viruses can also precipitate clinical deterioration. Reports show short-term minimal effects from pandemic influenza A (H1N1) in the CF population, but longterm effects remain unclear. Methods: Retrospective study compared outcomes in CF patients (pts) with H1N1 between 9/2009-12/2009 to those without H1N1. Records were reviewed and data collected for 3 periods, a 4-month "exposure" period, 8 months before, and after the exposure period for symptoms, PE, deaths, PFT and O 2 saturation, sputum cultures, WBC, ALT and creatinine. Influenza-like illness (ILI) was defined as fever with 1 or more of the following: sore throat, myalgia, rhinorrhea, headache or GI symptoms. H1N1 was confirmed by PCR. Comparison group: pts without ILI symptoms or PCR analysis. Baseline characteristics: age, gender, ethnicity, smoking use, CFRDM and BMI. Statistics: Continuous variables were described as medians and interquartile ranges and categorical variables were described as frequencies. In bivariate analyses, categorical variables were compared using Chi-square or Fisher's exact and continuous variables were compared using the nonparametric Wilcoxon test. Time to hospitalization was compared using Kaplan-Meier and log rank testing. All analyses were performed using SAS. Results: Fifteen of 144 (10%) pts contracted H1N1. There were 7 men and 8 women with median age of 27 yrs and BMI 21.7 kg/m 2 . H1N1 pts had lower baseline FEV1 (1.86 L vs 2.14 L). A 24% absolute increase in hospitalizations over 8 months was seen in the H1N1 group, with 10 (67%) H1N1 pts experiencing at least 1 re-admission compared to 55 in the control group (43%)(p=0.08). Ninety percent of re-admissions in the H1N1 group and 85% in the control group were due to PE. Other admissions were for hemoptysis, GI pain, emesis, ataxia and sinusitis. Time to 1st post-exposure hospitalization was similar in both groups (median 72 days, p=0.64). Thirteen percent absolute increase in PE was seen with H1N1 pts compared to control group (p=0.33). There was a 4-fold increase in mortality over 1 yr in the H1N1 group, with 50% during the exposure period. An 8-month PFT trend was analyzed prior to the designated exposure period (1/1/09-8/30/09) and compared to another 8-month PFT trend after the exposure period (1/1/10-8/30/10). Post-exposure period, H1N1 group showed an improvement in FEV1 (163cc/year) while the control group had a decline of 13cc/year. In contrast, both groups showed a decline in FEF25-75. Culture analysis demonstrated that 27% of H1N1 pts acquired a new organism after H1N1 exposure compared to 28% in the control group (p=1.00). New strains primarily comprised of MSSA,(67% H1N1 group vs 33% control) followed by PA (33% H1N1 group vs 30% control)(p=0.33). Total number of organisms within each culture pre-and post-exposure was similar in both groups. Discussion: Long-term outcomes of CF pts with H1N1 have not been previously described. We found that the risks of re-hospitalization and re-PE over an 8 month post-exposure period were higher in H1N1 pts, although differences were not statistically significant. There was a similar interval time to hospitalization following H1N1 compared to non-H1N1 CF pts. Interestingly, FEV1 trends showed improvement following H1N1, but also a trend toward a higher risk of death. Both groups acquired new organisms at a similar rate. Israel; 2. Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel; 3. Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; 4. The Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel Introduction and Objectives: Hypertonic saline (HS) is an acceptable treatment for cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, and its use has increased dramatically. A standardized sterile unit-dose HS solution is not available worldwide. Compounding pharmacies produce large-volume bottled solutions of 3-7% HS (multi-dose), which patients use for prolonged periods, without considering the risk of contamination. This study examined the sterility of multi-dose HS solutions in use for prolonged periods and also assessed the survival of CF-associated bacteria in HS solutions of different concentrations. The manner of use of these solutions by patients and staff was documented, in order to identify factors that might be associated with or affect bacterial contamination of the solutions. Methods: Bacterial contamination of HS solutions was examined under the following circumstances: 1) Daily opening and closing of previously unopened HS solutions (3%, 7%, and 14.6%), at defined intervals (at first opening [baseline], 24hr, 72hr, 1w, 2w and 1m) under optimal sterile conditions. 2) Survival of well recognized CF-associated bacteria in artificially inoculated HS solutions was tested for the following species: S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, H. influenzae, S. maltophilia, B. cepacia and M. abscessus. A questionnaire on the routine use of HS solutions was filled out by patients from 3 different out-patient CF clinics. Results: Under optimal sterile conditions, HS solutions maintained their sterility after one month of repeated opening. Variable survival among the different bacteria and the different solutions and containers was indicated. As expected, H. influenzae did not survive in any HS solution. Most of the bacteria survived better in the 3% and the 14.6% solutions than in the 7% solutions. Moreover, some bacteria survived in the 3% HS solution for 6 weeks (M. abscessus) and longer (B. cepacia and P. aeruginosa). Nearly 40% of in-use solutions (30/76) obtained from CF patients and out-patient clinics were contaminated: 1.6 contaminations in each contaminated solution. Of these, 67.3% were gram positive bacteria, 22.4% were gram negative bacteria and 10.2% were fungi. None of the contaminants was a CF associated pathogen as defined in this study. Discussion and Conclusions: The pathogenicity of the contaminating organisms found in the solutions during use is not clear and the number of solutions tested was not sufficient to draw any firm conclusions. Yet these findings raise the concern that solutions for aerosolization, once contaminated e.g. via infected secretions, may serve as reservoirs for the transmission of pathogenic organisms to the respiratory tract, regardless of salt concentration. Results of the survival of pathogens and the contaminants found in the in-use HS solutions, support infection control recommendations to abandon the use of multi-dose containers and to use unit-dose HS solutions only. , creating an ongoing need for the development of alternative therapies. The endogenous enzyme lysozyme (LYZ) has antimicrobial activity against gram positive and gram negative pathogens, but is inhibited in vitro by inflammatory polyanions found in the infected lung. We have previously shown that a charge modified lysozyme, with a remodeled electrostatic potential, has increased antimicrobial properties in vitro (Scanlon, 2010) . Here, we investigate the anti-pseudomonal effects of this modified lysozyme against mucoid Pa infection in vivo in a murine model. Methods: Male C57Bl/6 mice were inoculated with approximately 10 7 colony forming units (CFU) of mucoid Pa (FRD-1) by oropharyngeal aspiration under isoflurane anesthesia. A treatment dose of lysozyme (either wild type or charge modified) or a PBS control was then given by the same method, at a range of time points 1 to 10 hours after infection with Pa. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) and lung harvest was performed 24 hours after infection to determine BAL inflammatory cell count and cytokine levels, BAL protein, and lung bacterial burden (CFU). Results: The administration of lysozyme after mucoid Pa infection resulted in a reduction of whole lung CFU. This effect was greater after administration of charge modified lysozyme compared to WT lysozyme. In addition, the administration of modified lysozyme resulted in significant reductions in BAL inflammatory cytokines, including KC and TNFα, suggesting additional benefit. Conclusions: In a murine model of lung infection, administration of lysozyme following infection with mucoid Pseudomonas leads to decreased bacterial burden and decreased inflammatory markers. Reference Cystic fibrosis (CF) causes impaired chloride transport from epithelial cells resulting in decreased mucociliary clearance mechanism in the lung. This results in increased bacterial infections, hyper-inflammation and ultimately increased morbidity and mortality due to respiratory failure. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most prevalent bacteria, with 85% of CF patients suffering from chronic inflammation by their teenage years. While planktonic bacteria may be important to early infection states, it is believed that chronic infection is a result of biofilm based P. aeruginosa infections. How the airway perceives the differences in biofilm and planktonic bacteria is a crucial question that has yet to be explored. Hypothesis: The host airway is able to sense differences in bacterial mode of growth (biofilm vs. planktonic) and will respond differently to these presented conditions. The main objective of this project is to characterize how biofilm and planktonic soluble material affect the activation of airway epithelial cells. Methods: Airway epithelia sense bacterial infection through activation of pathogen recognition receptors (PRR) which in turn induce the initiation of innate immunity. One of the most well studied PRR is the toll like receptor (TLR) family, which initiates four major signaling pathways: the NFκB pathway and the three mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways, ERK1/ERK2, JNK and p38 MAPK, leading to increased production of inflammatory cytokines. This project will look at the activation (via phosphorylation) of p38 as a marker for airway inflammation in bronchial epithelial cells in response to planktonic and biofilm material produced by clinical isolates of P. aeruginosa , in order to define how the host responds to these differences. The bacteria will be grown in synthetic CF media so that nutritional cues will be as close as possible to what the bacteria sense within the host. Results: Current results have shown that diffusible material produced from planktonic P. aeruginosa increase the phosphorylation of p38 4 fold over control, while biofilm diffusible material increased only 2 fold. The activation of p38 via planktonic material is dependant on TLR 5 activation, whereas biofilm material is independent of TLR activation (TLR 2, 4 or 5) . This activation leads to increased IL-6 production and neutrophil recruitment via planktonic material but no increase from biofilm. This increase is blocked via a p38 inhibitor. Interestingly, in cell lines containing a defective CFTR (thus mimicking CF), biofilm material is able to surpass a threshold of activation and leads to increased IL-6 production and neutrophil recruitment that is dependant on p38 activation. Conclusions: These findings suggest that chronic biofilm infections in the lungs of CF patients could contribute to the hyperinflammatory state seen in patients in a p38 dependant manner. p38 activation is an important marker of inflammation and epithelial cells are activated differentially by planktonic and biofilm P. aeruginosa material. Acknowledgements: Supported by Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, CIHR training grant. The potential clinical impact of MRSA in the pathogenesis of CF is gaining increased attention. Studies have shown that pulmonary function declines with MRSA infection and the mortality rate is increased among MRSA-positive patients. These observations and the expected continued emergence of resistance emphasize the need for effective strategies to prevent and treat MRSA colonization/infection in CF. Foremost among these include the availability of affordable antibiotics optimally formulated to ensure safety, efficacy and to limit long-term development of antimicrobial resistance. The additional recognition of MRSA strains with decreased susceptibility or complete resistance to vancomycin and the increasing prevalence of multiply drug-resistant staphylococci emphasize the critical need for effective alternative antimicrobials with unique modes of action for treatment of staphylococcal infections. Anti-microbial resistance patterns in MRSA collected from pediatric and adult patients treated at different CF centers in the US show that ~70% harbor hospital-associated MRSA, and 17% community-associated strains. These strains especially show a higher rate of resistance to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole of up to 10%, which is usually lower in both types of MRSA. Although clindamycin is often active in vitro, there is a high rate of clindamycin resistance seen in our results and in published reports. Taksta is a novel oral formulation of fusidic acid (sodium fusidate) (FA) of the fusidane antibiotic class, currently under clinical development in the US for treatment of acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections (ABSS-SI). FA has a unique mechanism of action, specifically, inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis by binding to elongation factor G (EF-G), and therefore there is no cross resistance to other antimicrobial classes. Virtually all S. aureus isolated in the US are susceptible to FA (MIC 90 , 0.12 mg/L). In Europe, FA has been used to successfully eradicate S. aureus from the lungs of CF patients. When used as monotherapy, resistance has been noted to be a problem in Europe. A new loading dose regimen has been developed in the US that has been shown to be effective in limiting resistance selection. Taksta in its new US dosing regimen has been shown to be safe and non-inferior to linezolid in a Phase 2 study in ABSSSI. In order to determine the potential for Taksta in treating S. aureus infection in CF patients, 40 strains isolated from CF sputum were tested against FA and comparator antibiotics as shown in the table. These results indicate that Taksta shows potential for treating MRSA infection in CF patients and should be studied in a clinical trial. Background: The objective of this study was to describe the natural history of infection with transmissible and unique strains of P. aeruginosa in adult CF patients and to determine if loss of P. aeruginosa from sputum was associated with an improvement in clinical status. Methods: Three-year prospective cohort study of 373 adult patients with CF. Sputum was collected from each participant at baseline and annually for 3 consecutive years. Rate of decline of FEV 1 , body mass index (BMI), pulmonary exacerbation rate, and time to death or transplant were compared between patients whose sputum cultures became negative for P. aeruginosa versus those in whom P. aeruginosa was persistent. Results: Of 373 enrolled patients 189 (51%) were infected with unique strains of P. aeruginosa at baseline and 91 (24%) were infected with transmissible strains. Patients infected with unique strains of P. aeruginosa were more likely to become culture-negative for P. aeruginosa from their sputum over the 3-year period compared to those infected with transmissible strains (18.5% vs 9.6% respectively, P = 0.05). Declines in FEV 1 and BMI, rates of pulmonary exacerbations and deaths or lung transplants were not statistically different between patients whose sputum became culture-negative for P. aeruginosa compared to those who remained persistently infected with P. aeruginosa. Conclusions: Patients infected with unique strains of P. aeruginosa were almost twice as likely to become culture-negative for P. aeruginosa from sputum compared to patients infected with transmissible strains of P. aeruginosa. No clinical benefit was identified in patients who cleared P. aeruginosa from their sputum compared to those who remained infected with P. aeruginosa. Background: Staphylococcus aureus has been associated with recurrent and persistent infections in cystic fibrosis patients. This may be ascribed to the presence of intracellular (IC) Small-Colony Variants (SCV), which are protected from immune defenses and antibiotics (AB). We have developed a model of S. aureus-infected THP-1 cells and used it to assess the IC activity of AB against a MRSA strain and its two stable menadione-and hemindependent SCVs. As the menadione-dependent strain shows a slower IC growth (see abstract 1130322), we also examined the effect of Menadione Sodium Bisulfite (MSB) supplementation on AB activity against this strain. Results: In non-activated THP-1, IC growth was slower (lower Emin) as well as the amplitude of the dose-response (Emin-Emax) for K8 than for the other strains, but both parameters were restored upon MSB supplementation. RIF and MXF reached an Emax > 1 log reduction against the three strains, and GEN and DOR against K8 only (note that DOR was active against IC SCV even if MRSA, as described for non-SCV strains [AAC 2007 [AAC , 51:1627 ). Static concentrations (Cs: extracellular concentration for which no change in IC inoculum is observed) were all close to the MICs (not shown). Dose-response curves for K10 matched those of K7. Activation of THP-1 cells is accompanied by an increase in AB accumulation (1.7, 1.8 and 3.9 for RIF, MXF and GEN, respectively) and a 2-to 15-fold increase in their AB potency (decrease in Cs [not shown]). Conclusion: In non-activated THP-1, the global amplitude of the response was dependent on the growth rate of the strain. RIF, MXF -two bactericidal AB-are the most effective, as observed also for a thymidinedependent SCV in the same model (AAC 2009 (AAC , 53:1434 . Moreover, activation of monocytes in macrophages enhances the potency of AB, probably in relation to their increased accumulation. Background: Small-Colony Variants (SCV) of Staphylococcus aureus are slow-growing subpopulations that cause persistent and relapsing infections. In this study, we have examined how a MRSA strain and its two stable menadione-and hemin-dependent SCVS were internalized and survived in THP-1 cells and isogenic bronchial cell lines expressing or not a functional CFTR. Methods: Activation in macrophages: Incubation of THP-1 monocytes with PMA (200 nM, 48 h). Strains: MRSA COL (K7), menD disruptant (K8), hemB disruptant (K9) and hemB complemented strain (K10). Internalization: Enumeration of cell-associated CFU after 1 or 2 hours phagocytosis in THP-1 or CFBE41o-, respectively. Persistence: Assessed from the change in CFU from post-phagocytosis value after 24 h of incubation. Results: Internalization: SCVs were less avidly internalized than K7 in all cell types, with differences being more marked in THP-1 macrophages and CFBE41o-WT CFTR. For all strains, internalization was more important in THP-1 monocytes and CFBE41o-KO CFTR than in the other cell lines. Intracellular growth: K8 grew much slower in THP-1 cells, whether differentiated or not, than the other strains, whereas in CFBE41o-KO CFTR, all strains seemed to grow at the same rate. Yet, SCV showed a higher persistence than K7 in CFBE41o-WT CFTR and F508del. K10 displayed a behavior (internalization and growth) similar to K7 in all cell types (not shown). Conclusion: Unexpectedly, differentiation of monocytes in macrophages reduces internalization but does not affect intracellular growth. The fact that K8 grows much slowly than K7 or K9 in THP-1 suggests that the intracellular medium does not contain the nutrients needed for the growth of a menadione-dependent strain. Interestingly, the expression of WT or F508del CFTR seems to reduce S. aureus internalization, but SCVs seem to persist much better than a normal strain in CFBE41o-, independently of their CFTR status, as previously described in the literature for other cell types (JID, 2010 (JID, , 202:1031 CID, 2001 CID, , 32:1643 . Glenschek-Sieberth, M.; Obertegger, S. Bayer HealthCare, Wuppertal, Germany Background: In cystic fibrosis patients infected with Burkholderia cepacia (B. cepacia), infections can be associated with a rapid decline in lung function. Ciprofloxacin is a fluoroquinolone with high bactericidal activity against gram-negative bacteria. In a rat lung infection caused by B. cepacia, the efficacies of single intratracheal treatments of ciprofloxacin betaine (CIP ON; the active ingredient of ciprofloxacin dry powder for inhalation [ciprofloxacin DPI]), ciprofloxacin HCl (CIP) and tobramycin (TOB) were compared with sham-treated animals. Methods: B. cepacia ATCC 25610-loaded agar beads were used to induce the lung infection in rats. A concentration of 5 × 10 6 colony forming units (CFU) was instilled intratracheally per rat. One hour post-infection, animals (N=5-26 per group) were treated intratracheally with CIP ON (3.125, 6.25, 12.5 and 25 mg/kg), CIP or TOB (6.25, 12.5 and 25 mg/kg) dissolved in 0.1 mL water containing 5% glucose. Sham-treated animals received 0.1 mL water containing 5% glucose intratracheally. Intratracheal applications were performed under adequate anesthesia. Animals were sacrificed 24 hours post-infection and lungs were removed aseptically and homogenised. To assess efficacy, the CFUs in the lung homogenates were determined by plating serial 10-fold dilutions on agar plates. Results: CIP ON and TOB both achieved a mean CFU reduction of up to 1.7 log 10 units and CIP achieved a mean CFU reduction of up to 1.14 log 10 units. Compared with sham-treated infection controls, both CIP ON and TOB achieved a significant (p≤0.01) CFU reduction after intratracheal administration of 6.25, 12.5 and 25 mg/kg once daily. CIP reached significance (p≤0.05) only in the highest dosing group compared with sham-treated controls. Conclusion: In this B. cepacia lung infection model, a dose-dependent decrease of CFUs was observed after a single treatment with CIP ON, CIP or TOB. Treatment with CIP ON was more effective than treatment with CIP. CIP ON was as active as TOB. Chronic lung infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the major severe complication in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, where P. aeruginosa grows in biofilms in the endobronchial mucus under anaerobic conditions. Numerous polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) surround the biofilm and create anaerobiosis by consuming the majority of O 2 for production of reactive oxygen radicals. We hypothesized that P. aeruginosa can acquire energy for growth in the anaerobic endobronchial mucus by denitrification, which can e.g. be demonstrated by production or degradation of nitrous oxide (N 2 O), an intermediate in the denitrification pathway. In fresh expectorated sputum from CF patients with chronic P. aeruginosa infection we measured concentration profiles of O 2 and N 2 O with microsensors. The concentration of PMNs was estimated by flow cytometry and the concentration of NO 3 and NO 2 was measured by the Griess reagent assay. In 9 purulent sputum from 7 CF patients, N 2 O production occurred only in layers where O 2 was absent or at low concentrations. During the initial period of measurements the concentration of N 2 O increased to a maximum (median 30.8 µM N 2 O; range 1.4-157.9 µM N 2 O) followed by a period of decreasing N 2 O concentration in most samples. Additional indication of denitrification was obtained by a significant decrease in the concentration of NO 3 in sputum during 24 hours of incubation (p < 0.008, n = 13). Furthermore, the concentration of NO 3 and NO 2 in CF sputum was correlated to the concentration of PMNs; NO 3 -(p< 0.04, r: 0.66, n = 10) and NO 2 -(p< 0.006, r: 0.78, n = 11). The present study shows for the first time production of N 2 O in human endobronchial secretions. Therefore, our results demonstrate that P. aeruginosa can acquire energy for growth by denitrification in the anaerobic endobronchial mucus of CF patients. As a source of endobronchial NO 3 and NO 2 we suggest the summoned PMNs. Background: Chronic P. aeruginosa (Pa) infection is an unfavorable event for the prognosis of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. A limited number of studies on the possibility of early eradication of Pa have presented encouraging results but there are still no reports on large numbers of patients which compare the efficacy of various treatments. Aims: The main objective of this randomized multicenter trial was to statistically analyze the efficacy of two early Pa infection-eradicating treatment protocols: inhalatory (inh) colistin/oral ciprofloxacin (arm A) versus inhalatory tobramycin/oral ciprofloxacin (arm B) for 28 days in a sizeable number of CF patients. Patients who were Pa-free (never colonized or Pafree with at least three cultures negative in the last 6 months) and older than 1 year were considered eligible to participate in this trial. The treatment was considered efficacious if patients were infection-free with at least three cultures negative for Pa over 6 months (UK CF Trust definition). Results: Thirteen Italian clinical centers participated in this trial and 223 patients (107 females, 116 males) were randomized. A total of 105 (47.1%) out of 223 patients were treated with inh colistin /oral ciprofloxacin; 118 (52.9%) out of 215 patients were treated with inh tobramycin /oral ciprofloxacin. Pa first/new infection occurred in 34.6% of patients aged 1-5 years; in 39% of patients aged 5-12 years and in 26.4% of patients older than 12 years. The culture was performed on sputum in 40.8% of patients, on throat swab in 59.2%. One hundred two patients, free from Pa infection and eligible for the study, were previously infected by Pa, whereas it was the first ever infection for the remaining 121 patients. Median age at first Pa infection was 7.8 ± 7.4 yrs. According to the intention-to-treat analysis, using one single cycle of antibiotic treatment, Pa eradication was achieved in 66/108 patients in arm A and in 77/118 patients in arm B (OR = 0.9 95% CI 0.52-1.55, p=0.8). Thirty-eight (17%) out of 223 randomized patients dropped out of the study: 5 patients due to adverse events (3 for vomiting, 1 photosensitivity, 1 wheezing), 9 patients due to pulmonary exacerbations requiring intravenous antibiotic treatment, 24 patients because of lack of compliance with followup protocol. Conclusions: In this multicenter, randomized, controlled trial we have investigated the efficacy of two eradicating treatment protocols on a large group of patients with first/new Pa infections. We found similar treatment efficacy by using one single cycle of antibiotic treatment for 28 days. Data from our study indicate that the efficacy of treatment does not seem to depend on the drugs used or the fact of having previously carried out eradication treatment. Acknowledgements: This work was supported by the Italian Cystic Fibrosis Research Foundation (grant FFC#17/2007) with the contribution of "Delegazione di Vicenza." We thank the following CF Centers and Microbiology Laboratories: Ancona, Brescia, Cerignola, Cesena, Firenze, Genova, Gualdo Tadino, Livorno, Messina, Milano, Palermo, Parma, Roma Bambino Gesù. Aims: To evaluate Pa microbiological outcome and the emergence of other nonfermenters in a post-trial follow-up in patients participating in a multicenter trial to compare the efficacy of two early Pa infection-eradicating protocols: inhalatory (inh) colistin/oral ciprofloxacin (arm A) versus inhalatory tobramycin/oral ciprofloxacin (arm B) for 28 days. Treatment was considered efficacious if patients were infection-free with at least three Pa-negative cultures over 6 months. Results: A total of 223 patients (107 M 116 F) were randomized. One hundred five (47.1%) out of 223 patients were treated with inh colistin /oral cipro; 118 (52.9%) out of 215 patients were treated with inh tobramycin /oral cipro. A total of 192 (86%) out of 223 randomized patients were evaluable: 93 in arm A and 99 in arm B (unevaluable 31 patients, 12 in arm A and 19 in arm B). Pa microbiological status was defined using Leeds' criteria after a median observation time of 16 months (range 6-28). One hundred thirty (67.7%) out of 192 patients are still Pa-free, 48 (25%) are intermittently infected and 14 (7.3%) are chronically infected. We evaluated the isolation frequency of nonfermenters following the treatment in comparison with the same length of time previous to treatment. We observed no emergence of B. cepacia. Other nonfermenters were isolated in 47 (24.4%) out of 192 patients. The increase in isolation frequency of S. maltophilia (Sm) and A. xylosoxidans While the isolation frequency of Ax appeared unvaried following treatment, we observed an increase in Sm isolations (OR 3.9, CI 95% 2.19-7.2, p=0.001). Twenty-two (31.4%) out of 70 Sm isolations were observed following treatment of patients in arm A and 48 (68.6%) in arm B No statistically significant difference was observed in the emergence of nonfermenters in the two treatment arms. (Sm OR 0.746, 95% CI 0.35-1.59, p=0.57 Ax OR 1.426, 95% CI 0.47-4.27, p=0.72). Conclusions: A high number of CF patients were Pa-free after a 16month follow-up period. Early eradication treatment could promote airway infection with other nonfermenters. No B. cepacia infection was noted, but we observed the emergence of Sm. This work was supported by the Italian CF Research Foundation (FFC#17/2007), with the contribution of "Delegazione di Vicenza." We thank the following CF Centers and Microbiology Labs: Ancona, Brescia, Cerignola, Cesena, Firenze, Genova, Gualdo Tadino, Livorno, Messina, Milano, Palermo, Parma, Roma Bambino Gesù. Recently, the inhaled form of aztreonam (AZLI) was approved by the FDA for treatment of CF patients infected by P. aeruginosa. Despite the evidence that P. aeruginosa in the CF airway is growing in a biofilm, little is known regarding the effect of AZLI alone, or in combination with tobramycin, on biofilm-grown bacteria in the context of airway epithelia. Methods: We have carried out a comprehensive study of the effect of AZLI on P. aeruginosa lab strain PAO1 and 4 CF clinical isolates, using an in vitro co-culture model of P. aeruginosa biofilms formed on human airway epithelial cells over-expressing ∆F508-CFTR (CFBE41o-cells). The clinical strains of P. aeruginosa were isolated from the sputum of CF patients, of which 3 were described as mucoid (SMC1585, 1587, 1596) and 1 as nonmucoid (SMC1595). After P. aeruginosa biofilms were allowed to form on confluent CFBE cells for 6 hours, AZLI (700 µg/mL), tobramycin (1000 µg/mL) or a combination of both, were applied for 16 hours. Alternatively, antibiotics were added at the time of inoculation to assess their ability to impair biofilm formation. The antibiotic concentrations selected are clinically relevant. Bacteria (CFUs) remaining after treatment were then counted. CFUs recovered from untreated biofilms were used as control. All experiments were repeated at least 3 times. Results: Both tobramycin and AZLI alone reduced P. aeruginosa biofilm formation by 2-5 log units (p<0.05), although tobramycin mediated inhibition was more robust for all strains tested. Tobramycin and AZLI together worked no better than tobramycin alone for biofilm prevention. In the absence of antibiotics, all strains of P. aeruginosa developed biofilms that destroyed the integrity of CFBE monolayers after 16 hrs. AZLI reduced the CFUs of preformed biofilms formed by PAO1, SMC1595 and SMC1596 by ~1 log-unit (p<0.05), but did not preserve the integrity of CFBE monolayers. By contrast, AZLI decreased the CFUs of biofilms formed by SMC1585 and SMC1587 by ~4 logs (p<0.05) and protected the monolayers from being compromised, as observed by confocal microscopy. For established biofilms, the combination of AZLI and tobramycin was additive for strains SMC1587 and SMC1595, reducing the CFUs by an additional 0.5 to 2 log units, respectively (p<0.05). Conclusion: Our study suggests that the effects of AZLI on biofilms formed by various P. aeruginosa strains in the in vitro co-culture model are diverse, and the simultaneous application of AZLI and tobramycin may be beneficial for CF patients in eliminating some strains of P. aeruginosa that form antibiotic resistant biofilms. Introduction and Aims: Due to their frequency of isolation, the obligate anaerobic species Prevotella are emerging as potentially important pathogens in CF pulmonary infection. However the molecular basis of antibiotic resistance among these species has been poorly characterized. Therefore, the aims of this study were to determine (1) the in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility of CF and non-CF Prevotella isolates to antibiotics used in the treatment of CF pulmonary infection and anaerobic infections and (2) the presence of β-lactam resistance genes in these isolates. Methods: The susceptibility of clinical Prevotella isolates grown planktonically (CF, n=7; Non-CF, n=41) to antibiotics (Table) was determined by Etest® under strict anaerobic conditions. Each isolate was categorised as resistant, intermediate or susceptible according to the MIC breakpoints defined by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. A PCR assay was developed to detect the cfxA/cfxA2 gene encoding a β-lactamase that confers resistance to penicillins and broad spectrum cephalosporins. Results: Overall, 34/48 (70.8%) isolates were cfxA/cfxA2 positive. All isolates resistant to amoxicillin were cfxA/cfxA2 positive (n=26). Two CF (n=2 cfxA/cfxA2 positive) and 3 non-CF (n=1 cfxA/cfxA2 positive) isolates had intermediate susceptibility to amoxicillin. The remaining isolates (n=16) were susceptible to amoxicillin with 4 non-CF isolates cfxA/cfxA2 positive. Fewer isolates were both resistant to ceftazidime and cfxA/cfxA2 positive (15/47; 31.9%) than amoxicillin (26/47; 55.3%). All isolates were resistant to tobramycin with some resistance to metronidazole and clindamycin also apparent. In contrast, all isolates were susceptible to meropenem and piperacillin/tazobactam (Table) . Three of 6 (50%) CF and 5/33 (15.2%) non-CF isolates had reduced susceptibility (intermediate/resistant) to at least 4/8 antibiotics with six multi-drug resistant Prevotella spp. detected. Conclusions: Amoxicillin and ceftazidime resistance is common and can be linked with the presence of the cfxA/cfxA2 gene in the majority of CF and non-CF isolates. Meropenem and piperacillin/tazobactam may be effective treatment options for CF lung infection where Prevotella are identified. (CF Trust; 2007 ,2009 . Given that high healthcare utilization in CF may be associated with MRSA acquisition, this study examined the similarity of MRSA isolates at 4 CF centres (2 in US, 2 in UK) to determine (i) if specific MRSA strains were associated with CF, and (ii) whether there was evidence for shared clones within CF centres that could indicate transmission. Methods: CF isolates were obtained from pediatric patients at three CF centres [University of North Carolina (UNC) at Chapel Hill (n= 10 isolates from 10 patients); University of Washington (UW), Seattle (n= 71 isolates from 23 patients); Belfast Paediatric CF Centre, n= 22 isolates from 21 patients)] and pediatric and adult patients at one centre [Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester (n=10 isolates from 10 patients)]. Further isolates from non-CF patients were obtained from the Belfast Paediatric ICU (n=10 isolates from 10 patients), and from patients undergoing routine decolonization in N. Ireland (n= 22 isolates from 22 patients). Whole genome DNA extracts were separated by pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) subsequent to restriction enzyme digestion and results were analyzed using GelCompar-II® software. Isolates were considered similar if they possessed greater than 60% homology. The presence of genes encoding the PVL toxin (lukS-PV, lukF-PV) was determined by PCR. Results: In general, isolates from each centre formed closely related pulsed field groups, based on geographical location, often differing by only 1-2 bands. Isolates from US centres were more similar to each other than to UK isolates (67% vs 44% similarity). Similarly the UK isolates were more closely related to each other (64% vs 44%) than to US isolates. In the Belfast centre, CF and non-CF isolates shared a high degree of homology (70-100% similarity). Sequential isolates from individual patients at the UW shared >90% homology; isolates from all UW patients shared 65% homology. Two isolates from UNC and 1 isolate from Manchester were PVL positive; the remaining isolates were negative. Conclusions: The high degree of homology observed between MRSA isolates within each centre suggests the potential for patient-to-patient transmission of MRSA strains, and/or acquisition from a common source. Pediatric CF isolates are similar to endemic strains in the local healthcare setting, rather than specific CF clones, and studies investigating possible phenotypic differences between CF and non-CF MRSA are currently ongoing. The clonal nature of infection observed in sequential UW pediatric isolates suggests either repeated acquisition from the same source or, more likely, persistence within the patient. This study supports a role for rigorous infection control and appropriate decolonization strategies to prevent MRSA transmission and subsequent colonization/infection of CF patients. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is one of only a few bacterial species capable of synthesising hydrogen cyanide, a potent inhibitor of cellular respiration. Cyanide is detectable in the sputum of cystic fibrosis patients infected with P. aeruginosa in concentrations of greater than 200 µM. We have previously shown that its presence is associated with significantly impaired lung function. In this work we explored possible mechanisms for this association, focusing on the effect of physiologically relevant cyanide concentrations on ciliary beat frequency (CBF) and cell viability. Ciliated strips of human nasal epithelium were obtained from the inferior turbinate of healthy volunteers with a cytology brush and CBF in the presence or absence of cyanide was measured at 37°C using light microscopy. The addition of 150 µM (n=6) or 75 µM (n=2) KCN resulted in a significant reduction in CBF compared with the same concentration of KCl used as a control (baseline 10.89 Hz; 150 µM CBF 5.96 Hz 46% fall; 75 µM 7.28 Hz 25% fall; p<0.005). The slowing was apparent at the first measurement (5 min) and was maximal by 30 min. To date, one sample from a patient with CF has shown similar results. Staining with trypan blue indicated that cell viability was not significantly different in KCN-treated and KCl-treated cells. Cyanide-induced slowing of CBF was reversible in that CBF recovered to control levels immediately after washing. We conclude that concentrations of cyanide similar to those detected in the sputum of CF patients cause a marked inhibition of ciliary function in vitro. If this was of a sufficient magnitude to impair mucociliary clearance in vivo, it could provide an explanation for the link with increased disease severity observed in CF patients with detectable levels of cyanide in the airway. Study objectives were 1) to describe the epidemiology of MRSA infections in children with CF from a highly prevalent area; and 2) to identify children persistently infected with MRSA and compare their outcome to the outcome of children who have never been infected or have intermittently been infected with MRSA. Methods: Data was obtained by reviewing the medical records of children with CF at our institution from 1995 through 2009. Persistent infection was defined as a patient who had positive respiratory cultures for MRSA during the study period and for a minimum of 2 consecutive years. Intermittent infection was defined as a patient who had positive cultures for one year only or multiple positive cultures at least one year apart. Evaluated outcome measures included: mortality, the yearly rate of decline in FEV1, and the fre-quency of hospitalization. Yearly decline in FEV1 %predicted (%P) was analyzed using a mixed model comparing children who did not grow MRSA, grew MRSA intermittently and persistently with adjustment for potential confounders. Yearly decline in FEV1 among children with persistent infection before and after MRSA acquisition was calculated. The difference in hospitalization frequency among the groups was tested using analysis of variance. Paired t test was used to compare hospitalization frequency before and after the acquisition of MRSA among persistently infected children. Results: Data was collected for 224 children (follow-up 10 ± 6 y): 129 children had at least one positive culture for MRSA. The prevalence of MRSA was <1% in 1995 and increased significantly to 49% in 2009. Fiftyfive (43%) grew MRSA persistently. Fifteen children died; 5 (36%) were persistently and 1 (6%) was intermittently infected with MRSA. Significant differences were found in the rate of yearly decline in FEV1 among children who did not grow MRSA, grew MRSA intermittently and persistently. Children with persistent MRSA had the lowest baseline FEV1 and the slowest rate of yearly decline in FEV1 (MRSA negative -1.12 FEV1%P/year, intermittent MRSA -1.73 FEV1%P/year, persistent MRSA -0.19 FEV1%P/year; p=0.006). There was no difference in the rate of decline in FEV1 before and after MRSA detection in children persistently infected with MRSA. Children with persistent MRSA had significantly more hospitalizations (p=0.02), but there was no difference in the frequency of hospitalization before and after MRSA acquisition. Conclusions: Mirroring changes seen in the general population, the prevalence of MRSA increased at our center. Children with persistent MRSA had lower baseline lung functions and had a slower rate of FEV1 decline. Although these children required more hospitalizations, the rate of hospitalization was not affected by the acquisition of MRSA suggesting that either hospitalization facilitates the acquisition of MRSA or that sicker children acquire MRSA easily and/or cannot clear this pathogen.  Patients with CF typically experience lower respiratory infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA). Chronic infection is preceded by a period of transient infection. Once chronic infection is established, PA is almost impossible to eradicate and is responsible for the morbidity and mortality in this group of patients. Our clinic began to work in 2001 and received patients previously diagnosed who were chronically infected with mucoid PA (Historical control group). Since 2001 we diagnosed and followed new patients. In 2006 we initiated an eradication protocol for PA. In the first years we used nebulized colistin/oral ciprofloxacin and then we changed to nebulized tobramycin 300 mg /oral ciprofloxacin. Objective: To assess the efficacy of the two treatment protocol in eradicating PA from patient with CF, and evaluate its effects on health related outcome vs. the outcome of historical control age matched CF patient. Outcome measurements include quantitative chest radiography (Brasfield score), pulmonary function test, BMI and progression to chronic PA infection. Materials and Methods: Prospective observational study of patients with CF and recent PA infection: The treatment group was formed by 17 patients with CF. They underwent 27 eradication courses. The period of follow up was between 1 to 5 years. We used expectorated sputum samples or oropharyngeal secretions. PA was eradicated in 21 (79%) of them. The time free of PA during the follow up in these patients was 16.9 months ± 11.7 (CI 8.4-25.3) for colistin and 17 months ± 9.7 (CI 10.4-23.5) for tobramycin. There is no difference in the efficacy between these two regimens (P=0.97). There was a difference in lung function, growth parameters and radiologic score between the two groups. The results are shown in the Table. Conclusion: 1. Eradication of PA with inhaled and oral antibiotics was effective. 2. There was a difference in lung function, growth parameters and radiologic score between these two groups. 3. There was no difference between these two regimens.  Background: The ACFBAL study was a multi-centre, randomised controlled trial to determine whether BAL-directed therapy in infants and preschool children with CF provided better outcomes at age 5 years than the current practice of relying upon clinical features and oropharyngeal (OP) cultures. It also gave an opportunity to investigate early Pa strains in this young population. Aims: (i) To determine the genotypic relationships of Pa from the same child by: (a) testing serial isolates collected over time; and (b) comparing isolates from upper and lower airway samples. (ii) To explore the genotypic relationships of clinical Pa isolates between study children and previously identified major clonal and common environmental strains. Methods: In this study, 170 infants were randomised at mean age 3.6 (SD 1.6) months (84 to BAL and 86 to standard group). OP cultures were collected from both groups. BAL was performed at enrollment, with exacerbations requiring hospital admission, with positive OP culture for Pa and after eradication therapy for Pa in the BAL arm, and in all study children for final outcomes at 5 years. Pa isolates were confirmed by real-time PCR. Confirmed Pa isolates were genotyped using ERIC-PCR cluster analysis. Multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) was used to confirm relationships between serial clinical isolates, major clonal strains and common natural environmental genotypes. Results: A total of 81 children (48%) isolated Pa from either BAL ≥(10 3 /mL) or OP samples during the study; 296 OP and BAL samples were culture positive for Pa, and Pa isolates from 205 (69%) samples were available for PCR and genotyping. Sixteen children had serial confirmed Pa cultures from successive BALs with 13/16 (81%) showing a change in Pa genotype. Twenty-five children had serial confirmed Pa isolates from successive OP samples and 15/25 (60%) harboured an identical genotype between episodes. Of 17 paired isolates from contemporaneous upper and lower airway samples, 13 had an indistinguishable genotype. MLST was performed in a subset of 69 isolates from 34 patients, MLST confirmed that 1 patient harboured Aust 01 and another Aust 02 major clonal CF strains, while 22 patients showed strains consistent with those collected from other non-CF patient groups, animals and/or the natural environment (e.g. . Discussion: In this study we demonstrated that although persistent Pa genotypes were infrequently isolated from the lower airways, most serially collected upper airway isolates from the same patient were indistinguishable from one another. Overall, 44% of Pa isolates were genotypically indistinguishable from earlier isolates collected from the same child. These data suggest ongoing upper airway colonisation following eradication treatment or re-acquisition from common environmental sources. Isolate genotypes derived from upper airway samples were also highly representative of those collected by BAL. Very few patients harboured Aust 01 and Aust 02 major clonal strains, while genotypes often associated with other ecological niches were particularly common in this cohort of young patients. The underlying mechanisms of CF lung disease remain unresolved. It is generally believed that reduced CFTR function alters transepithelial salt/water balance leading to a dehydrated airway surface and impairment in anti-bacterial defence mechanisms. Bacterial infections in the CF lung produce a hyperinflammatory response with persistent infiltration of immune cells. However, despite innate immune responses bacterial infections are not suppressed, suggesting the possibility of immune system dysregulation in the CF lung. Pseudomonas aeruginosa secretes a quorum sensing homoserine lactone (C12) that represses innate immune function by disrupting critical transcriptional responses mediated by nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB). As such, P. aeruginosa may actively establish and maintain infections in CF, rather than merely flourishing in a favorable niche. We developed a high-throughput screen to identify small molecules that block C12 effects on NF-κB signalling, to test whether C12-mediated inhibition of the innate immune response is a critical initial step in the pathogenesis of CF lung disease. A stable FRT cell line was generated that expressed luciferase under the control of NF-κB-response elements (FRT-NF-κB cells). Stimulation of FRT-NF-κB cells with lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 0.5 µg/mL for 4 hours) produced a robust luminescence response that was suppressed completely by 25 µM C12. Primary screening of 25,600 drug-like synthetic small molecules gave several classes of active compounds that at micromolar concentrations reduced C12 suppression of NF-κB signalling by >70%. Secondary screening of compound analogs identified triazoloquinolines as leads that restored NF-κB-mediated transcriptional responses in LPS / C12treated cells with IC50 of 20-200 nM. Triazoloquinolines also restored NF-κB-mediated transcriptional activity initiated by alternative stimuli including TNFα, and they restored production of TNFα, KC, IP-10, CCL2 and MIP-1α, -1β and -2 in LPS / C12-treated macrophage cell lines and primary murine macrophages. Control experiments showed that triazoloquinolines are non-toxic and do not alter NF-κB-mediated responses in unstimulated or stimulated cells. Compounds of the triazoloquinoline class have been used for other indications in vivo and our preliminary pharmacological analysis showed triazoloquinoline accumulation in the mouse lung hours after compound administration. Current efforts are focused on the testing of triazoloquinolines in mouse models of lung inflammation with LPS and infection with P. aeruginosa. Small-molecule C12 inhibitors should be useful in studying mechanisms of P. aeruginosa colonization and lung inflammation, and may provide a novel approach to treat P. aeruginosa infection in CF. Funded by the CFF and NIH. CF lung disease is characterized by transient P. aeruginosa infections and excessive neutrophil-dominated inflammation followed by permanent chronic infection that causes a decline in lung functions. The mechanisms by which P. aeruginosa sustains chronic infection remain to be elucidated. Comparing sequential strains isolated from a CF patient, including mucoid and non-mucoid phenotypes isolated during a period of up to 7.5 years, we found for the first time that P. aeruginosa is subjected to lipid A and peptidoglycan modification as a strategy to evade the innate immune response (Cigana et al, PlosOne 2009). To establish the host response to P. aeruginosa whole bacteria, we tested virulence of P. aeruginosa early and late clonal isolates in human CF bronchial epithelial cells IB3-1 and macrophage-like cells THP-1 by microarray analysis and ELISA. In IB3-1 cells P. aeruginosa early strains induced a stronger inflammatory response (IL-8, TNF-α) in comparison to late strains, while late strains up-regulated MMP9, liable for tissue damage. In addition, we found that late isolates induced higher MMP-9 secretion in THP-1 cells. When tested in multihost pathogenesis systems including C. elegans, G. melonella, D. melanogaster and in a murine model of acute lung infection, we found that P. aeruginosa early strains were more pathogenic and lethal than late isolates from the same patient. Although attenuated in mortality, P. aeruginosa late isolates retained their capacity to persist in mouse models of chronic infection (Bragonzi et al, AJRCCM 2009 ). To address the potential role of adapted P. aeruginosa clones in airway infection, we analyzed the P. aeruginosa bacterial load and the inflammatory response in the bronchoalveolar-lavage fluid (BALF) and in lung homogenates after one day of acute infection and during 28 days of chronic lung infection in murine model. While P. aeruginosa early strain was lethal and ineffective in inducing chronic infection, late strains were able to establish persistent infection with bacterial load ranging between 4*10 3 and 4*10 4 CFU/lung, induced leukocytes recruitment, and stimulated proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines production (MIP-2, KC, TNF-α, IL-17, IFN-γ, MCP-1, MIP-1α) after 14 and 28 days of infection, as determined by Bioplex assay. Histological examination, PAS-and MTS-staining, and Tunnel assay of lung tissue sections after 28 days of P. aeruginosa infection showed that late strains increased numbers of mucin-positive goblet cells, collagen deposition and apoptotic cells, a typical hallmark of damage in the airway chronic diseases. In addition, we found also high amounts of sulphated glycosaminoglycan in lung homogenates after infection with late isolates by a dye-binding assay confirming the capability of adapted strains to induce damage to airways. Our findings suggest that P. aeruginosa pathoadaptive variants, although less inflammatory or lethal, can promote persistence while causing damage and fibrosis in the airway of chronic disease. Supported by the European Union 7th Framework Programme (project NABATIVI).  Background: Persistent MRSA infection in CF is associated with steeper decline of FEV 1 and increased mortality. Few data are available concerning genetic characterization of strains involved in persistent infections. Currently a reliable definition of chronic MRSA infection is lacking. Aims: The primary aim of this study was the molecular characterization of MRSA responsible for first colonization episode and successive persistent infection. Materials and Methods: During a five-year prospective study, we isolated MRSA strains from the first and persistent infection. Patients persistently infected by MRSA for at least three years were included. Fifty-six strains have been collected from respiratory samples of 16 CF patients. MRSA clones were identified by means of SCCmec typing and Multi Locus Sequence Typing (MLST) analysis as previously described (Oliveira and de Lancastre, 2002; Enright et al., 2000) . Results: SCCmec typing of 56 MRSA strains showed the presence of 10 (18%) SCCmec type I, 9 type II (16%) and 9 type III (16%). Twentyseven out of 56 (48%) showed SCCmec type IV, frequently associated with CA-MRSA. Thirteen out of 16 patients (81%) were persistently infected by the same clone for at least three years, while 3 out of 16 (19%) patients showed a clone replacement. Clones responsible for persistent infections were: ST1-MRSA-III, USA300/USA500 (ST8-MRSA-IV) PVL-negative, ST228-MRSA-IV, Brazilian-Hungarian clone (ST239-MRSA-III), Berlin clone (ST45-MRSA-IV), Southern Germany clone (ST228-MRSA-I), and ST152-MRSA-I. : Despite the small group of examined patients, and the need of further studies, we can observe that the majority of clones responsible for persistent infections represented already described epidemic lineages. These data suggest that virulent known epidemic clones have a better fitness in developing a persistent infection of CF lung. This work was supported by Italian Cystic Fibrosis Research Foundation (grant FFC#11 2009) with the contribution of Angelini. (Table) . Among patients with PA-positive cultures, the overall prevalences in 2003 vs. 2008 were similar for resistance to aminoglycosides and quinolones, and slightly decreased for resistance to beta lactams and MARPA (Table) . The prevalence of antibiotic resistance decreased from 2003 to 2008 among age groups younger than 26 years, and slightly increased in the age group 26 years and older (Table) . Conclusions: The prevalence of PA infection reported in the CFFPR decreased from 2003 to 2008, with the greatest relative decreases in age groups younger than 18. Overall rates of antibiotic resistance remained stable over time, with small decreases among patients aged younger than 26. Results should be interpreted with caution since culture methods, resistance breakpoints and reporting practices could vary across centers over time. Moreover, the relevance of in vitro resistance assessments for the effectiveness of inhaled antibiotics is not established. Acknowledgements: Supported by Novartis Pharmaceutical Corporation. Nasopharyngeal carriage of pathogens is important as potential source of bronchial colonization. Defective clearance of mucus is present in both upper and lower respiratory tract in CF and altered composition of airway secretion leads to increased infection and persistence of bacteria. Hyaluronic acid was demonstrated to increase ASL and could be potentially effective in CF. Aim: The present study aimed to compare tolerability and efficacy of tobramycin nasal solution to hyaluronic acid in CF patients (pts) carrying nasal bacteria. Subjects and Methods: We enrolled 27 pts (22 male), mean age 14.6 (range 5-27 yrs) attending our CF centre, with positive bilateral naris swab at start of the study (T0) and randomly assigned either to tobramycin + sodic hyaluronate 0.2%, group A, or placebo (sodic hyaluronate 0.2%), group B, for 14 days. Nasal swabs were evaluated 1-2 week after therapy (T1). ENT evaluation was done by rhinofiberoptic endoscopy (Olympus ENF type XP) and endoscopic score was attributed for nasal mucosa, secretion and obstruction (0-2 absent-severe alteration). Statistical differences between the two groups at T0 and T1 were determined using the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test. The nasal swabs were placed into 1mL of 0.9% sodium chloride for processing. After 20 minutes, the samples were vortexed and 0.1 mL was cultured on different agar plates to detect Gram positive and Gram negative bacteria. The treatment was considered to be useful when a two-fold decrease of CFU between T0 and T1 was found. Results: -Antibacterial activity: Reduction in bacterial count was found in 19/28 (67.9%) swabs in treatment group and 11/26 (43.2%) in the placebo group (p= 0.059). -Nasal mucosa changes: We observed a significant reduction in the medium endoscopic score, between T0 and T1, that is 1.2 to 0.35 in group A versus 1.2 to 1 in group B (p=0.0161). -Purulent nasal secretion decreased in 85.7% (12/14) of group A pts as compared to 15.4% (2/13) in group B (p=0.0016). No side effects were recorded. Conclusions: Tobramycin nasal solution is safe and effective, mostly restoring trophism of nasal mucosa and reducing nasal secretion. The addition of hyaluronic acid may potentiate the effect of tobramycin by means of increased hydration and mucus clearance. Finally antimicrobial activity is not statistically significant. Objective: To evaluate the efficacy (as measured by change in FEV 1 ) and safety of AZLI (Cayston ® ) in pediatric patients with cystic fibrosis and chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection who participated in the AZLI development program. Background: To date, 165 unique pediatric patients (< 18 years of age) have been treated with AZLI in the completed controlled efficacy studies. Change in FEV 1 (L or % predicted) from baseline to end of each AZLI treatment course was measured. Adverse drug reactions were recorded in each study. Results: Pediatric patients treated with AZLI in the Phase 3 placebocontrolled registration studies showed marked improvements in FEV 1 . The magnitude of treatment effect (AZLI -placebo) was similar to what was observed in the adult population, which was statistically significant. In the integrated studies (CP-AI-005 and CP-AI-007), the treatment effect for % change in FEV 1 (L) from baseline to Day 28 was 4.5%, 12.4% and 7.0% in children (ages 6-12 years), adolescents (ages 13-17 years) and adults (≥ 18 years), respectively. In the AZLI vs TIS comparator study (GS-US-205-0110), pediatric patients had improvement in FEV 1 % predicted at Day 28 and across 3 treatment courses of AZLI that were of similar or greater magnitude compared to adult patients. The small sample sizes for pediatric subjects in each of the studies limited the demonstration of statistical significance. The incidence of respiratory AEs was higher among adult patients than pediatric patients. This finding is consistent with the general observation of more severe disease in adults with CF. In the integrated studies, the only adverse drug reaction reported in significantly more pediatric patients than adults was pyrexia (18.4% vs 8.5%). Conclusion: The increases in lung function observed among AZLItreated children and adolescents were clinically meaningful and of a magnitude similar to that observed in adult patients. Adverse event (AE) rates were similar between age groups. Supported by Gilead Sciences. Anaerobic bacteria from a range of genera have been detected in large numbers in sputum from both CF and non-CF bronchiectasis patients with Prevotella spp. most frequently isolated. Furthermore, Prevotella are also detected from a range of other body sites including the oral cavity suggesting a possible reservoir for dissemination to the respiratory tract. This study aimed to investigate the molecular epidemiology of Prevotella spp. from a range of clinical specimens to determine whether there is a species particularly associated with colonisation of the respiratory tract. Methods: Prevotella isolates from CF sputum (n=20), CF oral plaque (n=5), non-CF bronchiectasis sputum (n=5), non-CF clinical isolates from a range of body sites (n=48) and commercially available type strains (n=5) were cultured under strict anaerobic conditions. Identities of all isolates were confirmed by 16s rDNA sequencing. Isolates were characterised by PFGE, using XbaI. Results from PFGE and 16s rDNA sequencing were analysed by construction of dendrograms using UPGMA and DICE coefficient. Results: Isolates (n=77) were grouped into four clusters: A (n=24), B (n=11), C (n=20) and D (n=22). Within group similarity for each was; A (57%), B (59%), C (60%) and D (36%). The minimum and maximum similarity between groups was 36% (Groups A and D) and 54% (Groups A and B), respectively. Each cluster contained different Prevotella species as determined by 16s rDNA sequencing. Furthermore, the same species appeared in more than one cluster, e.g. isolates identified as P. bivia appeared in clusters A, B and D. Similarity between respiratory (CF and non-CF bronchiectasis) and oral isolates was apparent, with isolates from both sources appearing in all clusters and sharing up to 91% homology. Conclusion: To date, PFGE studies have identified four main clusters among Prevotella spp., from a range of clinical specimens. Individual Prevotella species may be present in one or more of these groups suggesting limitations to 16s data for definitive identification and speciation of Prevotella. No Prevotella species were particularly associated with colonisation of the respiratory tract in either CF or non-CF bronchiectasis patients. Furthermore, genotypically similar Prevotella spp. have been shown to be present in both the oral cavity and respiratory tract, lending weight to the hypothesis that Prevotella in the oral cavity may be a reservoir for pulmonary infection. Further understanding of the molecular epidemiology of Prevotella spp. may help identify potential sources and routes of transmis-Staphylococcus aureus is not only the first but also one of the most prevalent pathogens cultured from the airways of CF patients. The aim of this prospective longitudinal multicenter study is to dissect S. aureus colonization from infection by analyzing various host and bacterial related aspects. Here, we present preliminary data of molecular analysis of S. aureus isolates. S. aureus isolates from primary cultures at the outpatient clinical visits were distinguished by phenotypical appearance (hemolysis, pigmentation, size), molecular typed by spa-typing. Virulence gene profiles were determined for sea-see, eta, etb, tst, seg-sej, pvl, cap5/8, cna, clfA/B, fnbA/B,sasG/H, sdrC/E/D and chips including agr specificity groups by single or multiplex PCR. A total of 1216 S. aureus isolates were retrieved from 565 specimens of 155 patients from 17 centers from first outpatient clinical visits and for some patients from several visits. Ninety-three patients were male. The median age was 16 years. The most diverse morphotypes were cultured from sputa, followed by nasal lavage, throat and nasal swabs ( The most prevalent genes were seg and sei, followed by tst, sec and sea. Interestingly, the adhesion cna was highly prevalent. Many isolates were positive for the pyrogenic superantigens with sei being the most detected gene indicating the virulence potential of S. aureus in the background of CF. This study is supported by a grant from the Mukoviszidose e.V. S05/07. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) has emerged to be shown as a polymicrobial disease. Some of the most common organisms present in the CF airway microbiome are the bacteria comprising the genus Streptococcus, especially those in the viridans grouping (VGS). This includes overlooked pathogens such as the Streptococcus milleri group that have been shown to behave as synergens in animal models (avirulent or beneficial strains that enhance the virulence of pathogens such as P. aeruginosa). Our collection of cultured isolates from CF sputum includes 48 isolates that fall into nine distinct clades based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing and may represent novel species within the Streptococcus genus. In addition to their potential for a direct role in disease progression, the streptococci are a potential reservoir of antibiotic resistance, due to their ability to undergo horizontal gene transfer, in addition to their naturally competent nature. The CF airway microbiome is under constant pressure from several prescribed antibiotics, resulting in increasing rates of antibiotic resistance and treatment failure. This study sought to determine if there are increasing rates of antibiotic resistance among a diverse group of streptococci and to elucidate the molecular mechanisms this may be occurring by. Methods: In this study, 297 streptococci, both novel and defined VGS that were previously isolated from sputum of adult CF patients, were tested for susceptibility to nine antibiotics relevant for CF treatment. Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion was done on individual isolates with zones of clearing used to indicate susceptibility. Molecular mechanisms of resistance against the macrolides were determined by a PCR-based screen for resistance determinants or by sequencing of the 23S rRNA to seek point mutations. Results: Resistance rates were greatest for macrolide antibiotics, at 60% for erythromycin and 63% for azithromycin. Among the novel streptococci, the resistance rates to the two macrolides was even higher at 81% and 77%, respectively. Due to these results, macrolide resistance mechanisms were looked at in closer detail. The two most common mechanisms of macrolide resistance reported in streptococci, the mef (efflux pump) and erm (target site methylation) accounted for only 45% of resistant isolates. Interestingly, the 23S rRNA point mutations conferring macrolide resistance accounted for 52% of macrolide resistance. The remaining 3% of macrolide resistant isolates may be due to another mechanism that requires further study. Conclusions: The prevalence, species distribution and influence of therapy on resistance profiles suggest complex ecological interactions among the streptococci in the airways of CF patients with mutation, rather than horizontal gene transfer, being the primary mechanism of acquired antibiotic resistance in some species within this community. This study also illuminates potential roles for the Streptococcus genus in disease progression. This study was supported by CFC, AIHS and CIHR. A primary cause of morbidity and mortality for CF patients is chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P.a.) lung infection. In the lung, P.a. acquires mutations that allow it to persist in its new environment. Some of these mutations, including mucoid conversion, are correlated with changes in the volatile metabolites produced by P.a., and exhaled in human breath. Using secondary electrospray ionization-mass spectrometry (SESI-MS), we have observed that the volatile signatures of FRD1, a lung-adapted P.a. strain, and PA14, a lung naïve strain, are distinctive (Fig). In this work we have employed two-dimensional gas chromatog-raphy-mass spectrometry (GC×GC-MS) to identify the volatiles that are correlated with common CF-associated mutations of P.a. Our goals are to develop a rapid test to detect, track, and characterize P.a. infections in situ in order to initiate early, targeted treatments that help maintain lung function. Methods: PA14 wild-type and mutants, including ∆mucA, ∆lasR, ∆mexZ, ∆mexS, ∆fleQ, and ∆lasIrhlI, were cultured aerobically for 24 h at 37°C in 50 mL of synthetic CF medium (SCFM). SESI-MS spectra of the headspace volatiles (20 -500 Da) were collected in positive ion-mode. For GC×GC-MS, the volatiles were adsorbed onto a triphase SPME fiber and analyzed using the Pegasus 4D (Leco Corp.). Results: The volatile signatures of the mutants are distinctive. For instance, the PA14 double mutant ∆lasIrhlI has a SESI-MS volatile signature that differs from its parental strain, as well as from FRD1 (Fig) . Additionally, using GC×GC-MS we have identified potential biomarkers for the mutations studied in this work, building a volatile metabolome for these strains. Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that P.a. mutations that commonly arise during chronic CF lung disease yield changes in its volatile metabolome, which have the potential to serve as biomarkers. Tracking the biomarkers for P.a. mutations via breath analysis could allow physicians to detect mutations such as mucoid conversion or antibiotic resistance in the lung prior to the successful culture from sputum or BAL isolates, which would facilitate the implementation of earlier, better-targeted treatments for P.a. infection. Funded by NIH P20 RR021905-01. We are interested in Pseudomonas aeruginosa virulence regulation in the lung. The PA4921 transcript was induced in the presence of pulmonary surfactant in a GbdR-dependent manner. GbdR also controls induction of hemolytic phospholipase C (plcH) in surfactant as well as the choline cata-bolic genes, suggesting that PA4921 may also play a role in this virulence/catabolic pathway. We were interested in determining the function of PA4921, including its role in membrane maintenance, PlcH secretion, and virulence. PA4921 translational fusions were used to determine regulation and induction. Binding of GbdR to the PA4921 promoter was demonstrated by mobility shift assay. Fatty acid esters of nitrophenol (4, 8 , and 16 carbon length) were used to measure lipase/esterase activity in cell extracts and with purified PA4921. PlcH activity was measured by nitrophenylphosphorylcholine hydrolysis, and plcH transcriptional control was measured with a plcH transcriptional reporter fusion and qRT-PCR. PA4921 transcript was induced in the presence of surfactant and phosphatidylcholine catabolites in a GbdR-dependent manner and GbdR bound directly to the PA4921 promoter. Purified PA4921 showed specific lipase/esterase activity towards short and medium chain acyl esters but not long chain acyl esters. PA4921 deletion mutants showed decreased PlcH activity in supernatants but no change in plcH transcription. We are examining the mechanism by which PA4921 controls PlcH expression and the impact of PA4921 deletion on P. aeruginosa virulence. Current data suggest that PA4921 is a GbdR-regulated lipase/esterase that post-transcriptionally regulates PlcH expression and may impact P. aeruginosa virulence in the lung. This work was supported by NIH NCRR P20-RR021905. Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) chronic pulmonary infections in CF patients are difficult to eradicate with current antimicrobials in part due to the formation of antibiotic resistant organized communities of bacteria or biofilms. New therapies aimed at disrupting or preventing biofilm formation that enhance the efficacy of currently available drugs are urgently needed. CORM-2 kills planktonic PA by releasing CO that binds to heme-containing oxidases of the respiratory chain stopping bacterial energy consumption. CO concentrations required for bacterial killing are not toxic for mammalian cell and exogenous administration of CO (100-500ppm) by inhalation is in phase I clinical trials as an anti-inflammatory agent (NCT00094406). While cell death during planktonic growth is well described, the ability of CORM-2 to affect PA biofilms and microcolony formation on epithelial cells has not been tested. We hypothesized that carbon monoxide releasing molecules (CORMs) attenuate PA biofilm formation and epithelial cell colonization. To assess the antimicrobial effects of CORM-2 on PAO1 surface colonization we examined biofilm formation and microcolony formation on human bronchial epithelial cells (16HBE14o-). In vitro PAO1 biofilms were established by overnight growth in M9 medium with glucose in 24 well plastic dishes. The planktonic cells were removed and fresh medium with various doses of CORM-2 (25µM-100 µM), DMSO vehicle control, iCORM control (containing ruthenium but no CO), +/-tobramycin, were added to the biofilm. The biofilm was incubated with drug, washed and the biomass analyzed by crystal violet staining. The presence of CORM-2 reduced biofilm formation by 50% with doses as low as 25µM. This effect was observed as early as 1hr after drug addition and maintained for 6 hrs. CORM2-induced bacterial death within the biofilm was confirmed by colony forming unit (CFU) assay of dissociated bacteria after gentle sonication of the biofilm (2 log drop with 50µM CORM2 at 60min). Tobramycin (100µg/mL) alone also reduced CFU recovery from the biofilm by 2 logs after 60 minutes and the combination of both CORM-2 and tobramycin gave an additive effect. Time-lapse microscopy (VivaView, Olympus) of PAO1 expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) attached to glass bottom dishes showed attenuation of biofilm formation after addition of CORM-2. For co-culture studies, 16HBE41o-cells seeded on glass-bottomed dishes were inoculated with PAO1-GFP at a 1:3 cell:bacteria/epithelial cell ratio for 40 minutes. After rinsing the unattached bacteria, the co-culture was visualized by time-lapse microscopy for 8 hours in presence of CORM2 (50µM) and/or of tobramycin (10µg/mL) or of controls (iCORM, DMSO). The epithelium integrity was monitored by differential interference contrast microscopy. CORM-2 prevented microcolony formation and epithelial cell damage over time and the combination of CORM-2 and tobramycin was again additive. This study demonstrates that CORM-2 alters PA surface colonization and identifies the PA electron transport chain as a potential target to design new drugs that attenuate PA biofilm formation. TSM and EMB contributed equally to the study. Rationale: Massively parallel DNA sequencing has enabled an explosion of data suggesting the presence of a diverse bacterial community in healthy and sick lungs, yet dogma dictates that normal lungs are predominantly sterile. Multiple defense mechanisms kill inhaled and aspirated bacteria, and include cough, mucociliary clearance, airway antimicrobial molecules and immune cells. Most studies of airway bacterial diversity have obtained samples using bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) or protected cytology brushes, which can result in contamination from the mouth and upper airways. Here, we investigated the relative contribution of the mouth and upper airways to bacterial counts and total bacterial DNA load in BAL samples, and asked whether most of the recovered DNA corresponds to live bacteria. We hypothesized that the distal airways would be sterile and that bacterial DNA in BAL samples would correspond to dead bacteria and sample contamination from mouth bacteria. Method: We obtained distal lung tissue samples from 6-week old pigs after thoracotomy under sterile conditions. Homogenates of lung samples were used for bacterial culture and for DNA extraction. We developed a DNase treatment-based method for bacterial quantification that allows discerning between intact bacterial cell 16s-rRNA DNA and free bacterial DNA or DNA from bacteria with damaged cell walls. We also examined the endogenous bacterial load of the pig bronchial airways in samples obtained directly after thoracotomy (Sterile BAL). We then examined the relative contribution of mouth bacteria to contamination of BAL by comparing the previous sample to localization-matched BAL obtained with a bronchoscope under conditions that mimic clinical practice (Standard BAL). Result: We were unable to culture bacteria from the distal lung samples. Moreover, we found that DNase-resistant DNA corresponded to approximately 4% of the total 16s DNA load, suggesting presence of mostly free DNA or DNA from damaged cells in the samples. In Sterile BAL samples, culturable bacteria were less diverse and levels corresponded to approximately 8% of those in Standard BAL samples, suggesting mouth contamination in BAL samples when standard clinical precautions are taken. Total bacterial DNA in Sterile BAL samples was 48% of that in Standard BAL samples. In both types of BAL samples, DNase-resistant DNA was about 35% of total bacterial DNA. Conclusion: These data suggest that normal distal lungs in pigs are mostly sterile. In contrast, in the bronchial airways, the abundance of bacterial DNA from damaged or dead bacteria suggests that antimicrobial mechanisms tend to keep the airways free from frequently inhaled and aspirated bacteria, but we cannot rule out the presence of intact bacteria. Our data also confirm that using standard clinical precautions to obtain BAL results in significant mouth contamination of the sample. Careful consideration of these factors is therefore important when studying bacterial communities present in diseased lungs and comparing them to healthy lungs. aeruginosa (CRPA) strains at some European CF centers, and patient-topatient transmission has been reported at two such centers. The objective of this study was to assess retrospectively the prevalence and molecular epidemiology of CRPA in the U.S., in light of data indicating that chronic inhaled COL use here is more prevalent than generally recognized. As part of this study, ~1100 isolates referred from U.S. CF centers to the CF Synergy Lab (Columbia University) as MDR P. aeruginosa and initially tested as resistant or intermediate to COL during 2000 -2007 were transferred to a research repository, re-coded, re-speciated and re-tested; ~410 isolates were confirmed as CRPA. A limited data set that links isolate codes to specimen receipt dates and patient, center, and region codes enabled analysis of temporal trends and geographic relationships without revealing patient or center identities. Overall, 57 U.S. CF patients had ≥2 CRPA isolates, and 14 had ≥4 isolates. Sixteen U.S. centers were identified at which at least three patients had had at least one CRPA isolate cultured. Our analysis focused on three centers, each with a relatively large number of CRPA isolates: Center J, with 20 isolates collected from 15 patients; Center M, with 12 isolates from 10 patients; and Center N, with 13 isolates from 9 patients. About half of these isolates were highly COL resistant (MIC > 1024 mg/L, or 128-fold above the current CLSI-defined lower limit of resistance). The phoPQ, parRS, and pmrAB loci encode two-component systems (TCS) that regulate COL resistance mechanisms; mutations in these loci can lead to resistance. To understand the nature of such mutations in this set of 48 isolates, alleles of the phoQ (PA1180), parS (PA1799), and pmrB (PA4777) sensor kinase genes were sequenced. In Center J, 13 isolates derived from 10 patients shared a single distinct pmrB double mutation (all 13 isolates were WT at the phoQ and parS loci). MLST genotyping of these isolates performed through analysis of aroE (PA0025), trpE (PA0609), acsA (PA0887), ppsA (PA1770), and mutL (PA4946) confirmed that these 13 isolates represented a single clone shared among the patients. Additional shared strains with different phoQ, parS, and pmrB mutations were observed in all three centers, generally involving pairs of patients. While the molecular epidemiology suggests the occurrence of patient-to-patient transmission of CRPA strains within these centers, in the absence of contact tracing other possible modes of transmission such as spread from a non-CF point source cannot be excluded. Moreover, sharing of clonal CRPA isolates between patients at different centers has not yet been observed. This represents the first reported spread of CRPA strains within U.S. cystic fibrosis centers. Supported by CFFT grant MOSKOW05P0 and NIH grant R01AI067653. Pseudomonas aeruginosa expresses many virulence factors important for its ability to cause human infections, including lung infections. As bacteria encounter different nutrient and stress conditions, the expression of virulence factors is modulated. Nutrient limitation induces the stringent response, a conserved global stress and starvation response, upon synthesis of the alarmone (p)pGpp by the genes relA and spoT. We here hypothesized that relA and spoT play an important role in the regulation of virulence. We compared the phenotypes of the PAO1 wild type, the mutants ∆relA and ∆relA∆spoT, as well as spoT+ and relA+spoT+ complemented strains. We measured production of total protease, elastase, pyocyanin, pyoverdin, and exotoxins U and T using in vitro assays. The production of total protease was significantly decreased in both ∆relA (60.9%, p = 0.006) and ∆relA∆spoT (6.9%, p < 0.0001) strains compared to the wild type (100%). There was a large decrease in the production of elastase (4.6%, p < 0.0001), pyocyanin (7.9%, p < 0.0001), and pyoverdin (35.8%, p < 0.0001) in the ∆relA∆spoT strain compared to the wild type (100%), but none were significantly decreased in the ∆relA strain. All complemented strains showed a recovery of virulence factor production, which confirmed that relA and spoT are required for full expression of these virulence factors. There was no significant difference in the production of exotoxins U and T among the strains. To further validate these in vitro phenotypes, we tested the wild type and ∆relA∆spoT strains in an acute pneumonia mouse infection model. The wild type strain caused 100% mortality within 48 hours compared to 20% with the ∆relA∆spoT (p ≤ 0.05), further suggesting that the ∆relA∆spoT strain is highly attenuated for acute virulence. In conclusion, a complete inactivation of the stringent response through the deletion of both relA and spoT is required to significantly reduce the production of specific virulence factors (elastase, pyocyanin, pyoverdin), whereas deletion of relA alone does not lead to significant reduction in virulence. Through in vitro and in vivo work, we have shown that the stringent response plays a critical role in the control of virulence in P. aeruginosa. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is of great clinical relevance to patients with cystic fibrosis, many of whose lungs are colonized by this bacterium in the first few years of life. Most colonizing strains are thought to be environmental, but little work has been done to identify environmental habitats most important in lung colonization. Identifying potential habitats from which infections are acquired would facilitate targeted management of patient exposure through elimination of P. aeruginosa habitat or targeted cleaning. In this study we examine the distribution of P. aeruginosa in the human home environment. Ten households were enrolled in this study, 5 of which had a young child with CF, 5 of which did not. In each household up to 125 unique sites were sampled 4 times over the course of 1 year. These included sites in and on humans and pets (e.g. nose, mouth, eyes), as well as nonhost associated sites (e.g. drains, counters, soils). In all, 4950 samples were taken from 1560 unique sites. Samples were swabbed onto Pseudomonas Isolation Agar and incubated for 48 hours at 28° C. Where growth occurred, the isolates were identified by their 16s rDNA sequence. In all, we isolated 72 P. aeruginosa from 47 of the 1560 unique sites. Patterns of recovery show that habitats differed significantly in recovery rates of P. aeruginosa. As expected, P. aeruginosa was recovered from the respiratory tracts of CF patients. It was also commonly found in household drains; 30% of the kitchen sink, bathroom sink, tub and shower drains sampled yielded P. aeruginosa. In contrast, it was rarely recovered from the other non-host associated sites including yard, garden, and houseplant soils; only 1.3% of these other non-host associated sites yielded P. aeruginosa. There were no differences in recovery from non-CF humans living in homes with versus without a CF patient, and non-host associated sites did not differ in P. aeruginosa recovery in CF homes versus non-CF homes. The fact that recovery of P. aeruginosa from drains in non-CF homes was not significantly lower than in CF homes suggests that colonization of the drains from patient sources does not explain the high rates of recovery from this habitat type. These data suggest that targeted cleaning of drains could substantially reduce P. aeruginosa populations to which CF patients are exposed in the home. Multiple in vitro studies have demonstrated the potential for an antibiotic to inhibit rather than synergize with the antimicrobial effects of other antibiotics. Azithromycin has been identified as a drug which may interfere with the effect of antibiotics targeting Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P.a.). Azithromycin is commonly prescribed as chronic therapy for patients with cystic fibrosis, due to broad immunomodulatory and antimicrobial properties. The majority of these patients also receive episodic treatment with anti-pseudomonal antibiotics, including ciprofloxacin and tobramycin. We sought to determine the interaction of azithromycin with these two anti-pseudomonal antibiotics in a model of persistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in vivo. Methods: Using IACUC approved protocols to minimize stress and discomfort, partial-thickness cutaneous thermal injury (i.e. burn wound) was established in C57Bl/6 mice. Two hours after injury, the wound was infected with P.a. strain PA01. At predetermined intervals following injury, animals were treated intraperitoneally with azithromycin, ciprofloxacin, and/or tobramycin, alone or in combination, at doses relevant to human use. At predetermined timepoints following infection, animals were euthanized for tissue collection to analyze both local and systemic burden of P.a. infection. Results: A single dose of azithromycin (20 mg/kg) administered 4 hours after infection demonstrated a significant antimicrobial effect against P.a. both locally (skin) and systemically (lung and spleen) at 24 hours and 72 hours after infection. This effect was similar to that seen with ciprofloxacin (20 mg/kg twice daily) or tobramycin (10 mg/kg daily) monotherapy. At 72 hours, azithromycin was additive in inhibition of P.a. skin and lung infection when combined with ciprofloxacin, but significantly antagonized the antimicrobial effect of tobramycin in the skin and lung. These data correlate with the observation of greater weight loss in the dual treatment (azithromycin and tobramycin) when compared with monotherapy or saline control. Splenic bacterial growth had a similar trend but was generally low and no statistically significant effects were observed. No significant effect on circulating neutrophils or neutrophil content of the infected wound was observed with any of the mono or dual therapies tested. Conclusion: The macrolide azithromycin may have significant antipseudomonal antimicrobial effects in a model of persistent skin infection with systemic spread to the lung and spleen. Azithromycin appears to have added anti-P.a. effects when used in conjunction with ciprofloxacin, but may significantly interfere with therapeutic efficacy in combination with tobramycin. These are the first in vivo data demonstrating this effect, which has been reported in multiple in vitro studies of combined antibiotic useparticularly those employing biofilm culture techniques. Ongoing studies of these potential interactions using primary pulmonary infection models will be presented. and in vivo after passive immunization for protective efficacy against lethal peritonitis in mice infected by BCC alone or by BCC mixed with PNAGproducing methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Results: PNAG is expressed in vitro by BCC species and in vivo in the human lung during infection with B. dolosa. CF patients chronically infected with B. dolosa mounted a PNAG-specific opsonophagocytic antibody response. Monoclonal human and polyclonal animal antibodies to PNAG mediated high-level opsonophagocytic killing of the major BCC species and were protective against lethal peritonitis in mice after passive administration. These antibodies also mediated protection in a BCC-MRSA coinfection model. Conclusions: PNAG is expressed in vitro and in vivo by the BCC, and antibodies to PNAG are protective in a murine model of BCC infection, raising potential new therapeutic options against all the PNAG-producing bacteria, including multi-drug resistant and pan-resistant pathogens. Distinguishing between these infections typically requires plating sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluids followed by biochemical testing of isolated organisms. In work done by others, in vivo measurement of patient breath volatiles shows that it is possible to distinguish between P. aeruginosa infected and uninfected individuals. We have employed a new technology -secondary electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (SESI-MS) -to measure the volatile, ionizable compounds present in the breath of mice with an established P. aeruginosa or S. aureus infection in the lung. The objectives of this study are to: 1. Distinguish between P. aeruginosa and S. aureus infection in the mouse lung by measuring the volatiles in the mouse breath using SESI-MS and 2. Distinguish between methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) and methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) infection in the mouse lung through a SESI-MS analysis of the rodent's breath. Rapid diagnosis of the dominant organism creating exacerbation in CF patients as well as the ability to distinguish between MRSA and MSSA strains would enable the physician to provide a more effective treatment regimen, thus improving the patient's quality of life. Methods: P. aeruginosa strain PA14, MSSA strain RN450, and MRSA strain 450M infections are established in male mice (C57BL/6J) at an infection dose of approximately 6x10 5 CFU/lung. Anesthetized mice are attached to a Flexivent system at 0.25 mL/breath and at ~180 breaths per minute. Mouse breath is collected over 60 minutes in a Tedlar bag. The breath is analyzed by SESI-MS in positive and negative ion modes, operating between 2 -4 kV and using a silica capillary (40 µm) with a sharpened tip. Results: The volatile metabolome (m/z range: 20 -200 amu) from each bacterium infecting the mouse lung is unique, and can be used to distinguish between P. aeruginosa and S. aureus. Discussion and Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that we can distinguish between mice with S. aureus and P. aeruginosa lung infections via assessment of the volatiles in their breath using SESI-MS. Our preliminary in vitro work suggests that we should also be able to show that we can distinguish between MSSA and MRSA infection in mouse breath using SESI-MS, too. The ability to easily and quickly assess breath as a gateway to the host-pathogen ecosystem would allow physicians to determine the identity and nature of dominant infectious agents in the CF lung, without the need for culturing organisms from sputum or BAL. Therefore, breath analysis would facilitate the implementation of earlier, better-targeted treatments for bacterial infection in CF patients. Funding: This study was supported by NIH P20 RR021905-01. Background: There are emerging data on the importance of viral infections as triggers for pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) in children with CF. Prompt treatment of PEx is crucial to ensure patients return to their prior best baseline lung function. Because timely diagnosis of viral respiratory illness can be challenging, we studied a home collection method of respiratory samples followed by detection of respiratory viruses by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). This approach to rapid identification of respiratory virus infections in CF patients may ultimately allow for more prompt recognition and potentially early treatment of PEx. Objective: A prospective observational pilot study was conducted among children aged 6-18 years with CF to assess the feasibility of a new method for self collection of nasal secretions using soft polyurethane foam swabs with detection of respiratory viruses by PCR. Methods: Symptom surveys were completed and swabs were collected with onset of new respiratory illness ≥24 hours and <7 days duration. If respiratory illness was present at a CF clinic visit, collection of a standard nasopharyngeal swab by research staff and a self-collected "wet" swab using saline spray was performed. At home, patients collected up to 2 sets of foam nasal swabs (one "wet" and one "dry" swab per set) with onset of respiratory illness. Samples were mailed to the laboratory at ambient temperature via Priority Mail. Results: Thirty-five CF patients (mean age, 11.7 years) were enrolled. Seventeen swab sets were collected in clinic with 8/17 (47%) positive virus detections in at least one swab per set; 42 home swab sets were collected from 24 patients with 34/42 (81%) positive virus detections in at least one swab per set. Overall, 46 viruses were detected (4 swab sets were positive for 2 viruses): 33 (72%) rhinovirus, 6 (13%) coronavirus, 2 (4%) respiratory syncytial virus, 2 (4%) parainfluenza, 2 (4%) influenza A/H1N1, and 1 (2%) adenovirus. Mean number of symptoms reported was 3.3 and 4.4 for clinic and home collections, respectively; and duration of new symptoms was 5.3 and 3.1 days for clinic and home collections, respectively. Median time from date of specimen collection to processing in the lab was 1 day (range, 0-3 days) for swabs collected in clinic and 6 days (range, 1-19 days) for those collected at home. For home collection, the same virus(es) were detected in both swabs among 32 swab pairs; 4 additional viruses were detected in dry swabs alone. Conclusion: Home collection and mailing of nasal swabs for respiratory virus diagnosis is feasible for children with CF. Swabs collected at home yielded a higher proportion of positive virus detections compared with swabs collected in clinic (81% vs. 47%), likely because home-collected swabs were obtained closer to the onset of symptoms. The self collection method was feasible with similar results using wet or dry swabs. This selfcollection method may be useful for clinical diagnostics and future investigations of the impact of respiratory virus infections in children with CF. Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) are widely found in the environment. The prevalence of NTM in the cystic fibrosis (CF) population ranges from 3-30%. American Thoracic Society 2007 guidelines have delineated diagnostic criteria for NTM infection based on clinical symptoms, radiolog-ic findings, and cultures. CF patients have chronic symptoms and radiologic findings that overlap with NTM infection making the differentiation between disease and colonization challenging. CF disease alone is an independent risk factor for NTM. Bronchiectasis, biofilm formation, specific concurrent bacterial infections, and azithromycin use have also been shown to increase the propensity of NTM infections. Our objective is to challenge the current existing clinical trends and evaluate the risk factors and necessity for anti-mycobacterial treatment in CF patients. Miller Children's Hospital of Long Beach in California is an accredited CF Foundation Center which cares for over 225 CF patients. Since 2006, 14 CF patients (6%) were identified to have at least one positive NTM culture. Sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cultures, identification of Mycobacterium species, pulmonary function tests (PFT), computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest, and azithromycin therapy were reviewed for each patient. Eleven of 14 patients met ATS guidelines, and of those, 5 patients (45%) were started on NTM therapy. Two patients showed radiographic improvement without significant change in PFT, while two other patients continued to show steady decline in clinical status and radiologic findings despite appropriate NTM treatment. The last patient was initiated on treatment but did not tolerate more than 1 week. Her radiographic studies and PFT however remained stable. Four (66%) of the 6 patients, who did not start NTM therapy, continued to have stable PFT (change in FEV1 ranged from -3% to 16% of predicted) 6-24 months following diagnosis. One showed improvement on chest CT without treatment. Sputum acid-fast cultures were positive in only 45% of these patients, while BAL cultures were positive in all 11 patients. Forty-five percent of patients were on chronic azithromycin therapy for anti-inflammation, and 92% had positive cultures for Staphylococcus aureus, 45% for Haemophilus influenzae, 36% for Pseudomonas species, and 36% for Stenotrophomonas maltophilia. The majority of CF patients remained clinically stable despite lack of therapy, and those who received NTM therapy showed no significant improvement in long-term PFT. Cultures from BAL appear to be more sensitive in detecting the presence of NTM. Our results question the necessity of NTM therapy in the CF population and suggest further prospective studies are needed before prolonged intensive and invasive (PICC line) therapy for NTM is commenced. Newer guidelines for treating NTM in CF patients should be developed by the national CF Foundation. Cystic fibrosis (CF) manifests in several organ systems, but inflammation and persistent infection in the lung are responsible for most of the morbidity and mortality associated with CF. Inflammation develops during the first few months of life in the CF lung and is characterized by a persistent influx of neutrophils and elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines. Multiple studies have demonstrated abnormal function of neutrophils isolated from CF patients, but it is important to note that all of these findings were demonstrated in neutrophils isolated from older children or adult CF patients with known colonization with P. aeruginosa, therefore it is unclear if the observed neutrophil abnormalities were due to stimulus from the infectious and/or inflammatory state of the host or to a primary defect within the CF neutrophil. Neutrophils are professional phagocytes and effectively remove infectious pathogens from a variety of tissues. Shortly after phagocytosis of bacteria, a complex cascade of reactions occurs that lowers the phagosomal pH and assails the engulfed bacteria with oxygen radicals and an array of proteolytic enzymes. Previous studies demonstrated that CFTR is required for bacterial killing by macrophages and that neutrophils isolated from adult CF patients were defective in chlorination of ingested bacterial proteins sug-gesting a potential role for CFTR in neutrophil phagolysosomal function. However, these studies utilized neutrophils from adult CF patients or CFTR-/-mice (which do not develop the hyper-inflammatory lung disease seen in human CF patients); therefore, the question remains if neutrophil abnormalities in CF patients are due to a critical role of CFTR in neutrophil function. We hypothesized that CF neutrophils are intrinsically normal and that CFTR is not needed for normal neutrophil function. To test this hypothesis we used the CF newborn screen to identify CF infants and isolate human CF neutrophils prior to the onset of significant pulmonary or systemic disease. Isolated infant neutrophils were incubated with P. aeruginosa or S. aureus to evaluate bacterial killing, phagolysosomal function, and the production of proinflammatory mediators. Results indicate that neutrophil mediated bacterial killing was normal in neutrophils isolated from CF infants when compared to CF carrier or control infants. In addition, phagolysosomal acidification and the production of oxygen radicals were normal in CF neutrophils. However, the secretion of pro-inflammatory mediators following bacteria exposure was increased in CF infant neutrophils when compared to normal controls. The unexpected conclusion suggested from these findings is that although CF neutrophil phagolysosomal function and bacterial killing is normal, CFTR is needed for normal neutrophil function and the inhibition of neutrophil activation. Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Foundation R457-CR07. . Multivariate analysis showed that both NTM+ Cases and ATS NTM+ Cases had poorer nutritional status and were more likely colonized with Aspergillus fumigatus. Treatment with low-dose azithromycin was associated with reduction in NTM+ Cases and ATS NTM+ Cases ATS (OR 0.40; 95% CI: 0.15 -1.05; P=0.06). Preliminary data suggest that azithromycin treatment was not associated with higher resistance to macrolides among NTM+ Cases previously receiving azithromycin. Conclusion: These data suggest that azithromycin is a primary prophylaxis for NTM disease and is not associated with resistance of NTM to macrolides. Prospective studies are warranted to confirm these findings. Previously we have shown that macrolide and clindamycin resistance in members of the Streptococcus milleri Group (SMG), consisting of S. intermedius, S. constellatus, and S. anginosus, is markedly high among isolates from cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, particularly those on chronic azithromycin therapy (Grinwis et al. 2010. J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 54:2823-2829). Typically, macrolide resistance in streptococci is due to the macrolide efflux pump, mefA/E, or the erythromycin methyltransferases ermA and ermB, although mutations in ribosomal DNA or proteins have also been observed, albeit at much lower frequencies. The purpose of the current study was to determine the mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance prevalent among CF airway isolates of the SMG. A total of 67 CF airway isolates resistant to macrolides, clindamycin, or tetracycline were subject to PCR using primers specific for known resistance determinants. These included mefA/E, ermB, ermTR/A, universal primers for a conserved region in the 23S rDNA gene, and the tetracycline-resistance gene tetM. Thirty-three isolates were considered duplicates and omitted from the analysis, leaving 34 unique isolates from 26 patients. Of these, 31 were resistant to at least one of the two macrolides tested, erythromycin and azithromycin. Sixteen of the macrolide-resistant isolates (52%) harboured either ermB (11/16), ermTR/A (4/16) or mefA/E (1/16). All of the isolates harbouring ermTR/A had inducible clindamycin resistance, while all but one isolate harbouring ermB were constitutively resistant to clindamycin. The remaining 15 macrolideresistant isolates (48%) had a point mutation at position A2058 or A2059 in the 23S rDNA gene. A2058G was the most common mutation observed (11/15), although A2058T (2/15) and A2059G (2/15) were also observed. Both A2058G and A2059G mutations conferred resistance to clindamycin, while isolates harbouring A2058T mutations were susceptible to clindamycin. Interestingly, macrolide resistance in all S. constellatus isolates (n = 6) was solely due to ribosomal mutations. These findings suggest that ribosomal mutation is a more common mechanism of macrolide and clindamycin resistance in SMG isolates than previously thought. The prevalence of methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has increased dramatically in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) over the last decade. This is concerning due to the possible association between persistent MRSA colonization in patients with CF and an increased rate of FEV 1 decline per year when compared with methicillin sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) colonization. The purpose of this study was to characterize current practices regarding efficacy and safety outcomes of long-term linezolid use in patients with CF, as this is not well described in the current literature. Methods: This was a retrospective, repeated measures study of patients with CF who received linezolid for the treatment of persistent MRSA lung infection between January 1, 2005 and December 31, 2010. The primary aim was to determine the annual rate of FEV 1 decline in patients who were treated with multiple courses of linezolid over at least 2 years. Each patient served as his or her own control, and a mixed effects regression model was used to assess the effect of linezolid treatment on the rate of FEV 1 decline over time. A two-tailed Student's t-test was then used to compare the annual rate of FEV1 decline in study patients treated with linezolid to centerwide data reported in the Port CF Database. ). An average of 6.9 linezolid courses were administered over a mean duration of 94.3 days (range 42 to 231; +/-47.5) for all combined therapies per subject. No significant difference in the rate of FEV 1 decline was noted in patients receiving linezolid over at least a two-year period (p=0.63). One case of transient linezolid resistance was documented; however, subsequent MRSA cultures all remained susceptible. Anemia and diarrhea were the most common adverse effects noted in 11 (73.3%) and 5 patients (33.3%), respectively. No cases of serotonin syndrome were reported during concomitant treatment with linezolid and serotonergic agents. Conclusions: Linezolid treatment was well tolerated overall; however, this small sample size of patients did not provide significant evidence to support the hypothesis that long term linezolid therapy maintains an expected annual rate of FEV 1 decline in patients colonized with MRSA. The aim of this pilot study is to evaluate the antimicrobial potential of a variety of essential oils and their key components toward cystic fibrosis (CF) pathogens in mixed species cultures and in combination with commonly used antibiotics. Essential oils (EOs), as a class of compounds extracted or distilled from plant materials, have long been known to possess antimicrobial activities. With ever-increasing awareness of the polymicrobial nature of CF airway infections, and concern for antibiotic resistence developing among bacteria and yeast of patients with frequent and/or chronic respiratory infections, research in our laboratories is focusing on essential oils and/or EO components as potential broad spectrum adjuvants to antibiotic therapy. Following initial EO screening experiments, this study tested selected EOs and EO constituents, those found to be the most effective oils against individual isolates of opportunistic CF pathogens Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) and Staphylococcus aureus (SA), on mixed species cultures from polymicrobial CF sputum and throat specimens. Using disk diffusion and vapor exposure assays, the oils cassia, oregano, and thyme white in particular, inhibited the broad range of bacteria and yeast common to these specimens; zone of inhibition (ZOI) ranges: cassia, 13-20 mm; oregano, 20-34 mm; and thyme white, 22-31 mm. For some of the patient samples it was also observed that ZOIs in the mixed cultures were greater than ZOIs of isolates cultured independently. Focused on PA, studies of potential synergy between vapor phase EO exposure in combination with common antibiotics on disks was evaluated. As seen with bay laurel for example, for organisms already susceptible to antibiotics ceftazidime and pipericillin, demonstrated little to no synergistic effect (< 2mm difference), whereas for an isolate showing less sensitivity to tobramycin (11.5 mm ZOI ABX alone), the ZOI was larger when simultaneously exposed to EO bay laurel (16.5 mm). Overall, oregano, thyme, cassia and bay ranked the "top performers" as potential antimicrobial EOs, and carvacrol, thymol, and cinnamaldehyde as antimicrobial components, based on number and variety of strains inhibited in contact and vapor exposure assays. These data suggest the potential of essential oils and essential oil (EO)-derived compounds to provide additive antimicrobial activity toward co-colonizing pathogens in a way amenable to CF inhalation therapy. This research was supported by corporate and private sponsors and the University of Missouri Agriculture Experiment Station Chemical Laboratories. Pittman, J.E. 1 ; Lin, F. 2 ; Davis, S. 1 1. Pediatrics, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Biostatistics, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Objective: CF lung disease begins in infancy and progresses before most children are able to perform spirometry. Our objective was to identify factors in infancy and early childhood associated with lung function at age 6-7 in a large cohort of children with CF from across the U.S. Methods: Analysis of prospectively collected data from CF Foundation Patient Registry on children with CF born from 1998-2002, using linear regression to investigate the association between early life occurrences (0-6 years of age) and mean FEV 1 at age 6-7. Analysis was restricted to subjects with pancreatic insufficiency (by genotype or supplemental enzyme use) with BMI data at age 2-4 and lung function data at age 6-7. Respiratory pathogen prevalence was defined as percentage of quarters (3 mo.) with cultures positive for a given organism. Results: We obtained data on 3,219 subjects from 171 U.S. CF centers, 3,180 (99%) of whom had confirmed diagnosis of CF. Of those, 2,535 (80%) were pancreatic insufficient (PI), 322 (10%) pancreatic sufficient; pancreatic status could not be determined for 323 (10%). Final analysis included 1965 PI subjects (47% male, 93% Caucasian, 11% Hispanic, 55% ∆F508 homozygous). Median age of diagnosis was 0.25 years; subjects presented with respiratory symptoms (36%), failure to thrive (37%), meconium ileus (25%), and abnormal stools (22%). Seventeen percent of subjects received tube feedings before age 6. Common treatments prior to age 6 included acid blockers (99%), dornase alfa (48%), and inhaled tobramycin (25%), β-agonists (60%), hypertonic saline (11%), and corticosteroids (31%). Organisms present on respiratory culture prior to age 6 included S. aureus (93%), methicillin resistant S. aureus (24%), P. aeruginosa (73%), On regression analysis, factors associated with lower mean FEV 1 at age 6-7 included lower BMI age 2-4, more hospitalizations, Hispanic ethnicity, respiratory symptoms at diagnosis, public insurance, and use of inhaled tobramycin. Other medications were not significantly associated with lung function at age 6. While density of cultures positive for P. aeruginosa was not significantly associated with lung function at age 6, higher percentage of cultures positive for mucoid P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, MRSA, and S. maltophilia were all associated with lower lung function at age 6, as was presence of B. cepacia. Conclusions: In nearly 2000 subjects with CF, we found a significant association between infection with mucoid P. aeruginosa, S. aureus, MRSA, S. maltophilia, and B. cepacia and lower lung function at age 6-7, but did not see an association with presence of non-mucoid P. aeruginosa. Lack of association of non-mucoid P. aeruginosa and early childhood lung function may reflect the widespread use of eradication protocols. Association of lower lung function with a wide variety of organisms suggests that the underlying pulmonary milieu (e.g. inflammation, mucociliary clearance) has a stronger influence on pulmonary outcomes than particular infectious organisms. Further study is needed to evaluate the impact of early childhood events on long-term pulmonary outcomes in CF. Support: CFF PITTMA10A0. (BX) is an early and prominent feature of CF lung disease. BX is present on chest CT even in children with normal PFTs, and chest CT scans can demonstrate progressive disease even when PFTs remain stable. Additionally, the presence of BX on chest CT is associated with more frequent pulmonary exacerbations in the 2 years following the chest CT. The association between BX and future lung disease has not been assessed. Methods: The Wisconsin Randomized Clinical Trial of CF Newborn Screening (WI RCT) is a prospective, longitudinal study of the effect of early diagnosis through newborn screening on children with CF. A chest CT was performed during a period of clinical stability on 81 children (mean age 11.5 years, range 6-17 years) enrolled in the WI RCT. Brody scores of severity (including BX subscores) were determined by three independent reviewers. Univariate linear regression was used to determine associations between BX subscores and the most recent (i.e., age 21, or 6/30/2010, whichever was later) measures of CF lung disease: PFTs, Wisconsin chest x-ray score (WCXR, range 0-100, a score > 5 indicates irreversible changes), Brasfield chest x-ray score (BCXR, range 4-25, scores < 21 indicate irreversible changes), and infection with P. aeruginosa. Data within 2 years of the chest CT was excluded. Results: Study participant characteristics at the time of the chest CT included: 41% female, 57% homozygous F508del, 84% pancreatic insufficient, 24% history of meconium ileus, mean FEV 1 91% predicted, mean WCXR 15.4, mean BCXR 18.8, and 48% with a respiratory culture positive for P. aeruginosa within the prior year. The median Brody chest CT BX subscore was 1.0 (range 0-5.0, out of a possible 12), indicating generally limited distribution of BX, although 84% of patients had BX. Follow up data was available for a mean of 5.6 years (range, 2-10 years). Mean age at follow up was 19.0 (SD 2.0) years. Table 1 details linear regression estimates of the difference in the most recent lung disease measure associated with a 1 point increase in BX subscore. BX severity was more strongly associated with the most recent FEV 1 and WCXR than FEV 1 , FEF 25-75 , and RV/TLC, (p<0.01), but not BCXR or WCXR (p>0.08), obtained at the time of the chest CT. Conclusions: Bronchiectasis on CT scan is the most significant predictor of lung disease progression and may be useful in guiding therapy. Chest imaging has added value in predicting which CF children with mild lung disease may develop more severe lung disease. Objective: Determine the impact of tobramycin, co-intervention effect of dornase alfa, and resistance to aminoglycosides on lung function decline measured by FEV1% predicted in CF patients prescribed chronic inhaled tobramycin. Study Design and Participants: Longitudinal cohort study of patients 6-21 years of age chronically infected with P. aeruginosa at least once. We acquired data from the CF Foundation Patient Registry for 1996-2009. We used Leeds criteria to annually determine chronic infection with P. aeruginosa for each patient. Patient-level tobramycin use was measured as the percentage of time the patient received Tobramycin when eligible based on CF Foundation care guidelines. Our primary outcome was mean quarterly FEV1% predicted. Methods: To examine short terms and long term use of tobramycin, we stratified regressions by tobramycin duration (< 3 years, м 3 years). Similarly, we stratified regressions by dornase alfa use (None, 1-2 years, м 3 years) to assess co-intervention effect of dornase alfa use on FEV1. We examined the impact of resistance to aminoglycosides. Potential confounders measured at baseline included age, FEV1, CDC weight-for-age %ile and insurance coverage. Baseline FEV1 was classified as Ϲ 35, 35-59, 60-79, 80-99% or м 100% predicted. Infection with MRSA, pancreatic insufficiency, CFRD, sex and pancreatic insufficiency were also considered potential confounders. We used two-stage instrumental variables regression to account for different prescribing patterns across CF centers. In the first stage, we performed a multiple linear regression of patient-level tobramycin use on center-level prescribing rate (our instrument) and observed confounders. In the second stage analysis, we performed a multiple linear regression of rate of decline in FEV1 on the instrumented patient-level tobramycin use (predicted values from the first-stage regression) and observed confounders. Results: For the overall cohort of 6-21 year-olds (n=8,270), increased tobramycin use was associated with improvement in rate of decline in FEV1 (0.026% pred/year for every 10% of increased use, 95% CI: 0.009 to 0.044, P=0.0039). For patients prescribed tobramycin for 3 years or longer (n=6,026), the association between use and FEV1% predicted rate of decline was statistically significant (0.054% pred/year for every 10% of increased use, 95% CI: 0.004 to 0.035, P=0.0364). Dornase alfa subgroups showed greater improvement that approached statistical significance. Relatively few patients never received dornase alfa (n=510). Although not statistically significant, there was a negative association between tobramycin use and rate of decline in FEV1 for the 771 patients with reported resistance to aminoglycosides (-0.013% pred/year for every 10% of increased use, 95% CI: -0.035 to 0.004). Conclusion: Increased tobramycin use is a predictor of slower rate of decline in FEV1. Patients on tobramycin м 3 years showed more improvement than patients on tobramycin <3 years. Patients with concomitant dornase alfa use had increased improvement in lung function. Objective: To develop and validate a PEx risk score for CF patients not receiving guideline-recommended therapies. Methods: Using data from the CF Foundation Patient Registry (1999 to 2008), we identified a cohort of patients with no reported use of either dornase alfa or inhaled tobramycin despite meeting recommended criteria (age ≥ 6 years, positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and predicted FEV1% 25%-75%) in a calendar year (defined as the index year). The primary outcome was a reported PEx requiring hospitalization or home IV treatment in the subsequent year. Index years were randomly split into a development sample (2/3 of the data) and a validation sample (1/3 of the data). In the development sample, a logistic regression model was developed to predict annual risk of pulmonary exacerbation following the index year based on characteristics including demographics, comorbidities, treatment history, disease severity and medical resource utilization. Important predictors were selected using the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) procedure, which identifies a parsimonious model while retaining predictive accuracy. The prediction model was then validated independently in the validation sample. Results: Among 4748 index years (from 2436 unique patients) the mean age was 28.9 years, mean FEV1 %-predicted was 57.5% and 44.8% were female. Pulmonary exacerbations occurred in 40% of all subsequent years. Higher risk of PEx in the development sample (n=3211 patient-years) was predicted by the following risk factors (in order of decreasing association): prior PEx, prior use of bronchodilators, cystic fibrosis-related diabetes, positive cultures for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, prior use of inhaled tobramycin, depression, prior use of dornase alfa, female gender, and lower FEV1 %-predicted. In the validation sample (n=1537 patientyears), the model demonstrated excellent predictive performance (c-statistic = 0.80). In the highest decile of predicted risk, 92% of patients experienced a PEx, while only 9% in the lowest decile experienced a PEx. Conclusions: A risk score for PEx among cystic fibrosis patients not receiving guideline-recommended therapies for pulmonary care was developed. Risk stratification identified patients with annual exacerbation risks ranging from very high (>90%) to very low (<10%). The risk score can be applied to inform treatment discussion and initiation of therapy for high-risk patients. Funding:Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp. Background: Treatment of pulmonary exacerbation of cystic fibrosis (CF) typically includes combination anti-pseudomonal beta-lactam and aminoglycoside antibiotics for 14 days. Optimal treatment duration is determined by response to therapy, including improved pulmonary function tests (PFTs), oxygenation, and nutrition status. Current therapy duration has largely been dictated by tradition, and few clinical studies have been conducted. Recent studies of other pulmonary infections, such as ventilatorassociated pneumonia, suggest therapy of less than 10 days may be adequate. Shortened duration of treatment may decrease length of stay, drug toxicity, and antimicrobial resistance. Methods: The study objective was to evaluate duration of antibiotic therapy for pulmonary exacerbation in hospitalized pediatric CF patients. This was a retrospective, observational study which utilized data obtained from medical records of an integrated health system, as well as the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Patient Registry, from January 1, 2006 to July 31, 2010. The study included CF patients ages 6-18 years from the Intermountain Cystic Fibrosis Pediatric Center admitted to Intermountain Primary Children's Medical Center for treatment of pulmonary exacerbations with combination therapy (anti-pseudomonal beta-lactam and aminoglycoside) for at least 14 days. A minimum of 3 PFTs for the admission were also required for study inclusion. The primary outcome variable was the percentage of patients who returned to baseline pulmonary function (FEV 1 , FVC) at 7 versus 14 days of therapy. This was evaluated by a chi-square test. Secondary outcomes variables included median FEV 1 percent predicted and median FVC percent predicted at 7 and 14 days, time to next exacerbation, improvement in nutrition status from baseline (BMI), and antibiotic susceptibility data (antibiogram). This study was IRB approved. Results: We evaluated 443 encounters (115 patients); 180 encounters (81 patients) met inclusion criteria. Return to baseline FEV 1 % predicted was significantly different at 7 vs. 14 days (47% vs. 64%, p<0.05). Median FVC% predicted was significantly different at 7 vs. 14 days (88 vs. 93, p<0.05), as was median FEV 1 % predicted (77 vs. 83, p<0.05). Median time to next exacerbation was 221 days (27-1269), with only 55% requiring readmission within 1 year. Median improvement in BMI was significant at 14 days (0.6 kg/m 2 , p=0.007). Discussion: This study shows significant improvement in pulmonary function and nutrition status after 14 days of therapy. The findings of this retrospective review suggest a length of treatment based on return to baseline would favor a 14 day course over 7 day course of inpatient therapy. Further study is needed to define the optimal duration of antibiotic therapy for CF pulmonary exacerbations. Background: Recent data from our group noted that nationally up to 25% of CF patients do not fully recover their lung function after exacerbation. This might be due to delayed recognition. The primary goal of this proposal is to assess the feasibility of performing an early intervention in the recognition and hence treatment of adult CF acute exacerbations using home symptom monitoring with the CF Respiratory Symptom Diary (CFRSD) and home spirometry. Methods: The study is a 6 month single center, stratified randomized non-blinded controlled clinical trial comparing usual care to a program of early identification and treatment of exacerbation in adults with CF. Subjects were randomized based on a stratified 1:1 randomization scheme (the stratification variable FEV 1 ≤ or > an FEV 1 of 50% of pred.). Subjects were enrolled if they were clinically stable, had not undergone solid organ transplantation, and were chronically colonized by P. aeruginosa. Subjects were excluded if they were infected with B. cepacia complex, receiving active treatment for nontuberculous mycobacterial infection, or diagnosed with ABPA. The early intervention arm performed home spirometry using the PiKo-6 spirometer and CFRSD assessment via web based questionnaire or Philips Telehealth twice weekly. If the respiratory symptoms noted the change in symptoms by a score of 2 or more or the subject's home spirometry result decreased by 10% or more, they were contacted by phone and evaluated about a possible acute exacerbation. The primary endpoint was feasibility and compliance of the intervention. Results: Forty-two subjects were enrolled, 20 randomized to usual care and 22 to early intervention. The mean age was 29.7 yrs (± 10.1 SD) with a mean FEV 1 % of pred. of 58.7% (± 22.0% SD). Subjects randomized to early intervention were older (mean age 32.8 vs 26.3) and had worse lung function (56.9% pred. vs 60.6% pred.). In the early intervention arm, compliance was high, with 59% of subjects completing all biweekly home spirometry and web-based CFRSD during the 6 month study period. Compliance was higher using the Phillips Telehealth device than the web-based assessment (74% vs 54%). Both groups had improvement in nutritional status with improved weight [+0.55 and +0.48 kg (p=0.94) in usual care vs intervention arm]. Lung function remained stable in the early intervention arm and fell in the usual care, but this did not reach statistical significance (-0.01 liters vs -0.15, p=0.19 ). The early intervention group experienced more exacerbations (all exacerbations: 44 vs 32; incidence rate difference: 0.32, 95% CI:-0.66 to + 1.32). Conclusions: Early intervention in pulmonary exacerbation using home symptom monitoring and home spirometry is feasible with reasonable compliance. Lung function as measured by FEV 1 did not change significantly between the groups, however, subjects in the early intervention arm had mean lung function that was unchanged compared to a fall in lung function in the usual care arm. These results suggest that a large scale efficacy study is warranted to study the impact of home monitoring of symptoms and lung function to improve clinical outcome in CF. Funding Source: CFFT GOSS08A0. Methods: A total of 143 children age 0.3 to 6.5 years contributing 2 to 5 annual assessments including bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage and limited slice chest computed tomography (CT) were included in this study. Relationships between severe CFTR genotype, defined as both mutations classified as Class I, II or III (compared to mild genotype, defined as at least 1 mutation from Class IV or V) and clinical status, endobronchial infection, neutrophilic inflammation (summarised using principal component analyses as an inflammatory response score) and components of structural lung disease (bronchiectasis and air trapping) were assessed using linear or logistic regression (depending on the response variable) controlling for potential confounders and allowing for multiple measurements on the same person using generalised estimating equations. Results: Class of both CFTR mutations was known in 122 of 143 children, with 15 children having a mild CFTR genotype and 107 children having a severe CFTR genotype. Children with severe CFTR genotype had a lower BMI z-score (p=0.001), significantly higher inflammatory response score (p=0.019) and had significantly greater worsening of inflammation between scans (p=0.008). We did not detect a relationship between severe CFTR genotype and endobronchial infection. While the presence of bronchiectasis and air trapping was not more common in children with severe compared to mild CFTR genotype, children with severe CFTR genotype had a significantly greater extent of bronchiectasis (p=0.006) and air trapping (p=0.011), and a significantly greater worsening in bronchiectasis (p=0.006) and air trapping (p=0.011) extent between successive scans. Discussion: Neutrophilic inflammation and structural lung disease are more severe in infants and young children with severe CFTR genotypes, with evidence of a greater rate of disease progression. This may have implications for more aggressive management of infants with severe CFTR genotypes. Supported by: CFFT, Inc, USA; ACFRT; and NH&MRC. Background: Pseudomonas (Pa) respiratory infection has clearly been associated with poorer long-term outcomes in CF patients. However, the relationship between initial Pa acquisition and shorter-term clinical outcomes remains poorly defined, and has not been evaluated in the current era of widespread use of initial Pa eradication regimens. As part of the ongoing EPIC Observational Study, we aimed to evaluate the clinical outcomes associated with the first lifetime isolation of Pa from a respiratory culture in a large U.S. CF cohort. Methods: Participants were children with CF <13 years of age at enrollment into the EPIC Observational Study between 2004 and 2006, with no prior isolation of Pa from a respiratory (generally oropharyngeal) culture, and observed at least 120 days without a Pa + culture. Clinical endpoints were abstracted from EPIC case report forms and the US CFF National Patient Registry. For continuous variables (lung function in patients >6 years, and growth), marginal regression models were fit to estimate slopes before and after Pa acquisition while on study. The rate ratio of pulmonary exacerbations treated with IV antibiotics before vs. after Pa acquisition was estimated with Poisson regression. Logistic regression was used to estimate the risk of the following before vs. after Pa acquisition: presence of respiratory signs and symptoms such as cough or crackles; antibiotic use; + culture for other bacteria. All models used generalized estimating equation (GEE) methods and were adjusted for potential confounders. Results: The cohort consisted of 886 subjects with a mean (SD) age of 4.6 (3.5) years at enrollment, observed for a mean 3.9 (SD 0.7) years. A total of 414 (47%) acquired Pa, of whom > 71% received anti-Pa antibiotics; 302 were ≥6 years of age and had spirometry data across a mean of 3.8 years on study. There was no significant effect of Pa acquisition on the slopes of FEV1 (% predicted or CF-specific percentile), weight or height percentile, or body mass index. The rate of pulmonary exacerbations treated with IV antibiotics was significantly greater after Pa acquisition (incident rate ratio 1.5, 95% CI 1.1, 2.0). The odds of crackles or wheeze on physical exam also increased after Pa acquisition (OR 1.3, 95% CI 1.1, 1.7) but there was no significant effect on cough or activity level. The odds of isolation of MRSA (OR 1.6, 95% CI 1.1, 2.2) and S. maltophilia (OR 2.6, 95% CI 1.7, 3.9) increased after Pa acquisition, while the odds of H. influenzae (OR 0.6, 95% CI 0.5, 0.7) decreased. Conclusion: In this large US cohort, first lifetime isolation of Pa was not associated with a significant deterioration in lung function or nutrition, but was associated with greater subsequent pulmonary exacerbation rates and odds of crackles or wheeze on physical exam. Longer observation periods may be required to observe an effect of Pa acquisition on lung function. Pa infection may be the cause of these adverse outcomes or may be a marker of more severe lung disease. Supported by CFFT. Background: Potential therapies such as denufosol (an ion channel regulator that increases chloride secretion through calcium-activated chloride channels and inhibits sodium absorption through epithelial sodium channels) may provide the greatest benefit if initiated during infancy or early childhood, before the onset of irreversible structural airway damage. Few studies have evaluated the safety of inhaled investigational drugs in children with CF <6 years of age. The objective of this study was to evaluate the safety and tolerability of denufosol for inhalation in 2 to 4 year old children with CF. Methods: Randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, parallel group study of the short-term safety and tolerability of denufosol tetrasodium inhalation solution. Eligibility criteria included a) established diagnosis of CF, b) age 2 to 4 years inclusive; c) room air oxygen saturation ≥95%; d) informed consent by parent or guardian. Patients were excluded if they had an acute respiratory infection; wheezing; or hemoptysis, hospitalization, or inhaled hypertonic saline use within 30 days preceding enrollment. Participants were randomized 1:1 to denufosol, 15 mg/mL, 60 mg tid or 0.9% sodium chloride, 4 mL tid for 7 to 10 days administered via Pari LC Plus nebulizer. The first dose at Visit 1 and the final dose at Visit 2, 7 to 10 days later, were administered under observation. The primary endpoint was intolerability of study drug, defined as one of the following post-dose at visit 1 or 2: a) room air Sa0 2 <90% or drop in room air Sa0 2 >5% from baseline for >5 minutes, b) cough for >10 minutes, d) new wheeze or crackles on chest auscultation. Results: Twenty-five children were enrolled, 12 in the placebo and 13 in the active arm. Mean (SD) age was 3.0 (0.79) years, 12 were male, all were white, 2 were Hispanic, and 13 were delta F508 homozygous. No subjects met the pre-defined intolerability criteria at either visit. Six (50%) patients in the placebo arm and 5 (38%) in the denufosol arm experienced 10 and 14 adverse events (AEs), respectively. Most were mild, 3 were moderate and none was serious. The most commonly reported AE was cough (placebo, 1 (8%); denufosol, 2 (15%)). Four patients in each arm had treatment-related AEs. Two patients prematurely discontinued, both in the denufosol arm. One had a mild increase in respiratory rate possible related to study drug, and the other had rhinorrhea and fatigue unrelated to study drug. Conclusions: Denufosol was well tolerated in this safety study in preschool CF children, supporting the investigation of the safety and efficacy of other inhaled therapies in this critical age range that has the potential to gain long-term benefit. Supported by Inspire, Inc Background: Detecting, monitoring, and treating early CF lung disease may improve prognosis, yet little is known of the association between physiologic measures and clinical characteristics in young children with CF. Objective: To describe longitudinal associations between pulmonary function tests (PFTs) and clinical characteristics in a multicenter cohort of infants with CF. Methods: CF patients < 24 months of age were enrolled in a 10-center study evaluating PFTs 4 times over a year by the raised volume rapid thoracoabdominal compression technique (RVRTC: FEV 0.5 , FEF 75 ) and plethysmography (FRC). Chest radiographs (CXRs) from 2 visits ~1 year apart were scored by an experienced blinded reviewer (PF) using the Wisconsin (WI) and Brasfield (BR) scores. Associations of each lung function parameter with clinical characteristics were evaluated with mixed effects models adjusting for length, age and sex with a random intercept and slope to account for repeated measures. The effect of baseline characteristics on lung function change was assessed by including an interaction between age and the clinical measure. Results: One hundred participants were enrolled, among whom 246 acceptable RVRTC and 303 acceptable FRC measurements were made, and 171 CXRs obtained. FRC was significantly associated with WI CXR scores (a 1 unit higher WI score was associated with a mean 4.62 (95% CI 0.66, 8.59) mL higher FRC) and presence of S. aureus in respiratory culture (mean 19.3 mL (95% CI 5.1, 33.4) higher FRC). The presence of cough was associated with a mean 34.6 mL/s (95% CI 64.2, 5.1) lower FEF 75 . Significant associations were not detected between any lung function parameter and cigarette smoke exposure, P. aeruginosa culture status, CF genotype, weight percentile, BR CXR score, respiratory rate or oximetry. No effect of baseline characteristics on subsequent lung function slope was detected. Conclusions: In this multicenter US study, WI CXR score and the presence of S. aureus on culture were associated with hyperinflation (higher FRC), and the presence of cough was associated with airway obstruction (lower FEF 75 ). No association was detected between other clinical features and lung function. Supported by CFFT. Background: Although it is known that pulmonary exacerbations negatively impact lung function in cystic fibrosis (CF), it is not clear what proportion of lung function decline is directly attributable to pulmonary exacerbations. The aim of this study was to determine how pulmonary exacerbations contribute to the subsequent course of lung disease in CF patients. Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study using the Toronto CF database of patients with CF followed at the Hospital for Sick Children and St Michael's Hospital (Toronto, Canada) from 1997 to 2008. Patients were excluded if they were unable to perform reproducible spirometry and once they had a lung transplant. A pulmonary exacerbation was defined as a hospitalization for respiratory symptoms requiring antibiotics. Lung function was measured by forced expiratory volume in 1 second percent predicted (FEV1% pred). All clinically assessed FEV1 measurements were analyzed using generalized estimating equations to determine the overall rate of decline, while adjusting for the correlated nature of repeated measurements and potential confounders (e.g. baseline FEV1, age, sex, year, history of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia cepacia infection, body mass index, genotype and age at diagnosis). Results: A total of 851 subjects (median age 18.0 years (IQR 8.7; 28.5)) were followed for a median of 6.7 years (IQR 2.4; 9.7). During this time, there were 1882 exacerbations and 415 (48.8%) subjects had at least one exacerbation (Range 1-6 exacerbations/subject/year). Overall the rate of FEV1 decline for the entire study population was 1.6%/year (95%CI:1.6;1.7). After adjustment for potential confounders, the rate of decline in those without an exacerbation was 1.2%/year (95%CI:1.0;-1.5), compared with 2.5% (95%CI:2.1; 2.8) in those with an exacerbation. Additional variables that predicted FEV1 decline are presented in the Table. Subjects who had an exacerbation within 12 months of the previous had the fastest rate of decline, 2.6%/year (95%CI:2.0; 3.0), compared to subjects with more than one year between exacerbations, 2.2%/year (95%CI: 1.5; 3.0), and those with only one exacerbation during the study period 1.2%/year (95%CI:0.5;1.8). The proportion of the overall FEV1 decline directly attributable to exacerbations was 51%/year (95%CI:35.0; 68.9). Conclusions: One-half of the FEV1 decline seen in CF patients can be directly attributed to the effect of pulmonary exacerbations requiring hospitalization and antibiotics. The time between exacerbations rather than the absolute number of exacerbations is driving this decline. These findings support using time to exacerbation as a clinical endpoint for CF trials. In response to chronic hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, and persistent pulmonary inflammation, there is an abnormal enlargement, proliferation and anastomosis of the bronchial vascular bed in patients with CF. Over a 5 year period, approximately 10% of people with CF will have hemoptysis with slightly less than half of this number experiencing massive hemoptysis during their lifetime. The source of massive hemoptysis is bronchial circulation in 90%. Bronchial artery embolization (BAE) has long been considered a safe effective nonsurgical modality to manage recurrent hemoptysis. Recently, an expert panel published consensus recommendations for treatment of hemoptysis in CF. While strong consensus favored BAE for massive hemoptysis, no consensus was obtained regarding selective versus extensive embolization. Also no recommendations defined specific arteries or collaterals to target. Methods: Bronchial arteries typically originate from the descending thoracic aorta, although multiple aberrant origins and highly variable courses are seen in patients with CF. We performed a retrospective single center review of angiography in CF patients to determine the frequency and common origins of anomalous vasculature leading to hemoptysis in this cohort. Results: In a retrospective case review of CF patients in our hospital admitted with recurrent hemoptysis requiring angiography and embolization, 71% were found to have more than one collateral from extra aortic vessels feeding the bronchial arteries. Internal mammary artery was the most common, followed by thyrocervical and costocervical trunks, subclavian arteries, the brachiocephalic artery and inferior phrenic artery. Complica-tions encountered in the setting of the need for widespread embolization were uncommon, but included particle embolization into cerebellar territories with subsequent ataxia and vascular occlusion of axillary circulation . Discussion: Vascular anomalies and an absence of clear guidelines for target vessels may increase the chance of non-targeted embolization and recurrent hemoptysis. Our case series highlights the fact that bronchial arteries with anomalous origin and supply should be suspected in CF patients. Apart from the traditional approach, an angiographic approach in CF should include arch aortograms to demonstrate entire blood supply of the bronchial arterial field. Pooled data on commonly observed collateral vessels to the bronchial circulation will help in defining target recommendations and will contribute to precision and long term success of BAE in CF. Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 2. U of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA; 3. Rainbow Babies and Children's Hosp, Cleveland, OH, USA; 4. ICON, plc, San Francisco, CA, USA; 5. U of Miami, Miami, FL, USA Background: Pulmonary treatment guidelines and an increasing emphasis on aggressive care for patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) have led to greater treatment complexity. Although patients with CF have reported high treatment burden, the determinants of treatment complexity have not been evaluated. Objectives: To evaluate trends in treatment complexity over time and as a function of age and location of care in a large observational CF cohort. Methods: Using data from the Epidemiologic Study of Cystic Fibrosis (ESCF), we defined a treatment complexity score (TCS) as a weighted sum of prescribed chronic therapies at each encounter. Each therapy (n=37) was assigned a complexity score of 1, 2, or 3, based on daily frequency, duration, and ease of administration. A composite TCS (range 0-72) was calculated as the sum of all individual scores at each encounter. On an individual level, we examined changes in average TCS over 3 years from 2003-2005 stratified by age (6-13 years [child], 14-17 years [adolescent], 18+ years [adult]). We stratified ESCF sites into quartiles based on 2004 data for mean FEV1, mean BMI, and mean Treatment Burden score (higher score signifying lower treatment burden) on the CF Questionnaire-Revised (CFQ-R) (teen/adult, child, and parent versions) and compared mean TCS between highest and lowest quartile sites for each outcome. Results: TCS scores were calculated for 7252 individual patients (41.7% child, 15.6% adolescent, 42.7% adult) at 153 sites. In 2003, mean TCS was 11.1 for children, 11.9 for adolescents, and 12.1 for adults. In all 3 age groups, TCS increased over 3 years; in 2005, mean TCS was 12. 4, 12.6, and 13.3, respectively . At the site level, there were no significant differences in mean TCS based on FEV1 or BMI quartiles (Table) . However, for all 3 CFQ-R versions, mean TCS was lower at sites in the highest quartiles for CFQ-R Treatment Burden scores. Conclusion: Treatment complexity was highest among adults with CF, although over 3 years, we observed a significant increase in treatment complexity in all age groups. By 2005, treatment complexity for children had reached the baseline level for adults over this 3-year observation period. Such increases in treatment complexity pose a challenge to patient selfmanagement and adherence. No differences were seen in average treatment complexity at the site level based on average lung function or nutritional status, suggesting less variation in prescribing patterns despite variation between sites in patient outcomes. In contrast, treatment complexity was lower in sites with lower perceived treatment burden. Further research is needed to understand the associations between treatment complexity and subsequent health outcomes to reduce treatment burden and improve disease management. Study supported by Genentech, Inc. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder that affects not only the lungs, but multiple other biological systems as well. Unsurprisingly, patients with CF have a reduced exercise capacity which is likely a consequence of their pulmonary disease, but may also be associated with vascular endothelial dysfunction. The flow-mediated dilation (FMD) test is a non-invasive assessment of vascular endothelial function that has been shown to predict future cardiovascular disease. Purpose: This study sought to explore the relationships among lung function, vascular endothelial function, and exercise capacity in patients with CF. Methods: Ten patients with CF and 8 demographically matched controls participated in this study. Spirometry, FMD of the brachial artery, and a maximal exercise test on a cycle ergometer were performed in all subjects to determine pulmonary function, vascular function, and exercise capacity, respectively. Independent t-test and regression analysis were performed using SPSS software. Results: No differences in age (13.4±1.8 vs. 14.6±1.0 years), height (61.4±2.4 vs. 62.4±2.0 inches), or BMI (19.2±0.6 vs. 19.2±1.0 kg/m 2 ) were observed between patients with CF and controls. Exercise capacity was lower in patients with CF compared to controls (VO 2 Peak 31.6±6.7 L/min vs. 37.2±9.8 L/min, respectively). Although lung function was similar between groups (% predicted FEV1 = 93±5% vs. 104±5% respectively), patients with CF exhibited an attenuated FMD compared to controls (6.0±1.9 vs. 7.9±2.4%; p=0.075). Additionally, preliminary relationships were observed between lung function (% predicted FEV1) and exercise capacity (VO 2 L/min) (r=0.441; p=0.067), exercise capacity and vascular function (FMD) (r=0.332; p=0.178), and lung function (% predicted FEV1) and vascular function (FMD) (r=0.316; p=0.26). Conclusion: To our knowledge, these preliminary data are the first to recognize vascular endothelial dysfunction in patients with CF. These data not only indicate that changes in vascular function precede the decline in lung function detectable by conventional spirometry, they also provide a foundation to begin understanding how CF related pathophysiology contributes to systemic vascular dysfunction. Knowledge of how the aspects of this triangular paradigm (lung function, vascular function, and exercise capacity) affect one another will ultimately lead to the development of enhanced therapeutic strategies for the treatment of CF. This study was supported in part by the Georgia Health Sciences University Child Health Discovery Institute (RAH) and the American Heart Association (RAH). (CF) . Non-invasive quantitative assessment of RV function in these patients would be beneficial. Tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) and strain and strain rate analysis are new echocardiographic tools that are able to quantitate RV function. The goal of this study was to compare the RV function in healthy CF patients versus non-CF patients to determine if there were any differences present. Methods: Healthy CF children with no active illnesses (Group I) and age-matched non-CF children (Group II) were enrolled in the study. TDI analysis of the RV free wall at the level of the tricuspid valve annulus was performed. Two-dimensional speckle echocardiography was used to measure global strain and strain rates in 6-segment model of the RV. Echocardiographic analysis was performed by a single person blinded to clinical status of the patients. Independent t-tests were used to compare the results between patients and controls. Results: Eighteen patients in Group I and 15 patients in Group II were studied (7.7 ± 2.0 vs. 6.4 ± 2.5 years, respectively, p = NS). FEV1 in the CF patients was 91 ± 15%. Systolic annular velocity by TDI was significantly lower in Group I vs. Group II (0.11 ± 0.02 cm/s vs. 0.13 ± 0.01 cm/s, p = 0.001). There were no other significant TDI differences between groups. RV strain values were significantly lower in 4 of the 6 segments in Group I vs. Group II (RV free wall base -35.1 ± 5.1% vs. -41.3 ± 6.2%, p=0.005; RV free wall mid -34.9 ± 3.7% vs. -39.2 ± 4.0%, p = 0.003; RV septal apex -20.4 ± 7.0% vs. -25.6 ± 7.40%, p = 0.049; and RV septal mid -20.31 ± 3.16% vs. -24.0 ± 4.9%, p = 0.018, respectively) There was a trend for decreased strain in the RV free wall apex in Group I (-27.5 ± 6.7% vs. -31.8 ± 6.5%, p = 0.072). Global strain value was significantly lower in Group I (-27.6 ± 2.4% vs. -31.0 ± 2.4%, p < 0.001). Systolic strain rate (SRs) and early diastolic strain rate (SRe) were significantly lower in Group I compared to Group II (SRs -1.7 ± 0.2 s-1 vs. -2.0 ± 0.3 s-1, p = 0.001, SRe 2.3 ± 0.4 s-1 vs. 2.6 ± 0.5 s-1, p = 0.022). Conclusions: Decreased systolic and diastolic RV properties were present in young healthy CF patients compared to controls. TDI and strain analysis could be used to evaluate early changes in RV function. Further studies with longitudinal follow up are needed to determine the significance of these findings in this population. Anbar, R.D.; Soultan, Z.N.; Wang, D.; Chelvanayagam, C.D. Background: Many industry-sponsored protocols measure FEV 1 values, using a sponsor-provided spirometer (SPS). Between 2005 and 2009 at our CF Center, participation of patients between 6-12 years in clinical trials utilizing SPS increased from none to 16/52 (31%). Concurrently, our Center data demonstrated a 2.7% decline in median FEV 1 within this age group, as reported by the CF Foundation. This lowered our ranking among all CF Centers from above the 75 th to below the 50 th percentile. We had noted anecdotally that FEV 1 values in clinical trials using SPS appeared lower than with our regular clinic spirometer (RCS), especially in younger children. This study was intended to define the extent of this issue. Methods: The study population included all of our CF patients (6-21 years old) enrolled in studies sponsored by Inspire (TIGER-2 and DEFY) that required use of a SPS, for 15 months after 10/09. All patients consented to perform a second set of pulmonary function tests (PFTs) on our RCS each time after performing study protocol-defined SPS PFTs. The PFT order was not randomized so as to not affect the sponsored studies. No bronchodilator was given between sets of PFTs. The same respiratory therapist (RT) administered both sets of PFTs. Both the SPS and RCS were KoKo ® Spirometers. The SPS animation incentive screen showed 8 black-and-white candles in which the first candle was blown out upon meeting predicted PEFR, the intermediate candles going out once per second until the end of testing, and the eighth candle required a flow rate plateau with no abrupt end. There was no associated audio. The RCS provided a choice of color incentive screens: A brick wall, sail boat, 3 little pigs' houses, or 16 candles. These reacted in response to exhaled volume, and the maximal response was reached when the total volume exceeded 105% of the predicted FVC. This animation was accompanied by coordinated cheerful sounds. Results: Two sets of PFTs were collected on 71 occasions, from 14 different patients. Among 33 sets from 6-12 year olds (n=7, mean age=7 years), FVC was 12% higher (p<.04, mean FVC=1.53 L measured on RCS, 97% of predicted), and the FEV 1 was 10% higher (p<.0001, mean FEV 1 =1.29 L, 90% of predicted) when measured by RCS as compared to SPS. Among 38 sets from 13-21 year olds (n=7, mean age=18 years), FVC and FEV 1 were not significantly different between the two spirometers. No statistically significant random effects among patients and correlation between measurements from the same patient were observed. The lower FEV 1 measured with the SPS could have accounted for much of the apparent decline in lung function among the 6-12 year olds at our Center. Given that FVC also was affected, the children may not have inhaled optimally during the testing with SPS. As both sets of PFTs involved the same spirometer model and RT, the difference in outcome likely was related to the patients' response to the incentive. As the patients were experienced with PFTs it is unlikely that a learning effect accounted for the difference. Conclusions: Sponsors should be careful about the selection of spirometry incentives for use in studies involving young children, in order not to introduce a bias into the data set. Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA; 2. Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA; 3. University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA; 4. ICON Clinical Research, San Francisco, CA, USA Reduction in pulmonary exacerbations is an important efficacy endpoint for CF clinical trials. Powering exacerbation endpoints requires estimation of the future exacerbation incidence in CF study populations, but rates may vary markedly with age and severity. Our objective was to estimate exacerbation rates for patients followed in the Epidemiologic Study of CF (ESCF) stratified by age, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) % predicted, sex, weight-for-age (WFA), respiratory signs and symptoms, and history of exacerbation and respiratory tract culture. To be included in this analysis, patients had to be clinically stable at a routine clinic visit (index visit) in which pulmonary function testing was performed within ± 7 days and no treatment for exacerbation had been administered within ± 14 days. In addition, patients had to have been enrolled in ESCF for at least 12 months before the index visit (baseline period) with at least 1 routine encounter within that period, and to have had at least 4 encounters spaced roughly quarterly (± 45 days) within a 13.5-month follow-up period after the index visit. Patients could be included more than once in the analysis if subsequent index visits did not occur during a follow-up period from a previous analysis. Patients with missing data on ESCF enrollment date, date of birth, or sex were excluded from the analysis. Key outcomes of interest were exacerbations treated with intravenous (IV) antibiotics and with "any" antibiotic (new oral quinolone, new inhaled antibiotic, or IV antibiotic). Percentages of patients treated for exacerbation within 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of their index visit and median time to treatment (if <365 days) were calculated for different subgroups. Sample sizes required to attain 80% power to detect 20% to 80% reduction in treatment for exacerbation in 1:1 randomized studies of 3 to 12 months duration were determined. A total of 39,326 unique analysis periods were captured among 16,082 eligible ESCF patients; 10,018 patients contributed at least twice to analyses. Only 34.1% of patients were treated with IV antibiotics during follow-up. Median time to receive "any" treatment was 294 days; 55.0% were treated at least once during follow-up. Incidence of treatment consistently increased in all age groups as lung function decreased; treatment incidence generally increased with age group regardless of lung function up to 24 yr, beyond which it declined slightly. Female sex, history of exacerbation, WFA <25 th percentile, and history of Pseudomonas aeruginosa culture were associated with increased IV and "any" antibiotic treatment regardless of lung function. Patients with daily cough, daily sputum, clubbing, and crackles were treated with IV and "any" antibiotics at higher incidence than the entire population regardless of lung function; the effect of wheeze was variable. Observed differences in the incidence of treatment for exacerbation between patient subgroups may help inform the design and powering of future CF clinical trials with exacerbation endpoints. Background: Nebulized 7% hypertonic saline has recently been incorporated as a new therapeutic agent that helps restore airway surface liquid in patients with cystic fibrosis. The aim of this study is to determine the aerosol characteristics of a commercially available formulation of 7% hypertonic saline when delivered by 4 different nebulizers. Material and Methods: Four units of a continuously operated nebulizer (UP-DRAFT II® Optineb Nebulizer, HUDSON ); 4 units of each brand of breath enhanced nebulizers (PARI LC® Plus, PARI and Sidestream Plus, SIDESTREAM) and 4 units of a breath actuated nebulizer (Aeroeclipse II) were tested. Nebulizers were loaded with 4mL 7% hypertonic saline (7% Hypersal, PARI) and run for 6 minutes at 6L/min of central air. Aerosol characteristics were determined by cascade impaction [cooled (4°C) Next Generation Impactor technique operated at 15 L/min]. Mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD), geometric standard deviation (GSD), percentage of particles < 5 µm (%<5), and percentage of particles 1-3 µm (%1-3) were calculated with CITDAS V3.1 software according to US and European Pharmacopeia recommendations. Solutes were analized by freezing point osmometry (Osmette II™, PSI, Natick, MA). Analysis of variance for repeated measures followed by Tukey test for multiple comparisons were used for data analysis. Significance level was set at 0.05. Results: Expressed as mean ± SD of 4 measurements (see Table) . Conclusions: Pari LC Plus, Sidestream Plus, and Aeroeclipse II nebulizers produced aerosols of similar characteristics when nebulizing 7% hypertonic saline. Hudson nebulizer produced a larger size aerosol with fewer particles in the respirable range. *p < 0.01 when compared to other nebulizers. # p < 0.01 when compared to PARI and Sidestream nebulizers. ^ p < 0.05 when compared to Aeroeclipse nebulizer. Com, G.; Jambhekar, S.; MelguizoCastro, M.S.; Berlinski, A. Pediatric Pulmonology, UAMS/ Arkansas Childrens Hospital, Little Rock, AR, USA Introduction: Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) is used to determine the severity of the lung disease and predict the morbidity and mortality in patients with CF. However, reliable measurements of FEV1 may not be achievable in many young toddlers leading underestimation of the pulmonary insult. We recently showed that low BMI percentiles, number of hospitalizations, presence of mucoid Pseudomonas (>1) presence of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (≥1), and heterozygosity for DF508 mutation were associated with low initial FEV1 (<80% predicted (% p)) measurements in a homogenous group of 122 children with CF. The objective of the current study was to find out whether the initial FEV1 predicts the severity of lung disease in older age. Methods: Retrospective review of medical records of patients with CF followed at Arkansas Children's Hospital were performed. Patients diagnosed <3y and followed for 2 consecutive years before and after initial spirometry were included. Patients were empirically classified in low FEV1 (<80% p) or normal FEV1 (≥80% p). For the longitudinal analysis, unadjusted repeated measures mixed model analysis was used to model FEV1 over time by groups. Statistical analysis was performed using SAS v. 9.2. Results: A total of 122 children, mean age 6 y (±1 year) at the time of initial spirometry, were included. Sixty-six participants were male. There were 16 (13%) children whose initial best FEV1 was <80% p; 106 patients had initial best FEV1 ≥80% p. The median FEV1 of the low and normal groups were 70% p and 91% p respectively. The mean follow up was 5.6 y (±4.8) for the low group and 7.6 years (±4.0) for the high FEV1 group. Mortality: Overall 5 children died: 2 in the low and 3 in the high FEV1 group. One patient from each group underwent lung transplant. Yearly decline in FEV1: When we used the best yearly FEV1 measurements to compare the low FEV1 group with the normal FEV1 group, the slope showed a positive trend in the low FEV1 group with a yearly improvement of +0.76 (-2.5,+2.6) . However, the slope showed negative trend in the normal FEV1 group. Slopes were negative in both low and normal groups when we used the worst yearly measurements and all FEV1 measurements. Outcome of patients in the low FEV1 group: One child died at age 11 years. This patient's initial FEV1 was 43% p and never improved above 50% p. The second patient had poor adherence and died at age 19. One patient underwent lung transplantation at age of 14y and her initial FEV1 reading was 36% p. The remainder had positive best yearly FEV1 slopes. Although 56% of patients in the low group responded to aggressive treatment with some improvement of lung functions (≥80% p), only one subject reached 100% p level. Forty-three percent of these children had established severe lung damage and their lung functions remained <80% p. Conclusions: 1) There is a distinct small group of children who develop severe lung disease early in life; 2) with intensive treatment, FEV1 values can be improved in some children with low initial FEV1 measurements, but the majority will continue having subnormal lung functions; 3) all FEV1 measurements, not the best yearly FEV1 may reflect the progression of the lung disease better in patients with poor lung functions early in life.  Aim and Method: There is increasing interest in predicting the problems which may arise as patients with CF survive into middle age. We reviewed all patients at our clinic who had survived for 40 years to assess what CF complications and additional medical problems had arisen. Results: Forty-seven patients have survived beyond 40 years; 35 are still alive with a mean age of 46.7 (range 40-71) years; 12 died at a mean age of 48.1 (range 40-60) years. All patients had classic CF but 13 were diagnosed in adulthood. Twelve patients have had lung transplantation at a mean age of 36.5 (range 31-48) years. As expected the well-known complications of CF increased with age with progressive lung disease dominating: mean FEV1 in non-transplanted patients 1.45 (0.35-3.14) L; 5 (11%) had allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, 3 (6.5%) had major haemoptysis, 2 (4%) had pneumothoraces. Only 2 (4%) had significant liver disease with portal hypertension; 4 (8.6%) had had a cholecystectomy for gallstones. Diabetes was present in 20 (42.5%) of the patients, and of these 3 developed retinopathy and nephropathy. Renal impairment occurred in 3 patients post-transplantation from ciclosporin toxicity. In the other patients renal function was well maintained (mean creatinine 83 µmol/L; range 41-149) despite high cumulative doses of antibiotics. Only 2 patients have had fractures possibly related to osteoporosis. Some additional medical problems have arisen in individual patients including: amyloidosis, dilated cardiomyopathy, coronary artery disease requiring angioplasty, stroke disease, peripheral vascular disease, ischemic optic neuropathy, esophageal carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, melanoma, meningioma, and colonic carcinoma. Conclusion: Progressive lung disease is the dominant issue as patients with CF reach middle age. Some additional medical problems occur which may represent late complications of CF (e.g. amyloidosis) or additional medical problems of ageing (e.g. vascular disease), and it is currently uncertain whether there may be a higher prevalence of some diseases in CF (e.g. malignancy). There is increasing complexity of disease as patients survive into middle age. Background: Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) in cystic fibrosis patients with end-stage lung disease is often used as a bridge to lung transplantation. Patients with advanced pulmonary disease have increased work of breath, which contributes to high metabolic demands. In CF patients with low BMI, the high metabolic needs of breathing may hinder efforts to gain weight. There is limited data regarding the use of NIPPV to assist in airway clearance and for overnight ventilatory support; no data exist regarding the use of NIPPV to decrease work of breathing and augment nutritional support. Methods/Results: In this pilot study, adult CF patients with severe lung disease (FEV1 <40% predicted) and BMI <20 were initiated on nocturnal NIPPV. Ventilation was provided using Trilogy 100 ventilator with bilevel pressure ventilatory support to achieve target goal tidal volume of 8cc/kg. Data was downloaded from the machines monthly to assess patient use as well as pressures and volumes delivered by the ventilator. Data was collected from five patients with initial mean FEV1 of 0.96L (27% predicted), FVC of 2.03L (49 % predicted), serum bicarbonate of 29.6mmol/L, BMI of 19.2. While compliance varied from patient to patient, in those patients who had been on NIPPV for greater than 12 months, the mean percent days of ventilator use was 82.5%, average hours of ventilator use was 6.5 hours, and the average hours of ventilator use on days actually used was 7.8 hours. In these five patients during this period, there was no change in lung function or BMI; one patient died and one patient successfully underwent lung transplantation. Conclusions: Use of non-invasive positive pressure ventilation may be of benefit in adult cystic fibrosis patients with low BMI and advanced lung disease. Based on our data, NIPPV appears to be well tolerated with good patient compliance and may provide a model for objectively measuring compliance in cystic fibrosis. Downloaded data from ventilators may also allow for remote monitoring of disease in cystic fibrosis. Our data does not allow any conclusions about efficacy of NIPPV on nutritional outcomes. A larger study will be needed to examine the effects of NIPPV on oxygen consumption/metabolic rate as well as the appropriate timing of initiation of NIPPV to augment nutritional support. Geller, D.E. 1 ; Nasr, S. 2 ; Piggott, S. 3 ; Angyalosi, G. 4 ; Higgins, M. 3 1. Nemours Children's Clinic, Orlando, FL, USA; 2. Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 3. Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, United Kingdom; 4. Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland Background: Tobramycin inhalation powder (TIP) is a new drug-device combination delivering light-porous-particles via the portable T-326 dry powder inhaler, designed to reduce treatment times and improve ease of use in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) infection. The recent EAGER trial compared the safety, efficacy and convenience of TIP vs tobramycin inhalation solution (TIS) in CF patients aged ≥6 years. Here we report the post-hoc subgroup analysis by age. Previously, the most robust response to TIS was shown in 13-17 year olds (Ramsey 1999). Methods: Patients with Pa infection and FEV 1 ≥25 to ≤75% predicted were randomized 3:2 to receive open-label TIP (112 mg) via the T-326 inhaler or TIS (300 mg/5 mL) via PARI-LC ® PLUS nebulizer twice daily for three cycles (28 days on, 28 days off). Assessments included safety and tolerability, spirometry, microbiology, antipseudomonal antibiotic use and hospitalizations for respiratory events. Patient-reported satisfaction was assessed using a modified Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication (TSQM). Data were stratified by age: 6 -<13 (n=46), 13-<20 (n=114), ≥20 years (n=357). The frequency and pattern of adverse events (AEs) were comparable across all ages. The nature and severity of AEs and serious AEs was similar by age group. Pediatric patients on TIP tended to discontinue the study less than those on TIS, whereas the opposite was true for adult patients. Improvement in FEV 1 % predicted from baseline to the end of dosing was greater in young patients treated with TIP than TIS (relative change TIP-TIS was 4.7, 3.7 and -0.8 in the 6-<13, 13-<20 and ≥20 years groups respectively). Sputum Pa density decreased from baseline with both treatments but the decrease was consistently greater with TIP. In patients ≥6-<13 years, Pa density decreased with successive treatment cycles, particularly in the TIP group. In the same group, anti-Pa antibiotic use was less (50.0 vs 83.3% patients) but treatment duration was longer (52.6 vs 38.2 days) in those treated with TIP vs TIS. These trends were reversed in patients aged ≥13. Frequency and duration of hospitalizations were similar between treatments, except in ≥6-<13 year olds, where fewer TIP patients were hospitalized (28.6 vs 44.4%). Overall, patient satisfaction was greater in patients receiving TIP, with a significantly greater score for convenience at all ages. Conclusions: Overall, pediatric patients treated with TIP tended to have numerically better efficacy outcomes than with TIS (n too small to assess statistically). Further, TIP was at least as effective as TIS in adults. The pattern of discontinuation does not appear to be driven by the rate or nature of AEs and so differences by age group do not seem to relate to factors inherent to TIP in this open-label study. TIP offers CF patients as young as 6 years of age a faster, more convenient treatment option that is at least as effective as TIS, without compromising overall safety. Study supported by Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Background: Recurrent pulmonary infections, inflammation, and airway obstruction lead to progressive decline in lung infection and poor health related outcomes in cystic fibrosis (CF). Azithromycin (Azm) is currently recommended for patients greater than six years of age and chronically infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PsA). The objective of this research is to retrospectively evaluate the effects of Azm on patients without chronic PsA infection. The primary endpoint is change in FEV1 and FEF25-75%. Secondary endpoints include changes in weight, sputum microbiology, hospital admission rates and duration of stay, and patient reported adherence and perspective of Azm. Methods: This retrospective chart review included 55 CF patients less than 18 years of age without chronic PsA infection at Children's Hospital in Birmingham, AL. IRB approval was obtained from Samford University and the University of Alabama at Birmingham. Statistical analyses were performed with GraphPad Prism version 5.0c. Data obtained included age, height, weight, BMI, microbiology, FEV1, FEF25-75, number of hospital admissions, number of hospital days, and a subjective patient survey assessing adherence and perception of Azm treatment. Results: The primary endpoint of pulmonary function improvement was not statistically significant: FEV1 (p=0.1722;CI=1.338-2.111) and FEF75/25 (p=0.3967; ). Hospital admission pre-and post-Azm therapy (0.71 vs 0.28;p<0.001;CI=0.10-0.42) and hospital days prevs. post-Azm therapy (7.77 vs 2.47;p<0.001;CI=0.78-4.45) did show significant reduction at 0.42 admissions and 5.3 days respectively. Remaining secondary endpoints did not show significant difference. The patient survey revealed that approximately 75% of patients understood Azm administration and 90% noted the thrice weekly schedule fit their lifestyle. Some patients (20%) reported access issues such as insurance prior authorization or medication refill every 2 weeks. Few patients (5%) reported adverse gastrointestinal effects and 70% reported feeling better after starting the medication. No statistical difference in FEV1 existed in patients reporting improved health after starting Azm (p=0.212). Most patients (43%) were unsure of the mechanism by which Azm was effective but 20% noted the effectiveness through decreased inflammation. Conclusion: This study of CF patients without chronic PsA infection did not detect any appreciable improvement in pulmonary function following the initiation of Azm. However, Azm does appear to impact significant clinical outcomes as it was associated with a decrease in hospitalization rates and days. Azm also had a low incidence of adverse effects and demonstrated a positive impact on individual health in this population. While this study has limitations related to sample size, retrospective nature, and lack of control of confounding variables, these results are similar to what has previously been reported and support the potential benefit of Azm in this population. Loeve, M. 1,2 ; Tiddens, H.A. 1,2 ; Gorbunova, V. 3 ; Hop, W.C. 4 ; de Bruijne, M. 2, 5 1. pediatric pulmonology, EMC Sophia, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2. radiology, EMC Sophia, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 3. computer science, university of copenhagen, copenhagen, Denmark; 4. biostatistics, EMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 5. medical informatics, EMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands Rationale: Trapped air (TA) on expiratory CT scans (TACT) reflects small airway disease, and plays an important role in the pathophysiology of early CF lung disease. Little is known about the dynamics of TACT over time. Aims: To assess localized changes in TACT over 2 years. Methods: TA was assessed on 2 consecutive routine expiratory CT scans (TACT1, TACT2) over 2 years. Lung tissue was segmented to determine Total Lung Volume (TLV). TACT volume was determined using thresholds between -975 HU and -675 HU (manually determined) and was expressed as a percentage of TLV. Localized changes in TA were assessed by matching CT2 on CT1 using deformable image registration, and measuring the relative volume of stable (TAstable), disappeared (TAdisappeared) and new TA (TAnew). Statistical analysis was performed using Wilcoxon's signed rank test. Results: Twenty-eight patients (14 boys) were included. Median (range) age and FEV1 at baseline were 11.9 (5-17) years, and 91 (39-130)%-predicted. Median (range) TACT1 and TACT2 were respectively 9.5 (2-33)% and 9.0 (0-25)% (p=0.49). Median (range) TA volume unchanged, disappeared, and new in CT2 relative to CT1 was respectively 3.0 (0-12)%, 5.3 (1-22)% and 6.6 (0-20)%. The proportion TAnew and TAreversed was significantly higher than the proportion TAstable (p=0.001 and p=0.003). Visual assessment however, suggested that the assessment of TAstable was most robust. Conclusions: In this study, TACT and TAPFT were not progressive over 2 years. TACT was shown to have a stable component, reflecting irreversible small airways disease. One treatment modality that has not been studied as a therapy for cystic fibrosis is osteopathic manipulative treatment (OMT). Objectives: To determine whether OMT leads to greater improvement in pulmonary function tests of CF patients compared to standard therapies. To determine whether OMT-treated CF patients report less difficulty breathing, pain, or anxiety. Methods: Patients aged 18 or older with cystic fibrosis were divided into a standardized OMT treatment protocol or sham group while admitted for pulmonary exacerbation. They received daily treatments, or sham, for 4-6 days. During this time, standard inpatient therapy was also administered. Primary outcome measures were change in pulmonary function tests before and after enrollment in the study. Secondary measures included change in vital signs and questionnaire data describing quality of breathing, anxiety and pain levels. Results: Data from 33 enrolled subjects was collected. Both the OMT and sham groups showed significant improvements in their PFTs. There were no significant differences between treatment groups in any of the outcome measures. There was no significant effect of number of treatments administered. Conclusions: Data show no significant difference in improvement of PFTs. Results from the questionnaires showed that 94% of patients in the treatment group felt their breathing was better after the last treatment. Possible confounding variables may include elements of standard therapy that achieve similar therapeutic results as OMT and using set amount of time for individual OMT treatments rather than completing treatments when tissue texture changes are appreciated. A larger sample size may be necessary to detect differences between OMT and sham groups. The clinically significant actions of oral azithromycin in modifying progressive CF lung disease have been well documented. In vitro and clinical data suggests that clarithromycin has immunomodulatory properties similar to other 14-member macrolides, however 2 previously reported short term trials of clarithromycin in small numbers of patients with CF failed to show significant benefits in modifying lung function or inflammation. We performed a trial in 63 subjects with CF who received either placeo or 500 mg oral clarithromycin twice daily for 5 months, with a one month wash-out. Patients were enrolled from Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC and CF centers at Princess Margaret Hospital for Children, Perth and the Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia. The study was a double blind, randomized, crossover, placebo controlled trial in subjects with a proven diagnosis of CF defined as clinical symptoms plus presence of 2 recognized CF gene mutations and/or a positive sweat test. Subjects were excluded if FEV1 was < 30% predicted at enrollment, had ever had Mycobacterium in a sputum culture, or had a respiratory exacerbation requiring IV antibiotics in the 60 days before enrollment. Other exclusion criteria were the presence of any significant (> 30 mL) haemoptysis in the preceding year, requirement for oxygen therapy, or the presence of any significant liver or renal disease. Subjects allergic to or intolerant of macrolides, or who were taking medications that adversely interact with macrolide were not enrolled. The primary efficacy end point was the change in lung function during the clarithromycin treatment period compared to placebo treatment. Secondary efficacy end points included; quality of life, number of pulmonary exacerbations, height and weight, sputum inflammatory mediator content, sputum transportability and surface properties, bacterial flora, nasal potential difference, and breath condensate. Mean age at entry was 16.7 ±11.0 years (mean ± S.D). There were 40 males and 23 females. Mean FEV1 and FVC at entry was 75.3% ± 22.8 % predicted and 87.9 ± 20.1 % predicted. Twenty-six subjects were taking dornase alfa at entry. Fifty-two subjects successfully completed the 11 month trial. There was no significant change from baseline of FEV1 or FVC over the 5 month period for the 2 treatment groups of the trial. Similarly there was no significant difference in the changes observed over the 5 month trial while subjects were taking clarithromycin compared to placebo. During treatment with clarithromycin, FEV1 rose 0.9% ± 9.8% predicted compared to a rise of 1.4% ± 8.4% predicted while taking placebo. No significant difference in any secondary end point was seen during the period of clarithromycin treat-ment compared to those seen during placebo administration. We conclude that clarithromycin is not effective in treating CF lung disease. Lebanon, NH, USA; 2. Intrinsic LifeSciences, LLC, La Jolla, CA, USA; 3. Earth Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA; 4. Physiology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH, USA; 5. Microbiology and Immunology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH, USA Background: Sputum iron content is higher in CF than in normal health. In a cross-sectional study of two adult CF cohorts, we found that subjects with higher sputum iron levels also demonstrated worse lung function, lower hemoglobin and blood iron levels, and higher blood levels of the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6). We noted a significant inverse correlation between iron and IL-6 in blood. IL-6 stimulates hepatic production of hepcidin-25, a peptide that causes hypoferremia by decreasing enteral iron absorption and promoting iron sequestration in reticuloendothelial cells. Knowing that IL-6 mediates hypoferremia through hepcidin-25 and that blood iron and IL-6 are related, we suspected that relative hypoferremia is a feature of CF pulmonary exacerbation (CFPE). We hypothesized that levels of iron would increase and levels of IL-6 and hepcidin-25 would fall in the blood after treatment for CFPE. Methods: Samples of blood and sputum were simultaneously collected from subjects within 24 hours of starting and completing treatment for CFPE. Serum at both points was available for 12 subjects, and sputum at both points was available for 9 of those subjects. Sputum was free of gross blood and was culture-positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa in all cases. Serum iron was determined using an autoanalyzer. Sputum iron was measured by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry. ELISA was used to quantify serum IL-6 and hepcidin-25. FEV 1 % and body weight were recorded. Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test was used to compare medians. Linear regression was performed on log-transformed data. Results: Median age was 32 years (IQR 23-40). At the start of CFPE, median body weight was 56 kg (IQR 44-61), and FEV 1 was 29% . Median duration of systemic antibiotic treatment was 12 days (IQR 10-13). Median FEV 1 and body weight improved by 4.5% and 2.0 kg, respectively (p <0.05). Median serum iron increased by 13.5 µg/dL (p <0.05). Median sputum iron decreased by 0.92 mg/kg of sample (p = 0.055). Median serum IL-6 and hepcidin-25 levels fell by 12.2 pg/mL and 37.5 ng/mL, respectively (p <0.05). Median hemoglobin did not change significantly. Correlations were found between serum iron and hepcidin-25 (r = -0.43, p = 0.04), serum iron and IL-6 (r = -0.65, p <0.001), FEV 1 % and serum iron (r = 0.61, p <0.01), and body weight and serum iron (r = 0.58, p <0.01) during CFPE. Sputum iron was unrelated to FEV 1 %, body weight, or any of the aforementioned hematologic parameters. Conclusions: Based on changes in serum iron, IL-6, and hepcidin-25, hypoferremia caused by inflammation is a feature of CFPE. Although serum and sputum iron levels trend in opposite directions during CFPE, blood concentrations do not predict levels in airway secretions. Close associations between serum iron and body weight, and between serum iron and lung function suggest that recovery from hypoferremia reflects treatment success. Rationale: Telephone-based triage and treatments are key tools at any CF center that services a large geographic area. The Doernbecher/OHSU CF center provides care to 220 pediatric patients in a 100,000 sq mile area covering Oregon and southern Washington. As part of our efforts to better understand telephone initiated care at OHSU, we employed the Akron Children's Pulmonary Exacerbation Score (PES) for telephone calls about CF patient lung symptoms. The telephone PES lacks objective data (e.g. PFT), but retains systemic signs including fever, fatigue, appetite, cough, missed school or work. Pulmonary signs include change in chest congestion or cough ≥ 1 week, dyspnea, and/or hemoptysis, into a weighted score from 0 -16. A combined score of 3 or more, including at least one from the pulmonary domain, suggests CF pulmonary exacerbation. Methods: From 12/2010 to 5/2011, 100 telephone calls to the OHSU CF center were screened by the center RN. After-hours calls were not scored. We recorded the caller's response to the PES questionnaire and disposition of the call. Calls that did not result in treatment or clinic appointment were kept open for 2 weeks and rescored at call back. Call notes and PES score of 3 or more were presented to the on-call MD for treatment plan. We also tracked time until next clinic visit following the telephone encounters. Results: For 100 calls the mean PES was 3.3 ± 3. This included 26 encounters scored at 0 because duration of symptoms < 1week or absence of dyspnea, and/or hemoptysis. The mean value of all initial PES scores π 0 was 4.5 ± 2.6. Fifty-five of the initial encounter scores were м 3, 19 were scored either 1 or 2. We noted 14 encounters initially scored less than 3 that then called a 2nd time. Their repeat mean PES score was 5.3 ±1.1. Using a 2 x 2 table, we calculated the positive likelihood ratio for a PES of 3 or more at 25.7 (CI 5.3 -139.8) for being treated as an exacerbation by the physician. For initial encounters where the PES was 3 or greater (n=55), 52 patients received oral ATB and were advised to increase airway clearance, 9 were also seen in the next available clinic, 3 were admitted to the hospital directly, and 2 refused to be seen. Physician response to the addition of the PES score was favorable. While we lack specific data for ATB prescription rate prior to PES scoring, we perceived an overall reduction in ATB use during the scoring period. For telephone encounters where PES ≥ 3, the average number of days to clinic follow-up was 37 ± 56. Conclusion: The Akron Telephone PES score is a useful tool for standardizing telephone triage assessments. The positive likelihood ratio suggests an initial score of 3 was felt by the on-call physician as being associated with exacerbation symptoms meriting treatment. We speculate the addition of an objective data point, such as home spirometry, will further strengthen its utility and may allow better determination of severity and recovery. Our time until next clinic visit after a telephone PES score of ≥ 3 may represent an opportunity for improvement in follow-up care. Adult Cystic Fibrosis Centre, University Hospitals South Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; 2. Long Term Ventilation Service, University Hospitals South Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom Introduction: Established daytime hypercapnia is used to indicate NIV requirement in our adult CF population. Overnight O 2 and CO 2 status were measured in normocapnic patients to determine whether future NIV requirement could be identified. Methods: Forty-two consecutively admitted consenting patients with no current NIV or oxygen requirement were studied at the beginning of an acute respiratory admission. Ear lobe sensors from an oxygen saturation (SpO 2 ) and TcC0 2 monitor (Tosca 500™) were applied late PM and removed early AM. Concomitant arterialized ear lobe blood gas samples were taken. Downloaded results allowed classification of 3 groups; desaturator (SpO 2 <90% for > 10% of the recording time) hypercapnic (TcC0 2 > 6kPa > 4 hours) and normal (neither of the other two). No results combined desaturator + hypercapnic. NIV practice continued unchanged -requirement determined by the presence of established daytime hypercapnia. Records were reviewed 3 years later to determine long term outcome. Results: Baseline demographic and 3 year follow up data are detailed in the Table. Conclusion: Adult CF patients with acceptable daytime PaO 2 and PaCO 2 values and moderate to severe disease may have nocturnal hypercapnia in isolation. Three year follow up data suggests that nocturnal hypercapnia is an indicator of future NIV requirement and poorer prognosis. Earlier intervention with NIV may help -further evaluation in larger longer term studies is required. Rotterdam, Netherlands; 3. Medical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Erasmus MC/ Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 4. Psychology and Pediatrics, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease is characterized by progressive bronchiectasis (BE) and trapped air (TA). Currently, FEV1 is used as primary end point in clinical trials. However, FEV1 has poor accuracy and sensitivity to detect and monitor BE and TA. Chest Computed Tomography (CT) is the gold standard to detect BE, but radiation exposure and costs limit its use. Chest Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) has been suggested as a radiation free alternative for CT. For this reason we aim to validate MRI as an endpoint in clinical trials. In previous studies we showed that MRI overestimates lung abnormalities in early disease and underestimates the severity in late stage lung disease. In addition we showed a correlation between BE score from CT and Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL), measured by the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised (CFQ-R). Based on the reduced sensitivity of MRI relative to CT we hypothesize that BE on MRI would not correlate to CFQ-R. Objective: To compare the correlations between the severity of BE, TA and CFQ-R for CT with MRI. Methods: In this cross-sectional study we included clinically stable children and adolescents with CF, who had a routine bi-annual chest-CT, or MRI, and CFQ-R obtained on the same day between July 2007 and January 2010. CTs and MRIs were anonymous and randomly scored using the CF-CT score and the CF-MRI score. Component scores (BE, TA) are expressed as a percentage of the maximum score. To assure a multi-informant approach the CFQ-R was completed by children aged 6-13 years and their parents, or by adolescents aged ≥ 14 years. The respiratory domain of the CFQ-R was included in the analysis, for which a score between 0-100 was obtained. Higher scores indicate better HRQoL. Spearman's correlation coefficient was used. Results: In the CT study we included 72 patients and 109 CFQ-Rs, consisting of 40 child CFQ-Rs, 37 parental CFQ-Rs and 32 adolescent CFQ-Rs. A negative correlation between BE (rs= -0.40, p<0.05) and TA (rs=-0.46, p<0.01) CT scores was found in the adolescent CFQ-R. In the MRI study we included 77 patients and 119 CFQ-Rs, consisting of 44 child CFQ-Rs, 42 parental CFQ-Rs and 33 adolescent CFQ-Rs. A negative correlation was found between BE-MRI scores and the adolescent CFQ-R (rs=-0.38, p <0.05) and the parental CFQ-R (rs=-0.35, p<0.05). There was no correlation found with TA-MRI scores and the CFQ-R. Pulmonary exacerbations (PE) are the most common cause of hospitalization (48%) in CF patients (pts). Management of CF pts experiencing a PE includes an average 10-14 day IV drug therapy. Maintaining peripheral IV catheters may be challenging due to the harsh effect of the drugs on the vein and frequent occlusion. Peripherally inserted central catheters (PICCs) and long-term indwelling catheters are proven alternatives to short term venous catheters for the administration of medications. Various reports of complications rate from catheter have an incidence between 4.7-16%. We evaluate the incidence of thrombosis and assess for risk factors which may contributory. Methods: Retrospective review of all hospitalized CF pts at USC for PE during a 5-yr period (2005-2010) . IRB approval was obtained. All pts with an indwelling catheter at the time of admission were identified. Only PICC and Port-a-Caths were included. Pts who developed a catheter-related thrombus were compared to those without a thrombus. The presence of thrombosis was identified by vascular ultrasound and determined to be present if it was adherent to the vein or surrounding the catheter. The number of catheter-related thromboses was documented and classified as symptomatic or asymptomatic. Medical records were reviewed for predisposing factors to the development of a catheter-related thrombus: smoking history, contraceptives use (OC), presence of malignancy or nephropathy, INR and CRP. Statistics: Comparisons were analyzed with chi square in categorical values and with independent t-test for numerical values. Results: We reviewed the records of 116 CF pts (median age 31 yrs) who were hospitalized over the 5 yr period (2005-2010) , for a total of 333 hospitalizations (median 2.87 per pt; 157 hospitalizations of male patients and 176 hospitalizations of female patients). Sixty-two pts were excluded for not having a PICC or indwelling catheter. There were 291 PICC line and 38 Port-A-Caths inserted during these hospitalizations. Eight thrombotic events (2.4%) occurred. Pts with a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) had no history of malignancy, nephropathy or tobacco use. Oral contraceptives use was not associated with development of thrombosis (p=0.24). No statistically significant difference in CRP was found between the thrombosis vs nonthrombosis groups (p= 0.51). DVT development from PICC line insertion was significantly shorter (mean 12.5 days) than from Port-A-Cath insertion (mean 1731 days). Two pts who developed a pulmonary embolus both had Port-A-Caths. Discussion: Incidence of thrombosis related to a PICC line or indwelling catheter is 2.4%. This incidence is lower than the 4.7% reported by Munck et al. in CF pts and lower than expected in the general population with 3%. Time to developing a catheter related DVT was much longer with the access mode of Port-A-Cath. Malignancy, nephropathy, tobacco and OC use did not confer a higher risk of developing catheter related DVT. The inflammatory marker, CRP, may not be used to assess this complication. The study shows that Port-A-Cath devices are relatively safe and reliable for long term and frequent IV drug therapy in CF pts. Eight pts with catheter related thrombosis were given anticoagulation for future admissions to prevent recurrence. INR therapeutic range was not met for the particular concern of hemoptysis in pts with CF (INR range 1. and only 1 recurrent asymptomatic event was observed. Wertz, D.A. 1 ; Stephenson, J.J. 1 ; Hsieh, H. 1 ; Chang, C. 1 ; Zhang, J. 2 ; Kuhn, R.J. 3 1. HealthCore, Inc., Wilmington, DE, USA; 2. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA; 3. University of Kentucky College of Pharmacy, Lexington, KY, USA Background: CF guidelines strongly recommend chronic use of TIS to improve lung function and reduce exacerbations in patients with moderateto-severe lung disease and persistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa in airways. This study sought to evaluate the impact of TIS use on quality of life using the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised (CFQ-R) among patients with CF in a managed care population. Methods: Patients, aged 6 to 64 years, were identified from the Health-Core Integrated Research Database as having ≥2 CF diagnosis codes (ICD-9=277.0x) and were recruited for participation in a longitudinal study of functional status and quality of life. Patients initially consented to participate in the study but only CF patients who subsequently were prescribed TIS and notified HealthCore prior to using TIS between August 2009 and February 2010 were eligible to complete the surveys. Surveys were administered at three time points over a one month period: just prior to starting TIS treatment, 2 weeks on TIS treatment, and 4 weeks on TIS treatment. The CFQ-R for Parents/Caregivers (children 6 to 13 years) and Adolescents and Adults (14 years or order) was used as the major instrument to determine CF patients' quality of life with sub-scales relating to disease-related symptoms, school, work, or daily activities and overall health perceptions. Raw sub-scale scores were transformed to standard scores ranging from 0 to 100. Repeated measures ANOVA and linear mixed models were used to examine differences from baseline to two weeks and four weeks. Results: Of the 3,105 identified CF patients, 138 were recruited into the study and 16 patients went on to receive TIS and complete the three surveys (9 adults, 3 teenagers, and 4 children). All respondents were Caucasian; 9 (56%) were female. The results from the repeated measures ANOVA indicated that patients' reported respiratory symptoms improved from baseline to 4 weeks (p-value<0.05). After controlling for patients' age and gender, patients' overall respiratory symptoms slightly improved at four weeks compared to baseline (p=0.099). Trends were in the right direction for the other quality of life subscale scores but were not significant due to the small sample size. Conclusion: Compared to baseline, patients' reported respiratory symptoms improved after 4 weeks of TIS treatment. Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) percent predicted is the most commonly used parameter in CF patients. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) guidelines suggest spirometry should be assessed at every visit. In a study of first-time spirometric tests in children 3-5 years of age, nearly 60% of patients produced reproducible forced vital capacity (FVC), but only 32% performed reproducible sets of FEV1 [1]. It is important to know how reliable the first PFT is as FEV1 percent predicted is used in every day clinical practice, to predict decline in health, survival and is the primary outcome parameter in clinical studies of new therapeutics in CF. To address this issue we undertook a retrospective study to assess reliability of first PFT in the CF population. Objective: To assess the reliability of first pulmonary function tests in children with cystic fibrosis. Methods: This retrospective study included patients with CF who had their first and subsequent PFTs done at Children's Memorial Hospital CF center. PFTs were considered to be acceptable and reproducible by ATS/ERS standards. CF patients with mild CF pulmonary exacerbation requiring oral antibiotics or step up in airway clearance were also included in the study. Forced vital capacity (FVC) percent predicted and FEV1 percent predicted during 1st, 2nd and 3rd PFT attempts were compared. Patients were managed according to clinical practice guidelines for CF, receiving standard CF therapies and maintenance medications. Patients were excluded if they required IV antibiotics, had surgery, had new acquisition of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia or allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis during the evaluation period. FVC percent predicted and FEV1 percent predicted were compared during the 1st, 2nd and 3rd PFT using paired student t-test. Results: FEV1 percent predicted improved during the 2nd and 3rd PFT in comparison to 1st PFT. Mean FEV1% predicted improved by 5% (P=0.004) and 5.5% (P=0.007) for the 2nd and 3rd PFT respectively. Mean FVC percent predicted statistically improved by 4% (P=0.03) during the 2nd PFT in comparison to the 1st PFT, but there was no statistically significant improvement in comparison to 3rd PFT. Conclusion: In a single CF center following CFF clinical guidelines, there was significant improvement in subsequent pulmonary function in comparison to the first PFT. We propose that with practice and familiarity with the process of pulmonary function testing, subsequent pulmonary function test results tend to improve. One needs to cautiously use the results of first PFT in either management of patients or when used in research studies to evaluate the efficacy of the new medication or treatment modalities. 1. Kanengiser, S. and A.J. Dozor, Forced expiratory maneuvers in children aged 3 to 5 years. Pediatr Pulmonol, 1994. 18 (3): p. 144-9. Barsky, E.; Sawicki, G.S. Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA Background: Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are at increased risk for developing hyponatremia. Recent data in non-CF populations suggest that mild hyponatremia is a risk factor for all-cause mortality. The prevalence, severity, and prognostic implications of hyponatremia in CF remain unclear. Objectives: To assess the prevalence of hyponatremia in a cohort of CF patients both during periods of stable disease state as well as exacerbations and to examine the relationship between hyponatremia and disease severity. Methods: A retrospective record review of laboratory values for 363 patients with CF <25 years old followed at Children's Hospital Boston from January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2010, was conducted. We included all measurements of serum sodium (Na + ) collected as part of routine clinical care, and defined hyponatremia as serum Na + values <135 mEq/L. We evaluated differences in serum Na + levels by patient age, gender, baseline lung function (FEV1 % predicted), and other CF-specific disease characteristics, and compared serum Na + levels collected during ambulatory visits and hospitalizations. Results: Among the 363 patients (mean age 12 years, 49% female, 79% with mild CF lung disease), 348 had at least one Na + level drawn in the ambulatory setting. The mean serum Na + was 137.4 mEq/L, and 57/348 (16.4%) patients had at least one serum sodium value <135 mEq/L. Compared to those with no low serum Na + value, patients with at least one episode of hyponatremia were more likely to be female (55%vs. 49%), have pancreatic insufficiency (91% vs. 81%), and have CF-related diabetes (23% vs. 7%). A higher proportion of patients with at least one episode of hyponatremia had an FEV1 less than 70% predicted (23% vs. 5%). We found 149 patients had at least one serum Na + measured during a hospitalization. Thirty-one percent of all admission lab values (n=444 labs) revealed hyponatremia, and the mean Na + at the time of admission was 135.5 mEq/L. In all, 56/149 (38%) patients had at least one admission Na + value <135 mEq/L. These patients were more likely to be female (61% vs. 49%), have CFRD (56% vs. 22%), and have baseline FEV1 below 70% predicted (63% vs. 46%). Among patients with both ambulatory and inpatient data, mean admission sodium levels were only 1.02 points lower than ambulatory sodium levels. For patients who had multiple Na + levels drawn over the course of a hospitalization, the average sodium increased by 1.35 from admission to discharge. Conclusions: Hyponatremia is prevalent in patients with CF, with an increased prevalence during hospitalizations. There is an association between hyponatremia and female gender, pancreatic insufficiency, CFrelated diabetes, and more severe lung disease. Future studies are needed to explore the impact of hyponatremia on health outcomes over time in CF. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a multisystem disease characterized by chronic pulmonary infection and bronchiectasis, pancreatic exocrine impairment and elevated sweat chloride. In the last decades, new therapies for lung disease and aggressive nutritional management have resulted in a median survival increase, now older than 35 years. CF diagnosis in a growing number of patients (pts) with mild respiratory involvement contributes to survival improvement. Aim of the Study: To identify Cardiopulmonary Exercise Test (CPET) variables that correlate with spirometric and clinical parameters and with Six Minute Walk Test (6MWT) in adult CF pts with normal lung function (spirometry) despite mild radiological alterations. Methods: Adult pts regularly attending CF Adult Center of Milan with normal spirometry (FEV 1 >80% of predictive value), 6MWT distance and mean pulse oximetry (SpO 2 ) were studied from February 2009 to September 2010. Every patient was evaluated with spirometry, clinical parameters (respiratory and cardiac rate, oxygen saturation, weight, number of pulmonary exacerbations, chronic pulmonary infection). A sub-maximal CPET with a 15 watt/min incremental protocol was performed at the beginning of the study and after 12 months. Results: The study population included 26 pts (2 females, 24 males; mean age 32.8 year, range: 20.8-46.1) in good nutritional status (mean BMI 23.4, . Mean FEV 1 at the beginning of the study was 94.4% (range 121-80) and in 15/26 pts (57.7%) sputum culture was negative or it identified S.aureus, in 8/26 pts (30.8%) P.aeruginosa was isolated and in 3/26 (11.5%) other gram negative bacteria were identified. We found a positive statistical correlation between Workload (W) max and FEV 1 both at the beginning of the study (p=0.02) and after a year (p=0.03); a significant reduction of mean FEV 1 at the beginning and after 1 year (p=0.04) was detected. Peak oxygen consumption (VO 2 ) was higher after a year versus basal data (p=0.05) as well as workload at VO 2 max (p=0.016). No correlation was found among CPET variables and lung infection and number of exacerbations. Conclusions: Despite a significant mean FEV 1 reduction during the study period, an improvement of aerobic exercise was observed: a hypothetical role of physical training could be supported to explain these data. W at VO 2 max did not correlate with other clinical parameters as number of lung exacerbations or chronic infection. More pts and a longer follow up observational period are necessary to confirm these data and to identify CPET parameters predictive of lung function progression. Background: The rate of decline in FEV 1 percentage predicted has been studied in CF to identify the risk of death, risk factors for decline and effects of therapeutic interventions. Slower rates of FEV 1 decline have been found in patients with preserved pancreatic function (PS). Little information is available about the relationship between FEV 1 trend in different age groups and pancreatic status. Aim: The aim of our study was to assess the FEV 1 decline in CF patients attending our CF Centre, according to their pancreatic status. Methods: Patients aged 6 to 17 (A), 18 to 29 (B) and > 30 (C) years were included. All spirometries, performed over a 4-year period (2006-2009) , were considered for each patient. Patients with at least 4 spirometries performed over 1 year were included. Pancreatic status was assessed with measurement of fecal chymotrypsin or elastase activity. Individual decline in FEV 1 predicted was evaluated using linear regression analysis. Results: Genotype is highly variable in our region (F508del in 47% of alleles). A total of 168 (90 males) patients were included. Pancreatic insufficiency (PI) was diagnosed in 117/168 (70%) patients. Median value (IQR) of the number of spirometries/patient was 15 (9, 22) . Median values (IQR) of baseline FEV 1 and decline in FEV 1 are shown in the Table. We found no significant differences in FEV 1 decline between males and females in all age groups. Conclusions: Children and young adults with PS had higher baseline values of FEV 1 compared to ones with PI. We observed no differences in FEV 1 decline between PI and PS patients. Disease progression occurs therefore in patients with PS: the early advantage in lung function level was lost indeed during the first 3 decades. Further studies are warranted to assess the effects of different mutations causing PS on lung disease. §: p<0.001 Background: Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are at an increased risk for sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) due to the aminoglycoside antibiotics they often receive as part of their treatment. Although the ototoxic nature of these antibiotics is well known, hearing tests are often not included in clinical care guidelines for patients with CF. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed data on 178 patients with CF who had their hearing tested between October 2007 and November 2010 (98 females). Subjects were coded as having normal hearing or SNHL (as defined by having sensorineural hearing thresholds ≥ 25 dB HL for at least one frequency in at least one ear). The number of hospitalizations in the year prior to the subjects' hearing test was also recorded. Subjects were grouped together according to age at the date of their hearing test. Three age groups were established: 1-19 years, 20-29, and >30 (range 1-67 years old). We compared the rates of SNHL in the CF population with data from the general population using a binomial test. Multivariable logistic regression was used to identify independent predictors for SNHL. Data was analyzed using SPSS 19. Results: Thirty-seven of the 178 patients were found to have SNHL (20.8%), a figure that is strikingly higher than the 10% prevalence found in the general population (0-80 years). There was no statistical difference in prevalence of SNHL found in children (ages 1-19 years) in this sample compared to the prevalence reported for the general birth-19 population in the US (p= 0.38). However, the rate of SNHL in our sample is significantly higher for both adult age groups (20-29 years and >30 years) than in the general population (p<0.001 and p=0.001, respectively). In our multivariable logistic regression model, males were more likely to have SNHL (p= 0.009, OR= 3.15). Increased age was associated with increased odds of hearing loss (p<0.001, OR= 1.103). Additionally, for every additional hospitalization (range 0-13 hospitalizations) in the year prior to audiometric evaluation the odds of a patient having hearing loss significantly increased (p= 0.005, OR= 1.225). Conclusion: The prevalence of SNHL in patients with cystic fibrosis is higher than the prevalence in the general population. Males, older age and prior hospitalizations are associated with higher risks for SNHL. As survival in the CF population continues to increase, regular ototoxic monitoring should become incorporated into standard care for the CF population. Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2. Pediatric Pneumology, CF Center, Verona, Italy Purpose: CF leads to early and chronic lung structural changes. CT is the most sensitive technique for CF follow-up, and the most relevant information obtained is about bronchiectasis (BE) and air-trapping (AT). Unfortunately CT exposes patients to radiation and its use is restricted to 1 scan every 2 years. MRI is an attractive alternative to CT, but it has poorer spatial resolution for BE and AT. Hypo-Perfusion (HP) is an even more relevant finding than AT since it identifies areas that do not contribute to gas diffusion. Therefore we decided to: 1) compare the distribution/volume of HP defects on CEMRI to the AT on the MRI; and 2) compare distribution/volume of HP defects and AT to PFTs of small airway disease: FEF25, FEF75 and FEV/FVC ratio. Material and Methods: This 2-year study enrolled 26 stable CF patients (13 males, mean age 14 yrs, range 8-18) according to their followup programme. PFTs and MRI were performed the same day. A 1.5T Scanner (Signa, General Electric) was used for the following protocol: SSFP 2D PD-w axial, coronal and sagittal (TR/TE/SL = 5.7/1.4/8mm). GRE 3D axial and coronal (TR/TE/SL= 3/1/3mm; 0.1mmol/kg, Magnevist®Bayer). MRIs were anonymized and scored in random order with Brody score. Descriptive statistics, T-test and Spearman correlation(r) were used. Results: Two patients were excluded for incomplete protocol. Mean AT score was 3.3 (min/max 0/8, SD 2.75). Mean HPs score was 4.4 (min/max 0/12, SD 3.94). The comparison of AT and HPs scores showed: a decrease of ATs in 29% (7)cases, an increase in 51%(13) and no variation in 17%(4). AT and HPs mean scores for these groups of patients were: 3.1/6.7, 4.6/1.6 and 1.75. Positive correlation was found between AT and HPs (r=0.413; p=0.045). HPs correlated negatively with FEF25 (r=-0.69; p=0.0001), FEF75 (r=-0.46; p=0.02) and FEV/FVC (r=-0.51; p=0.01). AT correlated negatively with FEF75 (r=-0.48; p=0.016), but not with FEF25 and FEV/FVC. No significant differences were found between AT and HPs scores (p=0.17). Conclusion: HPs correlated better with PFTs than did AT. Score variations between MRI and CEMRI suggested that ATs sometimes did not overlap the HPs, probably underlying a reversible/physiologic process. CEMRI seems to be a feasible and useful tool to monitor CF lung disease. Clinical Relevance Statement: Hypo-perfusion defects are a more sensitive indicator of small airways disease progression than air trapping. CEMRI should be included routinely in CF follow-up. R= Right. Note that the AT defect (white ROI) in the right lower lobe on MRI (right image) is larger than HP on CEMRI (left image). There are also other HP/AT defects in the right upper lobe (red arrow). Background: Exercise-induced bronchospasm (EIB), defined as transient bronchoconstriction during exercise, is a common condition in asthmatics. However, the role EIB may play in exercise limitation in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is unknown and not well studied. Eucapnic voluntary hyperventilation (EVH) is an accepted method of bronchoprovocation frequently used to diagnose EIB in athletes. We hypothesized that EVH could safely be used to diagnose EIB in healthy patients with CF. Methods: Adolescent and adult patients with a confirmed diagnosis of CF and normal baseline lung function (FEV1 ≥ 70% of predicted) underwent EVH as part of an ongoing clinical investigation examining the prevalence and physiological mechanisms of EIB in CF. EVH was performed by inhalation of room temperature air containing 5% carbon dioxide to allow hyperventilation at a goal of 85% of maximal voluntary ventilation (MVV). After sustained hyperventilation for 6 minutes, spirometry was performed immediately and at 3, 5, 10, 15, and 20 minute intervals. A positive EVH test was defined by a 10% decline in FEV1 at any time interval. A threshold of 60% MVV was used to determine if the EVH was adequate, although a positive EVH test at lower MVV was also deemed adequate. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) using a stationary bicycle and post-exercise spirometry was performed within one week to compare EVH to another accepted diagnostic test for EIB. Results: A total of 9 patients (7 males, 2 females), mean age of 24 years (range 14 to 59 years), successfully completed EVH testing. Mean baseline FEV1 of the group was 3.6 liters (range 2.8 to 4.8 liters) and 93% percent predicted (range 75% to 118% predicted). Each patient successfully achieved 6 minutes of EVH without interruptions due to cough or other adverse effects. Adequate EVH was achieved by all patients, with mean MVV of 70% (range 58 to 90% MVV). The one patient who achieved 58% MVV had a positive EVH thus the test was deemed adequate. A positive EVH test was found in 2 of 9 patients (22%). Both of these individuals experienced a drop in FEV1 of 10%, one at the 5 minute interval and the other at 20 minutes. Both individuals are teenagers who regularly engage in exercise and subjectively complain of cough or chest tightness during physical activity. Neither patient has had bronchodilator responsiveness on prior spirometry. None of the 9 patients had post-CPET spirometry values consistent with EIB. Conclusions: To our knowledge this is the first description of EVH in CF. We demonstrate that EVH is safe and well-tolerated in adolescents and adults with mild baseline pulmonary disease. Furthermore, these results suggest that EVH may be a more sensitive EIB diagnostic test than laboratorybased exercise challenge in the CF population. Further clinical studies utilizing EVH as a method of bronchoprovocation in CF are warranted. Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA; Children's Hospital, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany; 3. Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland; 4. Novartis Horsham Research Centre, Horsham, United Kingdom Background: Tobramycin is an established treatment for Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) infection in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). It is available as an inhalation solution (TIS) and is under development as an inhalation powder (TIP). To evaluate the safety of TIS ([TOBI ® ] 300 mg/5 mL tobramycin via PARI LC ® PLUS nebulizer twice daily) and TIP (112 mg tobramycin twice daily), we conducted a pooled analysis of data from two clinical trials: the EAGER and EVOLVE studies (primary results published elsewhere). Methods: EAGER compared TIP and TIS in patients of ≥6 years of age, while EVOLVE compared TIP and placebo in patients of 6-21 years of age. Both studies recruited patients with FEV 1 25-75% predicted. Patients in EAGER received three cycles of open label TIP or TIS (28 days on/28 days off). In EVOLVE, patients were randomized (1:1) to TIP or placebo in Cycle 1 (blinded), with all patients receiving open-label TIP in Cycles 2 and 3 (i.e. 50% received three cycles of TIP and 50% received one cycle of placebo then two cycles of TIP). The pooled analysis included 273 patients receiving TIP and 171 receiving TIS exposed to three treatment cycles. Safety (adverse events [AEs], vital signs, biochemistry and hematology) was evaluated for all patients, while audiology assessments were conducted in a subset of patients (91 patients receiving TIP and 45 patients receiving TIS). Results: AEs were reported in 242 (88.6%) patients receiving TIP and 145 (84.8%) receiving TIS. AEs were most frequent during Cycle 1. The majority of AEs were of mild or moderate severity, with severe AEs occurring in only 26 patients (9.5%) receiving TIP and 23 (13.5%) of those receiving TIS. The most frequent AEs were cough (47.6% of patients receiving TIP and 33.9% of those receiving TIS) and pulmonary exacerbation (31.1% of patients receiving TIP and 30.4% of those receiving TIS). Bronchospasm was reported in five patients (1.3%) receiving TIP and one patient (0.6%) receiving TIS. There were three deaths in patients receiving TIP, none of which was suspected to be related to treatment. Other serious AEs occurred in 59 patients (21.6%) receiving TIP and 47 (27.5%) of those receiving TIS. The most frequent serious AE was pulmonary exacerbation, which occurred in 39 patients (14.3%) receiving TIP and 29 (17.0%) of those receiving TIS. There were no clinically relevant changes from baseline for vital signs, and biochemical or hematological measures. Significant decreases in hearing were measured sporadically (in <2% of patients treated) and only one event was persistent in a patient receiving TIP. Conclusions: Overall, this pooled safety analysis indicates that the novel inhaled powder formulation of tobramycin has a safety profile comparable to that of the inhaled solution. Study supported by Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Background: Tobramycin inhalation powder (TIP) is part of a novel drug/device combination specifically designed to improve tobramycin delivery to the lungs and ease of use in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients with chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) infection. To demonstrate efficacy of new products, placebo-controlled studies are required by the FDA. However, such studies in patients with CF have been complicated by concerns regarding the ethical acceptability of withholding active treatment from chronically infected patients with a serious, progressive condition. The EDIT (Establish tobramycin Dry powder effIcacy in cysTic fibrosis) trial was designed to confirm the efficacy of TIP after minor modifications in the manufacturing process, whilst exposing CF patients to a minimal placebo period (one cycle). Methods: EDIT (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT00918957) is a randomized (1:1), double-blind, placebo-controlled study. The study population consists of approximately 100 patients 6-21 years of age with CF and Pa infection who have not received tobramycin within 4 months and with FEV 1 of 25-80% predicted at enrollment. The treatment phase consists of a single treatment cycle (28 days of treatment with TIP or placebo followed by a 28day off-treatment period) and a termination visit. Patients completing the study are offered the option to participate in open-label extensions for a total of six cycles of TIP treatment, in order to ensure a direct benefit for every patient participating in the core study. During the 28-day on-treatment period, patients receive twice-daily TIP 112 mg or matching placebo. The primary efficacy variable is the change in % predicted FEV 1 between baseline and Day 29 (end of on-treatment period). Other assessments include quality of life (CFQ-R), change in sputum Pa density, change in Pa tobramycin minimum inhibitory concentration, pharmacokinetics, and changes in forced vital capacity and forced expiratory flow at 25-75% of vital capacity. Safety assessments include monitoring of adverse events, physical examinations, vital signs, clinical chemistry and urinalysis. Results: Sixty-two patients from eight countries (17 centers) have been recruited over a 21-month period. Efficacy and safety data to be added when final results are available. Conclusions: Operational and ethical challenges of performing a confirmatory placebo-controlled study in a rare patient population with a high medical need and a serious progressive condition required an unprecedented worldwide recruitment effort. The EDIT study will provide valuable confirmatory data comparing the efficacy and safety of TIP and placebo in patients with CF and Pa infection. Study supported by Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Introduction: Progressive airways obstruction is a key feature of cystic fibrosis (CF) which has its origins in the small airways. More sensitive measures of lung function are needed in CF with reduced forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV 1 ) decline per annum. Inert gas washouts can be time consuming for CF patients and would be difficult to fit into routine assessment in the clinic. Impulse oscillometry (IOS) offers a quick and easy way to perform assessment of small airway function. As yet there is little research in this area within CF. Reactance at 5Hz (X 5 ), measured by IOS determines the capacitive properties of the peripheral lung. Studies so far in CF have used whole breath analysis only. Within breath analysis can separate X rs into its mean inspiratory and mean expiratory components. Aim: To determine the relationship between whole breath and inspiratory-expiratory analysis of X 5 with spirometry, body plethysmography and quality of life. Methods: Twenty-five patients with stable CF (age 18-65 years; FEV 1 range 26-119% of predicted; 64% with chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection) underwent impulse oscillometry (Jaeger IOS). Mean R rs and X rs were calculated between 5 and 35 Hz and whole breath and within breath analysis was performed. Results were correlated with spirometric, plethysmographic indices (Jaeger MasterLab) and quality of life using the cystic fibrosis questionnaire revised. Results: X 5 , inspiratory X 5 and expiratory X 5 correlated with FEV 1 (r= 0.756, p<0.001; r= 0.842, p<0.0001; r=0.892, p<0.0001), respectively. The parameters showed greater sensitivity at lower FEV 1 values. They also demonstrated an inverse linear relationship with RV/TLC% ratio (r=-0.776, p<0.001; r=-0.747, p<0.0001; r=-0.817, p<0.0001). When quality of life was assessed, again, expiratory X 5 demonstrated the best correlation (r= 0.568 p<0.007). Conclusion: Reactance at 5Hz is a promising index of airway obstruction and gas trapping in CF. By performing within breath analysis of IOS, expiratory reactance at 5Hz was shown to correlate better with gas trapping and hence may be a better indicator of small airway function. IOS could also be useful in more severe disease with increased sensitivity at a lower FEV 1 . In addition IOS requires little training to use, takes only a couple of minutes to perform and could be easily incorporated into clinical practice. progressed. Evidence suggests that earlier treatment of exacerbations is associated with improved health outcomes. We are currently conducting a randomized controlled trial (Early Intervention in Cystic Fibrosis Exacerbation (eICE)) comparing usual care to home monitoring of lung function and symptoms to trigger early treatment of pulmonary exacerbations. Our pilot study has shown that home monitoring can identify pulmonary exacerbations 15 days before patients typically report illness to their physician. Furthermore, the time to identification of the first exacerbation is reduced in the intervention arm (26 vs. 45 days, p=0.03). Lastly, adherence with home monitoring is high (>95%). Purpose of the Study: The main objective of this trial is to determine the efficacy of home monitoring of lung function and symptoms and the resulting effect on lung function, quality of life, rate of pulmonary exacerbations, treatment burden, adherence, and safety. Study Design: This is a randomized, multi-center trial in CF patients comparing usual care to early intervention. The early intervention arm uses an electronic device that records FEV1 and a standardized symptom diary. Participants in the intervention arm will perform home monitoring twice weekly and transmit the data to a central coordinating center. Remote data collection will identify pulmonary exacerbations and trigger treatment of these exacerbations. Usual care is defined as routine quarterly visits to the CF care center, and acute visits triggered by patient communication to the CF care center. Treatment of identified pulmonary exacerbations will be guided by a protocol. Inclusion criteria include individuals with CF, age ≥ 14, FEV1 ≥ 25% predicted, and no evidence of an exacerbation within the last 2 weeks. Exclusion criteria includes history of solid organ transplantation, history of Burkholderia cepacia in the last 2 years, and active treatment of non-tuberculous mycobacteria or allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. Participants will be enrolled in the study for 12 months, and enrollment will take place over 3 years. Endpoints: Our primary endpoint is change in FEV1 from baseline to 12 months. Secondary endpoints include number of acute pulmonary exacerbations; time to first acute pulmonary exacerbation; time to subsequent pulmonary exacerbation; number of hospitalizations; changes in quality of life, treatment burden, and respiratory symptoms. Statistical Analysis: A linear mixed effects model will be used to analyze all FEV1 measurements to estimate the 12 month change in FEV1 and compare the differences between the intervention arm and usual care arm. Conclusions: Pulmonary exacerbations are important events in the lives of CF individuals and carry devastating consequences. This is a novel interventional trial utilizing "telemedicine" to enable earlier detection and treatment of pulmonary exacerbations. Supported by NHLBI (1RO1HL103965-01) and the CF Foundation (LECHTZ10A0). Pseudomonas aeruginosa is commonly identified in the sputum of adults with cystic fibrosis. High-dose aminoglycosides are a mainstay of treatment for exacerbations in this population. We examined a single-center outpatient population of adults with cystic fibrosis for hearing loss. Patients who presented to the clinic for routine follow up were evaluated for perceived hearing loss using a screening version of the hearing handicap inventory questionnaire modified for cystic fibrosis patients. A total of 155 patients were screened. Patients with scores of 8 or higher on the screening inventory had at least a 13% probability of having measurable hearing loss and were referred for formal audiology evaluation. Fifteen patients in our population screened positive on the questionnaire and were referred for audiologic evaluation. Nine patients completed audiologic evaluations and eight had at least slight hearing loss. The prevalence of hearing loss in this high-risk population is 5-9%. There does not appear a correlation between severity of hearing loss and frequency of exacerbations, patient age or cumulative aminoglycoside dose. Our findings suggest that patients with cystic fibrosis who have had repeated courses of high-dose aminoglycosides have rates of measurable hearing loss similar to published rates of aminoglycoside-related ototoxicity in the general population. The sensitivity and specificity of the screening questionnaire was not evaluated in this study; validation of this screening tool may offer a simple, readily available and easy-to-administer ancillary test to routine audiometric monitoring of patients with cystic fibrosis. Background: Use of tobramycin inhalation solution (TIS) has been associated with significantly reduced mortality among patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) in the CF Foundation Patient Registry. We sought to assess the association between use of TIS and mortality in selected clinically relevant subgroups of patients with CF. Methods: The CF Foundation Patient Registry (1998 -2008) was used to identify CF patients meeting recommended criteria for TIS use ( age ≥ 6 years, FEV 1 %-predicted 25-75%, and persistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa [PA] infection). In each year of follow-up, patients were classified into subgroups based on: age when first meeting all recommended criteria for TIS use (6-17 years vs. ≥18 years), annual average FEV 1 %-predicted <40% or ≥ 40%, underweight for age, evidence of mucoid PA, and evidence of multiple antibiotic resistant PA (MARPA). Within each subgroup, the association between current-year reported use of TIS (yes/no) and subsequent-year mortality was assessed using longitudinal logistic regression adjusted for demographics, comorbidities, CF treatment use (i.e., dornase alfa, high-dose ibuprofen, pancreatic enzymes, home IV), FEV 1 %-predicted, and medical resource use. Generalized estimating equations were used to account for within-patient correlation across multiple follow-up years. Predicted absolute mortality rates with versus without use of TIS were also estimated for each subgroup. Results: A total of 12,740 CF patients met recommended criteria for TIS use and contributed to 74,505 patient-years follow-up. Annual mortality risk among CF patients not using TIS ranged from <1% to almost 10% across the studied subgroups. After adjustment, use vs. non-use of TIS was associated with significantly lower risks of subsequent-year mortality in all selected subgroups (Table) . Conclusion: Use of TIS was associated with significantly reduced mortality by 13% to 27% in all selected patient subgroups, suggesting that TIS use is beneficial for a wide variety of patients. Acknowledgments: Funding provided by Novartis Pharmaceutical Corporation. Background: Cystic fibrosis affects both the bronchiolar and alveolar deep lung regions with chronic airway infection and inflammation caused by excessive viscous mucus obstructing the airways and inhibiting the normal muciliary escalator clearance function. Inhalable microparticles and nanoparticles can efficiently target those regions as advanced inhalation aerosols. Targeted pulmonary delivery of first-line antibiotics (for bacterial killing) combined with a mucolytic agent (to decrease inflammation by fluidizing the viscous mucus and enhancing drug penetration) can efficiently target specific lung regions, reduce systemic side-effects and bacterial resistance, deliver higher drug dose levels directly at the site of drug action, and decrease the thickness and viscosity of the airway surface liquid. Objectives: The aim of this study was to rationally design, characterize, and optimize multifunctional microparticulate/nanoparticulate inhalation powders with essential particle properties and physicochemical properties necessary for inhalation formulation as dry powder inhalers (DPIs). Methods: An advanced spray drying system was employed to produce respirable dry powders using various optimized conditions. Laser diffraction particle size analyzer (LD) measured the volumetric particle size and size distribution. Particle and surface morphology were imaged by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Degree of molecular order was determined by powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD). Phase behavior was examined using thermal analysis. Birefringency was imaged by hot-stage microscopy (HSM). Karl Fischer (KF) titration quantified the water content in the powders. Gravimetric vapor sorption (GVS) measured water vapor uptake behavior with varying levels of relative humidity at 25°C and 37°C. Results: Respirable multifunctional microparticles and nanoparticles in the solid-state were successfully produced and optimized by advanced spray drying as individual DPIs and combination drug-mucolytic agent DPIs. LD indicated powders with a unimodal narrow size distribution in the respirable size range. SEM showed that the particle morphology changed as the spray drying conditions and composition ratios were systematically changed. The absence of crystallinity in the low water content spray dried particles existed for the spray dried powders except for the mucolytic agent in the PXRD patterns. Spray dried particles had distinct water vapor sorption isotherms as a function of composition and phase behavior. Conclusions: Novel inhalation formulations of respirable microparticles and nanoparticles of antibiotic drugs, a mucolytic agent, and drugmucolytic agent combinations suitable for targeted lung delivery by dry powder inhalation to specific lung regions were successfully designed and optimized. Excellent control of essential particle properties for targeted lung inhalation aerosol delivery to specific lung regions was achieved. Acknowledgments: UK Center of Membrane Sciences Fellowship. Background: A large number of hospitalized patients require PICC line insertion for intravenous (IV) antibiotic treatment targeting respiratory infections, such as cystic fibrosis (CF), pneumonia, and pleural effusions. Often, the antibiotic medications of choice require biweekly surveillance levels before and/or after infusions to assess therapeutic delivery of the drug and renal clearance for the duration of therapy. Our institutional policy for obtaining antibiotic levels does not specify if the specimen should be drawn from a PICC line or venipuncture. Thus, there is varying practice among clinical providers as to the site of specimen collection. Methods: We are prospectively conducting a study on two inpatient medical units. We screen all subjects ages 1 month to 21 years admitted with a respiratory infection requiring IV vancomycin or tobramycin, and who receive a new PICC line insertion for antibiotic treatment. The projected sample size is 90 subjects; each subject is eligible for enrollment if he/she requires levels within the first 16 days from the date of hospital admission. Subjects require antibiotic levels multiple times throughout their hospital stay, but only a maximum of two serum antibiotic levels were included for each subject during hospitalization. Results: After enrollment of 40 subjects, an interim analysis was performed. Thirty-four of 40 patients enrolled were CF patients, admitted for CF exacerbation or cleanout. Peak tobramycin levels were consistently higher in the peripheral sample than in the same patient's PICC sample. The mean difference was 1.34 µg/mL with standard error 0.29 µg/mL, statistically significant by Student's paired t-test at p<0.0002. Against the mean peak level of approximately 25 µg/mL, this represented a 5% difference. Trough levels were likewise consistently higher in the periphery than in the PICC sample, by 0.35 ± 0.11 µg/mL (mean ± standard error), significant at p=0.004. Against the mean trough level of approximately 3.5 µg/mL, this was a 10% difference. Conclusion: Our hope is that completion of the study and a final analysis of the data will provide information about whether PICC line samples are equivalent to samples obtained from a venipuncture. Statistical significance remains strong, despite having only 22 peak pairs and 31 trough pairs to analyze. Even though the results are statistically significant, the mean differences are not clinically meaningful. Ideally, there will be no clinically significant difference when our final analysis is complete, which will provide us with evidence to safely draw vancomycin and tobramycin levels from PICC lines; this will minimize invasive interventions and discomfort for patients. Keeping in mind the frequency of hospitalizations in our CF population and their exposure to antibiotics requiring close monitoring of levels, decreasing the number of venipunctures will also increase their quality of life during and after the hospital stay. Aminoglycoside antibiotics are known to be toxic to the inner ear. However, they continue to have a leading role in the treatment of certain infections and in the treatment of pulmonary exacerbations in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). While there is ample evidence in the literature of ototoxicity, and there are established protocols for monitoring the effects of toxic agents on hearing, less is known about the prevalence of aminoglycoside vestibular toxicity among CF patients, and there are no commonly accepted protocols for monitoring vestibular system function. Because of our concern about quality of life issues in CF patients with apparent vestibular ototoxicity who were referred to the Vestibular Testing Center (VTC) at the University of Michigan, we initiated a quality improvement clinical protocol with our pediatric CF patients. The purpose of this ongoing investigation is to determine the prevalence of hearing loss and vestibular system involvement among patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) who receive intravenous aminoglycosides, as well as to determine whether incremental changes in auditory and vestibular function can be detected with subsequent courses of antibiotics. As previously reported, we have discovered a high prevalence of sensory loss in this population. Of the patients that have been evaluated at our facility since the initiation of this clinical protocol, only 14% demonstrated both normal hearing and normal vestibular system function. Because there are no current guidelines for monitoring vestibular function, and since we are interested in determining whether some portions of the test battery are more sensitive to change with repeated exposure, we have obtained serial testing data on 30 patients to assess for both clinical as well as subclinical changes. While almost half of the patients showed significant enough changes to move them from one clinical category to another (normal to nonlateralized vestibular system involvement or unilateral loss, non-lateralized vestibular system involvement to unilateral or bilateral loss, and unilateral to bilateral loss), each of the patients who had bilateral vestibular loss remained in that category, although some demonstrated increased severity of the loss. Others without bilateral loss remained within the same category but demonstrated consistent changes for one or more subtests. Our data to date suggest that it is possible to detect consistent change over time within and across categories. Additionally, it is important to monitor vestibular system function each time potentially toxic agents are used in order to assess for significant changes that may occur and initiate intervention through vestibular rehabilitation, if needed. Previous studies have demonstrated that IPFTs may significantly influence clinical decision making. The sensitivity of this modality and its correlation with classical clinical assessment has not been clearly established. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the sensitivity of IPFT and to correlate this with clinical findings typically attributed to CF lung disease. Methods: Approval was obtained from the UAB institutional review board. We prospectively collected parental surveys and clinical assessments on infants diagnosed with CF by newborn screening between January 2009 and December 2010. Parental surveys evaluated 5 symptoms related to respiratory health (congestion, daily cough, wheezing, productive cough or increased work of breathing). The presence of two or more was considered to represent increased risk of active CF lung disease. Clinical assessment by the treating physician included 5 clinical factors (Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection, daily respiratory symptoms, crackles or wheezing on exam or any CF exacerbation requiring hospitalization). The presence of two or more was considered to represent increased risk of active CF lung disease. Infant forced expiratory flow was performed at the patient's baseline level of health using the nSpire IPL and raised volume rapid thoracoabdominal compression technique at one year of age. FEV0.5 less than 85% predicted was considered abnormal. Results: A total of 23 subjects (11 male and 12 female) underwent screening pulmonary function testing in conjunction with parental and physician assessment. Mean age was 54.3 weeks. Weight for length percentile was 90th % and 50th % for male and female respectively. Parental surveys found 5 infants had significant symptoms while provider assessment found 6 infants at risk of active lung disease. There was 33% concurrence between parental survey and clinical assessment. Mean FEV0.5 was 100.3% predicted (SD +/-24.9) among all subjects. Six infants had a FEV0.5 less than 85% predicted, suggestive of significant lung disease. Concurrence of suspected pulmonary disease and abnormal lung function by parental survey, clinical assessment and all three measures were 40%, 33% and 16% respectively. Conclusion: Screening infant pulmonary function testing at one year of age revealed a 26% incidence of abnormal pulmonary function in our CF population despite usual respiratory health maintenance therapy. Our findings demonstrated poor correlation with subjective and clinical occurrences frequently used to gauge severity of respiratory disease in this population. Our three assessment tools would suggest independently a respiratory disease incidence of 52%, perhaps contributing to unnecessary escalation of therapy. While this study does have significant limitations it does support the clinical utility of infant pulmonary function testing in screening for lung disease while raising significant questions about the specificity of parental observations and clinical assessment in detecting respiratory disease in infants with CF. Background: On a pediatric pulmonary inpatient unit, of a large Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Center, the unit's Quality and Safety Committee observed inconsistencies with the timing of the blood draws for aminoglycosides and vancomycin levels in children admitted for a pulmonary exacerbation. We hypothesized that improving the consistency in drawing blood levels would lead to more accurate laboratory values and improve the ability of the healthcare providers to determine appropriate antibiotic dosing for each patient. Methods: The committee designed a drug level communication form to collect the following data: the time the antibiotic was due, the time administered, the time documented, the time completed, the time flush completed, the flush volume, the draw time in the medical record, and the type of IV tubing used. All patients with CF hospitalized between 12/08/2010 and 02/13/2011 for a pulmonary exacerbation were included. Transplant recipients were excluded. Results: During the data collection period, forty-three drug levels were obtained on twelve patients. The data collected were evaluated for inconsistencies in administration and drawing of antibiotic levels. Opportunities for improvement were observed in at least one comparison point for all data samples collected. The chart below summarizes the findings. Conclusions: The results of this QI project demonstrated inconsistencies both in the intravenous administration of aminoglycosides and vancomycin and in the drawing of serum concentrations in hospitalized pediatric patients with CF. Specifically, it was discovered that inadequate flush volumes were being used which resulted in incomplete administration of the antibiotics. In addition, the implementation of the drug level communication form improved reporting between nurses and the pharmacist. As a result of this project, new hospital guidelines for administering and obtaining aminoglycosides and vancomycin levels are being adopted. Aerosolized tobramycin inhalation solution (TIS) may be absorbed and result in measurable serum levels. This could affect calculation of pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters and dosing if TIS is used concurrently with intravenous (IV) tobramycin for treatment of a pulmonary exacerbation. Computer PK modeling predicts that TIS given in the latter portion of the IV dosing interval would result in increased tobramycin trough levels in some patients. We wanted to assess the significance of timing of TIS on IV tobramycin trough levels in the clinical setting. Adult CF patients infected with P. aeruginosa admitted to the hospital for treatment of a pulmonary exacerbation were eligible for the study. IV tobramycin was dosed every 12 hours based on previous PK measures for a planned tobramycin trough <1mcg/mL. Tobramycin levels were drawn approximately 2 and 9 hours after an IV dose. The following day, tobramycin levels were again drawn at 2 and 9 hours, but TIS was given 5-9 hours after the IV dose. Sixteen patients have participated thus far. All tolerated the IV tobramycin and TIS without any adverse effects. Seven patients had a clinically significant change in the tobramycin trough level and 3 of those patients had an increase in their trough level >2mcg/mL. Seven patients had a doubling of their trough. Eight patients had a reduced elimination rate constant after TIS administration, which may be misinterpreted by the medical team as a perceived decrease in clearance of IV tobramycin. The creatinine remained stable throughout the treatment in all patients. Conclusion: Trough tobramycin levels were significantly influenced in some (44%) of CF patients following aerosolized TIS when given in the latter part of the IV dosing interval, consistent with significant absorption of inhaled drug in some patients. This study does not address the efficacy or safety of TIS when given concomitantly with IV tobramycin. However, these findings suggest that timing of the inhaled dose should be considered when interpreting PK measures of IV drug dosing. This project was supported by a generous grant from the Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation. Lindblad, A. 1 ; Al-Jassim, F. 2,1 ; Gustafsson, P. 3 1. Pediatrics, Queen silvia Childrens Hospital, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden; 2. Pediatrics, Karolinska University Hospital/Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden; 3. Pediatrics, Kärnsjukhuset, Skövde, Sweden LCI from SF6 multiple breath washout (MBW) is more sensitive than spirometry to detect early CF lung disease and correlates closely to CT lung changes in older CF subjects (1). Aim: To see if increased LCI during the preschool period correlates to elevated LCI, CXR abnormalities (Northern score) or reduced FEV1.0 at age seven. Methods: All CF patients born between 1995 and 2002, attending Gothenburg CF center, and who had done at least one MBW at an annual review between age 0.6 to 4.0 years and retested at age seven with MBW, spirometry and CXR evaluated with Northern score (2) were included. The colonization status of PA at age 7 was used as a grouping variable. Results: Out of 24 children included (17M, median age at dx 0.4, range 0.0-2.6 yrs) four had one, six had two and 14 three MBW done before age 4.0. For mean age and LCI at each age period see Table. Median (range) FEV1 at age 7 was 94% pred, (73;116). Three of the 24 were chronically colonized with PA at age 7. Mean LCI at age 1-3 yrs did not correlate to LCI or FEV1.0 (rs=0.26, p=0.228) and (rs=0.09, p=0.702) respectively at age 7 but correlated to Northern score (rs=0.52, p=0.010). Patients with chronic colonization at age 7 had significantly higher mean LCI at age1-3 yrs (p=0.040) but not at age 7 (p=0.355). Patients with LCI >9 (n=5) at age 7 had significantly lower FEV1.0 than patients with lower LCI (84±8% vs 99±10%, p=0.008). Conclusion: Increased LCI in the preschool years associated with the degree of structural lung changes and colonization status at age 7 but not to LCI or FEV1. The cross-sectional rate of decline in FEV 1 % predicted increases with age in children with CF. Registry analysis of this pattern of FEV 1 % decline is needed. Methods: CFF Registry data from 1996-2009 in patients ages 6-18 years were used. At each age, the peak FEV 1 % was calculated for each patient. If a patient had two consecutive years where a peak FEV 1 % was available, the corresponding year-to-year change-value was calculated. Mean, median, and distribution were calculated for each age for delta FEV 1 % values. Results are reported as the mean+/-SD. The percent of patients with FEV 1 % decreases of ≥ 5% and ≥10% were calculated at each age. Descriptive statistics and comparisons were performed between patients at or below the 10th percentile (rapid decline) and patients at or above 90th percentile (increase) for year-to-year change in FEV 1 % values. Results: The sample size in this analysis was 20,060 patients ages 6-18 years. The sample size available at each age for calculation of the year-toyear change in FEV 1 % ranged from 4,804 to 6010 patients. The mean yearto-year changes in FEV 1 % predicted from ages 6-9 years bordered on zero (0.06+/-11.0 from ages 6-7 years to -0.26+/-10.2 at 8-9 years). At subsequent ages, there was a progressive acceleration in the year-to-year rate of decline in FEV 1 % predicted until age 16 years. The mean year-to-year change in FEV 1 % predicted from ages 9-10 years was -0.69+/-10.2, from ages 10-11 years was -0.75+/-9.7, from ages 11-12 years was -1.40+/-10.1, from ages 12-13 years was -1.82+/-10.0, from ages 13-14 years was -2.34+/-10.2, from ages 14-15 years was -3.10+/-10.2, and from ages 15-16 years was -4.02+/-9.9% predicted. From ages 6-7 years, 15.8% of patients experienced a 10% decline and 29.8% of patients experienced a 5% decline in FEV 1 % predicted. From ages 15-16 years, 30.7% of patients experienced a 10% decline and 49.3% of patients experienced a 5% decline in FEV 1 % predicted. When comparing variables in patients at or below the 10th percentile (rapid decline) versus patients at or above the 90th percentile (increase) in year-to-year change in FEV 1 %, decline in BMI percentile was associated with the rapid FEV 1 % decline group in all ages. Chronic MRSA infection, government insurance status, and prescription of inhaled tobramycin were associated with the rapid FEV 1 % decline groups at multiple age intervals. Female sex was not associated with the rapid decline groups from ages 6-10 years, but was associated with the rapid decline groups at most age intervals from ages 10-18 years. Variables that were not associated with the rapid FEV 1 % decline groups at most ages included homozygous Delta F-508 status, age at diagnosis, chronic Pseudomonas infection, pancreatic enzyme supplementation, and prescription of dornase alfa or high dose ibuprofen. The year-to-year decline in FEV 1 % predicted rapidly increases with age in children with CF. Risk factors for rapid FEV 1 % decline status include female sex, government insurance status, decline in BMI percentile, and chronic MRSA infection. Further research is needed to investigate the mechanisms of lung function decline in children with CF. Objectives: The specific aims of this study were to evaluate the: 1) Admission rate and time to readmission between patients treated with TOBI® as an alternative to parenteral tobramycin (TOBRA) for pulmonary exacerbation of CF, 2) Change in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) percent predicted and 3) Change in Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) sensitivity between treatment groups. Methods: This study is a retrospective chart review following each patient for one year from their initial hospitalization in 2008 or 2009. Patients 0-21 years of age, diagnosed with CF, hospitalized due to pulmonary exacerbation and treated with TOBI® or TOBRA were included. Data collected included patient demographics, exacerbation history, hospitalizations, IV therapy days, time to readmission, FEV1 percent (%) predicted trends and respiratory culture with tobramycin sensitivity history. Data was analyzed using descriptive statistics, t-test for independent samples and Fisher's exact test for categorical data. Results: A total of 25 patients (12 receiving TOBI®, 13 receiving TOBRA) were included with no significant demographic differences between treatment groups. Time to readmission was 202.4 days for TOBI® and 178.3 days for TOBRA (p=0.64). Patients were hospitalized an average of 2.7 times per year in both treatment groups (p=0.97). The number of IV therapy days per year was 36.6 days for TOBI® and 31.7 days for TOBRA (p=0.76). The average improvement in FEV1 % predicted was 11.0% for TOBI® and 16.1% for TOBRA (p=0.37). No difference exists between treatments groups for Pa tobramycin sensitivity (p=0.27). No association exists between BMI and time to readmit (R2=0.09) or BMI and days on IV therapy (R2=0.16). Conclusion: Inhaled tobramcyin may be considered as an effective alternative to parenteral tobramycin used in conjunction with another systemic antibiotic for the treatment of CF pulmonary exacerbations. Gutierrez, H. 1 ; Self, S. 1 ; Gamble, S. 2 1. Pediatrics, Univ of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; 2. Children's Health System, Birmingham, AL, USA Introduction: Monitoring is a periodic measurement that guides the management of a chronic or recurrent condition. It aims to detect departure from the condition's baseline, establish the response to treatment and detect the need to adjust treatment. Statistical process control (SPC) charts have been used in asthma management and provide a patient-specific, statistically meaningful method of evaluating effectiveness of medications and interventions. It is conceivable that a similar approach to monitor forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) could be an effective and useful clinical and research tool for assessing lung function and disease progression in CF. Objective: Home monitoring of SPC-validated FEV1 trend charts can serve as an effective tool for tracking FEV1 of individual patients and help in various aspects of CF management. Methods: SPC charts with meaningful statistical limits were constructed from baseline home FEV1 trend data of stable patients to establish common cause variation and special cause variation. This allowed evaluation of statistical evidence of changes in respiratory symptoms (RS) scores and identification of early and significant changes in lung disease. Individual and Moving Range (X-mR) Charts for FEV1 data sets were created. An average of 18 individual measurements collected periodically were used to study the process. FEV1 measurements were obtained most mornings before airway clearance. Sigma (∑), upper control limits (UCL), lower control limits (LCL), and median of serial FEV1 for the X-portion were determined. Control limits were set at ± 2SD (95% of values). Subsequently, subjects were instructed to continue performing home spirometry (HS) and recording RS. Data was analyzed to determine if a correlation existed between the patient's perceived changes (if any) and lung function measured by FEV1. Results: Twenty-five patients were included in the analysis. In-control trends were obtained and then compared with clinical changes. Those patients with regular and consistent recordings showed meaningful changes with downward trends when getting sick and with an upward trend when increasing therapies or improving adherence. However, in several cases it was not possible to establish meaningful change due to poor adherence with periodic recording, limited details in symptoms diary, or inconsistent HS maneuvers. Discussion: The study showed benefits to a subset of patients using periodic monitoring of FEV1. Those who were historically more adherent with their chronic therapies took advantage of the additional information provided by HS and adjusted therapies accordingly. The availability of the device clearly changed their behavior and resulted in more stable lung function and a perception of better health. In this subset of patients, SPC-validated FEV1 trend charting showed departures from the patient's baseline and prompted intervention. Despite the significant limitations noted, the study provides a tool that could be valuable to clinicians, researchers, and patients and their families with objective information regarding clinical usefulness of therapeutic interventions and a significant adjunct to adherence with treatments and therapies. Objectives: Using mean FEV1% predicted may produce biased results, especially for patients on high or low extremes of disease severity. The aim of this study was to investigate behavior of FEV1% at the middle (median) percentile, as well as the extreme percentiles, using a more flexible, robust statistical approach. Methods: Data were acquired from the CF Foundation Patient Registry (2009) for 10,624 patients aged 6-18 years. Mean FEV1% across ages was estimated with a smoothing spline, allowing for curvilinear trend. We used quantile smoothing splines to estimate potentially non-linear and unknown age-related changes in FEV1 at different percentiles while controlling for age. Quantile regression permits the investigation of the regression relationships of quantities other than the mean with independent variables, and quantile smoothing splines is its extension that accommodates an unknown functional effect of an independent variable such as age. We compared agreement between mean curve fitting results and quantile regression results using Bland-Altman analysis. Results: Mean regression analysis overestimated age adjusted low quantiles and underestimated age adjusted high quantiles (See Figure) . Mean analysis differed in comparisons with 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th quantiles (all P<0.0001). Median quantile results were higher than those for the mean (difference: 2.8% predicted; 95% CI: 2.0 to 3.6). Mean results overestimated FEV1 for patients with very poor lung function (FEV1% predicted in the 10th percentile) by -29.3% predicted (95% CI: -30.6 to -28.0) and patients in the 25th percentile (difference: -12.7% predicted; 95% CI: -13.6 to -11.8). In contrast, means analysis underestimated less severe patients who had lung function in the 75th and 90th percentiles (difference: 15.0% predicted; 95% CI: 14.3 to 15.7 and difference: 24.9% predicted; 95% CI: 23.8 to 25.9, respectively). Conclusions: For patients with very high or low pulmonary function, quantile regression improves the quality of statistical analysis by providing a percentile specific higher resolution analysis of age related FEV1% change in CF patients. Although several retrospective analyses have assessed mean changes in lung function for select patient groups, quantile regression was shown to offer a robust viable option outside of mean-based analysis. Background: Early metrics that can predict long term outcome of progressive CF lung disease will be useful to facilitate drug development in children with mild CF lung disease (MCFLD). We looked at 2 promising metrics (chest CT quantitative air trapping, % expiratory volume A2 [QAT (%EV A2)] and FEV1 % predicted [FEV1 (%P)]) to determine whether these measures optimally predict subsequent progression of CF lung disease. Objective: To determine whether 2 defined metrics of change obtained from Baseline (B) ⇒ 3 Months (3 Mo) can accurately predict progressive CF lung disease over a 2 year period in children with MCFLD. Methods: QAT (%EV A2) and FEV1 (%P) measurements were studied at B, 3 Mo, 1 Year (Yr), and 2 Yrs in 24 children from Stanford enrolled in the Novartis Mild CF Natural History Study. We evaluated these metrics in 2 ways: 1) Regression analysis of the change in each measurement from B ⇒ 3 Mo vs. B ⇒ 2 Yrs; and 2) Comparison of each measurement at B, 3 Mo, 1 Yr, and 2 Yrs using 2-way ANOVA. All 24 subjects underwent inspiratory and expiratory low dose spirometer-controlled spiral CT scans and pulmonary function measurements for all testing sessions. Results: Mean age at B for the 24 subjects was 11.9 ± 2.5 years, with 13 females/11 males, mean height 146 ± 13.2 cm, mean weight 41.2 ± 10.5 kg, mean FEV1%P 104 ± 11.6, mean FEF25-75%P 103 ± 24.8, and mean Brasfield CXR score 22 ± 1.5. Both B ⇒ 3 month change metrics [QAT (%EV A2) and FEV1 (%P)] were able to predict total progression of disease over a 2 year period (B ⇒ 2 Yrs) in children with MCFLD as exemplified by correlations of r = 0.96 for QAT (%EV A2) and r = 0.93 for FEV1 (%P). When disease progression was stratified by either changes in QAT (%EV A2) or FEV1 (%P) from B ⇒ 3 Mo, there were significant differences noted between test date measurements by ANOVA in those subjects who had initially worsening disease at 3 Mo (Table 1) . However, only QAT (%EV A2) demonstrated a progressive trend of disease severity in subjects that had initial worsening measurements at 3 month testing. Conclusions: Both change in QAT (%EV A2) and FEV1 (%P) metrics from B ⇒ 3 Mo accurately predicted the overall 2 year change in lung disease in children with mild CF. However, only QAT (% EV A2) was able to discriminate progressive worsening of disease over a 2 Yr period. Study funded by Novartis and CF TDN. Significant early structural lung disease manifested by regional air trapping, bronchial wall thickening, and early bronchiectasis has been readily detected by chest CT imaging in infants and toddlers with CF even in the absence of clinically apparent respiratory symptoms. To begin studying early CF lung disease, we sought to obtain optimal motion free inspiratory and expiratory chest CT scans in young infants/toddlers with CF. In collaboration with the AREST CF group in Perth, Australia we have developed controlled ventilation infant CT (CViCT) scans at our institution to study infants and toddlers with cystic fibrosis. The methodology for obtaining these scans includes anesthesia induction with either propofol or sevoflurane, intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube, standardized inspiratory recruitment maneuvers, followed by chest CT imaging at precise lung volumes corresponding to 25 cm H 2 O for inspiratory scans and 0 cm H 2 O for expiratory scans. To date we have completed 40 CViCT scans in 32 infants/toddlers (7 CF patients, 4 Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia patients, 14 patients with pediatric lung disease, and 7 oncology patients). We have completed follow-up scans in 5 of the 32 infants/toddlers. For all 40 CViCT scans, there has not been any complications related to intubation, lung recruitment, or CT maneuvers. In only 1 case, has there been an adverse event related to hallucinations with propofol. The average age, weight, and height for all patients tested have been 2.4 yrs, 12.2 kg, and 85 cm. To investigate the effects of lung recruitment (up to 40 cm H 2 O on Peak inspiratory pressures) and inspiratory scan acquisition at 25 cm H 2 O during CT Testing, we closely studied 7 infant/toddlers from the 32 patients we have tested. The mean age, weight, and height of these 7 chldren were 2.8 yrs, 13.0 kg, and 88 cm respectively. The mean maximal pressure for inspiratory recruitment was 39 H 2 O which correponded to a mean tidal volume (Vt) of 477 cc and 36.7 cc/kg. The mean PETCO 2 was 26 torr. During inspiratory scan acquision at 25 cm H 2 0, the mean PIP was 24 H 2 O, while the mean Vt was 310 cc and 22.6 cc/kg. The mean PCO 2 was 29 torr. Thus far we have been able to complete combination infant PFTs/lung clearance index/CViCT in less than a 2 hr period, and have recently been able to complete the CViCT portion of the testing in < 15 minutes. We conclude that controlled ventilation infant CT scanning utilizing a cuffed ET tube, and recruitment maneuvers followed by inspiratory and expiratory CT scans under general anesthesia is a safe and feasible method to obtain high quality motion free CT images in young children with CF. Moran, F.C.; Tannenbaum, E. Physiotherapy, The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia Introduction: Improvements in outcomes in cystic fibrosis (CF) during the past three decades have been attributed to newborn screening, improved therapies and multidisciplinary management. Newborn screening commenced in Australia 30 years ago; with all states and territories performing newborn screening by 2001. Routine physiotherapy treatment for infants in Australia with CF has previously been modified postural drainage and percussion. However, there are now a variety of techniques which are used in the physiotherapy management of these children. The aim of this study was to investigate current treatment practices versus intended change to practices in this population. Method: Australian physiotherapists involved in the management of infants with CF were sent an electronic survey comprising multiple choice questions (with space for additional comments) regarding current clinical practice, possible changes to future practice and interest in research into different techniques. Results: Twenty physiotherapists responded to the survey, representing 13 hospitals. All recognized major Australian CF centres were represented. In infants under one year old, routine use of modified postural drainage with percussion and vibration (MPD with P&V) was used by 100% of physiotherapists while 90% utilised exercise/play/development, and 60% positioning to influence respiration. This is despite physiotherapists reporting that they frequently tailor techniques to the individual. Positive expiratory pressure (PEP) mask (25%), hypertonic saline (14%), assisted autogenic drainage (AAD) (10%), and postural drainage with percussion and vibration (PD with P&V) (4%) were not routinely incorporated into the treatment. Pulmozyme® was reported to be used in occasional cases. Techniques routinely used for children 1-2 years old, allowed for more active participation by the child with increased use of: blowing games (90%), huffing (55%), bottle PEP (45%), PEP mask (30%), active cycle of breathing technique (ACBT) and mouthpiece PEP (5% each). To the question regarding intention to change future treatment for children under one year old, 25% of physiotherapists indicated "Yes," 40% "No," and 35% "Unsure." Techniques being considered for inclusion were AAD, exercise/play/development, positioning to influence respiration and hypertonic saline (43% each), MPD with P&V (29%), PEP mask, normal saline and Pulmozyme® (14% each). The majority (65%) of physiotherapists were interested in undertaking research into physiotherapy treatments for infants with CF with 95% favouring multi-site research, and 60% randomized controlled trials. The techniques identified most often for future research were MPD with P&V (80%), PEP mask (65%), and exercise (50%) whilst hypertonic saline (35%), PD with P&V (20%), positioning for respiration, inhaled normal saline and Pulmozyme® (15% each) were least considered. Discussion: Routine physiotherapy techniques prevail in the treatment of infants with CF although Australian physiotherapists advocate tailoring management to the individual. Exploration of new techniques through research will promote confident translation of these techniques into current clinical practice and inform evidence based guidelines. Background: The addition of positive pressure to airway clearance has been shown to enhance sputum mobilisation, decrease work of breathing and patient fatigue during in-patient admissions for people with cystic fibrosis (CF). To give patients choice, community home-based treatments are available e.g. home IV antibiotics. Physiotherapy techniques should provide optimum airway clearance independent of location. We provided non-invasive ventilation (NIV) to patients at home who were not in type II respirato-ry failure. These patients had previously benefited from the addition of positive pressure, as in-patients, over their usual airway clearance therapy (ACT). We aimed to see if this subjectively improved their home ACT, and objectively impacted on healthcare use. Methods: Patient views on the addition of NIV to ACT were gathered via structured qualitative interviews. All interviews were completed by the same investigator. Data was also collected on number of hospital admissions, days in hospital and home IVs for 1-year pre-and post-NIV set up. Ease of clearance and breathlessness with ACT were assessed using a visual analogue scale. Fourteen patients (n=9 female), median age 24yrs (16-39), baseline median FEV 1 45% (17%-82%) were included having used NIV for ACT ≥1 year; however 4 were unable to complete interviews (3 died, 1 moved country). Pressure used for ACT ranged from IPAP 16-32cmH 2 O and EPAP 0-8cmH 2 O. Results: There was no statistically significant difference between the median time (60 mins (20-120)) spent in total on ACT/day or the number of sessions completed a day (2 sessions (1-3) ). However, patients reported feeling they needed less rest within treatment times using NIV. Common themes for why NIV was introduced into ACT included exhaustion with current regimes, requiring inspiratory positive pressure at home and optimisation of ACT. Reported impacts included: less time in hospital; less effort to clear secretions and more energy for ACT. Thirty percent (3/10) of patients subsequently developed nocturnal hypercapnia and felt that previous use helped synchronisation with NIV for sleep; however settings differed for sleep and ACT. Conclusion: Subjectively, the use of NIV to assist ACT made a significant difference to patients' ratings of ease of clearance and breathlessness during ACT. Patients felt that NIV helped them to clear more secretions than previous ACT, while limiting fatigue. Statistically significant improvements were seen in ease of clearance (p=0.011) and reduced breathlessness during ACT (p=0.011). In-patient days and admissions were lower after the set up of NIV for ACT than before use, and although no firm conclusions can be made due to small patient numbers, 40% (4/10) of the patients felt that the addition of NIV had helped them stay out of hospital. The addition of NIV for airway clearance warrants further investigations. Background: Respiratory care is the backbone of preventative and therapeutic medical management of CF lung disease. Our pediatric CF program has effective approaches to initial respiratory care teaching for newly diagnosed patients and the introduction of new respiratory therapies. During a period of rapid program growth, we neglected the issues of ongoing patient assessment and education regarding chronic therapies. Despite quality improvement (QI) efforts directed at improving outcomes, our program has not met pulmonary function targets. We hypothesized that using a respiratory care checklist (RCC) as part of an annual CF Care Curriculum, would improve patient care and pulmonary function outcomes. Methods: An RCC was developed as part of a comprehensive QI program at Texas Children's Hospital. The RCC consisted of two components; one part focusing on inhaled medications and the other on airway clearance therapy (ACT). The RCC included questions regarding frequency/order of therapy, adherence to therapy, therapy techniques, cleaning of respiratory equipment and patient/family feedback. The RCC was performed by a group of respiratory therapists (RTs) in both the out-patient (OP) and in-patient (IP) settings. The RTs underwent training to ensure that patient education was consistent. OPs were randomly selected during routine clinic appointments. The IPs were recruited during their hospital stay. Utility of the RCC was assessed by open ended questions asking what part of the RCC was most helpful and if it would change respiratory care practices at home. The time taken to complete an RCC ranged from 30 to 90 minutes, depending on the needs of the patient. Results: The goal for the OP setting was to perform the RCC on 30 CF patients from September 1, 2010 through October 31, 2010. A total of 36 were completed (12 additional RCCs were completed but included only one or the other component.) The goal for the IP setting was to perform the RCC on100% of the CF patients that were admitted in the month of October. A total of 29 patients were admitted during that time and 28 RCCs were completed (97%). The age range of the patients was 8 months to 21 years. Subjective feedback was overwhelmingly positive. Of the total RCCs done, 100% of the families learned something new or a better way of doing things. Changes or improvements were seen in huff coughing (69%), proper cleaning of respiratory equipment (64%), keeping track of MDI doses (59%), changing filter on compressor (41%), MDI technique (33%), ACT (31%) and order of therapy (22%). Conclusions: Implementing the RCC had a positive impact on all of our families. A significant number of families were performing therapies improperly and inconsistently and none of the families was doing everything correctly. The knowledge our patients and families gained by the RCC is expected to change their behavior at home and may improve outcomes. Periodic reassessment is critical in maintaining overall lung health. Future directions will include FEV1 measurements over time and re-assessment of each patient at least once a year and more often as needed. Background: The benefits of exercise in CF on improving exercise capacity and stabilising lung function, as well as survival are known. A previous study of supervised out-patient exercise and physiotherapy in CF reported a 48% reduction in intravenous antibiotic (ivAB) need, as well as modest improvements in lung function and exercise capacity. 1 We sought to evaluate the effects of such a programme in a second, novel population. Methods: Children who had ≥4 ivAB courses in 2009 were invited to participate in the study which ran during 2010. The study had ethical approval. An individualised home exercise and airway clearance programme was derived and included the following: airway clearance, aerobic exercise, strength training, stretching and postural advice. Children were reviewed in the community every 2 weeks (or more frequently if unwell), and a minimum of 30 minutes of exercise 3 times per week was completed by each participant. Spirometry was performed at intervals before and throughout the study, whilst exercise (modified shuttle -MST) tests were completed at start and end of the study. Clinical data were also collected including ivAB days. Results were entered into a database (SPSS v17.0) and paired t-tests used to compare data. Results: Thirteen children (7 female) were enrolled with mean (sd) age at study entry of 13.3 (2.1) years. Fifty-four percent (7/13) were homozygous for the F508del mutation, with the remainder being compound F508del heterozygotes. A significant (18%) reduction in ivAB Days from a mean (sd) of 57(4) in 2009 to 47(11) in 2010 (p=0.02) was noted, along with significant improvements in both distance covered and level attained on MST (Table 1) following this 1 year intervention. Although no significant differences in lung function were seen, the rate of change of FEV 1 was declining across the group in 2009, yet showed a mean increase for 2010 (Table 1) . A supervised outpatient exercise and physiotherapy programme verified the findings of a reduced need for ivAB, as well as modest improvements in exercise capacity in a second population. Thus individual benefits, and also quality improvement in the form of cost-benefits to service are suggested by the results of this programme. Further larger-scale studies are needed to verify these findings. Short-term (1-3 month) exercise training interventions in CF are known to improve quality of life (QoL). 1,2 A previous study of a 1-year, supervised out-patient exercise and physiotherapy program reported a reduced need for intravenous antibiotics (ivAB), as well as improved lung function and exercise capacity, but did not report QoL data. 3 Aims: To study the effects of a 1-year out-patient exercise/physiotherapy program on QoL in children with CF. Methods: Children who had ≥4 ivAB courses in 2009 were invited to join the study which ran during 2010. The study had ethical approval. An individualised home exercise/physio. programme was derived, and included airway clearance, aerobic exercise, strength training, stretching and postural advice. Children were reviewed in the community every 2 weeks (more frequently if unwell), and a minimum of 30 minutes of exercise 3 times per week was completed by each subject. The CFQ-UK, a disease-specific tool for assessing QoL across several domains in children with CF was completed before and after the study. Paired t-tests were used to compare CFQ scores pre-and post-intervention. Results: Thirteen children (7 female) were enrolled with a mean (sd) age at study entry of 13.3 (2.1) years. Fifty-four percent were homozygous for the F508del mutation, and the remainder were compound F508del heterozygotes. Statistically significant improvements in QoL for physical, emotional, social, treatment and respiratory domains were observed following a year of supervised out-patient exercise and physiotherapy (Table) . Discussion: Supervised outpatient exercise and physiotherapy results in significant improvements in QoL in areas relating to physical health (CFQ physical, treatment, body and respiratory domains). Furthermore, key areas pertinent to emotional well-being (CFQ role, emotional and social domains) also showed marked improvement. Exercise promotion may be a useful adjunct to psychology services in improving quality of life in children with CF. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a multisystemic disease characterized by an abnormal ventilation response that limits exercise tolerance. Current evidence shows that physical training increases exercise capacity, decreases dyspnea and improves quality of life in patients with CF. Adherence to respiratory rehabilitation programs is a key factor to guarantee optimal benefits. Our goal was to determine the efficiency of three Nintendo Wii™ video games as training systems by measuring the physiologic response of performing different exercises with CF patients. Methods: We included 24 CF patients [mean±SD: age: 12±3.7 years; BMI: 18±3; FVC: 97±20 %; FEV1: 93±20 %] and followed 4 different exercise types in randomized order during six minutes: 1) 6-min walking test (6MWT); 2) Nintendo Wii™ Fit Plus Platform (Wii-Fit); 3) Nintendo Wii™ Active Platform (Wii-Acti), and 4) Nintendo Wii™ Family Trainer Platform (Wii-Train). All physiologic responses were recorded breath by breath by using a portable gas analyzer (Fitmate Pro, Cosmed, Italy). Results: In all video game exercises, after the 3rd minute, we observed a plateau profile that remains stable until the end of the test, similar to the 6MWT. The Wii-Acti and Wii-Train obtained high and significant values compared with the 6MWT. Conclusion: From a physiological perspective, exercises executed with video game platforms are feasible and allow high intensity time-sustained exercise. This type of training could be recommended to CF patients and can induce important physiologic improvements when used as a training method. Physiological response during the three video game platforms VO 2 = oxygen consumption; VE = ventilation; HR = heart rate; 6MWT = 6-min walking test (*p< 0.05) Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 2. Great Ormond street Hospital, London, United Kingdom Background: It has been suggested that patients with CF may have abnormalities of right ventricular (RV) function, causing reduced RV augmentation with exercise, possibly related to the subtle pathological changes of early pulmonary hypertension (PH). Real time cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging is an emerging technique that assesses ventricular volumes, aortic and pulmonary artery (PA) flow during exercise. We hypothesised that CMR would identify early changes in cardiac function in CF patients with severe lung disease. Methods: This was a case-controlled study of adults and children set in 2 specialist London CF centres. Four distinct groups were recruited: children (<17 years) and adults (>22 years) with an FEV 1 < 40%; children with FEV 1 > 50%; and age matched healthy controls. Patients were studied at a time of disease stability. Using real-time CMR, ventricular and haemodynamic flow images were obtained both at rest and during an incremental sub-maximal exercise protocol, at 2, 4 and 6 watt. An ergometer that allowed supine exercise within the MRI scanner was used and the exercise consisted of knee flexion and extension. Post-imaging assessment of ventricular volumes and mass, aortic and PA flows were made using commercially available open-source software with in-house plugins. All parameters were indexed to body surface area. A number of previously validated functional and morphological CMR indicators of pulmonary hypertension were measured (e.g. PA distensibility and interventricular septal curvature). Results: Sixty participants have completed the study protocol (Table) . There were no CMR defined morphological features of PH. CF patients had impaired RV SV augmentation at all levels of exercise (control children 19%; severe CF children 0.05%; moderate CF children 1.7% and CF adults 1.1% (ANOVA p<0.0001). LV stroke function was similarly impaired. The percentage increase peak PA blood flow in patients with an FEV 1 <40% was reduced (children 8.5%, adults 3.8%, controls 23% p=0.005). There was no morphological CMR evidence of PH during exercise. Conclusions: RV dysfunction with exercise has been demonstrated in this group of CF patients and there appears to be a relationship between lung disease severity and RV exercise augmentation. However despite significant disease there was no evidence of PH. The explanation for this limitation may be related to abnormalities of preload, afterload, intrinsic myocardial factors or reduced demand. Moran, F.C.; Rodda, J. Physiotherapy, The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia Introduction: Exercise testing is vital in the ongoing evaluation of people with cystic fibrosis (CF). Lung function measures monitor disease progress in CF but only measure one aspect of disease. Exercise testing allows further evaluation of a patient's function. The gold standard in exercise testing is laboratory based, usually on a treadmill or cycle ergometer, using sophisticated measuring tools e.g. expired gas analysis. Laboratory based testing is not always available or feasible to be repeated regularly. Consequently, field-based exercise tests have been developed for routine clinical assessment as they require minimal equipment or space to perform. The aim of this review was to identify and report on field exercise tests which have been assessed for reliability and validity in the CF population. Method: Searches (from 1980 Searches (from -2010 were performed in the databases: Medline, Web of Science, Cinahl Plus, and PubMed. Search results were reviewed by authors independently. Inclusion criteria: subjects with CF; exercise test is a primary outcome measure/result, is standardized/described, is evaluated for reliability and/or validity. Exclusion criteria: exercise test requires laboratory based equipment or is evaluated in the post-lung transplant period only; article not published in English; published in abstract form only/conference proceeding/editorial/letter to editor/book; or describes a single case study. Disagreement was resolved through discussion. Results: Thirty articles (out of 554 initially identified) met the inclusion/exclusion criteria. Nine exercise tests were identified, three of which had multiple references: the six minute walk test (6MWT) (n=17), modified shuttle test (MST) (n=5), and three minute step test (3MST) (n=5). Testretest reliability and face validity were demonstrated for these three tests. Concurrent validity with VO 2 peak was demonstrated for MST but was variable for 6MWT and not described for 3MST. Predictive validity was not investigated for 3MST, was shown for the expected increase in distance from admission to discharge with MST, and was variable for predicting survival to transplantation with the 6MWT. Prescriptive validity for improvement in distance after admission or rehabilitation was shown for MST and 6MWT but 3MST showed improvement only in breathlessness with testing but not HR or SaO 2 . Convergent validity with FEV1 was established for 3MST and MST but was variable for 6MWT. Tests with one to two publications were: astride jump test, forwards-backwards jump test, two and twelve minute walk tests, shuttle walk test and shuttle run test. Discussion: The most frequently studied exercise test in CF is the 6MWT, despite there being eight other field tests which have been studied in this population. Validity for the 6MWT has shown variability and the MST and 3MST may also exhibit this trait if studied more extensively. Requirements for each test differ in time taken, equipment and space requirements. Clinical utilization of a test should consider: test reliability and validity, requirements of the test but most of all the demands of the test on the patient and the patient's clinical status to meet such demands. Astute use of an exercise test for a patient requires the clinician to be conversant with all available exercise tests. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease leads to progressive declines in lung function and exercise tolerance. Pulmonary exacerbations are the leading cause of morbidity among CF patients, but how pulmonary exacerbations affect exercise tolerance remains unclear. Because regular exercise has the potential to improve pulmonary function, developing routine exercise programs may be beneficial for CF patients, even during hospitalization. Therefore, using a validated exercise test, we investigated exercise tolerance and lung function in children with CF hospitalized for pulmonary exacerbations. Methods: Exercise tolerance in pediatric CF inpatients was assessed using the Modified Shuttle Walk Test (MSWT), a validated measure in which the subject walks 10m lengths (shuttles) at progressively increasing paces. Pulmonary function testing was performed in CF clinic on the day of admission and the MSWT was administered by the inpatient physical therapist within the first few days of hospitalization. Lung function after hospitalization was measured within one month of discharge. Along with measurements of oxygen saturation and heart rate, patients completed the Modified Borg Dyspnea Scale (MBS) and the Modified Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) to estimate the degree of breathlessness and exertion on a scale from 0 (none) to 10 (maximal) immediately before and after the MSWT. Results: Seventy-one inpatients (21M, 50F) performed the MSWT, twenty-seven of whom performed the test at both admission and discharge. Median patient age was 15y (range 7-19y). Median FEV 1 (% predicted) was 64% (range 14-106%) at admission. The median percent change in FEV 1 was 14% (range -3-143%) after hospital discharge. Patients completed a median of 67 shuttles (range 20-150) during the MSWT, with a median percent change in heart rate of 42% (range -17-162%). The median MBS value increased from 0 (range 0-5) pre-MSWT to 7 (range 0-10) post-MSWT. The median RPE value was 0 (range 0-6) pre-MSWT and increased to 5 (range 0-10) post-MSWT. Sixteen of the twenty-seven patients (59%) who performed the MSWT at admission and discharge completed more shuttles on the second test, with a median percent change of 3% (range -53-31%). FEV 1 correlated with the number of completed shuttles (r=0.61, p=0.002), demonstrating that patients with higher lung function perform better on the MSWT. Conclusions: Inpatients undergoing treatment for pulmonary exacerbations reported severe breathlessness and moderate exertion following exercise using the modified Borg scales. These results demonstrate that during a pulmonary exacerbation, patients are limited by dyspnea and those with lower lung function have lower exercise tolerance. Both exercise tolerance and lung function improve after treatment for pulmonary exacerbation. These findings show that the MSWT is a useful measure of improvement in the hospital and should be used in conjunction with regular exercise as part of inpatient airway clearance therapy. Introduction: Adults with CF develop increased work of breathing (WOB) from progressive pulmonary impairment that impacts the inspiratory muscles. An imbalance between the WOB and inspiratory muscle function (IMF) contributes to inefficient ventilation, dyspnea, and impaired exercise capacity. In COPD, inspiratory muscle training (IMT) increases IMF, decreases dyspnea, and improves functional capacity. Research evaluating IMT in CF is extremely limited. Given the time commitments of CF care, the clinical benefit of new interventions such as IMT should be determined before being added. This pilot study evaluated the feasibility of a homebased IMT program to determine its potential efficacy in adults with CF. Methods: Individuals with CF were recruited from the University of Pennsylvania clinic during a stable disease period. All subjects were instructed to perform a threshold-based IMT home program (Powerbreathe ® , Creative Health Products) for 30 minutes a day, 6 days per week, at 50 -60% of their maximal inspiratory pressure (MIP). Compliance was monitored by routine phone calls and daily training logs. Primary outcome measures including FEV 1 percent predicted, MIP, and six-minute walk distance (6MWD) were recorded at baseline and after 6 weeks of training. Results: Five adults (age=22 -36; mean=28.2±6.3yrs) with CF (FEV 1 =23 -104% predicted; mean = 66.8±32.7%) were enrolled. One subject completed only 54% of the protocol and was excluded from analysis. The remaining four subjects had a mean compliance rate of 92%. No adverse events were reported. After training, MIP increased in all subjects by an average of 24.75% (100 cmH 2 O to 122.75 cmH 2 O, p<0.01). No significant group changes were noted in 6MWD (1688' to 1685') or FEV 1 (64% to 67%). Three subjects with normal inspiratory muscle strength (IMS) at baseline (MIP>100% predicted) showed no functional benefit after training. One subject with decreased IMS (MIP=76% predicted) demonstrated a 10% increase in 6MWD and an improved FEV 1 after IMT (1270 ft to 1397 ft, 44% to 55% respectively). Conclusion: A 6-week home-based IMT program increased IMS but had no effect on walking ability and pulmonary function in this sample of adults with stable CF. The results are limited secondary to the heterogeneity of subjects, small sample size, and the non-randomized single-group design. An unsupervised IMT program can be safely implemented in an outpatient CF clinic. Ergogenic effects of IMT may be limited to individuals with preexisting inspiratory muscle weakness. Research is needed to determine the prevalence of inspiratory muscle dysfunction in adults with CF and individual characteristics of subjects that may demonstrate functional benefits from this mode of IMT. Introduction: Studies have shown that intravenous antibiotic (IV) therapies in combination with an exercise program may improve exercise capacity, level of physical activity (PA), lung function and quality of life. However, an IV antibiotic therapy as a single intervention improved lung function but not exercise tolerance. The purpose of this pilot study was to investigate the changes in PA in daily life following a 14 days course of IV antibiotic therapy on PA, using activity monitors. Method: Six subjects with CF aged 20 to 31 years (age 25.7±3.8yrs, FEV1 49.6±25.7%pred) were asked to participate in this study. All participants were admitted to IV antibiotic therapy due to pulmonary exacerbation. FEV1, VC and MEF25 were measured at admission and before discharge. Subjects wore an Actigraph activity monitor (GT1M; ActiGraph, Pensacola, FL) during waking hours for the 7 days prior to IV antibiotic therapy and day 14-21 post-IV antibiotic therapy. PA was assessed with activity intensity (in Metabolic Equivalents, METS) and steps per day. Results: Lung function parameters, body weight and BMI slightly increased after IV antibiotic therapy (p>.05). Steps/day increased from 5102.3±2663.7 to 6497.2±3297.7 steps (z=-2.023, p=.043). Daily PA at an intensity of less than 2.99 METS showed a non-significant trend toward improvement post-IV antibiotic therapy whereas a significant increase in PA at an intensity between 3.0 to 6.0 METS was observed (26.3±3.0 min to 34.3±4.4min, z=-2.120, p=.042). Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient revealed a non-significant relationship between FEV1 and steps/day and intensity of PA (p>.05). Conclusion: PA measured with activity monitors increased post-IV antibiotic therapy in patients with CF at an intensity level between 3.0-6.0 METS. We concluded that IV antibiotic therapy has positive effects on PA in CF. However, an activity level of moderate exercise from 3.0 to 6.0 METS of at least 30 to 60 min is recommended for individuals aged 18-64 years to achieve health benefits. For additional health benefits adults should increase their moderate intensity aerobic physical exercise to 300 min or should exercise in vigorous intensity aerobic physical exercise of 150 min per week (6.0 to 9.0 METS). Our participants achieved the lower limit of these recommendations. It is of great importance to motivate subjects with CF to improve PA in daily life as well as to participate in sports or planned exercise. Therefore, CF Care Centers should offer an individual "exercise support" to children, adolescents, adults with CF and their parents and partners. There is evidence a dedicated outpatient physiotherapy service can significantly improve admission days, lung function and aerobic fitness 1 . The service involved sessions every 1 to 3 weeks, over 12 months for CF patients with 4 or more admissions. Objective: To determine the effects of a 12 month intensive ambulatory physiotherapy service (APS) on the number of admissions and occupied bed days for pulmonary exacerbations, lung function, aerobic fitness, and health related quality of life (HRQoL). Patient satisfaction of the APS was also examined. Method: Patients with 3 or more admissions in 2010 (n=21) were recruited from the total CF population (n=153) at the WCH. They were offered the 12 month APS in 2011 which involved outpatient sessions every 1 to 3 weeks consisting of airway clearance regimes, nebulised osmolytic agents, aerobic and anaerobic exercise, education and self management support. Outcome measures included number of admissions and occupied bed days, percentage of predicted FEV1, Modified Shuttle Walk Test (MSWT) distance, maximum oxygen uptake (VO 2 max) calculated from MSWT 2 , Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire -Revised (CFQ-R) and a patient satisfaction survey comprised of the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ-8) and a modified Concise Outpatient Department User Satisfaction Scale (CODUSS). Results: Nine patients (8 females) accepted and commenced the APS in January 2011, with a mean age of 9.5 ± 3.9. One patient did not participate in spirometry or the MSWT due to age. See results table. Conclusion: Based on six months findings, the APS may result in a significant reduction in admissions and occupied bed days. The APS also has high patient satisfaction. References: 1) Black R, Tallis The APS is funded by the GP Plus Health Care Strategy -a SA Health Initiative. Table   * Scores range from 0-100. Higher scores represent better HRQoL. Scores range from 8-32. Higher scores represent higher satisfaction. # This score is an average of each domain. A higher score represents higher satisfaction. Women with CF have previously been shown to have a higher incidence of UI compared to matched controls. Little is known about UI in men with CF. Aims: To determine the prevalence of UI in men with CF; to investigate associations between UI, disease severity and symptoms including cough and dyspnea; to assess the impact of UI on men with CF. Methods: Adult men with CF in a clinically stable state attending CF Outpatient Clinics were invited to participate in the study. Control subjects were recruited via advertisement. They were required to be eighteen years or older, have no diagnosed respiratory disease, nor significant smoking history. A range of questionnaires looking at bladder function, well-being, physical activity and symptoms were used. [3.2] . Both groups were well matched for physical activity levels. The impact of urinary incontinence was not different between cystic fibrosis and control groups, as assessed by report of 'bother' (p=0.15). In men with cystic fibrosis, lung function, dyspnea (as assessed by the Modified Medical Research Council Scale) and reported frequency of cough were not different between men with and without urinary incontinence. Men with cystic fibrosis and urinary incontinence had significantly higher anxiety (mean [SD] 9.1 [4.8] ) and depression (6.8 [4.6] ) scores, compared to those without urinary incontinence (anxiety 4.7 [4.1] , depression 2.8 [3.4] ) using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (p=0.003, p=0.002 respectively). In men with CF there was no difference between men with or without UI when considering co-morbidities, medications, disease severity, symptoms or fluid intake. No man with CF and urinary incontinence had ever spoken to a health professional about this problem. Conclusions: The prevalence of urinary incontinence in men with cystic fibrosis may be higher than generally considered. UI occurs across the disease spectrum in cystic fibrosis and does not appear to be related to disease severity or symptoms. Routine screening in CF Clinics should be undertaken and appropriate referral for treatment should be provided.  Although significant evidence exists to support physiotherapy management in cystic fibrosis (CF), there is considerable variation in clinical practice across Australia. Patients move around the country to pursue new work and living opportunities and change CF centers. They sometimes comment on the confusion that they experience because of differences in clinical practice related to physiotherapy. The need for a consensus statement which was applicable to the Australian healthcare context was identified by members of the writing group, in order to support clinicians in delivering best practice care. A consensus statement was developed by physiotherapists and was endorsed by the Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand (TSANZ) and the Australian Physiotherapy Association in 2008. The consensus statement was available electronically on the TSANZ website for downloading. The aims of this project were: (1) to determine whether physiotherapists are aware of the recommendations for physiotherapy management of people with CF) in Australia; (2) to ascertain whether these recommendations have been implemented; and (3) to establish whether physiotherapists agree with the recommendations. Method: A prospective survey was developed and implemented using SurveyMonkey. All physiotherapists providing treatment to people with CF in Australia were sent an electronic SurveyMonkey Questionnaire. The purpose-designed online survey assessed knowledge and uptake of key recommendations made in 'Physiotherapy for CF in Australia: A Consensus Statement.' Results: Sixty-eight physiotherapists took part (response rate 49%). Knowledge of treatment recommendations was high for airway clearance (94%) and exercise assessment (76%). Most participants agreed with these recommendations (airway clearance 97% agreement, exercise 68% agreement). Only a small number of participants (18%) correctly identified the current recommendation to segregate patients with different organisms during airway clearance, with most participants (73%) implementing stricter infection control policies. Low levels of knowledge and agreement were evident for recommendations regarding measurement of blood sugar levels (BSLs) during exercise (36% knowledge and 28% agreement) and delivery of dornase alfa (53% and 65%). Physiotherapists from specialist CF centers were more likely to know the recommendations for BSL measurement (p=0.014), dornase alfa (p=0.001) and non-invasive ventilation (p=0.07) compared to physiotherapists in other settings. Conclusions: Physiotherapists are aware of treatment recommendations for CF in common areas of practice such as airway clearance and exercise. However, knowledge of recommendations is lower for specialized areas of practice and outside of specialist CF centers. Strategies to improve awareness and uptake of the consensus statement amongst physiotherapists outside of specialist CF centers are required. Schindel, C.S. 1 ; Hommerding, P.X. 4, 5 ; Baptista, R.R. 3 Brazil; 4. Faculdade de Medicina, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil; 5. Faculdade de Fisioterapia, UNIFRA, Santa Maria, Brazil The deterioration of lung function in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients can lead to increased work of breathing causing muscle imbalance, due to the altered mechanics of respiration, and postural deformities. However, few studies have been published evaluating postural alterations and its relation to lung function in CF patients. Thus, the objective of present study was to correlate baropodometric, postural evaluation and lung function in children and adolescents with CF. For that, we performed a cross-sectional study, evaluating twenty-three children and adolescents with CF followed at the outpatient CF clinic of Hospital São Lucas -Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul. Firstly, anthropometric (height, weight and body mass index) and lung function (spirometry) evaluations were performed. Then, all patients were submitted to a postural evaluation using digital photos, after specific anatomical points were marked, in four different angles (anterior, posterior, left and right). The postural analysis was performed using the SAPO software. Static and dynamic baropodometric evaluations were also conducted in order to measure plantar pressures and anterior/lateral pressures displacement using the Footwork software. All data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Correlation analysis was performed using the Pearson's correlation test (significance accepted when p≤0.05). Results have shown a mean age (years) of 13.3±3.4, height (cm) of 152.3±13.8, weight (kg) of 45.6±13.5 and body mass index of 19.3±2.9. Lung function test demonstrated a mean FVC (%) of 109.9±20.1 and FEV1 (%) of 95.0±21.0. Postural evaluation (degrees) has shown a head asymmetry of 48.6±5.4 and a vertical acromion-head misalignment of 13.1±7.4. Baropodometric analysis demonstrated a mean anterior pressure dislocation of 11.8±7.0% and a lateral pressure dislocation of 4.6±4.5%. There were significant negative correlations of both FVC and FEV1 with the horizontal pelvic angle (r=-0.53;p=0.01 and r=-0.51;p=0.01), knee angle (r=-0.55;p=0.009 and r=-0.56;p=0.009) and ankle angle (r=-0.57;p=0.007 and r=-0.53;p=0.01), respectively, but no significant correlations with head or shoulders. There were also significant correlations of the pelvic alignment with the anterior/posterior pressure dislocation (r=0.43;p=0.03) and of the shoulder and spine with the lateral pressure dislocation (r=0.41;p=0.04 and r=0.40;p=0.05), respectively. In conclusion, the results demonstrate the presence of postural alterations that do not seem to strongly correlate with lung function. Baropodometry could be used as an adjunct to postural evaluation in CF patients, although its isolated role remains uncertain. The Life Space Mobility Assessment is a simple survey that evaluates an individual's overall level of mobility according to the amount of time spent in and away from the home. The lifespace score has been shown to strongly correlate with clinical outcomes in geriatric patients. In a previously conducted retrospective study at our CF center, we found that the life-space score was associated with frequency of hospitalization and pulmonary function measured by FEV 1 % predicted (Gottlieb et. al., "Life-Space mobility is associated with frequency of hospitalization in adults with Cystic Fibrosis," The Clinical Respiratory Journal, 2011). The objectives of this present study are to determine whether the lifespace score can be used as a predictor of future outcomes, and to validate the life-space score as a measure of mobility by comparison to number of steps measured by pedometers in adults with cystic fibrosis. Methods: This study was approved by the Emory IRB. We administered the Life-Space Mobility Assessment to consenting adult subjects at the Emory University Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center. Subjects were asked to wear a pedometer for three consecutive days in the first month, and quarterly thereafter. Life-space scores and steps measured by the pedometer were collected during quarterly phone calls. Over the course of one year, life-space scores and pedometer steps will be compared with the following clinical outcomes as recorded in the patient's medical records: frequency of hospitalization, changes in lung obstruction (FEV 1 % predicted), and survival. Results: The mean life-space score was 85.1 ± 20.4 out of a maximum of 120 points, indicating only mildly reduced mobility. The mean number of pedometer steps over three days was 20,637 ± 18,022 steps. We found that the life-space score was positively correlated with the number of pedometer steps (R 2 =0.4829 and p=0.018). Conclusion: The Life-Space Mobility Assessment is a useful marker of mobility in adults with CF. As in the geriatric population, decreased mobility may be associated with worse clinical outcomes in the CF population. In our prospective study, we are currently evaluating whether the Life-Space Mobility Assessment can be useful to predict clinical outcomes such as hospitalizations and pulmonary exacerbations. Park, J.L.; Lloyd, E.A.; Walshaw, M.J.; Ledson, M.J.; Greenwood, J.F. Adult Regional Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Liverpool Heart and Chest NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, United Kingdom Introduction: Nebuliser therapy is an important part of the management of lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. In the UK during exacerbations requiring hospital admission, nebuliser therapy is usually supervised by attending ward nurses. The knowledge and expertise of nursing staff in the use of nebulised therapies therefore plays an important role in supporting patients with their treatment. The aim of this study was to ascertain the level of nursing staff's understanding of nebuliser therapy in CF at a large adult CF centre (250 patients). Method: Thirty-three ward-based nurses (representing a cross section of all grades and experience from newly qualified staff nurses to CF ward manager level) completed a structured questionnaire looking at formal training received, methods of administration, knowledge of medications prescribed, timing of nebuliser use and concomitant oxygen therapy. Results: Only 4 (13%) had received any formal training in nebulised therapy, 1 individual failed to answer the question; and in every case this training was undertaken more than 18 months previously. Although 4 (12%) reported a face mask to be more effective than a mouthpiece, 24% (8) thought the choice of device did not affect delivery of medication. With regards to medication knowledge, 3 (9%) did not know the function of dornase alfa (DNase), 7 (21%) thought DNase was a bronchodilator, 2 (6%) believed salbutamol to be a mucolytic, 7 (21%) did not know the function of hypertonic saline and 6 (18%) believed hypertonic saline was a bronchodilator. Overall, up to 23 nurses (70%) did not know the common side effects of the medication. In terms of the timings of medication in relation to airway clearance techniques (ACT), 7 (21%) thought bronchodilators should be taken after ACT, 8 (24%) thought hypertonic saline should be taken after ACT and 7 (21%) thought Dnase should be taken after ACT. On evaluation of the nurses' knowledge of methods of nebuliser therapy administration, 10 (30%) were not aware of the different types of compressor and up to 30 (91%) stated that oxygen should be used as the driving gas. Almost a third of respondents stated oxygen should be used to deliver Dnase compared to 16 (48%) who believed a compressor was more appropriate. Conclusions: Ward-based nurses play an important role in the delivery of nebulised therapy for CF patients. However, our findings show that some nurses surveyed had little understanding of nebulised medication, its timing and methods of administration, despite having worked in the centre for a number of years. The findings of this study highlights a need for further support and training to ensure the appropriate use of and optimise the delivery of this important inpatient medication. Background: Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) often present skeletal muscle weakness which can be due to several factors such as nutritional depletion, decreased oxygen delivery, detraining, systemic inflammation, and corticosteroid treatment. However the mechanisms leading to reduced muscle strength have not yet been fully elucidated in patients without severe pulmonary impairment. Aims: The purpose of the present study was to investigate the relationship between skeletal muscle strength and nutritional status, level of habitual activity, exercise capacity and airways obstruction in CF patients with mild/moderate lung disease (FEV1 > 40% pred). Nineteen patients with CF (8M-11F), aged 19 to 34 years, with FEV1 43-100% pred entered the study. Skeletal muscle strength and exercise capacity were evaluated by means of the Hand-Grip Strength Test (HGST), the 1-Repetition Maximum Test (1-RM) for both arms and legs, and the Modified Shuttle Walking Test (MSWT). Nutritional status was determined by Body Mass Index (BMI) and Fat Free Mass (FFM). The level of habitual activity was investigated with a 7 Days Activity Diary (7DAD). Statistical analysis was performed using Student's t-test and linear regression. Values of p<0.05 were considered significant. Results: The results of the linear regression analyses among the variables considered in the present study are reported in the Table. In brief, skeletal muscle strength was significantly correlated to the level of daily activity and the fat free mass. On the contrary the degree of airways obstruction, BMI and exercise tolerance were not significantly correlated to the muscle strength variables considered. Conclusions: The results of our study show that skeletal muscle strength is mainly influenced by the daily activity and fat free mass in CF patients with mild to moderate airflow obstruction. It is therefore to be recommended an active lifestyle and muscle training in order to mitigate the loss of muscle function. The finding that muscle strength is not correlated to exercise capacity, reinforces the conviction that both aerobic and anaerobic performances must be routinely evaluated in patients with CF. Acknowledgments: The authors thank the patients and their families for their enthusiastic participation. Treviso Hospital, Cystic Fibrosis Centre, Treviso, Italy; 2. Peadiatric Department, Hospital, Treviso, Italy; 3. University, Padua, Italy Background: Regular assessment of exercise capacity in CF is a useful tool to facilitate exercise prescription and to monitor disease changes, in particular with aerobic tests that measure peak exercise (VO 2 ). Indeed, aerobic fitness, measured by peak oxygen uptake during maximal exercise, is a strong predictor of survival. Aim: To investigate whether there were any correlations between the Cardio-Pulmonary Exercise Test (CPET), the Bruce Test (BT) and the Modified Shuttle Walking Test (MSWT). PATIENTS 18 CF patients (6 male, mean age 16 years, range 11-30), mean FEV1 80% predicted and mean VC 81% predicted. MEASURES All patients performed CPET on cycloergometer. All subjects performed BT that consisted of an incremental treadmill exercise test using Bruce protocol and with measurements of VO 2 . All patients performed MSWT in order to assess exercise tolerance, which was expressed in meters. A specific Armband was used for 3 days by each patient. A SenseWear®Armband is a complex multisensory activity monitor that includes a 2-axis accelerometer, sensor for heat flux, galvanic skin response, and skin temperature. Moreover it is able to calculate the metabolic equivalent (MET) and the number of steps/day. To evaluate physical activity expressed in METs/week, the Minnesota Leisure Time Activity Survey (MLTAS) Questionnaire, adapted form of the Minnesota Leisure Activity Survey, was used. Results: We found a significant correlation between CPET and BT (r = 0,935, p<0,0001) and between CPET and MSWT (r = 0,731, p=0,0006). However there was no correlation between exercise performance indexes and pulmonary function and nutritional status parameters. Finally there was a significant correlation between CPET (expressed in VO 2 ) and MLTAS (expressed in METs/week) (r=0,83, p<0,0001). Conclusions: Our data showed that BT and MSWT are feasible, cheap, and easy to perform. These tests may be a viable alternative to CPET for assessing exercise capacity in CF patients. Moreover, analysis of the questionnaire (MLTAS) showed that physical activity has a real physiological impact on performance index. Clinical Relevance Statement: BT and MSWT are a feasible and cheap alternative to CPET and they may be used routinely to assess exercise tolerance in CF patients. Monitoring physical activity should be a primary goal in CF care. Taillon Background: The recruitment patterns of the deep and superficial abdominal muscles during static short duration activities such as abdominal hollowing have been documented in the general population, and recently, in adults with stable symptoms of cystic fibrosis (CF). These patterns were found to be similar in individuals with CF when compared to healthy controls. Because of the repetitive use of the abdominal muscles for coughing in CF, the capacity to produce a sustained contraction of these muscles, such as during yoga and Pilates, may be altered as compared to a non-coughing control group. Objective: The study's objective was to compare changes in time and frequency domain characteristics of electromyographic (EMG) signals recorded from the superficial and deep abdominal muscles during a sustained ("fatiguing") abdominal hollowing exercise between a group of individuals with stable symptoms of (CF) and a control group (C). This study received ethical approval from three ethics review boards in Ottawa, Ontario, Canada and was funded by the Alun Morgan Memorial Fund for Research in Orthopedics from the Physiotherapy Foundation of Canada. Sample: Twenty-eight individuals (14 with CF and 14 control group) participated in this study. None of the participants had had any previous exposure to deep abdominal muscle training, had chronic low back pain, had stress urinary incontinence or had abdominal pain. All were in good general health. Potential participants with CF were not included if they were one month post-discharge from hospital or were experiencing fever, increase in sputum production, change in sputum color, tiredness or increase in cough frequency during the week prior to testing. Participants with a cardiorespiratory disease other than CF or a neurological condition were also not included. All participants provided written informed consent. Data collection occurred from April 2009 through to January 2010. Methodology: Surface (EMG) signals of the deep (internus obliquus and transversus abdominis) and superficial (externus obliquus and rectus abdominis) abdominal muscles were recorded during a sustained 1-min abdominal hollowing exercise performed using a pressure biofeedback unit (PBU) placed under the lumbar spine with the participants positioned in a standardized supine lying position. Data was acquired using a 1401 digital/analog acquisition card and stored on a personal computer. Data analysis was performed using Spike 2 version 5.6™ software. Analysis: The root mean square amplitude, mean power frequency and median frequency of EMG signals from each muscle will be computed for consecutive 1-s windows throughout the 60-s sustained hollowing task. Three-way repeated mixed model ANOVAs will be used to assess the effect of group (CF, non-CF), muscle (transversus abdominis, internus obliquus, external obliquus, rectus abdominis) and time (different sections of the 60s hollowing task to be determined) on each EMG variable. The alpha level was set at 0.05. Conclusions: The conclusions will be available in July 2011. Bucholski, A.; Luithlen, A.; Bründl, K.; Müller, D.; Knoch, M. Introduction: Inhaled hypertonic saline (Hyper-Sal™) has proven to be tolerable and effective for sputum induction and mucociliary clearance in CF patients (Donaldson et al., NEJM 2006 , 354(3):241-50, Elkins et al., Pediatric Pulmonology, 2006 . This in-vitro study was conducted to assess the aerosol characteristics of an electronic nebuliser marketed in Europe as eFlow rapid® (RAPID) upon nebulisation of 4 mL Hyper-Sal (6%) available as a preservative free, single unit dose vial. Methods: Aerosol delivery performance was assessed by breath simulation tests using a standardised adult breathing manoeuvre (500 mL tidal volume, 15 breaths per minute, inhal./exhal. ratio 1:1). NaCl collected on inspiratory filters was quantified by potentiometric titration and represents the delivered dose (DD). The respirable dose (RD) corresponding to NaCl in droplets < 5 µm was calculated based on droplet size assessment obtained from laser diffraction tests at a continuous flow of 15 L/min. Results represent the data from 3 devices tested in duplicate, each (n=6). Results: The respirable fraction was 64.3% ± 2.6% for droplets < 5 µm and 30.4% ± 4.1% for droplets < 3.3 µm characterised by a mass median diameter (MMD) of 4.2 ± 0.2 µm. We found that 3.6 ± 0.7 min was needed to deliver a dose of 38.9 ± 5.7% (= 91.8 ± 13.4 mg NaCl) corresponding to a respirable dose of 25.0 ± 3.7 % (= 59.0 ± 8.6 mg) NaCl in droplets < 5µm. The high output efficacy of the RAPID is apparent from a total output rate of 821 ± 187 mg/min. The clinical effects of hypertonic saline (6%) reported by Elkins et al. are supported by these in vitro data indicating good lung deposition of Hyper-Sal™ (6%) when nebulized using RAPID. Objective: The PARI LC PLUS® (LC PLUS) is the approved nebulizer for Pulmozyme® (2.5 mg/2.5 mL, Hoffmann LaRoche) for mucolytic therapy in CF patients. The electronic nebulizer marketed as eFlow®rapid in Europe (RAPID) is an eFlow Technology device modified and intended for administration of currently approved medications used in CF (other than Cayston®). This study investigates the in-vitro aerosol characteristics using RAPID compared to the LC PLUS to deliver Pulmozyme. Methods: Delivered (DD) and Respirable Dose (RD) were measured during simulated breathing (tidal volume 500 mL, 15 breaths/min, inhal./exhal. ratio 1:1). The droplet size distribution was assessed by laser diffraction (Malvern MasterSizerX) at a constant flow of 20 L/min. Results: With Pulmozyme the delivered dose is the same for the RAPID and the LC PLUS. The RD is only slightly increased with the RAPID compared to the LC PLUS. The in vitro nebulization time of the RAPID is significantly shorter than the LC PLUS. The nebulization time with the RAPID is 2.3 min with Pulmozyme compared to 5.8 min with the LC PLUS. Both Drug Delivery Rate (DDR = 0.29 mg/min vs. 0.12 mg/min) and Respirable Drug Delivery Rate (RDDR = 0.22 mg/min vs. 0.07 mg/min) are significantly higher for the RAPID allowing for a much faster drug delivery to the lungs. Conclusions: The RAPID electronic nebulizer shows a high RDDR and significantly reduced treatment time with Pulmozyme which is essential for an effective and convenient inhalation therapy. This is important with respect to patient adherence, which may improve therapeutic efficacy. Loeve, M. 1,2 ; Hop, W.C. 3 ; de Bruijne, M. 2, 4 ; van Hal, P.T. 5 ; Robinson, P. 6 ; Aitken, M.L. 7 ; Dodd, J.D. 8 ; Tiddens, H.A. 1,2 1. pediatric pulmonology, EMC Sophia, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 2. radiology, EMC, rotterdam, Netherlands; 3. biostatistics, EMC, rotterdam, Netherlands; 4. medical informatics, EMC, rotterdam, Netherlands; 5. respiratory medicine, EMC, rotterdam, Netherlands; 6. pediatric pulmonology, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia; 7. pulmonary and critical care medicine, university of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 8. radiology, St Vincent's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland Rationale: There is a 15-40% mortality for CF patients awaiting lung transplantation (LTX) . We hypothesized that inclusion of CT related parameters may improve current prediction models of survival. Objectives: To investigate the relation between CT scores and waiting list mortality in CF patients screened for LTX, and the role for CT parameters to improve the survival prediction model. Methods: Clinical data and chest CT scans of 411 CF patients between 1990 and 2005 were collected from 17 centers worldwide. CTs were scored with the Severe Advanced Lung Disease (SALD) 4 category scoring system, including the components 'infection/inflammation' (INFL), air trapping/hypoperfusion (AT), normal/hyperperfusion (NL) and bulla/cysts (BUL). The relative volume for each component was estimated on a 0-100% scale using semi-automated software. Survival analysis included Kaplan-Meier curves and the log rank test. LTX was considered a censoring event. Cox-regression survival models included SALD CT scores and the Lung Allocation Score (LAS). The method of multiple imputations was used to account for missing values of LAS. Results: A total of 366 (186 males) out of 411 patients entered the waiting list (mean age 24, range 5-58 years). Forty-five patients were screened but were not listed for transplant. Of the listed patients, 67/366(18%) died on the waiting list, 263/366 (72%) underwent LTX after a mean waiting period of 10 months and 36 were still awaiting LTX after a mean waiting period of 20 months. Cox-regression showed that a higher INF and LAS were both significantly associated with waiting list mortality in multivariate analysis. Grouping patients into equal sized groups according to tertiles of INF scores and LAS, and comparing tertiles 1, 2 and 3 showed that survival decreased with increasing tertile. Compared to tertile 1, waiting list mortality hazard ratios of tertiles 2 and 3 were 1.62 (95% CI 0. 78-3.36, p=0.19), and 2.65 (1.35-5.20, p=0 .005) for INF, respectively. For LAS tertiles, these figures were 1.42 (0.63-3.24, p=0.40), and 2.32 (1.17-4.60, p=0.016). Conclusions: The relative volume of infection/inflammation as estimated as one proportion of the SALD scoring system correlates significantly with survival, and adds to the prognostic value of the LAS. ) is a developing therapeutic option as a bridge to lung transplantation. Therefore, VV ECMO should be considered as a bridge to lung transplant for cystic fibrosis (CF) with acute respiratory failure. Methods: A retrospective review was performed in CF patients who developed acute respiratory failure with need for mechanical ventilation and were ultimately treated with ambulatory VV ECMO as a bridge to lung transplant. None of these patients had been evaluated for lung transplantation prior to the current hospitalization. Results: A total of 4 patients were treated with ambulatory VV ECMO. Mean age was 29.5±6.4 years (range 25-34). Each patient continued to decline despite optimal medical management. Prior to intubation and mechanical ventilation, arterial blood gas analysis showed mean pH 7.30±0.04 (range 7.25-7.33), mean PaO 2 51.0±12.7 mmHg (range 42-60), and mean PaCO 2 110.5±19.1 mmHg (range 97-124). VV ECMO was instituted due to refractory hypercapnia on mechanical ventilation with mean pH 7.32±0.07 (range 7.27-7.37), mean PaO 2 49.5±10.6 mmHg (range 42-57), and mean PaCO 2 92.0±18.4 mmHg (range 79-105). Respiratory support with VV ECMO improved gas exchange without the need for mechanical ventilation and permitted provision of both rehabilitation and oral nutrition. Each patient underwent successful emergent lung transplantation with mean wait time of 8.5 days (range 2-15 days). Conclusions: We report successful outcomes with ambulatory VV ECMO as a bridge to lung transplant in a series of CF patients who had not previously been evaluated for lung transplantation. Prolonging the life of suitable transplant candidates or treating to allow recovery of acute respiratory failure using VV ECMO increases the probability of organ availability for lung transplantation. Most notably, ambulatory VV ECMO optimized patient suitability for emergent lung transplantation in this small cohort with each patient receiving both physical therapy and oral nutrition without the need for sedation and paralytics, which is often required with standard respiratory support with mechanical ventilation. Introduction: Chronic aspiration is a significant problem in advanced lung disease due to cystic fibrosis (CF). The clinical impact of aspiration continues after lung transplantation in CF patients and is considered a risk factor for the development of allograft rejection, thus Nissen fundoplication (NF) is routinely done for preventative measures. There is no biomarker available to assess aspiration in lung transplant recipients, so we hypothesize that the lipid-laden macrophage (LLM) index may be useful in objectively assessing the results of NF in CF patients. Methods: Oil red O stain was performed to determine the LLM index on all bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid analysis of CF patients undergoing bilateral transplantation from December 2010 to April 2011. A retrospective review was performed to investigate the impact of the NF upon LLM index in CF patients after lung transplantation. Results: A total of 5 CF patients (3 female, 2 male) underwent bilateral lung transplantation during the 5 month study period. The mean age of the cohort was 28.8 ± 10.4 years (range 15-40). Four of the 5 patients were homozygous for ∆F508 while one patient had ∆F508/R553X mutation. The mean LLM index was 141.8 ± 41. 5 (range 85-195) for the cohort after bilateral lung transplantation. Three of the 5 patients underwent NF with a reduction of the LLM index to 33. 3 ± 19.8 (range 19-56) . All 3 patients who underwent NF reported significant improvement in clinical symptoms of esophageal reflux. The 2 patients who did not undergo NF had acute rejection (A1/B0, A3/B1) on their initial surveillance transbronchial biopsy. The single patient who underwent NF and experienced acute rejection (A2/B0) had the highest LLM index post-NF. Conclusions: Significant reduction in the LLM index occurred after NF in CF patients after undergoing bilateral lung transplantation, which also correlated with symptomatic improvement. Further study of the LLM index as a biomarker for aspiration in lung transplant recipients, especially in CF, is warranted to verify these preliminary findings. Braun, A.T.; Merlo, C.A. Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA Background: Socioeconomic factors such as education and health insurance status are known to affect health outcomes. Recent studies have shown non-private insurance status to be predictive of worse survival in lung transplant (LTx) recipients. Furthermore, level of education has been associated with medical nonadherence which may potentially impact posttransplant outcomes unfavorably. The United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) database provides a large cohort of CF LTx recipients in which to evaluate the effect of these factors on survival. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed UNOS data for 2,085 adult CF LTx patients from 2000 through 2010. Patients were stratified by insurance status (private, Medicaid, Medicare, and other type), and educational attainment (grade school, high school, any college). All-cause mortality was examined with multivariable Cox proportional hazard regression, and the Kaplan-Meier method was used to model survival after lung transplantation. Results: Of 2,085 CF LTx recipients, 1,323 (63.5%) had private insurance; 384 (18.4%) had Medicaid; 192 (9.2%) had Medicare; and 185 (8.9%) had other type insurance. In regard to education, 132 (9.9%) patients had not completed high school, 762 (36.6%) had a high school degree, and 1,028 (53.5%) had any college. During the study period, 778 patients (37.3%) died. Patients with nonprivate insurance had 15% lower 5-year survival than patients with private insurance. A survival difference was also noted at 1-year (4%), 2-years (6%), and 3-years (9%). An educational attainment of high school or less was associated with a 17% lower survival at 5-years post-transplantation when compared to individuals with any college education. This survival difference was also noted at 2-years (7%) and 3-years (11%), but not at 1-year. In multivariable analyses, non-private insurance status increased the risk of death (hazard ratio, 1.33; 95% confidence interval, 1.14 to 1.55). Similarly, educational attainment of high school or less was associated with an increased risk of death (hazard ratio, 1.31; 95% confidence interval 1.10 to 1.54). When deaths in the first year were excluded survival differences persisted in both the insurance and education groups. Conclusions: This study represents the largest cohort evaluating the effect of socioeconomic status on survival in CF LTx recipients. Improved survival is seen in patients with private insurance and higher levels of educational attainment. Further investigation of the health care delivery mechanisms and patient-specific behaviors that underlie these differences may aid in improving the utilization and outcomes of the limited and lifesaving resource of lung transplantation. Supported by NHLBI (T32HL007534-29). Khan, K.; Desai, C. University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA Background: Improved treatments for cystic fibrosis (CF) have resulted in a marked increase in the longevity of patients over the past few decades. While pancreatic insufficiency is a source of morbidity chronic lung disease and liver failure are a potential cause of mortality. We evaluated the long term outcome of solid organ transplantation in CF patients. Method: Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients data was reviewed on CF patients who underwent transplantation between 1987 and 2009. Results: A total of 3326 patients underwent individual or combinations of lung, heart and abdominal organ transplant; isolated lung (88.39%), liver (6.46%), and lung-heart (1.62%) were the most common followed by a second lung (0.93%), liver-lung (0.63%) and a second liver (0.48%). The remaining combinations were < 10 transplants in each group. There was a gradual increase in transplants from 1987 to 1994 after which there has been a steady number (range 161-216). Of the thoracic transplants 82% were adults, (48% female), while of the abdominal organs 76% were pediatric (42% female). Mean age at thoracic transplantation was 28±10 years, while in the abdominal organ transplants mean age was much younger, 15±10 years. Interestingly, Hispanics consisted of 1% of thoracic transplants and 8% of abdominal transplants. Overall patients' survival was 61% at 1 year from 1987 to 1990 which increased to 85% between 2001 and 2009. Survival at 10 years was similar at 41% and 40% respectively. Survival after abdominal transplant was consistently better than after a thoracic organ through all time periods, however, combined abdominal and thoracic organs had a long term outcome equivalent to abdominal organs transplant survival. Conclusion: In CF patients, transplantation for liver failure typically occurs in adolescence as compared to lung transplantation which typically is necessary in young adults. Long term outcome of lung transplantation is poor compared to abdominal organ transplantation but is markedly improved when combined with an abdominal organ transplant. Long term outcome of liver, lung and liver-lung transplantation Lowery, E.; Mahoney, E.; Barton, K.; Forsythe, S. Internal Medicine, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL, USA Background: Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality following lung transplantation. Recipients with cystic fibrosis (CF) may have an increased incidence of PTLD although the literature is contradictory and studies are limited to pediatric populations. Our primary aim was to examine the incidence of PTLD in an adult population with CF. Methods: In this retrospective cohort of adult lung transplant recipients we examined risk factors associated with PTLD in 444 lung transplant recipients at Loyola University Medical Center between 2000-2010. We also reviewed UNOS data to identify 13,497 lung transplant recipients in the US between 2000-2010. A total of 1909 recipients received a transplant for CF. Statistical analysis was performed using Pearson's χ2, Poisson regression, and the log rank test. Results: In CF recipients there was an increased incidence with 9.7% of the cohort developing PTLD (6 of 62 patients) compared to 1.3% of those recipients without CF developing PTLD (5 of 380 patients). The OR for developing PTLD in CF recipients was 8.04 (95% CI 2.51, 25.67), p=0.0001. The rate of development of PTLD in recipients with CF was increased at 3.19 (95% CI 0.82, 12.3), p=0.09. All CF recipients who subsequently developed PTLD had EBV negative serology at transplant whereas those without CF had positive EBV serology at transplant. Additionally, the non-CF recipients presented with extra-thoracic lymphoma whereas 50% of the CF recipients presented with pulmonary involvement. According to UNOS data, the incidence of PTLD in recipients with CF was 3.2%. In those recipients without CF the incidence of PTLD was 1.4%. There is an increased risk of PTLD development in CF recipients in the US with OR 2.34 (95% CI 1.74, 3.16), p<0.00005. Conclusion: Adult patients with CF have over twice the risk of developing PTLD after lung transplantation. These patients are younger and the PTLD occurs earlier than in those recipients who do not have CF. They are also more likely to have thoracic disease compared to those without CF. Factors that may contribute include EBV serology prior to transplantation and the use of induction immunosuppression at the time of transplantation. Goralski, J.L.; Neuringer, I.P. Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Univ North Carolina Chapel Hil, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Introduction: Lung transplant for cystic fibrosis offers 5 year survival rates of 65%. As post-surgical care and treatments for infection and rejection improve, survivors are increasingly affected by medication side effects and other chronic health problems. In particular, as the average age of CF patients undergoing lung transplant is about 30 years old, many women of reproductive age undergo lung transplantation. Little is known about the effects of transplant on women's health issues. Methods: We undertook an anonymous survey of all living female lung transplant recipients who are followed post-transplant at the University of North Carolina. This is a mid-sized lung transplant program, performing 10-15 transplants yearly, primarily for an indication of cystic fibrosis, although survey responders included other diagnoses. Approval for the study was granted by the UNC IRB. Results: Forty-two surveys were mailed; 31 were returned (74%). The average age of the respondents was 40.2 years old (range 17.5-66) and mean length of time since transplant was 5.6 years (range <1 year to 14 years). The majority of patients were transplanted for cystic fibrosis (68%). Only 52% of patients reported that their health care provider had discussed future pregnancy with them prior to their transplant. Sixteen percent responded that they learned that "pregnancy is undesirable but normal pregnancies can and do occur." Sixty-one percent knew that pregnancy is not advised after transplant but only 39% recognized that pregnancy can result in loss of lung function in the transplant graft. The majority of patients (77%) indicated that they were not self-conscious about their surgical scars; however, the respondents noted multiple other changes in their appearance that they attributed to post-transplant medications, such as acne (22%), alopecia (33%), hypertrichosis (37%), weight loss (19%) and weight gain (37%). Twenty-two percent admitted to loss of libido, with 30% indicating that they were not able to maintain a healthy sexual life with their partners. Mental health was also a major concern among the respondents to the survey. Fifty-eight percent of respondents admitted to being anxious or depressed following their transplantation; 30% of respondents were worried that they were a "burden" to their family members since their transplant. Overall, 94% of respondents indicated that despite complications, they felt their health was better than it had been prior to their transplant. In the words of one recipient, "I feel I have traded one disease for another, and sometimes the cost outweighs the benefit and vice versa. However, I know I wouldn't do it any differently given the chance to do it again." Many respondents indicated that they "love to breathe" and thanked the investigators for "asking the questions that no one else seems to care about." Discussion: The results of this survey indicate that appearance-related medication side effects and mental health issues were prominent among our population of primarily CF female lung transplant recipients, and these issues may not be routinely addressed at clinic visits. Additionally, a standardized approach to addressing contraception and pregnancy, especially in young pre-transplant CF patients, is urgently needed. De Wachter, E. 1 ; Knoop, C. 2 ; Clauwaert, E. 1 ; De Schutter, I. 1 ; Malfroot, A. 1 1. CF Clinic, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium; 2. CF Clinic and Brussels Lung Transplant Group, Hôpital Erasme, Brussels, Belgium Background: Introduction of lung transplantation (lung Tx) for CF has been an important milestone in the treatment of end-stage lung disease. To improve post-transplant outcome, the International Society for Heart Lung Transplantation (ISHLT) has developed criteria to select patients for lung Tx. Over the last decades improvement in CF care has led to better pulmonary outcome and survival rate. This improvement might result in a change in characteristics of CF patients with end-stage lung disease eligible for lung Tx. Aim: We aimed to evaluate whether characteristics of CF patients on the transplantation list have changed between 1998 and 2008. Methods: In this retrospective study, we collected the following data from all CF patients that were listed in the Brussels lung transplant centre (Erasme) between 1998 and 2008: gender, age, FEV 1 % predicted, Body Mass Index (BMI), oxygen therapy, pancreatic insufficiency (PI), CF-related diabetes (CFRD), colonization with P. aeruginosa (PA), B. cepacia and S. aureus. All recorded data were baseline data from time of listing. Results: Seventy-one patients, of whom 38/71 (53.5%) were females, were listed between 1998-2008. Median age at listing was 23.9 years (+/-7.2 SD) and median FEV 1 was 21.6% (+/-5.5 SD). Median BMI was 16.8 kg/m*m (+/-2.4 SD). Most patients had PI (67/71= 94%) and 20/71 (28.2%) had CFRD. No significant change was seen in these variables over the study period. The number of patients on O 2 therapy increased significantly over time (p=0.044). A significant decrease in PA colonized patients was seen along the years (p= 0.002). No change in colonization with both other pathogens was observed. Discussion: Despite no significant decrease in FEV 1 over time, an increased rate in oxygen-therapy reflects a worse respiratory condition (diffusion capacity). More slow and progressive lung damage could explain this finding. Decline in the rate of PA colonized patients is especially seen since 2003. This common pathogen in CF is known to develop rapid decline in lung function and severe lung disease. The use of new anti-Pseudomonas inhaled antibiotics such as high dose tobramycin (Tobi®), colistin and the systematic use of azithromycin have probably led to a slower progression of lung damage in PA colonized patients. Another explanation could be the use of more accurate identification techniques enabling better differentiation between PA and other gram-negative bacteria. 'New emerging pathogens' such as Stenotrophomonas, Achromobacter species and other gram-negatives were probably previously mis-identified as PA. This shift in nomenclature could contribute to a global decrease in PA colonized CF patients, but further studies are needed to prove this hypothesis. Conclusion: CF patients listed on the Brussels lung transplant list have more need for oxygen supplements and are less colonized with P. aeruginosa over a period of 11 subsequent years. No other significant change in characteristics in this period has been noticed in our study. In recent years patients with cystic fibrosis are more frequently colonized/infected with highly resistant bacteria. We aimed to assess whether the incidence of colonization with panresistant bacteria pre-transplant has increased and whether it has an effect on survival. Methods: Single center study with chart review of all patients with cystic fibrosis transplanted from 1/1/01 to 6/1/11. Transplants performed after 1/1/07 were considered the more recent era. Panresistance was defined as isolation of at least one strain of bacteria without sensitivity to any class of antibiotics before or in the first 30 days after transplant. Demographic data were collected. The Student-t test or its non-parametric equivalent was used to compare continuous variable and the Fisher's exact test for categorical variables. Survival analysis was performed using the Kaplan-Meier method and comparisons among groups were made using the log-rank test. Results: There were 37 patients that met our criteria. The overall incidence of panresistant bacteria was 22/27 (59.5%). The incidence did not significantly increase between the two eras (early: 9/18 (50%) vs. late: 13/19 (68.4%); p=NS). There were no differences in the age, CMV status, Lung Allocation Score (LAS) or other variable between the groups. Despite the trend towards more panresistance in the modern era, survival was significantly better in the recent era (early vs. late survival: 30-days 100% vs. 100%; 1-year 77.8% vs. 94.4%; 2-years 66.7% vs. 94.4; 3-years 61.1% vs. 94.4%; p=0.035) . Multivariable analysis revealed no other significant predictors of survival. Discussion: Survival of patients with cystic fibrosis post-transplant is improving despite trends in sicker patients transplanted in the more recent era. If these findings are verified in larger studies, they suggest that improved understanding of the complex care of such patients can lead to improved outcomes despite higher risk characteristics of these patients. Objective: Molecular testing in newborn screening (NBS) laboratories has become increasingly common; however, there are no readily available quality control (QC) materials in the dried blood spot (DBS) matrix for routine testing. The Newborn Screening Quality Assurance Program (NSQAP) developed a method for constructing DBS QC materials for cystic fibrosis (CF) molecular testing and sent them to U.S. NBS laboratories participating in NSQAP's CF Mutation Detection Proficiency Testing Program for evaluation. Method: Two transformed lymphoblast cell lines heterozygous for the F508del mutation in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene were purchased from Coriell Cell Repositories. Six cultures ranging in densities from 1.0 X 10 6 -1.0 X 10 7 /mL were grown according to Coriell's protocols. Lymphoblasts were mixed with red blood cells; the hematocrit was adjusted to 50-52% and the mixture was spotted on Whatman 903 filter paper. Genomic DNA was extracted from DBS and the presence of the CFTR gene was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction. The Innogenetics CFTR Line Probe Assay, the Hologic InPlex ® CF Molecular Test, and the Luminex xTAG ® Cystic Fibrosis 60 v2 kit confirmed the genotype of the specimens. DBS QC materials were sent to 26 and 27 domestic laboratories over two quarters. Performance was evaluated based on the reported genotype. Results: Ninety-six percent of laboratories reported results. Methods included three commercial kits and two in-house methods. For five of the QC pools, 81-88% of laboratories could detect the correct genotype. For one pool, 75% of laboratories reported the correct genotype. For all specimens, six laboratories could not determine the genotype due to low signal, equivocal results, or sample failure. Some participants commented that the signal was lower than seen in NBS specimens. Conclusions: DBS QC materials for molecular testing are a growing need, especially for uncommon and rare mutations. The challenge is to construct materials that perform well in the different assays available for CF molecular testing. NSQAP's pilot materials for CF gave positive results in a majority of the laboratories for all methods used. Future studies will include working with laboratories to further optimize these materials and expanding the pilot to include cell lines with other CFTR mutations. Ooi, C.Y. 1 ; Keenan, K. 2 ; Gonska, T. 2, 3 ; Taylor, L. 2 ; Tam, K. 2 ; Ratjen, F. 2, 3 ; Solomon, M. 2, 3 ; Price, A. 4 ; Morgan, L. 5 ; Van Wylick, R. 6 ; Chakraborty, P. 7 ; Durie, P. 2, 3 1. Uni of New South Wales & Sydney Children's Hospital Randwick, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 2. Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3. Uni of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 4. Uni of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada; 5. Windsor Regional Hospital, Windsor, ON, Canada; 6. Queen's Uni, Kingston, ON, Canada; 7. CHEO, Ottawa, ON, Canada The natural history of infants with an uncertain CF diagnosis (QUERY) identified by newborn screening (NBS) is unclear. We followed QUERY patients prospectively since April 2008 when NBS was introduced in Ontario, Canada. We provide interim data on QUERY patients followed up to 3 years. Methods: QUERY subjects were enrolled by 3/4 Ontario CF Clinics (April 2008-May 2011). Enrolment criteria included: (1) borderline sweat test (30-60 mmol/L) and 1 disease-causing mutation; or (2) normal/borderline sweat test and CFTR mutations on both alleles (at least 1 mutation of unknown significance); or (3) borderline sweat test, very high immunoreac-tive trypsinogen (IRT) and no mutations. For comparison, we enrolled NBS+ infants with confirmed CF from the Toronto CF clinic during the same time period. Serial sweat tests were performed in QUERY and CF subjects during follow-up. Results: Twenty-five QUERY and 24 CF patients were enrolled. Twenty-three of 25 (92%) QUERY infants carried CFTR mutations (or variants) on both alleles. Serial sweat testing of QUERY subjects showed a significant fall in mean sweat chloride (SD) from 37.6 (10.6) to 28.0 (13.0) mmol/L (P=0.006) with a mean (SD) difference between first and last sweat chloride of -9.7 (11.4) mmol/L; the mean (SD) age at last sweat test was 16.1 (9.6) months. To date only 1 (4%) QUERY infant (pF508del/L206W) fulfilled the CF diagnostic criteria on follow-up (2 abnormal sweat tests ≥60 mmol/L). In contrast to the QUERY subjects, serial testing of the CF subjects showed a significant rise in mean sweat chloride (SD) from 74. 2 (24.3) to 88.4 (20.7) mmol/L (P=0.04), with a mean (SD) difference between first and last sweat chloride of +13.8 (24.2) mmol/L. QUERY subjects developed significantly less respiratory symptoms (cough, wheeze, pneumonia) than CF patients (8 (25%) vs. 17 (71%); P=0.01; relative risk (95%CI)=0.5 (0.2-0.8)). QUERY subjects had significantly less P. aeruginosa (Pa) isolation on throat swab than CF patients (2 (8%) vs. 13 (54%); P=0.0006; RR (95%CI)=0.1 (0.04-0.6)). One QUERY subject who was assigned a CF diagnosis was asymptomatic (no respiratory symptoms and Pa negative). There was no significant difference in the mean (SD) first (40. 3 (9.5) vs. 36.4 (11.1) ) and last (30.9 (8.6) vs. 27.9 (14.3) ) sweat chloride values between symptomatic and asymptomatic QUERY subjects (all P>0.05). All QUERY subjects and the patient diagnosed with CF have remained pancreatic sufficient (fecal elastase-1 >200ug/g). Conclusions: The diagnosis of CF in one QUERY patient was based on sweat testing. Mutation testing, respiratory symptoms and/or carriage of Pa were not helpful for excluding or establishing a CF diagnosis. The majority of QUERY subjects carried 2 mutations but demonstrated falling sweat chloride values while CF patients showed rising sweat chloride concentrations. These interim data highlight the limitations of CFTR mutation testing and support longitudinal sweat testing and clinical monitoring of QUERY CF subjects.  A recent review in a United States population estimated there is a death reduction of approximately 2 per 100 children when newborn screening (NBS) for CF is conducted. This study aimed -using a linked newborn screening-live birth-death file for which archived newborn dried blood spots were available -to understand how many infants and young children died from CF in California during a time when NBS for CF was not available. The cases were comprised of all deaths (N=2428) to children before 30 months of age (without regard to cause or any other factors listed on the death certificate) born between 01/07/2002 and 06/13/2003 (18 month period) (Cohort size=810,452). To identify CF cases, dried blood spot specimens were first analyzed for immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) by PerkinElmer using the AutoDelfia® IRT assay. CF mutation testing was conducted at CDC using the Asuragen Signature® CF 2.0 ASR assay which was customized to include 54 CFTR mutations, including those specially designed for the California CF NBS program, DNA sequencing of all CFTR exons, intron borders and 5' and 3' regions, and large deletion/insertion analysis using the MRC Holland MLPA assay. Altogether, 345 (14.2%) of the death specimens had IRT values above the 95th percentile of the current CF screening program. CF genotyping revealed that none of the 345 screen positive deaths had two CFTR mutations and 24 had one mutation. None of the 2428 deaths were due to CF according to the death records. This study provides strong evidence that there were no deaths in the first 30 months of life to individuals with CF prior to the enactment of CF NBS in California in 2007. Background and Objective: CF patients are inconsistently treated with antibiotics (ABX) for signs and symptoms of pulmonary exacerbations (PE). A previous ESCF analysis (Johnson et al, Chest 2003; 123:20-7) showed that IV ABX were used more frequently at sites with better pulmonary function; however, it did not examine how ABX were prescribed. The CFF Benchmarking Project found that higher performing centers had lower thresholds for prescribing ABX in response to signs and symptoms of PE. Our aim was to determine if higher FEV 1 sites are distinguished by a greater likelihood of identifying signs and symptoms of PE and or by a greater likelihood of prescribing ABX in response to documented signs and symptoms of PE. Methods: ESCF sites with at least 50 pediatric patients were ranked by calculating their median FEV 1 % predicted value for each year from 2001-2003 by age group (6-12, 13-17, 18+) using patients' best FEV 1 during the calendar year. Annual rankings by median FEV 1 for each age group were averaged to assign overall site ranks for the study. New signs and symptoms of a PE (Rabin et al Ped Pulm 2004; 37:400-6) were ascertained at each clinic visit during 2003. ABX prescriptions within 21 days of new signs and symptoms were then compared between sites in the highest FEV 1 quartile for each age group and those in the lowest quartile. Comparisons were adjusted for gender, race/ ethnicity, age, Medicaid status, and baseline disease severity (defined by weight for age percentile in patients under 6 years of age and FEV 1 in patients over 6) and + Pseudomonas culture in the previous 6 months. Results: Top-quartile sites had a total of 2164 children eligible for this analysis; low-quartile sites had 1292. Top quartile sites were more likely to report new signs and symptoms of PE in their patients: 86.7% vs 65.6% (p<.001) were documented to have at least one visit with 1-2 new signs or symptoms, and 12.4% vs 7.6% (p<.001) had at least one visit with 3-4 new signs or symptoms. The adjusted odds that a high quartile site reported 1-2 new signs or symptoms was significantly higher in <6 year olds (2.79, 1.40-5.56 ), 6-12 year olds (2.00, 1.38-2.90), and 18+ year olds (1.57, 1.01-2.44 ). The odds of reporting 3-4 new signs or symptoms were higher only in 18+ year olds (2.24, 1.18-4.27) . The odds of initiating ABX in response to new signs and symptoms were not significantly different for sites in the higher vs lower quartile. Conclusion: The previously noted higher likelihood that patients at top-quartile sites receive more ABX appears to be explained by the fact that high quartile sites are more likely to identify and document signs and symptoms of PE than low-quartile sites. Once these signs and symptoms are identified, treatment with ABX is just as likely. Study supported in part by Genentech, Inc. The Wisconsin program has found that average population IRT levels vary by season and reagent lot number as well as birth weight. This finding has important ramifications for the establishment of cutpoints and the sensitivity and specificity of state screening programs. Georgia's climate and population demographics differ from Wisconsin's so we evaluated the experience of our screening program to determine if it matched that of Wisconsin. Methods: The Georgia NBS program began in 2007, but data on IRT measurements from the first year was not reliably preserved so we reviewed data on all specimens received from January 2008 -May 2011. This was grouped into monthly averages for percentile cutoffs at the 95-99 %ile range. Demographic information was taken from the reports submitted along with specimens from hospital nurseries. Breakdown on race and ethnicity was only available from 2009 onward. Results: A total of 509695 specimens was received during the time period studied. There was no significant seasonal variation seen. The figure illustrates the degree of variability in measurements recorded among the entire population during that time. The table compares 95 and 96%iles across different demographic categories. All comparisons are statistically significant. Conclusion: There is significant overall variation in IRT measurements, but no seasonal trends in Georgia. The IRT distribution of Hispanics is close to that of non-Hispanic Caucasians. However, infants with BW<1500 gms tend to have very high IRT's, and the 95 and 96 %ile for IRT in African Americans (AA) is about 30% higher than Caucasians. This upward shift in the population IRT distribution would be expected to impact on the specificity of an elevated IRT for these groups, and is of particular importance in the AA population given its lower incidence of CF. A reasonable response to the variability in IRT measurements might be the use of a floating IRT cutoff for the general population, but consideration should be given to the use of race and birth weight specific cutoffs as well. King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 2. Pediatric Surgery, Dept of Child Health, King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom Background: Meconium ileus (MI) occurs in 10-20% of newborns with CF. Most require surgery and may be an inpatient for many weeks, which combined with the diagnosis of CF results in a very stressful time for parents. Echogenic bowel (EB) occurs in around 1% of all second trimester fetuses and in a small proportion is associated with pathology such as MI. Three percent of fetuses with EB have CF. Serum immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) levels in babies with MI have previously been considered unreliable. Aim: To audit characteristics of babies with CF diagnosed in a Regional Service since the introduction of Newborn Screening (NBS). Patients and Methods: King's College Hospital is the Specialist CF Centre and a Neonatal Surgical Centre for a population of 2.8 million in SE England. CF NBS was introduced across the UK from July 1st 2007. All positive CF NBS ("CF Suspected") results from babies born in this region are communicated to, and followed up by, our service. Clinical notes were reviewed for all babies, including whether antenatal counselling had been provided by a paediatric CF specialist and/or paediatric surgeon. Results: Since the introduction of NBS in our region 48 babies with CF have been identified; 14 (29%) were born with MI (MI+ve) and 13 of these required surgery. Echogenic bowel was more common in MI+ve babies than those without MI (MI−ve) but was still only identified in just over one third of the former group. Two MI−ve infants had EB and had CF confirmed by amniocentesis, but only one had access to antenatal counselling. Two of the MI+ve babies with EB had antenatal diagnosis of CF by amniocentesis but neither had satisfactory counselling. Both parents of each of the other three EB and MI+ve babies were found to be CF carriers but they declined amniocentesis; counselling was only provided to parents of one fetus. The mother of one MI+ve babies was known to be a CF carrier, but testing of her partner was only performed when EB was detected. Initial serum IRT levels in MI+ve babies were significantly lower than MI−ve (p=0.04), however, all but one of the MI+ve IRT levels were above the cut off value that would trigger a "CF suspected" result in the NBS protocol. Discussion: Antenatal detection of a fetus at risk of MI due to CF has a number of advantages. Firstly, counselling from a CF specialist can be provided to parents before birth to help them cope with the diagnosis and prepare for subsequent events. Secondly, delivery or early transfer of the baby can be directed to a pediatric surgical centre with an onsite CF team to ensure all non-surgical aspects of CF care are introduced as early as possible. Conclusion: Almost two-thirds of our MI+ve babies had no antenatal features to suggest CF. Even where CF was diagnosed, or suspected, through the presence of EB there was inadequate referral of parents to counselling and a pediatric surgical centre before their child was born. Good communication between the obstetricians, genetic services and paediatric CF team is recommended. Williams, S. 1,2 ; Chin, T. 1,2 ; Randhawa, I. 1,2 ; Nussbaum, E. 1,2 1. Peds Pulm/Allergy, Miller Children's Hospital, Long Beach, CA, USA; 2. Pediatrics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA As a result of newborn screening programs, individuals have been identified as possibly having cystic fibrosis (CF) on the basis of two genetic mutations of the CFTR protein (located on two different chromosomes) but having a normal sweat chloride test. Retesting of these infants, who are assigned the diagnosis of CRMS, have been recommended at two and six months of age (J Peds 2009; 155:S106-16) . Because not all CFTR mutations are disease-causing, there continues to be uncertainty as to the natural history of these newborns. We have identified a family with delta I507 with poly T (TG)12-5T and (TG)10-7T mutations. The newborn had three normal sweat chloride determinations (24, 20, and 30 mMol/L at 2, 4, and 12 months of age). However, his two older siblings with the same mutations show positive values of 71 and 76 mMol/L at 42 and 63 months of age. We then looked at fifteen of our CRMS patients and examined their sweat chloride test results and ages. It appeared that there is a direct correlation between age and sweat Cl in patients with CRMS. On the other hand, patients with two mutations which are clearly associated with CFTR dysfunction (i.e., CF) will have positive sweat chlorides, even at two to four months of age. There was no correlation with the volume of sweat and the value of chloride in CRMS. In conclusion, close follow-up of CRMS patients identified by newborn screening with re-testing of their sweat chloride is recommended. Extrapolating the data on our CRMS patients, it would appear that continued sweat chloride testing, especially after 40 months of age, may be necessary. This was also indicated by our family described above. Pediatrics/Pulmonology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA; 2. Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 3. Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA; 4. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA Background: Since 2010, CF NBS has been available in all states in the USA. In addition to diagnosis of CF, NBS can also result in the diagnosis of CRMS: infants with a positive NBS but indeterminate CF diagnosis. Little is known about how NBS has affected diagnosis of CF and CRMS at CF Centers. The goal of this project was to assess the impact of CF NBS on diagnosis of CF and CRMS by using data from the CF Center annual renewal application. Methods: In an effort to understand better the impact of CF NBS and acquire data to improve CF NBS in the USA, the CF Foundation added 4 questions regarding CF NBS to the CF Center annual renewal application in 2010: (1) How many positive NBS tests did the Center receive? (2) How many infants were diagnosed with CF by NBS? (3) How many infants were diagnosed with CRMS? (4) What was the average time from positive NBS to sweat testing? We analyzed the responses to these questions in aggregate from all CF Centers and by subgroups based on NBS algorithm. Results: In all, 132 responses were received (91 Centers, 41 Affiliates). A total of 5,077 positive NBS tests were reported, with 706 cases of CF diagnosed (13.9% of the total) and 187 CRMS cases identified (3.7%). Nine sites reported no cases of CF diagnosed by NBS. The ratio of CF:CRMS was 3.8:1, and 61 respondents (46%) reported no cases of CRMS. The mean time from positive NBS to sweat test was 12.32 days (range 1-45 days). Time to sweat testing did not differ significantly by NBS algorithm (12.8 days, N=80 for IRT/DNA vs 10.29 days, N=22 for IRT/IRT; P=0.25). Conclusions: Almost all CF Centers in the USA are diagnosing CF by NBS. The majority of CF Centers are sweat testing positive NBS infants within 2 weeks, but there is room for improvement at some sites. CF NBS has also resulted in the identification of many infants with CRMS, highlighting the importance of gathering more data on the natural history of this con-dition and assessing the potential variability in the use of this label. These results highlight the growing impact of CF NBS on CF Care Centers and identify areas for quality improvement and future research. Boas, S.R. 1,2 ; Hageman, J. 2 ; Liveris, M. 1 ; Washburn, J. 3 ; Piasecki, S. 3 1. The Cystic Fibrosis Center of Chicago, Glenview, IL, USA; 2. Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA; 3. St. Alexius Medical Center, Hoffman Estates, IL, USA Background: Although newborn screening has resulted in increased sweat testing for infants, obtaining an adequate volume of sweat has remained a challenge. The national standard for individuals >3 months of age is a < 5% quantity not sufficient rate (QNS). Studies examining neonatal QNS rates at various centers show significant variability. It has been suggested that a goal of < 10% QNS be achieved for children ≤ 3 months of age. The Cystic Fibrosis Center of Chicago at St. Alexius Medical Center is one of Illinois' designated centers for newborn screening. After an initial period of testing, a quality improvement (QI) program for sweat testing was instituted to improve QNS rates at this center. Objectives: To demonstrate the utility of a QI program designed to reduce QNS rates in sweat testing for all ages. Methods: All sweat tests were performed by pilocarpine iontophoresis via the Macroduct coil collection system and quantitatively analyzed for chloride concentration per CLSI guidelines. A CF Working Group was formed in 2009 and resulted in a QI program addressing sweat testing. As the main elements of the program were in place by the end of 2009, data are compared prior to this point (2008 and 2009) and post-implementation (2010) . QNS rates were evaluated pre-and post-implementation for both age groups (≤3 months versus >3 months of age). The QNS rates for each technician performing the tests were also evaluated pre-and post-implementation. Chi square testing, Fisher's exact tests and logistic regression were performed for the data. Significance was set at p<0.05. Results: In all, 291 specimens were analyzed for a total of 264 patients. Patient age varied with approximately 29.6% (n=86) of the specimens collected when the patient was ≤ 3 months of age. The proportion of QNS specimens pre-QI implementation was 15.6% (n=179). Post-QI the proportion of QNS specimens fell to 2.70% (n=112). Results of a chi-square analysis indicate an improvement in QNS rates following the QI initiative, χ2(1, n=291) =12.16, p < 0.001. A Fisher's exact test demonstrated similar results (p = 0.0003). Logistic regression analysis indicates that the QI implementation was associated with a reduction in a QNS specimen regardless of age. Patients ≤ 3 months had 5.1 times the odds of obtaining a QNS specimen (z = 3.98, p < 0.001). The proportion of QNS among patients ≤ 3 months was 31.0% before the QI and 7.1% after, compared to 8.3% before and 1.2% after the QI for patients > 3 months. There was wide variability in QNS rates when evaluated by technician with ranges from 0 to 25.2%. Post-QI, QNS rates improved for 2 technicians, remained 0% for 1 and was unchanged for 1. Discussion/Conclusions: The success of an individual program appears to depend on experience with sweat testing and commitment to the implementation of a QI program. This study has demonstrated the success of a QI program and should encourage other programs that are having difficulty obtaining targeted QNS rates to develop an individual QI program. Michelson, P.; Quante, J.; Clark, A.; Ferkol, T. Department of Pediatrics, St Louis Children's Hospital, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA Introduction: Malnutrition at the time of diagnosis with cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with a poorer prognosis. Despite universal newborn screening, many children with CF are still malnourished with the national median weight-for-length percentile for CF toddlers still below 50% by two years of age. We proposed that intensive education and improved nutritional education contributes to improved nutritional outcomes and aggressive nutritional education with close monitoring in the first 2 years of life is critical in maintaining adequate growth and preventing future respiratory compromise. Methods: We collected data from the CF center at St Louis Children's Hospital from 2007 through 2010. Following CF infant care guidelines, our dietitian met with families and initiated our educational program that incorporates monthly meetings to provide nutritional support regarding pancreatic insufficiency, timing and dosing of pancreatic enzyme supplements and strategies to increase caloric intake. Heights, weights and head circumferences were obtained at each visit. Weight and weight-for-height z-scores are calculated at each visit. Treatment modification i.e. acid suppression and GE reflux assessment are performed based on clinical criteria. The outcomes were contrasted to previously reported data from our center obtained as part of a two-year quality improvement (QI) project that was part of the NICHQ "Breakthrough Series" (2002 -2003) . Results: Twenty-three infants, identified by CF NBS and diagnosed by sweat chloride measurement and identification of mutant cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator alleles, were analyzed. All were pancreatic insufficient. Our recent nutritional data was contrasted to weight-forage z-scores of children studied as part of our earlier QI project. Whereas those children had an improved weight-for-age z-score (-1.8 to -0.9) over the 12 month study period, our most recent data revealed less weight gain with infants demonstrating a weight-for-age z-score of only -1.4 at diagnosis, improving to only -0.88 ± 0.38 at 1 year of age. Weight-for-height z-scores were somewhat better, increasing from -1.0 at diagnosis to 0.10 at 1 year of age, although 43.4% of our subjects still were at least one z-score below the 50% isopleth. Poor growth was not attributable to a delay in diagnosis with all infants having confirmatory sweat testing an average of 21.1 days postpartum. Clinical monitoring was sufficient; 75% of the infants were seen in recommended clinic follow-up visits during the first year following diagnosis. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that a significant proportion of our CF infants and young children identified by newborn screening remain at nutritional risk with an average weight-for-age z-score at 1 year that is suboptimal at -0.9. As well, we show that >40% of our children have weightfor-height z-scores that reveal growth failure. Our data supports our contention that despite early diagnosis and relatively frequent clinical followup, an even more aggressive management approach, possibly with additional behavior interventions, is needed to address the nutritional as well as respiratory health of young CF children. Watts, K.D. 1, 2 ; Layne, B. 4 ; Harris, A. 1, 3 ; McColley, S.A. 1, 2 1. Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA; 2. Children's Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA; 3. Children's Memorial Research Center, Chicago, IL, USA; 4. University of Illinois, Springfield, IL, USA Background: States develop specific protocols for CF newborn screening (NBS). Diagnostic bias and health disparities may result depending on the ethnic and racial populations represented if testing is not tailored to the population served (1). Illinois initiated CF NBS using the IRT/DNA method in 2008. We hypothesized that mutation distribution and detection rates would differ between Hispanic and non-Hispanic CF patients diagnosed by NBS and that more Hispanic infants would carry mutations not detected by the NBS panel. Methods: For IL CF NBS, an IRT assay is performed; when IRT is > the 96th percentile the assay is repeated. Once confirmed, the sample is analyzed for 37 CFTR mutations (Inno-LiPA, Innogenetics, Belgium). A positive CF NBS is reported if 1-2 mutations are detected or for IRT > 170 ng/mL ("ultrahigh IRT"). Race and ethnicity are recorded by birth hospitals through maternal self-report and provided to the IL Department of Public Health. We reviewed data on CF cases diagnosed in IL via NBS between 3/1/2008 and 10/31/2010, including only infants with a sweat chloride value > 60 mEq/L. Chi-square tests were used to compare differences in mutation detection in the racial/ethnic populations, with significance at p < 0.05. Results: Among 491,467 newborns screened, 104 babies met diagnostic criteria for CF (2 per 10,000 newborns screened). Infants were 71.2% non-Hispanic Caucasian, 14.4% Hispanic Caucasian, and 2.9% African American; 11.5% had missing ethnic/ racial data. Twenty-three CFTR mutations were identified: Delta F508 accounts for 71.6% of non-Hispanic Caucasian alleles, but only 36.7% and 33.3% of alleles in Hispanic and African American patients, respectively. Seven mutations (28%) were present in the Hispanic and African American patients but absent from non-Hispanic Caucasians. Ten mutations (36%) were present in only the non-Hispanic Caucasian patients. Among 104 newborns diagnosed with CF, mutations were identified in 92% of alleles. The case detection rate is 97% when 2 mutations are identified; this number drops to 0.3 % and 0.7% when 0 or 1 mutations are detected, respectively. More Hispanic infants with CF had one or more undefined mutations after screening, in comparison to non-Hispanic Caucasian patients (40% vs. 9.5%; p<0.002). The risk of having a positive diagnosis of CF with only one mutation on a positive newborn screen panel increases 2-fold in Hispanic Caucasian versus non-Hispanic Caucasian infants (5% vs. 2.4%). Mutation detection rates differ among ethnic/racial groups (p=0.03). No false negatives (missed diagnoses of CF) have been reported. Conclusion: In IL, CF NBS detects mutations less frequently for Hispanic infants than for non-Hispanic infants (40% vs. 9.5%). These findings are important in designing newborn screening panels for use in regions with significant ethnic minority populations. 1. Ross LF. Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis: a lesson in public health disparities. J Pediatr; 2008;153:308-13. Michigan Department of Community Health, Lansing, MI, USA; 2. Detroit Medical Center, Detroit, MI, USA; 3. MSU Kalamazoo Center for Medical Studies, Kalamazoo, MI, USA; 4. Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI, USA; 5. University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 6. Department of Pediatrics and Human Development, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA Genetic counseling is offered to all parents of newborns scheduled for sweat testing in one of Michigan's five Cystic Fibrosis (CF) centers who follow positive CF newborn screen (NBS) cases. This system was established to ensure families can delineate between carrier status, CF related metabolic syndrome (CRMS) and a clinical diagnosis of CF, as well as decrease parental anxiety and provide an opportunity for carrier testing and planning for future pregnancies. In 4 of 5 centers genetic counseling is provided by CGC®, or active candidate status, genetic counselors and in the remaining center by the Medical Director or Associate Director. This study was conducted to determine: (1) the percent of families who receive genetic counseling following their newborn's negative sweat chloride test; (2) characteristics associated with refusal of genetic counseling: and (3) the topic areas addressed during the genetic counseling. These three components will be used to evaluate the efficiency of the genetic counseling system in the Michigan NBS Program. All resident infants born from 2009-2010 identified as CF carriers following a positive NBS were included. A standard form with demographics, sweat testing results, and key topic areas discussed (from a checklist of 16 benchmarks) is returned to the NBS Follow-up Program to document the outcome for each scheduled genetic counseling session. The percent of families who received, refused, or had unknown genetic counseling status was determined. Logistic regression was used to determine the association between select characteristics (birth weight, gestational age, neonatal intensive care unit admission, race, ethnicity, and maternal age) and refusal of counseling. Frequency distributions were used to ascertain facts provided to those who received genetic counseling. A total of 566 infants met inclusion criteria. Genetic counseling status was unknown for 11% of the population, 26.5% of the families refused counseling, and 62.5% received it. Families of black infants were significantly more likely to refuse counseling (OR=9.0, 95% CI 5.2, 15.4) , although the odds were attenuated after adjusting for CF center. No other characteristic examined significantly correlated to refusal. Of the families who received counseling, the mother was present for 91% and the father for 75% of the sessions. All 16 benchmarks were discussed with 95% of families who received genetic counseling. While this evaluation revealed high standards of information provided by our genetic professionals, further assessment of patient understanding is needed and will be undertaken. Additionally, further work is needed to separate the effects of race from those of center-specific logistical barriers, because attention may need to be directed at identifying and eliminating barriers for black families to receive genetic counseling. Since then a total of 730,730 babies have been screened with 296 cases of CF identified; however, 325 cases of CF are known to the screening laboratory. Of the 29 cases missed on screening, 10 had meconium ileus (MI), 12 were pancreatic insufficient (PI) but without MI and 7 were pancreatic sufficient (PS). The age of diagnosis for the non-MI false negative cases ranged from 4 weeks to 14 years and included several patients homozygous for DF508. Six PI patients had an IRT within 5µg/l of the cut-off for the IRT screen, 3 of whom had an initial raised IRT with the second IRT being below the cut-off. The majority of patients had respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms at the time of diagnosis. False negative results occur frequently in CF babies with MI although the cause is unclear, possibly relating to surgery and/or lack of enteral feeding. Failure to detect some CF cases without MI reflected the IRT cut-off chosen, however in a small number the IRT was close to the neonatal population mean (both PI and PS). Ninety-one false positives (FP) were identified by the two stage assay. Forty-three occurred in well, term infants. Several causes were noted in the remaining 48 including multi-organ failure, renal insufficiency and Trisomies 13 and 18. The Sorin kit gave a FP rate of 0.01%, the Agen kit 0.08%, and the Delfia/Autodelfia 0.02%. The 3 stage assay (Autodelfia) which is more relevant to today's screening programmes, has given a FP rate of 0.004% (7FP out of 164,612 infants screened). Of these 7 only 1 child was a fit and well term infant. Whilst false positives will generally result in further clinical assessment, a negative CF screening test should not preclude further examination of the child if the symptoms are suggestive of CF. Pedder, L. 1 ; Hauff, K. 2 ; Carroll, V. 3 ; Brick, L. 4 ; Grey, V. 2 1. Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; 2. Pathology & Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; 3. Cystic Fibrosis, McMaster Children's Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada; 4. Genetics, McMaster Children's Hospital, Hamilton, ON, Canada Objectives: Newborn screening (NBS) for cystic fibrosis (CF) was implemented in Ontario in 2008. Hamilton Health Sciences is one of five regional centers for NBS confirmatory testing. By assuring the sweat chloride test is performed correctly, we ensure consistent, reliable and timely follow-up for screen positive infants. Our aim was to investigate the quality of our confirmatory sweat chloride testing. Methodology: We reviewed the data collected on all CFNBS positive infants identified by the NBS program from January 2010 to December 2010, inclusive. We examined the effects of gestational age, birth weight, ethnicity, CFTR mutations, and IRT values on both the sweat weight and results. Results: In 2010, 66 patients were identified for confirmatory testing, the results are summarized below (Table 1) . Sweat testing confirmed 9 CF affected infants (a 10th died prior to sweat testing). Of these, 5 initially revealed only 1 mutation by NBS. Our patients were a mean age of 15 ± 4 days when first identified by the NBS program, and were seen for sweat testing within 9 ± 12 days, (recommended standard: < 2 weeks). Our rate of insufficient sweat collection was slightly high, at 13%, (recommended standard: 5-10%). Conclusion: Our results represent an estimated incidence of ~1:2000, somewhat higher than expected in a population of predominantly European descent. This is likely due to increased identification of milder cases with the NBS. Our practices for confirmatory sweat testing of positive CFNBS infants are in line with the current recommendations. Minimal wait times for confirmatory testing allows earlier identification of CF patients (<3 months old) than prior to the implementation of CFNBS (mean age 3.6 years old). This is expected to result in overall improved health and outcomes due to a delay of bacterial colonization and better nutrition earlier in the course of disease. McMahon, V.R.; Schellenberg, A.; Burgess, C.A.; Sinclair, G.; Vallance, H.; Chilvers, M.A. Provincial Newborn Screening Program, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada Background: In 2009, the province of British Columbia (BC) initiated CF newborn screening (NBS). BC extends over 950,000 km 2 and careful consideration was required in developing the NBS algorithm due to the widespread distribution of our population. IRT/DNA/IRT was chosen as inclusion of a second IRT significantly reduced the number of infants required to attend our centre for sweat testing. A consequence of DNA analysis was the identification of infants who were carriers of 1 CF gene mutation. It was predicted that these carrier infants who did not have elevated repeat IRT levels were at low risk for CF (0.7%). The program elected to develop a novel approach for managing this group. Parents of these infants are counseled by the CF Newborn Screening Nurse (NBSN) by telephone and offered the option of attending BC Children's Hospital (BCCH) for a sweat test to exclude CF. It was expected that most families would pursue this option. Aims: 1) To review uptake of optional sweat tests in carriers of one CF mutation found on NBS. 2) To determine if geographical limitations influenced uptake of optional sweat testing. Methods: IRT is measured by immunoassay (Autodelfia, Perkin Elmer). Infants with IRT > 97th%, CF DNA analysis is performed using a 39 mutation panel. Hypertrypsinemic infants found to carry 1 CF mutation require a repeat NBS card for IRT at 21 days of life. Persistently hypertrypsinemic infants undergo a sweat test at our centre. For carrier infants with a normal repeat IRT, the NBSN provides parents with information and basic genetic counseling. An optional sweat test is offered. We reviewed the data from all recalled babies from Nov 2009 to April 2011. The geographical location of families was noted. Results:During the 18 month period, 65,366 infants were screened and 2087 had CFTR molecular genetic analysis performed. Thirteen infants were found to carry two CF-causing mutations. One hundred forty-nine infants were found to carry one CF gene. Of these carrier infants, 19 had an elevated repeat IRT at day 21 and underwent a sweat test. None were diagnosed with CF. One hundred thirty carrier infants had a normal repeat IRT at day 21, and genetic counseling and optional sweat testing were offered. Only 18 (13%) attended our centre for optional sweat testing. Of those 18 infants, 16 (89%) had negative sweat tests and 2 (11%) were considered 'borderline' with intermediate sweat chlorides (36 and 38 mmol/L), requiring long term follow-up to determine clinical significance. Geographical location did not appear to influence the decision to attend for a sweat test. No significant difference in average distance to BCCH was observed between those who attended (170 km) and those who declined (237 km) (P=0.41). Discussion: The uptake of optional sweat testing for low risk carriers was much less than expected. Distance to our centre did not appear to influence this decision. It is likely that families had received appropriate counseling and information by the CF NBSN which reduced the need for a subsequent sweat test. A future study will evaluate factors in parental decisionmaking in this sub-group of patients. An interesting observation was the detection of 'borderline' sweat test results in 2 infants in the carrier group. The clinical implications remain to be evaluated. Methods: Charts of all infants attending BC Children's Hospital (BCCH) for a comprehensive evaluation and sweat test were reviewed. OP swabs were obtained at the infant's first visit and were cultured using BCCH standard laboratory techniques. Over an 18 month period we evaluated OP culture results, age at culture, clinical status, feeding method (breast vs. bottle), DNA and sweat chloride values. Results: Forty-four infants were assessed of whom 12 had CF and 33 were either carriers or had no identifiable mutations. CF infants appeared to isolate fewer gram-negative and -positive organisms (E. coli (2) , Staphylococcus(2) , and Candida (3)) in comparison to non-CF infants (Table) . Non-CF infants isolated a greater number and variety of organisms but were seen significantly later than CF infants (P=0.0006). Eight non-CF infants grew polymicrobial cultures in comparison to 0 CF infants. Of note, two non-CF infants grew non-mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In both CF and non-CF breastfed infants, a trend to isolate fewer organisms was observed. (Average number of organisms: CF Bottle: 0.8, Breast: 0.5; Non-CF Bottle: 2.5, Breast: 1.2.) Sample size was insufficient to fully evaluate this further. Summary: •Non CF infants appear to isolate a greater number and variety of organisms than CF infants on oropharyngeal culture. Age at sampling may be a confounding factor. •Pseudomonas may be isolated in healthy infants. •The impact of breast feeding on oropharyngeal flora in CF remains to be evaluated. Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; 2. Starship Childrens Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand; 3. National Testing Centre, Auckland, New Zealand; 4. Canterbury Health Laboratories, Christchurch, New Zealand Background: Newborn screening commenced in New Zealand (NZ) in 1981 as a 2-step serum immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) measurement with an incidence of 1 in 2701 reported. From 1997 to 2010 this changed to IRT followed by 3-4 common CF genes measured in the highest 1% levels. Aims: To determine the number of positive, carrier and missed cases of CF 1997-2009 inclusive. To review sweat test results at time of first clinic in all, and the number with symptoms in those with CF. To calculate the current incidence of CF. Methods: Review of National Testing Centre records 1997-2009 inclusive. Each child with a positive screen is reviewed by a regional paediatrician with assessment, genetic testing, sweat testing and a measure of pancreatic sufficiency. An audit sheet is then returned to the Testing Centre. National population statistics were obtained from census data in 1996 and 2006. Results: There were 765,729 babies screened -this represented 99.6% of all children born per year in NZ. Of these, 714 were positive with 561 diagnosed as carriers and 153 diagnosed with CF, with 12 known missed cases. The incidence of CF is 1 in 4640 newborns or 2.14 per 10,000 live births. A positive screen occurred in 1 in 1000 newborns with 1 in 5 having CF and 4 in 5 being carriers. From the census data, the total population of NZ increased from 3.7 to 4.4 million over this time with shift in the ethnic make-up. Those considered to have a high CF gene carriage (European) decreased from 83.1% to 77.6% and those with low CF gene carriage (Maori, Pacifika, Asian) increased from 21.6% to 31.6% of the total (both census allow nomination of more than one ethnicity). All children with positive screens were seen between 3-6 weeks of age. The sweat test was reported in 556 (78%) with 103 (19%) being definitively positive (>60mEq Cl), 53 (9.5%) being equivocal (< 30 to > 60 mE Cl), and 347 (62%) being normal (<30 mE Cl). There were 153 children diagnosed with CF; 100 with positive, 19 equivocal, 5 normal on sweat testing using above criteria. Forty did not have sweat test results with 30 having homozygous dF508. Conclusions: The newborn screening programme in NZ has good sensitivity and specificity with currently 7.2% of cases missed. The incidence has halved over time in part due to changing ethnicities in the population though the absolute numbers remain. At time of first clinic review not all children had a sweat test and there were a number of equivocal sweat tests which now likely require further follow-up. Acknowledgements: Ministry of Health, and the Regional Cystic Fibrosis Paediatricians of New Zealand. Methods: From the early 1960s to December 2010, 1822 patients were followed at the Cystic Fibrosis Center of Verona. Of them, 464 were born in Veneto and Trentino region and were diagnosed at birth by the regional neonatal screening program. Information was extracted from the clinical database of the CF Center of Verona, data were updated until April 2011. Demographic characteristics and survival analysis are presented. Survival probability was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier estimator; comparison between groups was performed using the log-rank test. Results: From January 1971 to December 2010, 241 (52%) females and 223 (48%) males were diagnosed. The 30 year overall survival (OS) was 82.2% (95% C.I.: 74. 2 -87.9 ). Among 428 survivors the median age at last follow-up was 16.3 years, range 0.14 -40.2. No difference was found according to gender: the 30 year OS was 85.6% (75.0-91.9) for males and 78.9% (65.6 -87.5) for females, p=0.4. Eighty-two percent of the patients had pancreatic insufficiency and showed a worse survival probability: 30 yr OS 80% (70.9 -86.5) vs. 97.3% (82.3 -99.6), p=0.04. The overall survival in cystic fibrosis patients followed in the Center of Verona improved notably in the last decade. At December 2000, the 30 yr OS was 69% for male and 58% for females [1]; 10 years later the 30 yr OS was 86% and 79%, respectively. The survival probability at December 2000 took into account all patients, followed after symptoms or screening. Considering only screened patients, at December 2000 the 20 year OS was 80%, at December 2010 it was 92%. Considering 5 yr birth cohorts, 20 year overall survival continuously improved: 77.8% in the cohort 1971-1975, 84.3% in 1976-1980, 92.3% in 1981-1985 and 97.0% in 1986-1990 (in the later cohorts the 20 yr follow-up was not reached). Conclusions: Patients diagnosed after neonatal screening and born in the last two decades have a long term survival probability much higher than previously described. [1] Epidemiology and Survival Analysis of Cystic Fibrosis in an Area of Intense Neonatal Screening Over 30 Years, Assael, Am. J. Epidemiol. (2002) 156 (5): 397-401. Franco, M.E. 1,5 ; Lozano, J.M. 2, 5 ; Farrell, P.M. 4, 5 ; Lopez, C. 2, 5 ; Sanchez, G. 2, 5 ; Torres, J. 3, 5 ; Barber, D. 3, 5 1. Pediatric Pulmonology, Miami Children's Hospital, Miami, FL, USA; 2. Division of Research & Information, Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA; 3. Newborn Screening Program, Florida Department of Health, Tallahassee, FL, USA; 4. Pediatrics, UW School of Medicine, Madison, WI, USA; 5. Cystic Fibrosis Newborn Screening Program Group, Miami, FL, USA Background: There is limited information about CFTR frequencies identified through newborn screening in U.S. regions with genetically/ethnically diverse populations like Florida, which is mostly composed of Non-Hispanic Whites, African Americans, and Hispanics. Objective: To describe the frequencies of CFTR mutations in CF cases identified through newborn screening in Florida. Methods: The newborn screening program for CF began in Florida in September 2007. All data available for years 2008, 2009 and 2010 were reviewed to obtain information on the number of newborns screened and confirmed, and on the frequency of CFTR mutations among the CF cases. Results: A total of 665,360 neonates were screened during the threeyear period, and 1,701 were referred for follow-up evaluations. One-hundred and fourteen cases of CF were confirmed. Ninety (78.9%) and 24 (21.1%) cases had two and one identified mutation, respectively. Among the 90 CF confirmed cases that had two identified CFTR mutations, 43 had ∆F508/ ∆F508 (37.7%), 41 had ∆F508 and another mutant allele (36.0%), and 6 cases had other/other allele (5.3%). In the 24 CF confirmed cases with one identified CFTR mutation (20.2%), 18 patients had ∆F508 (15.8%), and 6 cases had a different CFTR mutation. Two patients had single mutations that are not included in the ACMG panel (A559T and Q493X). Conclusions: The distribution of CFTR mutations found in the first three years of the CF cases identified through the newborn screening program in Florida seems to be similar to that recently described in Wisconsin, a state with a less diverse population. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom; 2. Cystic Fibrosis, Royal Brompton Hospital and Imperial College, London, United Kingdom; 3. Cystic Fibrosis Trust, Bromley, United Kingdom Objective: An FEV1 less than 30% predicted has been widely used as a trigger for consideration of lung transplantation as median mortality within two years is considered greater than 50% in this group (1). However, in a recent study of patients attending a specialist adult CF unit whose FEV1 was <30%, a marked improvement in survival was demonstrated, increasing from 1. 2 years in 1990-1991 to 5.3 years in 2002-2003 . To explore whether these results are generalisable to the general population of adult patients we examined data from the UK-wide Port CF database of specialist clinic annual reviews. Methods: We identified all patients aged 16 years and older attending an annual review (ie. not during an exacerbation) whose FEV1 dropped below 30% predicted between 1/1/2001 and 31/12/2004 and whose FEV1 was at least 30% predicted the previous year. Survival was estimated through to 31/12/2009 and all patients who had ever had a lung transplant were excluded from the analysis. Results: We identified a cohort of 255 patients of whom 53% were male. At the time of entry, the mean (SD) age of patients was 27.9 (9.0) years and FEV1 was 25.7 (3.7) % predicted. Mean FVC was 45.6 (12.9) % predicted on entry and BMI was 19.2 (2.9). By the end of follow-up there had been 151 deaths in the cohort. Median (95% CI) survival for the entire cohort was estimated to be 4.7 years (95% CI: 3.8-6.2). Conclusion: In a cohort of patients identified through a national database of specialist CF clinics, we observed an important improvement in survival at low lung function, confirming the generalisability of an earlier study, and highlighting the important changing spectrum of advanced lung disease Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA; 2. Children Hospital and Research Center Oakland, Oakland, CA, USA; 3. Genetic Disease Screening Program, California Department of Public Health, Richmond, CA, USA California implemented newborn screening (NBS) for CF in July of 2007. The screening algorithm includes focused CFTR sequencing as a last step and allows for the detection of both known mutations as well as novel mutations and variants. Only infants with 2 or more mutations/variants detected are referred to CF centers for sweat chloride testing and further evaluation. While a positive sweat test represents definitive diagnostic criteria for CF, a good number of CF patients have sweat chloride values outside of the diagnostic range. Discordance between genetic results and sweat chloride results creates difficult diagnostic and treatment dilemmas. We have been conducting a longitudinal study with a uniform protocol for Sweat Testing and clinical evaluation to better understand the natural histo-ry of the disease among these infants with varying levels of CFTR dysfunction. A standard patient preparation protocol for sweat testing that includes salt supplementation (4 mmol per day for 3 days prior to testing) and adequate fluid intake guidelines has been implemented. Sweat testing is performed upon referral by the California NBS program (baseline), 1 month later, at 6 months of age and at 12 and 24 months of age. To date 25 infants have been enrolled (13 males) and have completed evaluation to their sixth month of age. Forty percent are Caucasian, 46% Hispanic/Latino and 14% Black. Median IRT for the group was 78 (range 64.6 to 211.2 ng/mL). Infants underwent a baseline evaluation at a mean age of 49 days and their mean baseline sweat chloride was 48.3 ± 37 mmol/L. A mild correlation was noted between IRT and baseline sweat chloride (r = 0.54, p = 0.01). By genetic analysis, 57% of the alleles are affected by a severe mutation (class I-III), but only 27% of the infants carried two copies of severe mutations (either homozygote or compound heterozygote). As expected, by CFTR genotype patients carrying only severe mutations (classes I-III) had a higher baseline sweat Cl than patients carrying at least one mild mutation (classes IV-V), 105.4 vs 36 mmol/L. Infants with severe mutations were seen significantly earlier than infants with milder genotypes, 34 vs 59 days (p = 0.01), in part a reflection of the additional time required for focused sequencing to detect uncommon mutations. At the 1 month and 6 month evaluations sweat chloride values have not differed substantially from the initial test (48 and 54 mmol/L, respectively). When broken down by genotype, no definitive trends are noted in sweat chloride values over the first 6 months of life. In part this could be due to the limited sample size, but perhaps more importantly due to the limited period of observation. As our cohort ages and more infants are enrolled into the study we expect to be able to more firmly establish if there are any significant changes in sweat chloride by genotype in the first two years of life. Supported by CFF grant MILLA08A0. We started a newborn screening (NS) for CF to assess the CF incidence in our population and the benefit of early detection and treatment. From September 1999 to 2009, 713422 newborns were screened. Our NS is based on determinations of immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) in the blood spot (Immunochem. Blood Spot TrypsinMW Elisa) collected at 3-5 days. Infants with higher than the cut-off (120ng/mL) were recalled for a second measurement (before 40 days of life). If the level remained high (cut-off 60 ng/mL) they were submitted to CFTR gene analysis (32 common mutations) and to sweat testing. Newborns presenting one CF mutation and positive sweat test were analysed for the complete CFTR gene (DGGE, SSCP and sequencing of abnormal patterns). Results: The IRT-1 was positive in 13,421 (1.8%) and the IRT-2 in 4,142 (0.5%). The total number of CF patients identified by NS was 98. Forty-two CF patients were identified by positive sweat test and two CF mutations in the first gene analysis. Fifty CF patients were diagnosed by second mutations identified by the complete CFTR gene analysed. Six patients were diagnosed by positive sweat test, and 2 mutations in the complete CFTR gene. There were 5 false-negative cases and 24 cases with inconclusive diagnosis. A total of 122 cases of CF (including 16 meconium ileus and 2 cases diagnosed by positive family history) were detected with an incidence of 1/5,847 live births being much lower than the expected. F508del was found in 51% of alleles. Vit E levels were low in 47% of cases. No CF patients with chronic colonisation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) was reported. Conclusions: The NS for CF allowed assessing the incidence of CF in our population. The early diagnosis and treatment dramatically decrease the chronic colonisation of Pa. Also, declining CF birth rates as a genetic screening effect must be considered in the future. Pittman, J.E. 1 ; Lin, F. 2 ; Davis, S. 1 1. Pediatrics, UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Biostats., UNC Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Objective: It is recognized that CF lung disease begins in early childhood, with increasing awareness of the need for research and interventions aimed at preschool patients. Our objective was to provide description of this population (comparing pancreatic sufficient (PS) and insufficient (PI) subjects) that may aid in future study design and implementation. Methods: Analysis of prospectively collected data from CF Foundation Patient Registry on children with CF born from 1998-2002, using X 2 and ttesting. PI was defined by supplemental pancreatic enzyme use. Results: We obtained data on 3,219 subjects from 171 U.S. CF centers, 3,180 (99%) with confirmed CF diagnosis. Of those, 2,594 (82%) were PI by enzyme use. Ninety-two percent of subjects were Caucasian, 12% were Hispanic; 51% and 34% were ∆F508 homozygous and heterozygous, respectively. The PI group had more females than PS group (52% vs 46%, p=0.02). Median age of CF diagnosis was 0.3 years. PI subjects were significantly more likely than PS to present with failure to thrive and abnormal stools at diagnosis; there was no significant difference in presence of meconium ileus or respiratory symptoms at diagnosis. In the first 6 years of life, PI subjects had more outpatient visits (mean 27.8 vs 18.1, p<0.001) and hospitalizations (mean 2.3 vs 1.5, p<0.001) than PS. PI subjects were more likely to use inhaled medications before age 6, including dornase alfa (48% vs 10%), tobramycin (26% vs 4%), beta-agonists (60% vs 16%), hypertonic saline (11% vs 2%), and corticosteroids (31% vs. 7%) (p<0.001 for all), and were more likely to be treated with acid blockers (99% vs 29%, p<0.001) or chronic oral antibiotics (7% vs 2%, p<0.001). PI subjects were more likely than PS to have respiratory cultures positive for P. aeruginosa before age 6 (70% vs 51%, p<0.001), though prevalence of mucoid P. aeruginosa was not different between the two groups (20% vs. 24%). PI subjects were more likely to have cultures positive for S. aureus (92% vs 76%, p<0.001) or methicillin-resistant S. aureus (24% vs 11%, p<0.001) before age 6, as well as Haemophilus sp. (65% vs 55%, p<0.001), S. maltophilia (30% vs 15%, p<0.001), Achromobacter sp.(8% vs 4%, p<0.001), A. fumigatis (10% vs 5%, p<0.001) and B. cepacia (2% vs 0.5%, p=0.03). PI subjects had poorer nutritional status throughout early childhood than PS (mean BMI age 2-3 years: 50 th percentile vs. 55 th , p<0.001). Though mean FEV 1 at age 6-7 was normal in both groups, it was significantly lower in PI subjects vs. PS (92% predicted vs 95%, p=0.005). Conclusions: We present data on young children with CF across the U.S, the majority diagnosed in infancy with respiratory symptoms (38%), failure to thrive (35%), meconium ileus (23%) or abnormal stools (21%). In the first 6 years of life, PI subjects appear to have higher burden of both treatment and disease, with more outpatient visits, hospitalizations, chronic medications, and lower nutritional status and pulmonary function than PS subjects. The two most prevalent respiratory pathogens in the first 6 years were P. aeruginosa (67%) and S. aureus (89%) (21% MRSA), both more prevalent in PI than PS subjects. Interestingly, there was no difference in mucoid P. aeruginosa prevalence or presence of respiratory symptoms at diagnosis between the two groups. Support: CFF PITTMA10A0. Formerly recognized as a pediatric disorder, the diagnosis of CF in adult patients has been increasing over the past fifty years. These patients have been described as having "nonclassical" CF with pancreatic sufficiency and a milder phenotype. This study sought to characterize a single cohort of patients diagnosed with CF as an adult at a single center. Methods: A retrospective chart review of all newly diagnosed adult cystic fibrosis patients at one Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center over the past seven years (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) was performed. Patient characteristics including age at diagnosis, genotype, sweat test results, gender, symptoms leading to diagnosis, pancreatic status, the presence of bronchiectasis, organisms in the first respiratory culture, lung function, CFRD status and the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis in a first degree family member were noted. Results: During this seven year period, 13 newly diagnosed adult cystic fibrosis patients were evaluated at our center. This cohort consisted of 8 females and 5 males. The age range was 21 years of age to 64 years of age, with a median age of 34 and a mean age of 38. The diagnosis was suspected in 10 patients due to respiratory symptoms, while infertility led to the diagnosis in 2 patients, and chronic pancreatitis in the remaining patient. Nine of the eleven patients that were genotyped were ∆F508 heterozygotes. Six patients had sweat tests performed, for a total of nine values, all of which were greater than 60 Meq Cl/L, except for one value of 56 MEq Cl/L. Bronchiectasis was present in 6 patients at the time of diagnosis. Seven patients had normal FEV1s at the time of initial presentation, while an additional 2 patients had moderately severe obstructive lung disease, and 4 patients had severe obstructive lung disease. Respiratory culture growth at time of diagnosis is as follows: 3 patients with S. aureus and Pseudomonas, 4 patients with Pseudomonas alone, 1 patient with S. aureus alone, 1 patient with Enterobacter cloacae and A. lwoffii, 1 patient with Mycobacterium chelonae, 1 patient with Mycobacterium avium complex, 3 patients with oral flora. Two patients carried the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus at the time of diagnosis, both males with BMIs greater than 30. One patient was found to be pancreatic insufficient, one patient had a low normal fecal elastase, one patient was pancreatric insufficient due to chronic pancreatitis, and the additional 10 patients were pancreatic sufficient. Two patients had a sibling with known CF, and 2 patients had a first degree relative diagnosed with CF as a result of their diagnosis. Conclusions: Patients with CF who are diagnosed as adults commonly are pancreatic sufficient. In our population, at least half of patients had no signs of obstructive lung disease at initial presentation; however, when obstructive lung disease was present, it tended to be moderately severe to severe. There was a high prevalence of ∆F508 heterozygosity, along with typical CF pathogens in respiratory cultures. The sweat test remained a helpful diagnostic tool in those in which it was utilized. Aims: To increase the efficiency of the execution of research protocols and increase team satisfaction with the research process. Methods: A 15-item multiple choice and short answer research satisfaction survey was sent to 13 research team members including research coordinators (RCs), investigators, data managers, administrative/ contract personnel and other support personnel. The survey assessed the areas of division of labor, training, job satisfaction, patient recruitment, and research study specific questions. Ten months later, a 24-item multiple choice and short answer follow up research satisfaction survey was sent to 12 of the 13 same research team members. The follow up survey assessed the same focus areas as the initial survey. The follow up survey also included questions which addressed areas that were directly affected by process changes. We implemented changes to our processes after evaluation of the initial survey. These changes included a pre-assigned schedule of rotating RC responsibilities, re-distribution of duties, time sensitive team meetings, and Standard Operating Procedures to aid in training. Results: For analysis purposes, strongly agree/agree were scored as one category, and disagree/ strongly disagree were scored as one category. Ten out of the 13 team members responded to the initial survey (76% participation). Questions were divided into three sections including overall job satisfaction (91 % satisfaction), division of labor (73% satisfaction) and study specific assignments (90% satisfaction). Eleven out of the 12 team members responded to the follow up survey (91% participation). Questions were divided into the three same categories including overall job satisfaction (96% satisfaction), division of labor (80% satisfaction) and study specific assignments (97% satisfaction). After implementation of QI initiatives, all three areas measured increased, with the most noted increases seen in the areas assessing satisfaction of division of labor and study specific assignments. On the follow up survey 100% of the team agreed the research calendar implemented increased the team's efficiency and team research meetings were becoming more effective and productive. However, 22% voiced concern over the systems approach to distribution of labor and study selection methods. Conclusions: Although overall job satisfaction was greater than 90% in the pre-and post-survey, defined and implemented study processes led to an increase in satisfaction with division of labor and study specific assignments which increases the efficiency of our team. In moving forward, individual principal investigator surveys and RC specific surveys may provide more insight into specific concerns over our system approach. Ongoing improvements also include the development of an RC evaluation process and career advancement track. In an effort to improve the cystic fibrosis (CF) research program at Stanford, the research team queried all research subjects who had participated in at least one CF study since 1992 about their experiences. Out of a population of 330 Stanford patients, 107 were identified as having participated in at least one study. The specific data from this project "Survey to Assess Research Satisfaction at Stanford (STARS) was presented at the 2010 NACF conference. This left a large number of patients who had either never participated in research, or had never participated in a study at Stanford. As a follow-up to the original project the research team decided to explore the reasons for nonparticipation. A brief survey was developed to investigate whether or not the patient/child had ever participated in any research studies at Stanford. If not, what was the primary reason for nonparticipation. They were also asked if there was interest in participating in future studies, and if so, how would they like to hear about them and who would they like to hear about them from. A total of 289 CF patients were identified through the Stanford database that were eligible to participate. The survey was completed by 199 patients (69%): 148 were adults and 141 were parents of pediatric patients. A nonbiased interviewer asked the questions over the phone or in person at a clinic visit. The answers were entered verbatim onto paper questionnaires: 55% (n = 110) of respondents reported participating in at least one study and 45% (n = 89) reported not participating in any type of research study at Stanford. Of the non-participators, 55% (n = 49) said the primary reason for nonparticipation was because they were not asked, 27% (n = 24) reported that they didn't participate because of scheduling conflicts, 12% (n = 11) reported that they were not eligible, 9% (n = 8) were not interested in research, 4% (n = 4) felt that research participation would negatively impact their health, and 3% (n = 3) felt the length and complexity of studies made participation difficult. However, 93% of the respondents said they would consider research participation in the future if they were contacted. Ninety-four percent had no preference as to who made the initial contact (physician, nurse practitioner, research coordinator, or clinic staff). Thirty-one percent (n = 62) wanted to hear about studies during a routine clinic visit, 28% (n = 56) wanted to be contacted via e-mail, 3% (n = 6) wanted to be contacted via phone, and 45% (n = 90) had no preference how they heard about potential studies. The percentage of individuals who did not participate in research studies at Stanford because they were never asked (55%) is strikingly similar to the survey that was completed by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) in 2006 (54%). The research team was disappointed to learn that their increased education and recruitment efforts over the past several years were not recognized. However, this may be due, in part, to the relocation of the adult CF program and the decreased research team presence in the new clinic. These results clearly indicate that there is a continued need to educate, and perhaps the face to face interaction between the patients, families, and the research staff is crucial. Children's Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL, USA; 2. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA; 3. Clinical Research Ambassador Board, Chicago, IL, USA Objective: Since March 2010, we have participated in the Clinical Research Ambassador Board Pilot Program for the CF Foundation. The purpose of this program was to engage patients and parents to serve as a local voice for CF research by promoting knowledge and awareness amongst peers in order to improve interest and enrollment into clinical trials. Methods: Twelve patients/parents were invited to join the board; with about half regularly attending meetings and teleconferences; others contributed by sharing their stories about research participation. Staff and families members from other regional CF Centers were included. A baseline survey was conducted to assess patient and family awareness, preferences, and barriers influencing clinical trial participation in order to develop strategies. A logo "You are the Key: Unlock the Cure" was designed to link efforts to the national "I am the Key" campaign. Quarterly newsletters are published featuring a personal story from a patient/parent, an educational article, and links to resources for finding clinical trials. These are distributed via CF centers, distributed via mailings, e-mail, and in-person at CFF events (i.e., Great Strides). T-shirts featuring our logo identify ambassadors at events. Logo buttons and pens were distributed at Great Strides 2010 and 2011. Results: Evaluation of the pilot program by the CF Foundation elicited a positive response, indicating the program had fostered a partnership between people with CF/parents and CF Center Staff, with the ambassadors successfully serving as advocates for CF research by sharing their stories and encouraging others to participate in research. Board members also are partnering with the CF Foundation nationally to develop awareness/educational videos and a customized clinical trial alert program to augment the current "Find a Trial" tool. Challenges encountered included time commitment, member participation and funding. The board applied for educational grants and procured limited funding from pharmaceutical companies to offset the costs incurred for printing, postage, and other materials. Additional funding is being sought for larger initiatives. Costs were reduced by using an e-mail distribution list. Meetings were supplemented with teleconferences held over the lunch hour to increase participation. The CF Foundation provided a guide for "telling your story" and some generic research articles that could be utilized or adapted for the newsletter. The board is seeking to expand and engage more patients/parents from all local care centers. Conclusion: This pilot program has demonstrated that engaging members of the CF community can help increase interest, understanding, and participation in clinical research. Such a program offers a means to nurture a culture of research by reversing misconceptions and encouraging efforts between patients, families, and caregivers to further enhance research efforts. We would like to acknowledge and thank the CF Foundation and all of our patients and parents who participated in this program and who breathe hope by participating in clinical trials. George, A.B.; Dorkin, H.L.; Thakkallapalli, E.L.; Solomon, J.M. Cystic Fibrosis Center, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, USA Background: One barrier to obtaining informed consent for subjects participating in minimal risk clinical research studies is that many potential subjects find it inconvenient and/or too far to travel to the study center for initial contact and consent. Telephone consenting provides some flexibility for these types of studies, but lacks the personal aspect of face-to-face communication during the consenting process. Technological advances in videoconferencing offer a new opportunity for a personal consenting experience for those who have difficulty traveling to the study site. By utilizing this method, the researcher is able to assess the subject's reactions and comprehension as well as allow for open discussion throughout the process. Objectives: To provide a geographically dispersed population the opportunity to participate in a one-time phlebotomy study using new and easily accessible video-conferencing technology. Methods: A process for obtaining informed consent remotely via videoconferencing was developed by the CF Center and approved by the IRB at Children's Hospital Boston. Access to video-conferencing equipment and software, in this case, Skype™, either at home or at a collaborating site, was arranged with each participant. A hardcopy of the informed consent was mailed to the subject or parent beforehand, along with return shipping material. A video-conferencing session was arranged. At the time of the conference the subject or the parent was asked to verify receipt of the appropriate consent by presenting the document on camera. The subject or parent was consented following ICH/GCP consenting guidelines. The subject or parent displayed the signed consent on camera to show it was properly completed and placed it in the provided envelope. Once sealed, the subject or parent displayed the envelope on camera to show the shipment tracking number. Research staff documented that the consent process was conducted via video-conferencing. Results: Since the process was initiated, five subjects who otherwise would not have participated in the study have been consented using videoconferencing. No patient or family felt that the process denied adequate opportunity for questions, and all appreciated the ability to conduct the interview from their home. The yield for enrolling in the trial through videoconferencing has been 100%. Conclusions: In addition to creating a more personal consenting experience compared with phone consenting, video consenting has provided families the flexibility and comfort of consenting from a familiar environment. Subjects have noted in particular that this option, be it from home or from their local clinic, significantly affected their willingness to participate in the study. The video-conferencing format also potentially allows for increased efficiency and decreased cost for minimal risk clinical trials. As experience increases with this format, it is hoped that this consenting procedure can be expanded to include more extensive trials. Background: Quality improvement (QI) initiatives have become primary drivers for improving clinical outcomes in CF. Despite multiple QI activities, key outcomes in our program have remained below targets. The benefits of asthma action plans have been well documented. Despite similarities with respect to chronicity and a focus on self-management, there is no literature regarding the use of CF action plans (CFAP). There is some evidence that reviewing individual patient data and counseling lead to better adherence and improved outcomes. The CF Foundation recommends that Patient Registry reports be shared with patients. Despite the availability of five CF action plans in an electronic medical record and Registry-based Individualized Patient Registry Reports (IPRR), these resources were not being utilized. We hypothesized that use of CFAPs and IPRRs will improve the quality of care that we provide and lead to improved outcomes. Methods: A multidisciplinary group including medical (physician and nurse), administrative, respiratory care, dietitian, and social work members reviewed existing resources. A single CFAP was developed. It included respiratory therapies/medications, nutrition and GI care/medications, and social work/educational components. Each section had space for disciplinespecific notes and goals. The final CFAP was loaded into the medical record and all older versions deleted. Our nursing service underwent training to access and print IPRRs from Port CF. Upon completion of the updated CFAF and IPRR training, five primary CF care providers were briefed on expectations regarding the new resources. The goal for the pilot QI project was that 75% of patients receive both a CFAP and IPRR. Patient perception of the pilot was assessed by internet survey. This consisted of seven questions regarding the usefulness of the CFAP and IPRR and a comment section. Results: During the pilot period, 608 CF patients were seen in clinic with 71% receiving both a CFAP and IPRR, 17% receiving only a CFAP, 1% receiving only the IPRR, and 11% receiving neither. Post-intervention, 32 families were surveyed (12 responses, 37.5%). When asked how confident they were in managing their child's care before receiving the CFAP, 33% said very, 42% said somewhat, and 25% said not at all. After receiving the CFAP, 92% said very, 8% said somewhat, and 0% said not at all. The IPRRs were thought to be somewhat to very helpful by most families. Subjective feedback was overwhelmingly positive and was summed up by the comment "I think this is a fantastic service you are providing families. I think it gives us a clearer picture of where we have been, where we are going, and how we are to achieve our health care goals." Conclusions: CFAPs and IPRRs are valuable resources and should be included in routine patient care. We hope that increased knowledge and understanding will be empowering to patients and families and lead to increased adherence and improved self-management. This should drive improved outcomes. Future directions include expansion of the pilot to all CF care providers, CFAP upon hospital discharge, and outcome assessment. Wall, M.; Briggs, E.; McCullar, B. Pediatrics, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, OR, USA Background: Data from our center indicate that pulmonary outcomes for patients who live a long distance from our CF center (> 120 miles) are worse than for those who live closer. The reason for this seems to be related to delays in treatment of lung exacerbations. This delay appears to be caused by a combination of inability to come to the CF clinic regularly, failure of local providers to recognize and treat exacerbations effectively, and perhaps social issues inherent to a long distance population. We hypothesized that we could improve access to care for these patients by developing a "virtual office visit" using a web based system that included standardized clinical questions and home spirometry. Methods: We developed a secure website for patient log in. Subjects were ages 7-17 years, lived > 120 miles from our center, and had internet access. When patients logged in they answered 6 Likert scale questions related to change in lung symptoms since the last contact. Patients were provided with a home spirometer and entered their FEV1 for comparison to their recent best baseline. Patients were asked to submit data on a monthly basis plus whenever they felt a need to do so. All submissions were reviewed within 24 hours by a CF nurse clinician. Any responses indicating a worsening of lung symptoms or a decrease in FEV1 of >10% led to a phone encounter as per our standard practice. Results: We enrolled 16 patients but 2 never submitted data and 4 dropped out after 1 submission due to loss of internet access. Over 10 months of data collection there were 67 encounters submitted from the remaining 10 patients. Twenty-seven of 67 encounters (40%) led to an intervention including starting oral antibiotics (11), hospitalization (6), come to clinic as soon as possible (4) , and advice (6). Nine of the 10 ongoing patients required at least 1 intervention. Most patients submitted data when they did not feel well or on follow up to an intervention. Four of the 10 submitted regular monthly data throughout the entire data collection period. In recent years there has been increasing interest in the CF community in using symptom scores and change in FEV1 to define exacerbations and enhance the potential for early interventions. Our data indicate that symptom scores and FEV1 can be obtained over the internet with interventions being initiated by person to person contact. We found that a large percentage of patient encounters led to specific interventions. The data indicate that patients are more likely to submit data when they have an increase in symptoms than on a routine basis. The protocol adherence rate was similar to that seen in a previous study of home monitoring in adults with CF. The major barriers to data submission seem to be forgetfulness and denial, i.e., not wanting to see their FEV1 outcome. The next step in the evolution of home symptom and FEV1 monitoring may be to move from demonstration mode to routine practice. We believe that EMR systems that allow for patient to provider interaction (e.g., My Chart in EPIC) hold great promise in this regard. (Supported by a CFF QI grant). Reference Background: The quality improvement (QI) process is an effective way to initiate change within a healthcare team, with emphasis on improved patient outcomes through stepwise change. However, little is known about what is necessary to sustain QI efforts within a microsystem. Our CF Center was selected for LLC IV, and began in May, 2006. We completed 4 main QI projects, and earned the CF Foundation's 1st Annual QI Award in 2008. Since then, our team has struggled to sustain consistent efforts in QI. Although our patient outcomes continued to improve we struggled with lack of focus, project completion, frustration, and decreased meeting frequency. The purpose of this study was to examine the barriers to sustaining QI at our center, to develop a plan to re-energize our QI efforts, and to enhance understanding of successful QI maintenance. Methods: We developed an anonymous two-part survey to ascertain our CF team's thoughts about the QI process: 1) 8 quantitative questions addressing perceptions of our QI efforts, its impact on patient care, and its importance in our CF center using a 5-point Likert scale, and 2) 7 openended questions, including perceived barriers to sustaining QI, lessons learned, and cultural changes that occurred in response to the QI process. Quantitative answers were scored and averaged. Answers from open-ended questions were analyzed using the constant comparative method and a grounded theory approach for identification of themes. Two reviewers independently reviewed and coded the data, identifying themes for each question, and met to refine final themes and codes. A focus group was held during two one-hour sessions with members of our CF team to verify themes (as a form of member-check) and to develop an action plan for sustaining QI. Results: Ten of 15 distributed surveys were completed. All team members view QI as an important component of our CF center (4.8/5; 5/5 for core QI team members) and feel QI has improved patient care (4.7/5; 5/5 for core team members). The lowest score (3.7/5; 3.6 for core team members) occurred in response to the phrase "We have been successful in sustaining QI efforts at our center." From our qualitative analysis, barriers to sustaining QI grouped into 7 themes: resources, attitudes, difficulty with measurement, focus, structure/frequency of meetings, lack of involvement of families, and leadership. One additional theme was identified by the focus group: lack of accountability. Discussion: Little has been written about sustaining efforts in QI. We identified several barriers to sustaining QI at our institution. In response, we developed an action plan focused on overcoming these barriers. Our plan included considering hiring or training a coach, initiating an internal tracking system, recommitting to meeting rules and structure, and celebrating team victories. Although our results are specific to our institution, we are likely not alone in our struggles to sustain momentum, energy and focus for the QI process over the long term. Fullmer, J.J.; Pai, S.; Bilger, K.; Tatum, T.; Heneghan, K.; Baker, A.; Horton, J.; Frank, A.; McWilliams, B. Dell Children's Medical Center, Austin, TX, USA Background: Using the Clinical Microsystems process our Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Center was analyzed and pulmonary outcomes identified as an area in need of improvement. A "fishbone" was conducted to identify barriers to improvement in lung function. Education was identified as a modality to improve patient adherence, proper use of therapies and communication with caregivers, all with the potential to improve pulmonary function. In the past our clinic has not had a standardized education program. The ImPOW-ER project was designed to implement a standardized approach to education in our clinic with the specific aim of improving our center FEV1 by 5% in 3 years. Methods: A knowledge survey was created and piloted. Once felt to be a useful tool this knowledge survey was used as a pre-test (visit 1). An educational resource, the ImPOWER Education Flipchart was developed. This was a laminated flipchart reviewing respiratory therapies, airway clearance, exercise, nutrition and CF-related diabetes. The flipchart was reviewed by the clinic respiratory therapist with the patient (visit 2). A post-test was given on the next scheduled visit (visit 3). Additional handouts were provided to the patient dependent upon medications and airway clearance modalities used. Pre-and post-test scores were recorded at visits 1 and 3. Spirometry was recorded at visits 1 and 3. Results: The pilot knowledge survey was given to 4 patients with a mean score of 70% recorded. Sixteen patients completed the project. The mean pre-test score was 73% and pre-test FEV1 was 64 percent predicted. After standardized education with the ImPOWER flip chart the mean posttest improved to 83% correct. However, the post-test FEV1 was not significantly changed at 66 percent predicted. Conclusion: Utilizing a standardized approach to education with the ImPOWER flipchart we were able to demonstrate an improvement in patient knowledge. This technique was practical and easily fit into the multidisciplinary clinic visit. It was well accepted by the patients. Our center will continue to review the ImPOWER flipchart with each patient on an annual basis with additional educational handouts provided on an individual basis. Pulmonary function did not change significantly during the study period. This is not unexpected given the short study time. We plan to continue to monitor spirometry on a quarterly basis for the next three years to see if the specific aim of this project can be reached. This project was supported by the Learning and Leadership Collaborative Adult Quality Improvement. Objective: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) affects about 20% of adolescents and 40-50% of adults with CF. Early detection and management of CFRD is essential due to the detrimental effects CFRD has on pulmonary function, nutrition, and mortality in CF. New guidelines for CFRD were released in July 2010 and published in December 2010. To improve compliance with these guidelines, a quality improvement (QI) committee was formed in October 2010 that included both pediatric and adult pulmonary and endocrinology providers to improve screening of the CF population at Vanderbilt for CFRD through a program sponsored by the CF Foundation and the Pediatric Endocrine Society. Methods: The entire QI committee met for an hour at biweekly meetings to review the data collections and system processes. For pediatric patients with CF, baseline data regarding screening rates for CFRD with an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) in the outpatient setting were collected by the pediatric QI subcommittee for the months of March 2009 -March 2010. Educational handouts regarding CFRD and the OGTT procedure were developed for patients and families. Patients who were eligible for screening for CFRD (greater than 10 years old based on the current guidelines) were identified by staff in the CF pediatric program. The identified families were provided the educational handouts during a clinic visit prior to the scheduled OGTT, and families received a telephone reminder of the OGTT 24-48 hours prior to the study. Data were collected for screening rates for March 2010 -March 2011 by the pediatric QI subcommittee to determine if an improvement in screening had occurred. Results: From March 2009 -March 2010, 39/78 (50%) eligible patients were screened for CFRD of which 11 (14%) had a diagnosis of CFRD. In March 2010 -March 2011 eligible patients were screened for CFRD of which 19 (23%) had a diagnosis of CFRD. Conclusions: Dedicated personnel to identify and provide reminders for patients eligible for an OGTT in the CF pediatric population allows for a consistent process within a large CF center. This process coupled with the education of families regarding the importance of CFRD and its implications with respect to overall CF survival showed sustainability and provided a 56% improvement in CFRD screening in a one-year period of time. This improved screening process resulted in the identification of 64% more patients with CFRD. Acknowledgements The Intermountain Cystic Fibrosis Center provides care to 250 pediatric patients. Medtracker was a past quality improvement effort that focused on medications prescribed when patients were clinically eligible to receive them. Greater than 90% adherence was found for prescribing indicated medications. How medications and therapies were utilized by patients was less rigorously evaluated. Previously our practice had been to verbally teach each new therapy added to a CF patient's regimen. Careful attention was paid to cleaning and disinfecting of respiratory equipment, type of equipment used, and order of medications. The annual respiratory assessment (ARA) was performed with close-ended (yes/no) questions. Families were provided individualized written recommendations and feedback. The ARA required an average of 30 minutes of clinic time to complete. Recently, our Center participated in an adolescent adherence study (iCARE) which shifted us from verbal instruction of respiratory techniques and medications to patient demonstration. We observed substantial deficiencies in the performance and knowledge of key respiratory therapies and medications in the adolescent population. A decision was made to modify the ARA for all patients. We similarly adopted this approach of instruction for newly diagnosed patients. Methods: During the ARA, patients demonstrated all techniques that were prescribed. This included MDI and nebulizer technique and High-frequency Chest Wall Oscillation or other airway clearance modality. Openended questions were utilized for techniques that could not be demonstrated (i.e., cleaning and disinfecting of equipment). Knowledge domains about action of medications were added and queried with open-ended questions. Patients were asked to bring their own "vest" from home to evaluate fit. The time required for these assessments was monitored based on "level of service" billed. Results: See Table. Discussion: Patients with CF have a complex daily care regimen. Medications are extremely expensive and their effectiveness is hinged on proper adherence and utilization. We identified that a high proportion of our previously educated patients performed many key therapies incorrectly when evaluated by return demonstration. This method of respiratory assessment and education is time consuming and labor intensive. We speculate that improved technique and performance may enhance the preventive nature of patients inquired if they could self administer maintenance regimens while hospitalized. Process: We applied The Dartmouth Microsystems Improvement Methodology to initiate a self-administration program for CF inpatients. A team of physician, father of 2 CF patients, social worker, unit nurse manager, respiratory therapist (RT), pharmacist, and dietitian was assembled and coached by a physician with expertise in improvement sciences. Program Implementation: We spent several weeks researching potential obstacles preventing inpatients from self-medicating including review of hospital policies, the Joint Commission standards and Institute for Safe Medication Practice recommendations. We found no policies forbidding self administration, and no data on how to set up such a program. We chose the following maintenance medications for self-administration program: SABA, ICS, hypertonic saline, dornase alfa, pancreatic enzymes and vitamins, nebulized tobramycin. We concluded that patients should choose whether to self administer, therefore a patient's consent form was created. A patient may choose to self administer some or all medications. Five metal boxes with a combination lock and separate drawers for each medication, were acquired for medication storage at bedside. Once pharmacy receives the orders indicating self-administration, the pharmacist fills the medication box with reconciled drugs. The nurse picks up the box from the pharmacy and delivers to the patient. The bedside nurse educates the patient to maintain a record of each time the patient administers a medication. Inventory of the box is taken every 24 hours and refilled. The inventory process allows for the nurse to assess patient compliance. After discharge the box is delivered to a central facility for cleaning, and returned to pharmacy. Results: Out of 50 admissions, only 3 opted not to self administer. One was too ill.The others did not know how due to lack of adherence as outpatients. This provided an opportunity to educate on proper use and function of medications. Few patients displayed poor technique when self-administering resulting in further educational opportunities. Effectiveness of the self administration program was evaluated by interviewing patients and health care workers before, during and after program initiation. Uniform satisfaction among patients and professionals was observed. Nurses were spending more time with patients rather than simply handing out drug. The program resulted in RTs checking on CF patients twice daily, allowing time with needier patients. Conclusion: A medication self-administration program sensitive to CF patient values and preferences can be realized in a safe practice with transparency of information between patients and providers. In contrast to Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes, CFRD typically has an insidious onset and does not present with classic symptoms of polyuria or polydipsia. An unexplained decline in pulmonary function or an inability to gain weight despite aggressive nutritional intervention may be the only signs of underlying abnormalities in glucose metabolism. Uncontrolled CFRD can lead to microvascular complications of nephropathy, neuropathy, and retinopathy. Because of its insidious onset and potential long-term complications, annual screening for and management of patients with CFRD is very important. The 2 hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is the screening tool recommended to diagnose CFRD. CSRCHCFC cares for 197 pediatric patients with CF, of which 10% have CFRD. Care for patients with CFRD was challenging due to a lack of understanding of the nuances of CF care and a heterogeneity in treatment philosophies by members of the endocrine division. Beginning in August 2010, a pediatric endocrine fellow joined the CSRCHCFC team. Working along with the CF Center Director, she was given training in the care and management of patients with CF. Training specific to the diagnosis and management of CFRD occurred via a two week mentorship with Antoinette Moran, MD. As a part of quality improvement (QI), we developed an algo-rithm to improve screening of patients aged 8-18 years of age for CFRD at our center incorporating the 2010 CFRD Screening Guidelines. The algorithm is placed in the chart of each eligible patient prompting the physician to order the OGTT. The endocrine fellow is responsible for follow-up on the results, and together with the Center director implements a plan for management of abnormal results. The algorithm also introduced the concept of using continuous-glucose monitoring (CGM) in select patients with abnormal (impaired or indeterminate category) OGTT results to decide if early treatment with insulin could be beneficial. We improved algorithm chart placement from 54% in the 1st month to 84% in the second month. We also diagnosed one new patient with CFRD and placed CGM on 2 patients. Patients diagnosed with CFRD receive ongoing care by the endocrine fellow in CF clinic. This initiative reflects both a successful collaboration between divisions as well as implementation of a screening algorithm. Results in terms of percentage of algorithms placed in eligible charts, percentage of OGTT and CGM appropriately ordered, the time period between ordering OGTT and receiving results, and the time period between ordering CGM and obtaining results will be updated for presentation. Methods: We began by reviewing our baseline percentage of patients screened for CFRD in 2010 and examined existing barriers. After identifying the main barriers, we decided to focus on educating our patients on the importance of CFRD screening along with including discussion of screening in pre-clinic meetings. To begin we created inpatient and outpatient CFRD screening protocols and began tracking our results. We also developed an educational poster to display in clinic rooms for providers to use as a discussion tool. Results: In 2010, 51% of eligible patients from the pediatric program and 64% of eligible patients from the adult program were screened for CFRD. As of April 2011, 32% of eligible patients from the pediatric program and 36% of eligible patients from the adult program have been screened. We will continue to track our results through the end of 2011. Conclusions: Since we are a third of the way through the year and have screened approximately one-third of our patients, we feel we are on target to meet our goal of 100% by the end of the year. Based on this preliminary data, we believe that using a similar protocol and educational tool may also benefit other centers in improving their screening for CFRD. Future Directions: In addition to working on CFRD screening, our second specific aim is to improve the management of patients newly diagnosed with CFRD and patients with established CFRD who have a hemoglobin A1C greater than the target of 7.0%. We expect to have additional materials and approaches regarding this aim to share at NACFC in November. 1. Moran, A. et. al. (2010) As the life expectancy for children with cystic fibrosis (CF) has steadily increased, so has the need to transition the care from pediatric to adult specialists. The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has mandated that CF centers develop a model to provide age-appropriate CF care to maintain accreditation, with the expectation that patients be transitioned to adult providers by 21 years of age. In this study, we evaluated the experiences and opinions of patients in our adult CF center that went through a formal transition versus those who did not, in an attempt to evaluate the overall process and to identify means for improvement. Methods: A questionnaire was given to adult CF patients at the University of Michigan Health System to complete after consent was obtained. Inclusion criteria included diagnosis of CF in childhood, previous care in a pediatric center, and current participation in our adult CF clinic. A formal transition process was defined as introduction of the "idea" of transition by the pediatric team followed by 1-3 appointments in the pediatric clinic attended by the pediatric and adult CF specialists. Patients were questioned regarding their pediatric and adult CF care and the transition program. Results: A total of 91 patients completed the questionnaire. Forty-four of the 91 study patients went through a structured transition program. On average, patients who participated in a formal transition process had higher satisfaction with both CF programs, perceived health status, and independence but no differences in their level of anxiety about transferring to the adult program. These averages were statistically significant for three groups: satisfaction before (p=0.01), perceived health status before (p= 0.01), and perceived health status after (p=0.04) transition (Table) . Patient opinions regarding when to transfer care were considered more often in patients who participated in a transition program (p=0.02). Patients formally transitioned were also significantly more likely to have discussed leaving their pediatric clinic, going to a new clinic, and meeting a new doctor with the CF staff. Conclusion: Although a structured transition program does not appear to decrease patient anxiety during this stressful period, it does appear to improve patient satisfaction, perceived health status, and independence. These findings suggest that establishing a transition program could be important in optimizing patient health, continuity of care, improving adherence, and hopefully reducing rate of patients lost to follow-up. The progressive nature of cystic fibrosis (CF) uniquely requires an intensity of care that escalates as the patient ages. Upon review of centerspecific data, it became apparent that the rate of pulmonary function decline is most pronounced in the emerging adult years (18 to 29 years); the primary reason is presumed to be non-adherence to treatments. Therefore QI efforts targeting the emerging adult population were undertaken. The global aim of CF quality improvement through the Adult Quality Improvement Initiative, (AQI 1) was to demonstrate substantial improvement in the nutrition and pulmonary outcomes of adults with CF, resulting in a set of best practices and specific change ideas for adult care. An adult specific CF knowledge and adherence assessment was developed with an aim to develop smart change ideas to improve adherence to prescribed therapies that would slow the rate of pulmonary and nutrition decline. The assessment tool included 58 questions separated into 5 sections with 10 questions specifically focused on their attitude and beliefs regarding adherence, and possible barriers to adherence. The tool was administered to 52 of 103 emerging adult individuals with CF via survey monkey. The results identified no significant knowledge deficits, but proved to be an excellent educational tool for individual patients. There were, however, several discrepancies between knowledge and adherence practices. We found 96% acknowledged the importance of treatments, however 37% only rarely or sometimes have a regular schedule for doing therapies, and 33% reported time management difficulties some, most, or all of the time. Thirty-one percent reported skipping airway clearance at least 3 or more times a week, and 20% reported skipping their enzymes at least once a day. Analysis of the data involved group discussion including two patient representatives as well as the whole multi-disciplinary CF team. The process generated a list of smart change ideas each of which can become a specific aim for further analysis. A "shotgun" approach to testing these ideas is underway to help identify those that will contribute to best practices for adult care in the emerging adult CF population. Background: Pulmonary exacerbations are often associated with hospitalizations, concurrent weight loss and poor appetite. Estimated energy requirements for the cystic fibrosis (CF) population are up to 200% that of the general population and are influenced by severity of lung disease, degree of malabsorption, and other factors. The link between nutritional status and survival is well established. Optimizing in-hospital nutritional intake is critical for improving weight during exacerbations. Objectives: 1) To evaluate the meal service provided within the Respirology inpatient unit; 2) To identify gaps in care with respect to nutritional services while in hospital. Methods: At St. Michael's Hospital, inpatients complete self-selective menus for meals and snacks. It is standard of care to provide 3 meals and 3 snacks per day, plus nutrition supplements. Adults with CF who were admitted between February and May 2011 were asked to participate in this quality improvement (QI) assessment of the food services provided at the hospital. Subjects filled out a food satisfaction survey for a period of 5 days. Data was collected on meal satisfaction and errors on meal trays. Satisfaction was rated on a score from 1 to 5 (1 = extremely dissatisfied and 5= very satisfied). Meal errors were identified as: item(s) missing; incorrect item(s) delivered; incorrect amounts; or inappropriate item(s). When items were missing, calorie counts were recorded to estimate the amount of weight that could have been gained had the food been provided correctly. Results: A total of 17 inpatients were approached to participate in this QI initiative. Fifty-nine percent of patients completed the meal satisfaction surveys for a total of 44 meal days. The mean satisfaction score was 3.1. Seventy-two separate errors occurred on 35/44 (80%) of the meal days. Breakfast had the highest rate of the errors (36%) followed by dinner (31%), lunch (21%) and snacks (8%). The most frequent errors were item(s) missing (38%), followed by incorrect item(s) delivered (33%), incorrect amounts (28%), and inappropriate item (3%). 'Missing items' generally referred to items that were printed on the patient's tray ticket but did not appear on the patient's tray. Patients selected 'incorrect amounts' when they did not receive their multiple portions. In the case of 'incorrect item(s),' possible reasons include: menus not getting to the kitchen or a food item had to be substituted for a product that ran out. Some patients chose to supplement intake with food from the cafeteria or outside the hospital however the majority (78%) did not. Lost calories for one patient were 357 kcals per day, which would equate to a 1 lb of potential wt loss (or lack of gain) for every 10 days that the patient remained in hospital. Conclusions: Frequent meal service errors were identified in the inpatient unit. Many patients did not receive their estimated energy requirements for weight gain due to missing items or portions. Future projects are planned to address some of the identified gaps in the meal service process to improve the quality of care provided to our inpatients. Rationale: Regular airway clearance and exercise are important forms of physiotherapy for cystic fibrosis (CF) patients although previous research reports compliance in only 50% of patients in the emerging adult population. As a part of our center's adult Quality Improvement effort, we initiated a Re-Education in Airway Clearance Therapy (REACT) program in our emerging adult (ages 18-29 years) population. Methods: The REACT program included 2 questionnaires, one in which patients responded anonymously to home mailings and a second in clinic which was a similar questionnaire. There was also a complete educational program and assessment of patient's equipment by a respiratory therapist during a routine clinic visit. Anonymous responses to home mailings were marked for each applicant and compared to in clinic responses by a blinded third party. Results: To date, a total of 17 of 40 patients have completed the in-clinic portion of the REACT program. Of these a total of 8 completed both the in-home questionnaire and clinic program for comparison with 75% reporting daily ACT sessions on both the anonymous and in clinic questionnaires. The time spent performing ACT was also similar in the anonymous (A) and in-clinic (IC) questionnaires; with 62.5% (A) vs. 50% (IC) reporting sessions lasting 30-60 minutes and 32.5% (A) vs. 50% (IC) performing session of <30 minutes respectively. Of the patients who participated in REACT, equipment upkeep was an issue with only 52.9% reporting routine sterilization of their equipment and 23.5% of patients were found to have defects in equipment upon individual inspection. Conclusions: Patient-reported adherence to daily ACT is similar in questionnaires administered both anonymously and in person and is consistent with previously published rates. A significant minority of patients may have suboptimal equipment. Annual in-clinic equipment assessment may improve cleanliness and functionality of equipment and lead to improved lung function in this patient population. Background: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) practice guidelines recommend that all patients ≥ age 6 should use dornase alfa and hypertonic saline on a daily basis, and those ≥ age 6 colonized with Pseudomonas aeruginosa should use inhaled tobramycin (TOBI) and oral azithromycin to improve lung function and reduce pulmonary exacerbations. A decline in FEV1 was noted in the 6-17 and 13-17 year old age groups in our 2008 CF Center Report. We hypothesized that increasing clinician adherence to prescribing guidelines for these pulmonary medications would improve mean FEV1 in 6-18 year olds. Methods: This was a quality improvement project completed at a United States CF center. It included children with CF who, based on CFF practice guidelines, were eligible to receive dornase alfa, hypertonic saline, TOBI, and azithromycin. At the outset, CFF practice guidelines were reviewed with our center's physicians. Using Port CF we identified patients that were eligible to receive recommended therapies, determined whether they were prescribed those therapies, and collected baseline FEV1 data. We followed adherence rates and FEV1 quarterly for 1 year. Providers received a quarterly "report card" with adherence rates and mean FEV1 compared to colleagues, as well as a list of eligible patients that were not on recommended therapies. Chi-square compared adherence rates between physicians. Two-sample t-test compared mean FEV1 between adherence groups for each medication. ANOVA compared mean FEV1 by quarter. Pearson correlation coefficient described the relationship between adherence rate and FEV1. Results: Ninety-two patients with CF fit inclusion criteria. At the start of the project, the overall clinician adherence rate to prescribing guidelines was 69%. The overall clinician adherence rate increased quarterly: Q1-80%, Q2-88%, Q3-90%, and Q4-93%. There was an improvement in adherence to dornase alfa (baseline-78%, Q1-80%, Q2-93%, Q3-94%, Q4-97%), hypertonic saline (baseline-30%, Q1-49%, Q2-75%, Q3-81%, Q4-88%), and TOBI (baseline-83%: Q1-68%, Q2-96%, Q3-96%, Q4-92%) (p<0.001). Mean FEV1 was 93% at baseline. After Q1 it decreased to 91%. Thereafter it increased quarterly: Q2-92%, Q3-94%, and Q4-98% (p=0.092). There was a moderate correlation (r=0.533) between improved adherence and improved mean FEV1. Patients who were prescribed hypertonic saline and TOBI had a significantly higher mean FEV1 (p=0.018 and p=0.011, respectively). Conclusions: Educating clinicians about prescribing guidelines, providing feedback on adherence, and monitoring adherence over time improves prescribing adherence. Although mean FEV1 showed improvement after several months of sustained adherence, it did not reach statistical significance. Improved adherence may not necessarily translate into improved mean FEV1, but may instead slow/halt the rate of decline in FEV1. Longer follow-up may demonstrate this. The trend towards a longer and healthier life in CF patients is, in large part, due to better nutrition. There is a definite correlation between good nutritional status and increased pulmonary function, immune defense mechanisms and survival. Unfortunately, there are still great variations in the nutritional status of CF patients. At MUSC, our median BMI percentiles and BMIs were below the national average in 2009. As a result, we developed a quality improvement program aimed at improving the nutritional health of CF patients by providing relevant nutritional education to our patients and their families. Methods: In order to assess the educational needs of our patients, a nutritional knowledge test was developed to measure their understanding of different aspects of CF nutrition. The test consisted of 18 questions (based on previous validated questionnaires). Three pools of questions were developed targeted at different ages/populations (patients 13 years and older, patients 7-12 years old, and parents of children younger than 13 years). Each pool contained 3 questions for each of the following categories: salt and vitamins, enzymes, malabsorption, calories, fat, and behavior. After the initial testing was completed, analysis of the results showed that the questions most commonly missed pertained to malabsorption, calories, fat, and behavior. Educational materials about these four areas were developed and these materials and verbal education were provided to all patients by a dietitian during their quarterly clinic visits. The final educational cycle is ongoing and the success of this program will be determined at the end of this cycle by having patients take the same nutrition test again and comparing scores, and by verifying whether an improvement in BMI (or BMI percentile) is noted. Results: Thirty-five pediatric and 44 adult patients enrolled in the educational portion of the study. The preliminary results following the first 3 cycles of our education program were obtained and demonstrate improvements in nutritional status. The median BMI% in the pediatric patients enrolled in the study increased from 58% to 60%. Furthermore, the percentage of pediatric patients with BMI at or above the 50th percentile, increased from 55% to 64%. Our current data comparing 2009 to 2010 reflects that there is not a BMI change in the adult population. Conclusion: It appears that the educational materials provided to our patients were most beneficial in the pediatric population with 30% of the patients enrolled demonstrating an increase in BMI percentile. The adult population did not see any significant change in median BMI (collectively or individually) as a result of this intervention, despite their scores on the nutritional test being on average lower than the pediatric scores. The results support our contention that improving nutritional knowledge amongst the CF population and their families will have a positive impact on nutritional outcomes. The data also suggests that implementing aggressive nutritional interventions and optimizing education are most beneficial during childhood when the patient (and family) is perhaps more flexible and willing to adjust their lifestyle and feels they will benefit from doing so. Objectives: Nutritional status in cystic fibrosis (CF) is very important as it is strongly associated with pulmonary function and survival. Our global aim is to improve nutrition status. Our specific aim is to increase our CF center's mean BMI percentile by 5% for patients 2-20 years. We assigned nutrition risk using a validated screening tool (McDonald, 2008) , and initiated early intervention. We anticipated that by increasing mean BMI percentile by 5%, our center will be above the national mean by one year. Methods: A nutrition risk screening was initiated using a validated screening tool. Using nutrition risk score, the tool measured body mass index (BMI), weight gain and height gain. Measures repeated at ≥ 3 months reassessed nutrition risk. Risk categories are: no-low (0-1), moderate (2) (3) , high (≥ 4 points). Patients and caretakers were made aware of their level of nutrition risk in simple terms, using traffic light colors: green (no-low), yellow (moderate) or red (high). An individualized nutritional plan of care (more extensive for high risk) was discussed and incorporated in the CF Action Plan, given at each clinic visit. Using SPSS statistical software, data were analyzed. Port CF was also utilized to track outcomes, primarily our center's mean BMI percentile. Results: Nutrition risk assessment was initiated in July 2010. Our pilot data consisted of n=16, age range 2-14 years, so a complete nutrition risk scoring was done, with more uniform data. Score for height gain category would have been omitted for Tanner V, female ≥ 15 years, male ≥ 17 years, as per the validated tool. However, nutrition plan of care was given to all of our pediatric patients. To date, there are 16 paired samples of nutrition risk score and BMI, from date 1 (first nutrition risk assessment) to date 2 (≥ 3 month follow-up). McNemar-Bowker test for categorical data (repeated measures using chi-square tests) was used. We found 100% (2 out of 2) improved their nutrition risk score on the high risk, 86% (6 out of 7) improved or did not get worse on the moderate and 71% stayed the same (5 out of 7) on the no-low risk group. Using paired sample t-tests, mean nutrition risk score was 1.63 (standard deviation, SD 1.3), improved to 1.44 (SD 1.2) at date 2. Mean BMI percentile was 43.38 (SD 28.5), improved to 50.56 (SD 28.8) at date 2. Conclusions: Based on preliminary data, our quality improvement (QI) project suggests improvement on nutrition status of our pediatric patients. Lower nutrition risk score and higher BMI percentile were found on followup. CF Patient Registry data showed our center's mean BMI percentile (age 2-20 years, 40 patients) increased from 48.4 (2009) to 50.3 (current), meeting the current national goal of 50 (national average is 49.1). Future Plans: Our center will continue efforts to improve nutrition and will look into our data for >14 years of age, and adult population (16 patients). In spite of our center's small number of patients and hence, outcomes that are easily impacted by sick episodes and non-adherence of even just a few patients, our QI efforts have shown encouraging results. Our center will present these findings to our patients. Through our CF Parent Advisory Council, team effort/educational events focusing on nutrition will be incorporated in the council's agenda. Interventions made in clinic have the potential to improve treatment adherence in patients with CF, but should be targeted to patients' specific needs. In 2009 we implemented changes in clinic procedure to facilitate a more focused discussion of treatment adherence at each visit. These changes included the addition of self-assessed adherence levels at each visit, the facilitation of a patient-centered discussion of adherence, and plans to improve when needed. Objectives: 1) Evaluate level of adherence in our adult CF population before and after changes to clinic procedure; 2) Compare levels of selfassessed adherence between inhaled medications, oral medications, and chest physiotherapy (CPT); 3) Compare levels of self-assessed adherence for various treatments by demographics. Methods: This retrospective QI project was approved by our IRB and included the collection of self-assessed adherence levels from before (1/1/09 -6/30/09) and after (1/1/10 -6/30/10) changes in clinic procedure. At each clinic visit, patients are asked to self-assess their adherence levels to inhaled medications, oral medications, and CPT (75-100%, 50-75%, 25-50%, or 0-25%). The first time this was collected from each patient was considered baseline data for this QI study. Self-assessed adherence levels were treated as ordinal data and coded as 1 -4 for 0-25% -75-100%. Wilcoxon signedrank test was used to compare adherence levels before and after changes in clinic. Kruskal-Wallis statistic was used to compare levels of adherence across treatment type. Mann-Whitney rank-sum test was used to compare adherence levels between different demographic groups (gender and age). Results: Self-assessed adherence levels were available in both time periods for 37 different patients (28.4 ± 11.7 years old, 37.8% female). Percent of patients reporting 75-100% adherence at baseline was 94.4% for oral medications, 71.9% for inhaled medications, and only 37.5% for CPT. Baseline adherence levels for CPT were significantly lower than for either medication type. After intervention, the level of adherence improved for CPT (P=0.03) but not inhaled or oral medications. Adherence levels for CPT were still lower than oral medications, but not different from inhaled medications. When data was analyzed by gender, there were no statistically significant differences although there was a trend toward lower adherence to CPT among males before clinic changes (P=0.06). When data was analyzed by age group, there were no significant differences between those ≤21 and ≥22 years. Conclusions: Our interventions in clinic improved self-assessed adherence levels for CPT but not inhaled or oral medications. Self-assessed adherence at baseline was high for oral medications and low for CPT, especially among males. Limitations of this QI study include the fact that adherence levels are self-reported and may actually be lower. This was also a singlecenter study and so interventions by different centers and practitioners may have a different result. Background and Objective: Cystic fibrosis (CF) -related bone disease occurs in about 11% of people with CF, and the incidence increases with age. Low vitamin D levels secondary to pancreatic insufficiency likely contribute. Our center follows about 160 patients, and 25(OH) vitamin D levels are measured at least once per year in accordance with CF Foundation guidelines. Recently, clinic procedures were changed to measure vitamin D levels in the winter when they are at their nadir rather than at the patient's annual visit during his or her birth month. The objective of this quality improvement (QI) study is to evaluate the impact of this change on vitamin D levels and recommended dosing. Methods: To evaluate the impact of season of measurement on whether winter vitamin levels are at goal, levels measured during Jan -Mar 2011 will be grouped by the season during which vitamin D was measured in 2010 and compared by analysis of variance. To evaluate the impact on vitamin D doses, doses in the first 3 months of 2011 will be compared to doses in 2010 for those same subjects. Paired t-tests will be used for these comparisons. Vitamin D dosing from 2010 will also be evaluated. Doses based on levels drawn during winter months will be compared to doses based on levels drawn during other months. A t-test will be used for this comparison. Results: Data collection is ongoing; a preliminary analysis of the first 37 CF subjects shows no difference in winter 2011 vitamin D levels according to the season of measurement in 2010. However, the dose based on winter 2011 levels was somewhat higher than doses based on 2010 levels drawn throughout the year (76.1±44.2 units/kg vs. 65.9±51.6 units/kg) although this did not reach statistical significance (P=0.08). There was a trend toward higher vitamin D doses based on winter 2010 levels when compared to doses based on levels drawn during other months (94.2±74.8 units/kg vs. 57.5±40.7 units/kg, P=0.08). Data collection and analysis will be completed by the conference date. Further analysis will include the remaining patients and follow-up of how many patients required additional dose adjustments. Conclusions: The proposed work is significant because the results will provide insight into whether our continuous QI efforts are resulting in an improvement in vitamin D levels. Although many CF Centers measure vitamin D levels during winter months when they are at their nadir, there is still variability. Improvement of vitamin D levels by measuring at their nadir has the potential to improve outcomes. We have implemented a relatively simple change in clinic procedure which if successful could be initiated in other CF clinics. Objectives: There is no formal cystic fibrosis (CF) program at UNC; lack of structured emphasis on self-care skills by pediatric providers can result in patients who are ill-equipped to direct their own health care. The goal of this program is to encourage adolescent patients to take ownership of their health care, to help families assist their children in this endeavor, to give pediatric providers quantifiable information with which to assess patients' readiness and track this longitudinally, to allow for a multi-disciplinary approach to transition that allows each team member to have input and an impact, and to improve communication between pediatric and adult providers with a formal transfer of care and patient information. Methods: A multidisciplinary team that spans both pediatric and adult physicians, nurses, social workers, dietitians and case managers was formed. Next, a standardized protocol was developed whereby patients are identified, a transition date is set, self-care and independence are encouraged, readiness to transition to adult care is assessed on a regular basis and tracked over time, deficits in education or preparedness are identified and addressed, orientation to adult care settings is offered, and feedback from patients and their families is collected and used to continuously improve the process. Results: See Figure. Web-based resources include a transition patient list in the electronic medical record, a transition summary, a transition information database and an interactive transition website. Paper resources include a transition information database and a transition action plan. This program serves as a first step in identifying and addressing unmet needs in adolescent and young adult CF patients and will ideally improve the quality of health care delivered to this vulnerable population. Transition Summary = running summary of past medical history, transition progress and interventions, which serves as a transfer summary at the time of transition. Annual Review = visit dedicated to transition spearheaded by social work to discuss medical, educational, vocational, financial and sexual health issues surrounding transition to adult care. Recorded in the transition summary. Readiness assessment = completed quarterly, tracks progress longitudinally and identifies areas of unmet need. This information is given to the patient in the form of the transition action plan. The CF Foundation Benchmarking project sent a multidisciplinary team to visit high performing pediatric CF centers in order to identify clinical practices that led to exceptional nutritional and pulmonary outcomes. That project used a qualitative method that led to the development of a set of "signature themes" derived from observations and impressions accumulated during these visits. Our current aim was to verify and validate these findings in a more quantitative way. Methods: An electronic survey consisting of 44 questions was sent out to all accredited pediatric CF center directors and clinical coordinators. Centers serving only adults and those with <50 pediatric patients were excluded from this analysis. We used adjusted 2009 center level average FEV 1 % predicted for patients 6-18 years and BMI percentile for patients 2-20 years as published on CFF.org. These were derived using General Estimating Equations to adjust for sex, race, ethnicity, age, pancreatic enzyme use, age at diagnosis, and median family income by zip code. Centers were ranked and the top and bottom quartile centers for each outcome were identified and compared on their responses to survey questions regarding clinical practice. Results: There were a total of 159 responses from 102 Centers. Respondents from high FEV 1 centers were more likely to agree that good CF care requires active input (p=0.02) and participation by patients and families in treatment decisions (p=0.03). When asked for their likely response to 11 different clinical scenarios involving patients presenting with new respiratory symptoms, lower quartile respondents were repeatedly more likely to check an option that stated "I cannot make this sort of generalization, every patient is different." Respondents from high BMI sites were more likely to report holding regularly scheduled clinic meetings (p=0.026), distributing port CF summaries at each visit (p=0.029) and having had a clinic coordinator in place for >10 years (p=0.02). They were more likely to express concern about small declines in weight/BMI (p=0.045) and expect patients to be ≥50th percentile (p=0.001). Higher BMI center respondents were also more likely to report access to endocrinologists with a specific interest in CF (p=0.042) and increased endocrinologist involvement in patients with CFRD with (p=0.028) and without fasting hyperglycemia (p= 0.013). Conclusions: Providers at top performing centers place a higher value on patient and family involvement and addressing clinical compromise aggressively. Furthermore, they are more likely to respond to questions in a way that suggests the existence of standard algorithms of care, in contrast to providers at lower quartile sites who prefer to demur on these questions. These findings suggest an approach and philosophy of care that may be beneficial for centers to adopt in their attempts to improve CF disease outcomes. Background: Patients with CF are at risk for developing co-morbidities such as ABPA, CFRD, and liver disease. The CF Foundation recommends annual screening for these and other diseases as early detection and management help preserve lung function and quality of life. Despite this, adherence to annual blood draws has been a challenge for some of our pediatric patients and their families. To address this, a process improvement project was undertaken. Methods and Results: This IRB approved quality improvement study was performed in an accredited CF center affiliated with a 200 bed pediatric hospital. In the previous process, reminders including prescriptions for blood work were mailed to the patient's home prior to the blood draw anniversary. Barriers to having lab work obtained included lost or overlooked letters, families forgetting to have blood collected before their annual visit appointment, and patients leaving after the clinic visit and not going to the lab. Furthermore, the CF Family Advisory Council (CFFAC) expressed concern regarding infection control due to the possibility for multiple CF patients to be in the lab waiting area concurrently. The CF team shared this concern. After these barriers were identified, a working group consisting of representation from pediatric and lab administration, clinic and lab staff and members of the CF team met. These stakeholders agreed to change the process and offer phlebotomy in the patient exam room at the time of the CF clinic visit. The clinic staff was trained in blood drawing by the phlebotomists. A pilot study of blood collections in the CF care center was performed during 3 months with a total of 27 patient/family surveys completed. Family feedback revealed complete support for the revised process resulting in full implementation after the pilot. The study team evaluated and compared blood draw adherence for two consecutive 14 month epochs: 12/2/2008 to 2/1/2010 and 2/2/2010 to 4/1/2011. The first epoch occurred prior to the pilot project. There were a total of 73 CF patients evaluated for annual lab draw adherence. During the first epoch 58 patients (79.4%) had their annual CF lab draws completed. During the second epoch 69 patients (94.5%) completed their annual lab draws. This is an increase of 15% in adherence to CF annual lab draws when performed in the CF clinic exam room. Conclusions: With the input of multiple stakeholders, including the CFFAC, a quality improvement project was implemented. Increased CF patient adherence to annual lab draws was identified with the change to blood draws in the CF clinic visit exam room. Both adherence rates and family satisfaction were improved. CF parental feedback included the increase in convenience, decreased exposure to infection and reduced time at the center on the day of annual lab draws. The old IC guidelines allowed patients without B. cepacia to leave their rooms for individual activities and to use food vouchers in the cafeteria for individual food selection. New IC guidelines required all patients with CF to be isolated to their rooms during inpatient admissions. With the new IC guidelines, food service and clinical nutrition initiated room service delivery style food delivery (RS). Three host/hostesses were assigned solely to patients with CF to tend to their food service needs and were accessible by a wireless communication system. Patients were able to view the daily menus on-line and/or a patient TV channel. Menus available for patients to select from were the alternative menu, café menu, and patient tray line menu options. In addition, patients also received one $15 food voucher for use in the café or snack store by a family member/friend for the patient. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to assess patient and staff satisfaction with the new RS food delivery system while on strict contact isolation during hospitalizations. Methods: Five months after the RS had been implemented, patients and staff were surveyed about this system. Patients were administered an 11 question multiple choice survey. Staff nurses were administered a 4 question open-ended qualitative survey. Results: Out of the 14 respondents, 79% were patients. The distribution on patient age was 0-21 years. Most patients (78%) were admitted at least twice in the last year. All (100%) participants surveyed understood RS ordering instructions. All aspects of RS delivery had a 50% (range 57-85%) or higher rankings of good to excellent. Patients' preference for viewing menus were 57% from the computer and 43% from the patient TV channel. Patients overwhelmingly used food vouchers in the snack store (93%) with family members (79%) most often getting the food for the patients. Patients most often used the vouchers for soda (57.1%), salty snacks (78.6%), sweet snacks (42.9%), and desserts (35.7%). Nine nurses responded to the qualitative questions and revealed 100% satisfaction with the RS food delivery service. They verbalized decreased nursing time for food orders as one benefit of this service. Nursing also revealed that patients have not complained about the changes and that patients felt in charge of the process. Nursing did not note anything they felt had gone wrong and they believed the RS process was more efficient than expected. Discussion: These results indicate that patients and staff members were highly satisfied with RS and that this change provided benefit to the patients and nurses. Specific gaps identified during the survey (condiments not sent with food; portion sizes too small; older teens prefer paper menus) have provided insight into areas of improvement for both food service and the CF team. Background: Patients with CF are at risk for developing CFRD. The diagnosis of CFRD has a negative impact on pulmonary function and survival. The CF Foundation recommends OGTT as the annual screening for CFRD in patients 10 years and older. The December 2010 CF Consensus Guidelines for Care of the CF Patient recommend a multidisciplinary team approach with the inclusion of endocrinology support. Adherence to annual screening with OGTT has been a challenge for many pediatric patients and their families at our center. To address this, the inclusion of an endocrine specialty nurse to the CF Care team was initiated. Her specific role was to increase the focus of the CF Team on CFRD and to educate patients and families about the importance of diagnosis and management of this common CF co-morbidity. The endocrine specialty nurse attends CF Clinics, provides education about CFRD and has placed a CGM (continuous glucose monitoring) device on several CF patients for initial screening. CGM has been identified as a useful tool for initial screening for CFRD. Methods and Results: This IRB approved retrospective study was performed in an accredited CF Center affiliated with a 200 bed pediatric hospital. The CF multidisciplinary care team added an endocrine specialty nurse to better address adherence to CFRD screening and to enhance patient education. After discussion with the endocrine team, the endocrine specialty nurse became available to attend CF Clinic sessions to offer initial screening for CFRD via the CGM and stress the importance of diagnosing and treating CFRD. Patients requiring CFRD screening or CFRD follow-up were identified prior to CF clinic, and the endocrine specialty nurse met with the patient and family during the subsequent CF clinic visit. The endocrine specialty nurse provided education regarding CFRD and offered screening with CGM during the clinic visit. The study team evaluated and compared yearly OGTT/CFRD screening adherence for two consecutive 12 month epochs: 10/1/08 to 9/30/09 and 10/1/09 to 9/30/10. The first epoch occurred prior to the addition of the endocrine specialty nurse, and during CFRD screening recommendations for patients 13-years and older. There were a total of 20 CF patients eligible for CFRD screening during the first epoch, with only 2 (10%) completing OGTT. The second epoch occurred during the addition of the endocrine specialty nurse and during the period of CFRD screening beginning at 10-years of age. During the second epoch, 19 of 40 (47.5%) eligible CF patients completed screening with either OGTT or CGM. Of the 19 CF patients completing initial screening for CFRD: 11 completed OGTT and 8 completed CGM. This is an increase of 37.5% in adherence to CF annual screening for CFRD. Conclusions: With the addition of the endocrine specialty nurse to the CF care team, the adherence to initial screening for CFRD was greatly improved. An additional benefit for the CF patients diagnosed with CFRD is the expertise of the endocrine specialty nurse available during subsequent CF visits. Siracusa, C.; Gothard, M.; Spoonhower, K.; Kraynack, N. Akron Children's Hospital, Akron, OH, USA Background: Pulmonary disease is the major cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF). There is no standard definition of a pulmonary exacerbation (PEx) for children ≤6 years. In an improvement initiative at Akron Children's Hospital, the Pulmonary Exacerbation Score (PES) was used at all well and sick visits for patients >6 years with CF, and was optional for children ≤6. The goal was to objectively identify a patient experiencing a PEx. We hypothesize that standardizing recognition of PEx in patients ≤6 years will result in improved outcomes for patients in this age group, specifically BMI, weight/length percentile, and antibiotic use. Methods: Visit and exacerbation data for patients age ≤6 years were retrospectively reviewed and compared to identify significant changes from 2006 to 2010. Data was summarized for each cohort using appropriate statistical measures. Categorical comparisons of associations with study cohort employed the Pearson chi-square test. Non-normally distributed numeric data used Mann-Whitney U tests to determine mean rank equality between the two patient cohorts. Normally distributed data was tested for mean equality via unpaired Student's t tests. The primary outcome variable, BMI percentile, was tested for equality between the cohorts for patients >2 years old. For patients ≤2, the wt/length percentile was used in a separate analysis. FEV1(%) was also analyzed by year. Visit and PEx data were compared to identify significant changes that have occurred from 2006 to 2010. The use of oral and IV antibiotics were also compared between the two cohorts. Results: For patients ≤ 6 years, the PES was used for 73% of all patient visits. Demographic comparisons between the two groups, patients ≤ 6 years in 2006 (n=44) and 2010 (n=48) showed no significant difference in mean age, mean age of diagnosis, nor mean height or weight percentile. Mean BMI percentile differences between patients 2-7 years in both groups (2006 (n= 28) vs 2010 (n=36)) were 52.9 vs. 59.9 (p=0.356). Mean wt/length percentile differences in patients <2 years old in both groups (2006 (n=16) vs 2010 (n=12)) were 43.5 vs 54.7 (p=0.240). Of patients with FEV1 recorded in 2006 (n=5) vs 2010 (n=9)), mean FEV1 was 95% vs. 104% (p=0.255). The percent of patients experiencing a PEx was 86.4% (2006) and 66.7%( 2010) (p=0.027), with a mean number of exacerbations per patient 2.5 vs 2 (p=0.059). Overall 28.1% vs. 19.6 % of patient visits were associated with a PEx (p=0.011). Oral antibiotic use was 37 vs 30 (p=0.02), and IV antibiotic use was 10 vs 13 (p=0.63). Conclusions: BMI percentile, wt/length percentile, and FEV1 showed no statistically significant change after initiation of the PES; however, these metrics trend in the desired direction. There was a statistically significant decrease in the amount of identified pulmonary exacerbations, and those that experienced them had significantly less. Similarly, there was a significant decrease in the percentage of patients with exacerbation, the amount of patients receiving oral antibiotics, and those that did, received less. Our findings suggest that a standardized scoring system in this age group may help objectively identify pulmonary exacerbations and help guide treatment. The course of cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease is typically punctuated by pulmonary exacerbations (PEs), which appear to play an important role in pulmonary function decline. We have been interested in utilizing an electronic PE score (PES) tool to develop a more proactive approach to treatment of PE's (1). We previously implemented an electronic version of the PES sheet developed by Kraynack et al (2) in order to standardize our management. This follow up project examines practice patterns and outcomes after 2 years of use of the system. Methods: All phone call messages to the Adult CF Program at Maine Medical Center were logged in an electronic medical record (EHR), which has an embedded PES tool. Calls during the calendar years 2009-2010 were retrospectively reviewed to identify the nature of the call, the providers involved in decision making, and the frequency of use of the PES tool. As part of a Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle (PDCA), periodic education about the availability of the tool was provided at provider administrative meetings and via e-mail. Month-by-month frequency of PES usage was observed. Pulmonary function for the cohort of patients was compared between 2009 and 2010. Results: In 2009 data were collected for 61 adults (median age 28; range 18-60). The EHR recorded 215 and 172 phone calls for pulmonary issues in 2009 and 2010, respectively. The proportion of calls handled by non-CF providers increased from 6.8% to 14.5% from year 1 to 2. The proportion of pulmonary calls with assigned PES increased from 64.3% (95% CI, 0.58-0.71) to 79.1% (95% CI, 0.73-0.85) in 2009 and 2010, respectively. We observed seasonal variations in both the frequency of calls and resultant prescription of therapy for exacerbations. Use of the PES tool led to a range of measurable changes in practice including between-scheduled-visit spirometry for patients with borderline scores. The median values of FEV1% predicted for the 56 patients followed in both 2009 and 2010 were 56.75% and 59.25%, respectively. Conclusion: Use of the PES tool in an electronic environment provides an efficient way to track overall utilization of this resource. Seasonal variation in the volume of pulmonary-related calls was observed. When used in concert with the PDCA cycle, the application was increasingly utilized over a two year period by CF and non-CF providers. Use of this tool was associated with improvement in lung function among a stable cohort of adult patients. is an important outcome measure in CF, with an increasing annual frequency as the population ages. Increased PE rate has also been associated with decreased survival rates. Hence, one could anticipate that proper and early recognition of PE will lead to more timely treatment and ultimately better clinical outcomes. Objective: To improve clinical outcomes, education, and self-management for CF patients with PE by integrating the use of a CF-specific symptom checklist and an EMR-based phone triage assessment tool. These tools will aid patients and families to seek prompt medical advice and allow the CF team early recognition and initiation of appropriate management of PE. Methods: After approval from the UAB institutional review board, patients seen at the pediatric center were offered enrollment. Participants were given a simple Respiratory Symptom Score (RSS) checklist for home use. Users were asked to document their symptoms in the checklist on a reg-ular basis. The checklist contained simple actions to perform in the event their scores were deteriorating including calling the CF center, increasing CPT, and adherence to medications. If the score triggered a call to the center, the staff nurse used a standard EMR phone triage assessment tool and provided instructions according to an algorithm developed for phone triage. The number of admissions for PE, clinic visits, and phone calls were prospectively recorded and compared with those of the year prior to the study. Lung function (FEV1% predicted) and body mass index (BMI%) were also recorded. Basic statistical analysis was performed including paired t-test. Results: Thirty-seven patients completed the study. The number of admissions for PE, clinic visits and PE phone calls the year prior averaged (median) 1.24 (1), 6.15 (5), and 1.41 (1) respectively. After one year the number of admissions for PE, clinic visits and PE phone calls averaged (median) 1.2 (1), 5.35 (5) , and 1.85 (1) respectively. Although there was a 31% increase (63 vs. 48) in PE phone calls in the group after a year, the difference was not statistically different. The group's baseline mean FEV1% and BMI% were not statistically different after a year of study (FEV1% 92.05% vs. 96.7% and BMI% 64.2% vs. 65.8). Enrollment was limited by the number of potential study subjects enrolled in clinical trials which could have been affected by enrollment in an additional study that impacted adherence. Although most patients were enthusiastic to use the checklist, the use of the tool was inconsistent and a significant number dropped out ("forgot to use it," "not enough time"). Discussion: The current study intended to use a RSS checklist to allow patients and families an additional tool for early recognition of changes in lung health and to prompt timely intervention. There was an apparent increase in PE phone calls to the center but the change was not significant. Although the required work by the family was minimal, it still represented a significant burden to their daily routine. Its inconsistent use could reflect the larger issue of poor overall adherence in patients with complex chronic diseases. The basic premise of the program is to pair a respiratory therapist (RT) who is new to CF with an experienced RT from a similar CF Care Center. Purpose: By providing new therapists with specific CF knowledge, encouraging relationships with other RTs, and building a national network of RTs that are involved in CF care, we expect to accelerate the improvement in care of CF patients, to see improved retention of in RTs in CF centers, and to improve the health outcome of CF patients. Methods: Mentor/apprentice pairs are chosen based on: the characteristics of the CF population that they care for (adult/pediatric/both), their clinical setting (inpatient/outpatient/both), CF Center size, and geographic location. The apprentice participants complete a pre-and post-Mentoring Metric knowledge assessment tool to determine basic knowledge of aspects of respiratory therapy pertinent to CF. Prior to the site visit they are asked to confer with their team members and develop measurable goals for improving the respiratory care at their Center. Apprentices were surveyed following their participation in the program to assess outcomes of the mentoring program. Center Directors and/or clinic coordinators evaluate the effectiveness of the program by completing an evaluation 3 to 6 months after the apprentice's site visit. Results: Of the 44 apprentices that have participated in the program, 38 (86%) completed the program evaluation survey. The results were: 97% were still working in CF care, 54% said that the amount of time that they spend working with CF patients had increased since participation in the program, 44% indicated that they have presented their work at CF conferences, 87% feel that the level of CF RT care has improved at their center, 73% feel that they have been able to accomplish the goals that they had set for their outcome measures for the Mentoring Program, and 60% remain in contact with their Mentor. Center Directors and clinical coordinators report that respiratory care has improved at their center (72%), and that the RT is more knowledgeable and active in CF care following participation in the program (80%). Discussion: These early results suggest that the RT Mentoring Program has achieved its primary goals. These RTs that are new to CF feel better equipped to fulfill their role at their CF care center. They have maintained a relationship with an experienced RT mentor that will help aid in the growth of their career in the field of CF, and they feel comfortable presenting their work with CF to audiences. And finally, Center Directors and Center Coordinators report an improved level of respiratory care at the center following participation in the Mentoring Program. In our efforts to improve pulmonary outcomes for the New Hampshire CF Center, we evaluated our use of recommended therapies for pulmonary health. We explored the utility of a brief, self-administered questionnaire regarding prescription and use of bronchodilators, dornase alfa, and hypertonic saline. For the population identified as Pseudomonas positive there were two additional questions regarding use of oral macrolides and inhaled antibiotics. For each medication class the patient was to indicate if it had been prescribed, if it was being taken, and how often it was being taken, with an option for comments. The physician conducting the clinic visit reviewed the questionnaire with each patient and made clarifications, particularly of reasons for not taking prescribed therapies, then acted on the questionnaire information at that visit if it was appropriate. Over a three month cycle of clinic visits there were 123 patients who answered the questionnaire at least once. Where there were multiple questionnaires, only the first was used for this analysis. We used this base to assess our prescription of recommended therapies and patients' adherence to prescribed treatment, as well as the reasons for nonadherence. The reasons for nonadherence included lack of insurance coverage and time required for therapies, as well as misunderstanding of instructions. The greatest discrepancy between prescription and use was with bronchodilators, where only 75% were taking =/> 10 doses per week, 8% taking with dornase only and 12.5% taking prn only. i 90% of patients taking dornase were using it =/> 5 times per week; of those for whom it was prescribed but not being taken, half agreed to start at that clinic visit. All of the patients for whom dornase had not been prescribed were < 6 years old. Hypertonic saline represented the area of least prescription provision by physicians; many of the patients for whom it had not been prescribed were <6 years old. In >50% of those prescribed but not taking hypertonic saline said it was because of irritation/burning of the solution. In the 14 eligible patients for whom macrolides had not been prescribed, 1 had identified non-tuberculous mycobacteria in sputum and 2 had sputa pending for mycobacterial cultures; 4 had medicine prescribed during the clinic visit. This tool allowed us to identify areas for improvement in physician prescribing (bronchodilators and macrolides); areas for improvement in teaching use of medications (bronchodilators); and barriers to treatment (hypertonic saline). Background: Cystic fibrosis related diabetes (CFRD) is a common complication in adults with cystic fibrosis (CF), affecting about 50% of adults by age 40. Early diagnosis and management of CFRD is associated with improved clinical outcomes. New guidelines for CFRD diagnosis and management have been recently published. The guidelines recommend that a diagnostic oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) be performed annually. The 2009 Care Center data showed that 79% of eligible patients from the Cincinnati Center were screened. The national average was 75%, but the top performing centers screened 95% of patients. The new guidelines provide an opportunity to review the screening process for CFRD and implement changes to improve the rate of OGTTs performed in eligible patients. Methods: The CF team reviewed the 2009 and early 2010 diabetes screening data. Reasons for failure to obtain OGTT were reviewed with patients. A clinic process flow diagram was developed and key personnel were identified. A series of steps were initiated to improve the number of patients with CF who obtained an OGTT. These steps include: -All non-diabetic patients were recommended for annual OGTT. -OGTT performance was integrated into clinic flow. -EMR modifications made patient OGTT results more accessible. -OGTT orders were clarified and standardized. -OGTT orders and an educational handout were mailed to patients just prior to their appointment. -Patients were called and reminded to come to the appointment NPO. -CFRD education materials were made available at time of OGTT order. -Patients were sent a letter with OGTT results and information on CFRD. Results: In 2010, 69% of eligible adults with CF performed OGTT. Twelve percent of the studies were performed in the first 3 months of 2010, before changes were initiated. By implementing a series of improvements, the percent of patients without CFRD who performed an OGTT for diagnosis of CFRD increased through the remainder of 2010. OGTT performance was increased from 12% to 22% in the first 3 months of 2011. Conclusion: Many factors contributed to the failure to obtain OGTT. Patient education as to the need and relevance was an important factor in the improvement. Cost and convenience were also important. By implementing a systematic approach to education, ordering, screening, tracking and documenting, the team was able to improve oral glucose tolerance testing rates. Clinical care and research require accurate and organized data. We have built a comprehensive, web-based system, CF CenterCare, to manage clinical and research data for our Adult Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Care Center. Such a system will improve patient care by streamlining decision making, ensure adherence to CF guidelines for care, facilitate further QI initiatives and thereby improve nutritional and pulmonary outcomes for patients at our CF Center. Several of these outcomes will be measurable using Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) Patient Registry center reports and local QI data. At our CF center the system will be used to follow 120 patients in the Adult Program, with plans to extend its use to the 180 patients in the Pediatric Program in the near future. The project was implemented using a three-tier, web-based architecture. The user interface is compatible with commonly used browsers. The middle tier containing the business logic of the application is written in Java programming language. The data storage tier resides on the Oracle 11g database server and contains more than 80 tables with over 1,000 attributes. Security is addressed using the electronic information security standards mandated by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Patients' Protected Health Information (PHI) is stored encrypted in the database. The project is being implemented in two phases. In phase 1 the system was designed to allow web-based data input and reporting in real time at the point of care. The software tracks complex medical problems and medications in a prioritized, focused manner useful for clinical decision making during clinical encounters and for later review and/or research purposes. The system is also designed to generate, modify and print outputs such as patient education information, discharge action plans, pre-clinic planning forms and CFF Registry information. Other outputs include annotated pulmonary function trending, graphic representation of lung exam findings and detailed medication and problem list history. In phase 2 of the project, encounter data will be exchanged between CF Cen-terCare and the permanent electronic medical record. An additional goal is to work with the CFF to automate data uploads into the CFF Patient Registry. When fully implemented, CF CenterCare will streamline clinical data entry from the point of care where it will facilitate clinical decision-making, drive adherence to best practice guidelines, and enable the collection of research-quality clinical information. The use of such a system by multiple CF Centers with electronic throughput into the CFF Patient Registry would enable efficient, accurate and complete data transmission, where the data can also be shared with the clinical and basic science research communities. Cystic fibrosis is a multisystem disorder involving the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. Poor nutritional absorption, inadequate caloric intake and subsequent difficulty in weight gain are inherent in the disease. CFF guidelines define optimal nutrition as a BMI percentile of 50% or greater in children or a weight/length of 50% up to 2 years of age. The median BMI percentile for our center was 46%, with 50% of patients having BMI below the 40%. Our goal is to increase the median BMI of the CF center by focusing on BMI in our pre-clinic planning and incorporating multiple team members to reinforce the importance of the goal, targeting the group of patients at nutrition risk with BMI below 40%. Methods: Posters in clinic waiting areas focusing on nutrition, high calorie recipes sent in quarterly newsletters and distribution of a high calo-rie CF cookbook to families to increase nurtritional awareness. Individuals with a BMI below 40% were asked to sign a contract to attend clinic monthly for 6 months to ensure optimal medication and dietary interventions. The nutritionist was a required part of clinic visits. A checklist was developed to address: evaluation of GERD (gastroesophogeal reflux disease), H2blocker or PPI use, oral supplements, high calorie foods, adequate enzyme dosing with appropriate administration. Appetite stimulants were discussed and often offered. Monitoring of blood glucose levels was initiated for those with impaired glucose tolerance. Social workers met with families to assess stressors around meals and offered behavioral interventions; a session was offered for parents to assist families in dealing with behavioral eating issues, which five families attended. Short term goals were set with patients and families: either 1-2 pound weight gain, additional calories, or supplemental shake at each encounter. Before this program patients would be given many chances to gain weight over several years before a gastrostomy tube was agreed upon, and referral to GI when they were significantly malnourished. In this proactive approach, early visits with GI were started to detect many subtle problems contributing to poor appetite. The GI physician became an integral part of the CF team. Referrals to the Endocrine clinic for impaired glucose tolerance increased. Results: Twenty-eight individuals signed up for monthly clinic appointments for this intensive nutrition intervention. Twenty-four of them completed all 6 visits. The mean BMI of this group was 24% which improved to 41% at the end of 6 months. The median BMI of the clinic population as a whole improved to 52% at 1 year and 62% at 15 months. Fifteen patients were started on an appetite stimulant and 24 were on an H2 blocker or PPI. Six patients had G-tubes placed for night feedings. A change in culture occurred by focusing on the importance of nutrition in the minds of the patients, families and staff. Future Plans: Introduction of nighttime G-tube feedings as a natural part of treatment during discussions at time of diagnosis or shortly after. Provide earlier intervention with monthly focused visits before children are at serious nutritional risk. Study design: Prospective, observational study using data from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Registry for patients born between 1989 and 1992. Patients were categorized by weight-for-age percentile (WAP) and height-for-age percentile (HAP) attained at age four years, and outcomes until age 18 years were compared across age four WAP and HAP categories. In a second analysis ("current"), growth velocity (centimeters grown per year) was calculated annually and categorized by the patient's corresponding WAP at each year. Results: WAP at 4 years of age was positively associated with HAP throughout childhood. Age four WAP>10% was associated with better lung function from 6 to 18 years of age. In boys with current WAP>25%, and girls with current WAP>10%, peak pubertal height velocities approximated but remained lower than that of the healthy reference population. By age 18, patients with an age four WAP>50% suffered fewer acute pulmonary exacerbations, spent fewer days in the hospital, and had lower rates of disordered glucose metabolism or diabetes. Patients attaining higher age four WAP and HAP had a survival advantage throughout childhood. Conclusion: We report that greater weight at age four is associated with greater height, better pulmonary function, and fewer complications of CF and better survival through age 18. Furthermore, greater weight for age in the peripubertal period is associated with improved tempo and timing of pubertal height growth. The association between nutritional status, pulmonary function and survival in cystic fibrosis (CF) has been demonstrated in multiple studies. A previous study at Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne (RCH) (300 pediatric CF patients) demonstrated suboptimal referral practices and further supported the importance of early nutritional intervention in children with CF. A subsequent state government audit identified that patients were receiving dietary advice from dietitians on average at 1.4 outpatients clinics (OPD) per year despite patients attending an average of 4.3 OPD per year. Additional financial support for the clinic was provided by the government including employment of an extra full-time dietitian. Subsequent OPD contact between patients and dietitians rose to 3.2 consultations per year. This study was done to assess improvement in intervention time and the effect on clinical outcome in a group of patients referred for gastrostomy insertion. Method: We conducted a retrospective review of patients who had a gastrostomy inserted between 2002 and 2011. Clinical information was collected including demographics, weight-for-age and height-for-age Z-scores (WAZ and HAZ), forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) for 2 years prior to gastrostomy and 2 years post-insertion. Colonisation rates with Pseudomonas and survival were also recorded. The data was compared to the previous study (See table below) . The increases in WAZ and HAZ at 2 years post-insertion in this recent study were more marked than in our previous study. Further, this present study showed an improvement in FEV1 at 2 years compared to at time of PEG insertion, which was not seen in our earlier study. Conclusion: This study demonstrates that based on the recognition of the benefits of early nutritional intervention from the previous study, with improved patient access to dietetic consultants, patients were referred for insertion of gastrostomy at a more timely stage. These changes had clear benefits in improving growth parameters in excess of that seen previously and in addition an improvement in pulmonary function was also noted. Introduction: Good nutrition is the foundation upon which the overall health status of children with cystic fibrosis (CF) is built. CF Foundation guidelines recommend that CF patients maintain a BMI percentile at or above the 50th percentile for optimum health. Children with CF require a much higher caloric intake than do children without CF. Malabsorption, chronic lung disease, and infection can increase caloric demands, leading to poor nutrition. Most children with CF require nutritional supplements (NS) to maintain BMI percentile and general health. The annual cost for NS for our patient population can range from $720.00 to $5800.00 per year. Many private insurance plans do not pay for NS, requiring families to pay out of pocket. We estimate that 35% of families in our program struggle to pay for, or cannot afford, NS. We hypothesize that nutritional outcomes, as measured by BMI percentile for age, can be improved when patients who cannot afford NS are provided with supplements free of charge through an internal financial assistance program. Methods: Our CF Family Advisory Board (FAB) was created in 2006 to further the exchange of ideas and information between the CF Center and families. The FAB recognized that financial hardship prevented many patients from obtaining NS and that this issue negatively impacted nutrition, pulmonary function, and overall health. They developed a Family Assistance Program (FAP) to fundraise and provide NS free of charge to families with financial hardship. A multidisciplinary committee, including physicians, nurses, dietitians, social workers, and a psychologist, identified patients who would benefit from the FAP. Barriers specific to each patient attaining adequate nutritional status were identified and addressed. The committee assured that the families had exhausted all other potential resources for nutritional remediation. Families signed a contract and agreed to monthly weight checks. Eligible patients initially received NS for 3 months. Preliminary results were encouraging and assistance later extended to 6 months. Upon exiting the program, families were allowed to continue NS by self-pay at a reduced rate. Results: Over a 20 month period of time, 13 patients with a BMI less than the 50th percentile received NS through the FAP. Five of the 13 patients completed the assistance program within the 20 months. The total cost for NS during this time period was $7359.47 for a monthly average of $566.11 per patient. Mean baseline BMI percentile was 7.4%. The post-intervention BMI percentile for the 8 patients completed with the program was 18.4% (149% improvement). Long term follow up will include examination of the relationship between the patients' improved BMIs and lung function during FAP participation. Conclusions: Providing otherwise unavailable NS to CF patients can improve nutritional outcomes, and potentially improve FEV1. Financial assistance programs sponsored by CF family advisory boards can address the unmet need for NS in families unable to obtain NS through traditional routes. Background: In 2008, the CF Parent Advisory Council (CF PAC) at this pediatric CF Center established a local, independent, evidence-based and reliable website for parents of infants and children with CF. Focus groups determined CF parents valued frequent, brief information with concrete, age-specific suggestions they could implement. Surveys regarding the preferred mode of information distribution determined 65% preferred email with less than 10% of respondents selecting Facebook. An email function was incorporated into the website in 2009 to distribute weekly CF tips and recipes to families registered on the website. Objective: With global growth of social media, increased accessibility to CF information can be achieved through the development of a Facebook page designed by and for CF parents. Methods: Two different electronic surveys were distributed via email in February and May, 2011, to families who receive the local electronic CF newsletter. Results: According to the February survey, the percent of respondents (N=28) indicating at least weekly use of electronic media was: internet or websites (96%), email (92%), Twitter (0%), Facebook (71%), LinkedIn (4%). Almost 81% of respondents favored adding a Facebook page for the parent website. The CF PAC voted to establish a nonprofit organization Facebook page to provide a discussion forum for parents and to drive traffic to the CF PAC website. In May 2011, parents (N=17) responded anonymously to a survey regarding their use of social media. Respondents were 94% female with 53% having children with CF aged 1-5 years and 35% aged 6-12 years. Almost one third (29%) of respondents live farther than 50 miles from the CF clinic, therefore, attendance at CF parent educational events is unlikely. About 60% of respondents currently use Facebook more than four times per week, while another 35% use Facebook at least once per week. Percent of respondents indicating they were likely or very likely to use a Facebook page moderated by the CF PAC for specific topics was as follows: nutrition or CF management tips (77%), recipes (82%), upcoming CF-related events (88%), parent discussion forum (88%), and sharing personal stories and/or pictures (82%). Informal interviews with parents reinforced the use of a CFrelated Facebook page for parent and patient communication, weekly tips, and upcoming events. Additional ideas generated included posting recent drug research updates and supplying direct links back to the website. Conclusion: With the goal of ongoing quality improvement, the CF PAC has established a Facebook page to bring parents of children with CF together, provide reminders for upcoming events, and offer an alternative electronic method for receiving weekly CF tips and recipes. CF PAC members and clinic staff will moderate the page. Utilizing social media outlets will enable CF families to communicate online and access information they would otherwise be unlikely to obtain. Ongoing evaluation of the website and Facebook page utilization will be conducted by the CF PAC with Google Analytics, electronic surveys to users, and monitoring of wall posts and discussion forums. Objectives: To assess the prevalence of abdominal pain and gastrointestinal symptomatology at our center, to characterize the relationship of abdominal pain to known gastrointestinal manifestations of CF, and to examine the relationship between abdominal pain, gastrointestinal symptoms and quality of life. Methods: This was a prospective, cross-sectional, observational study. Patients with CF between the ages of 6 and 21 were eligible. Upon enrollment, the CFQ-R was administered. Demographic and clinical data was obtained from the medical record. Statistical analysis including t-tests, chisquared tests and linear regression was performed. Results: Sixty patients were enrolled. The distribution of demographic and anthropometric data was as expected based on previous studies and knowledge of the patient population. Over half of the patients reported experiencing abdominal pain in the preceding two weeks. A minority of patients reported experiencing pain "always" or "often." The most common gastrointestinal manifestations of CF were constipation, malabsorption, abnormal liver function tests, GERD, gastrostomy tube with or without fundopli-cation, abdominal surgery, and pancreatitis. Only malabsorption was predictive of a greater frequency of reported abdominal pain. Age, gender, BMI percentile, pancreatic function and type of acid suppression were not predictive of the frequency of reported abdominal pain. Greater frequency of abdominal pain was predictive of lower quality of life scores in the physical and eating domains. Higher BMI percentile for age was predictive of higher quality of life in the body image domain, except in adolescent females. Pancreatic function was not predictive of quality of life in any domain. Conclusions: Given that children and adolescents with CF frequently experience abdominal pain, it would be beneficial for practitioners to ask about abdominal pain at each clinical encounter. Pancreatic sufficient patients may experience significant abdominal pain and impaired quality of life. Abdominal pain is associated with impaired quality of life in the physical and eating domains. Effective and timely evaluation and treatment of abdominal pain may improve patients' quality of life in these domains. Higher BMI percentile for age is associated with improved quality of life in the body image domain. Adolescent females may be more satisfied with a lower BMI percentile which may adversely impact their nutritional status and overall outcomes. Further studies are needed to determine causal relationships. Objective: Vitamin D deficiency is common in CF. Recent literature in the general population has shown that vitamin D may have an effect on lung function and on the lung's ability to fight infection. This is important in the CF population in which pulmonary exacerbations and decline in lung function cause significant morbidity and mortality. The relationship between vitamin D and lung function in children is not well established. We hypothesize that children with lower vitamin D levels at baseline will have worse pulmonary function at baseline and in later childhood, more impaired growth, more pulmonary exacerbations and earlier detection of pulmonary bacterial pathogens than those with higher vitamin D levels. Methods: The University of Minnesota CF Center maintains a large electronic database that includes demographic, pulmonary function, laboratory and microbiology data on nearly 1400 CF patients. We examined 678 simultaneous outpatient measurements of serum 25-OH vitamin D (25OHD) and lung function from 175 children between the ages of 6 and 15 years, seen between November 1999 and June 2010. Trends by 25OHD category (<20µg/L, 20-29µg/L and >30µg/L) across ages were estimated with a mixed-effects linear model, adjusting for age and gender effects, and correlation of measurements within children. Results: Only 39% of initial 25OHD measurements were at the CFF recommended level of >30µg/L, and 18% of all 678 measurements were <20µg/L. Compared to children aged 6 to 15 with <20µg/L 25OHD, children with >30µg/L had a 5±1% greater % predicted FEV1 (p=.0009) and had a 4±1% greater % predicted FVC (p=.017). Children with 20-29µg/L had a 3±1% greater % predicted FEV1 (p=.002) and had a 3±1% greater % predicted FVC (p=.018). A linear effect was seen as well in that for every 10µg/L increase in 25OHD, FEV1 increased by 1.7% (p= 0.002) and FVC increased by 1.2% (p= 0.0149). These relationships were independent of age and gender. Conclusions: More than 60% of children with CF at our institution are below the CFF recommended level of 25OHD. 25OHD levels in children with CF are positively associated with lung function, as measured by FEV1 and FVC. These differences were consistent through ages 6 to 15. The similar quantitative increase in both FEV1 and FVC with increased 25OHD levels suggests that vitamin D affects lung compliance. Future Directions: Unlike similar studies, we found a linear relationship between vitamin D and its effect on lung function. Possible mechanisms for these relationships include: vitamin D as a marker of general nutritional status, mediating improved lung function; its role in activating an antipseudomonal peptide, delaying infection and exacerbations, or its role in airway remodeling. Ongoing prospective data analysis will explore these mechanisms further by evaluating the relationship between 25OHD levels and pulmonary exacerbations and age of first detection of P. aeruginosa. We are also evaluating the impact of general nutritional status on the relationship between lung function and vitamin D. Supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (#MCAUL09B0 and #C061-10). Recently we have shown that a substantial number of pediatric patients with CF are characterized by nutritional failure based on low body mass index (BMI) and/or fat-free mass index (FFMI). It is unclear whether these CF patients have higher protein turnover and breakdown that relate to more susceptibility for protein loss and to more energy costs. Methods: In the present study, we examined in the postabsorptive state whether whole body protein breakdown (PB) and synthesis (PS) differ between 14 stable pediatric patients with CF and 17 healthy young controls. Whole-body PB, PS, and net PB (= PB-PS) were measured by the combined infusion of the stable isotopes L-[ring-2H5]phenylalanine and L-[ring-2H2]tyrosine. Myofibrillar PB, as indirect marker of skeletal muscle protein breakdown, was measured by L-[2H3]-3-Methylhistidine. In arterializedvenous plasma, the isotope enrichment values and amino acid concentrations were measured. FFM was measured using Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. Presence of nutritional failure in the CF group was defined according to the criteria BMI percentile < 10th and/or FFMI < 5th percentile. Lung function (as reflected by forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)) of each CF patient was recorded. Statistics was done using ANOVA and t-tests when appropriate. Results: Whole-body PS, PB (p< 0.001) and net PB (p<0.05), but not myofibrillar PB was higher in the CF group (mean age: 15±2y, FEV1: 85±22%pred.) than in the control group. Stratification of the CF group into nutritional failure (n=7) vs. normal nutritional status (n=7) resulted in higher values for whole body PS and PB (p<0.05) in the group with nutritional failure. Net PB, myofibrillar PB, FEV1 and age were not different between the CF groups. Conclusion: The present study reveals that nutritional failure in CF is associated with elevated levels for whole body protein turnover and increased net catabolism in pediatric patients with CF, indicating that specific nutritional modulation is warranted to target the abnormalities in protein and amino acid metabolism in CF. Background: Despite the pivotal role of nutrition in CF, current approaches to treat muscle loss by nutritional intervention have only been partially successful. To circumvent diminished protein digestibility due to pancreatic insufficiency in CF, (semi) elemental diets containing free amino acids are advised. We and others have previously found in diseases and conditions associated with muscle wasting that mixtures of essential amino acids (EAA) are more effective in stimulating whole body and muscle protein synthesis than equal amounts of balanced mixtures of EAA and nonessential amino acids as present in dietary (milk) protein. However data on the anabolic properties of EAA in CF are lacking. In the present study, we examined whether 6.7g of leucine enriched essential amino acid mixture (LEU/EAA) induced more protein anabolism than the same dose of a balanced mixture of essential and nonessential amino acids (TAA) as present in Whey protein in 14 clinically stable pediatric patients with CF (mean age:15±2y, FEV1: 85±22%pred.). Fifteen grams of maltodextrin was added as a source of carbohydrates. Whole body protein synthesis (PS) and breakdown (PB) and net PS (= PS-PB) were measured by the combined infusion of the stable isotopes L-[ring-2H5]phenylalanine and L-[ring-2H2]tyrosine. Myofibrillar PB, as indirect marker of skeletal muscle protein breakdown was measured by L-[2H3]-3-Methylhistidine and collagen PB by [2H]-hydroxyproline. The isotope enrichment values and amino acid concentrations were measured in arterialized-venous plasma, and Fat-free mass (FFM) was assessed using Dualenergy X-ray absorptiometry. Presence of nutritional failure in the CF group was defined according to the criteria BMI percentile < 10th and/or FFMindex < 5th percentile. Statistics was done using (un)paired t-tests when appropriate. Results: Whole-body PS (p<0.05) but not PB, myofibrillar PB or collagen PB was significantly stimulated after intake of the LEU/EAA mixture as compared to the TAA mixture, resulting in 70% higher values for net PS (P<0.001). Stratification of the CF group in nutritional failure (n=7) vs. normal nutritional status (n=7), showed no difference in (net) PS and PB values (whole body, myofibrillar or collagen) after LEU/EAA intake indicating comparable elevated values for net PS as compared to the TAA mixture in both groups with CF. Conclusion: A dietary Leu/EAA mixture has a significantly higher anabolic potential than a balanced mixture of amino acids in pediatric patients with CF, independent of the presence of nutritional failure. This indicates that even patients with CF characterized by nutritional failure are responsive to amino acid modulation. is a condition unique to cystic fibrosis, which is due to the accumulation of abnormally viscous mucus in the terminal ileum, caecum and ascending colon. Our recent studies showed that normal mucus secretion requires the presence of CFTR-dependent HCO 3 secretion. Herein, we further hypothesize that the absence of CFTR-dependent HCO 3 also contributes to the formation of abnormally thick mucus. The aim of the present study is to investigate the effect of CFTR-dependent HCO 3 on mucus viscosity in WT mouse distal small intestine. Methods: Two segments of distal small intestine from CL57Bl/6 WT mice were incubated with stimulants in vitro in either NaCl (no HCO 3 -) or NaHCO 3 (with HCO 3 -) Ringer solution. Fluorescent microbeads (500 nm) were added to mucus samples collected from incubated intestinal sacs. The movement of the microbeads was recorded by cinematography and analyzed by spot tracking software. To study HCO 3 secretion, segments of the WT or CFTR knock-out mouse distal small intestine were placed in Ussing chambers, and HCO 3 secretion was measured via pH stat. Results: To obtain maximal mucus secretion, 5-HT (5-hydroxytryptamine, 10 µM) plus PGE2 (prostaglandin E2, 1 µM) were added to the basolateral solutions. The viscosity of mucus from intestines bathed in NaCl Ringer solution was significantly more than mucus from intestines bathed in NaHCO 3 Ringer solution (3.2 ± 0.7 vs. 1 ± 0.1 cPa.s, p < 0.05, n=3), respectively. To further show that HCO 3 secretion in small intestine is dependent on CFTR, the effect of a CFTR inhibitor (glyH-101) and CFTR knock-out mice were examined. Apical application of GlyH-101 (25 µM) significantly inhibited 5-HT (10 µM) plus PGE2 (1 µM) -induced HCO 3 secretion from 0.73 ± 0.24 to 0.16 ± 0.12 µM/cm 2 /h (p < 0.05, n=6) in WT mouse distal small intestine. Furthermore, 5-HT (10 µM) plus PGE2 (1 µM) did not induce significant HCO 3 secretion in CFTR knock-out mouse distal small intestine, indicating that 5-HT +PGE2 -induced HCO 3 secretion is dependent on CFTR and that the abnormally viscous intestinal mucus in CF is likely due to depressed HCO 3 secretion in the gut. (1, 2) . Recently, vitamin A supplementation in utero has been linked to improved lung growth, development and function (3, 4) . In cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, normal vitamin A levels were recently shown to have a protective effect on the respiratory status of older patients (5) . Does the protective effect of vitamin A, shown to be important in lung growth and development in utero, continue throughout early childhood; and if so, do CF patients with normal vitamin A levels at the time of diagnosis have better lung growth and development compared to CF patients with low vitamin A levels at the time of diagnosis? We performed a non concurrent, retrospective cohort study that identified 47 CF patients diagnosed at our center between the years of 1990 and 2000. We determined 33 patients had normal vitamin A levels at the time of diagnosis (16 of the patients were diagnosed with CF before two years of age and 17 were diagnosed after two years of age). Ten patients had low vitamin A levels at the time of diagnosis, (four in the group diagnosed before two years of age and six in the group diagnosed after two years of age). Four patients had high levels of vitamin A at the time of diagnosis. A two-tailed t-test was performed to evaluate the relationship of the vitamin A level at the time of diagnosis and lifetime highest FEV1 value. We found no statistical significance between vitamin A levels at the time of CF diagnosis and highest FEV1 attained (P=0.346). These results could be explained by all of our patients being born in the United States where maternal vitamin A deficiency is rare, and suggesting that maternal vitamin levels have a significant effect on initial lung growth and development. Also, lung growth can occur up until eight years of age and our CF patients with low vitamin A levels were, on average, 5 years of age with vitamin A supplementation being initiated before full lung development had occurred. Small numbers involved in our study may have not allowed for clear differences to be found. Correlation between fat free mass (FFM) and shuttle run score. is considered more potent in non-CF patients but little data are available describing the use of D3 in addressing vitamin D deficiency in children with pancreatic insufficient (PI) CF. Objectives: 1.) To review 25OHD levels and vitamin D3 supplementation used in clinical practice amongst Children's Hospital of Philadelphia CF Center PI-CF patients and 2.) To explore factors impacting 25OHD. Methods: Retrospective chart review (1/1/08 to 8/1/2010) of PI-CF patients age>2y. Data were collected for all occasions when 25OHD was available during the study period and included: age, gender, race, BMI percentile (BMI%), FEV1%-predicted (FEV1%), D3 supplementation (multivitamins and D3 supplements), serum 25OHD and season. Mixed effect models were used to assess the effect of D3 dose on 25OHD levels after adjusting for confounders. Results: 25OHD (mean±1SD) was available at: baseline 36.7±12.2ng/mL (n=113); two occasions 33.7±10ng/mL (n=98); three occasions 35.9±11 (n=47). Baseline data: age 11.5±5y, 63 female, 7 black, BMI% 53±24, FEV1% 102±18. 25OHD was <30ng/mL in 40% and <20ng/mL in 12%. 25OHD was lower in black (20.1±5.4) vs nonblack (37.7±1.1); p=0.0001. Males had a higher 25OHD (39.4±13.7) vs females (34.5±10.4) p=0.033. Baseline 25OHD did not differ between winter (34.5±1.8) and summer (38.5±1.4) p=0.09. No relationship was found between 25OHD and FEV1% (p=0.105) or BMI% (p=.421). Median baseline D3 dose/day (6 children were on no supplementation) was 1000IU (min-max: 200-8000; 85% were on CF-specific MVI) and did not differ by gender (p=0.28) but differed between blacks (860±219) and nonblacks: (1432±1092) p=0.046. Baseline 25OHD was positively associated with subsequent 25OHD. In longitudinal models, 25OHD was positively associated with summer (p<0.001) and negatively associated with being black (p=0.007) but was not associated with previously prescribed D3. Conclusions: While optimal 25OHD status in CF remains to be defined, 25OHD>30ng/mL is attainable with daily D3 supplementation via CF-specific MVI. From this chart review we are unable to deduce the specific dose of vitamin D3 supplementation that is necessary to correct vitamin D deficiency/insufficiency or the dose necessary to maintain sufficiency in all patients. As with the general population, blacks were at increased risk for vitamin D deficiency while 25OHD was unrelated to either nutritional or pulmonary status in this relatively healthy PI pediatric population. Longitudinal studies are necessary to define not only optimal vitamin D status but the D3 dose necessary to achieve and maintain optimal vitamin D status. In 2009, after review of the literature and clinical experiences, the Minnesota CF Center changed the age for screening colonoscopies to 40 years in patients with CF who were clinically stable. Given the special challenges in cleansing the colon of CF patients to allow optimal screening exam, this change in the Center's standard of care involved determining an appropriate bowel prep to allow for a complete study. A database collecting information on potential colon cancer risk factors was initiated. Methods: We identified 16 CF patients who underwent screening or surveillance colonoscopies beginning in 2009. We collected information on the procedure prep that was used as well as the quality of the prep as documented by clinician reports. Descriptive statistics are presented as mean and standard deviation. Results: The average age at the time of screening colonoscopy was 45.5 (±7.5) years. There were 9 males and 7 females that underwent the procedure, and 2 were post-lung transplant. There were no immediate complications documented with any of the procedures. The colonoscopy preps involved a quadruple split regimen with magnesium citrate and polyethylene glycol-based purgatives. The prep was considered optimal in all of studies using both Aronchik and Ottawa scales of quality. Colonic polyps were found in 5 of the studies. All patients with polyps were males. Remarkably, all patients had multiple (6 ± 1.8) polyps. All polyps were adenomatous. Summary: Cystic fibrosis appears to be associated with early onset of adenomatous polyp growth in the colon. The rigorous prep protocol administered for these exams allowed for adequate visualization of the entire colon. Male gender may be risk factor for adenomatous colon polyps in cystic fibrosis patients. Aims: To evaluate biochemical and clinical effects of one year DHA supplementation in CF patients. Methods: A multicenter double-blind placebo-controlled study was performed. Thirty-four CF patients aged 6 to 10 years were randomized to receive DHA (100mg/kg/day in the first month and 1g per day thereafter) or placebo (germ oil in identical capsules). Plasma fatty acids concentrations were determined by GLC. Clinical (pulmonary function and anthropometry) and biochemical data (standard biochemistry, inflammatory cytokines, liposoluble vitamins, steatocrit) were collected every 6 months. Results: Five patients dropped out. In the treatment group, but not in the control group, a significant DHA enrichment in plasma (median % of plasma FA from 1.40 up to 4.5%) and a decrease in AA/DHA ratio were documented after 6 months. Interleukin-8 decreased significantly after 6 months but this finding was not consistently maintained. No changes in respiratory function, nutritional status and other biochemical parameters were detected in both groups. Conclusions: DHA supplementation for one year did not induce any relevant improvement in CF patients. Humans with cystic fibrosis (CF) typically have short stature and low BMI, both strongly associated with pulmonary function and longevity. Therefore, promoting growth in CF has become a key clinical goal. Essential fatty acids (EFA) play a pivotal role in postnatal growth and development. Pediatric and adult CF patients have abnormal plasma and tissue fatty acid profiles, specifically, deficient amounts of EFAs linoleic (LA, 18:2n-6) and docosahexanoic acid (DHA, indicating that dietary intake, absorption and/or further processing of EFAs is defective in CF. However, these abnormal fatty acid profiles are independent of pancreatic insufficiency and fat malabsorption, processes typically implicated as causing reduced growth in humans with CF. Linoleic acid supplementation fails to normal-ize LA and DHA plasma levels in CF patients, suggesting that the mechanisms of EFA deficiency in CF are more complex than simply inadequate nutrient intake. EFA deficiency has been demonstrated in mouse models of CF, but the results are conflicting. The objective in this work is to quantify plasma and liver fatty acid profiles representative of various developmental stages in F508del mice. We studied mice at neonatal (1-2 day old), postweaning (23-25 days old), young adult (42 days old), and mature (70 days old) time points. We measured growth-related indices, including body weight and dietary caloric intake. Thirteen fatty acids were extracted from plasma and liver samples and their concentrations determined using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. We find that neonatal CF mice have normal FA plasma profiles except for a decreased level of arachidonic acid. Post-weaning CF mice have significantly decreased levels of several fatty acids including LA, linolenic, DHA and eicosapentanoic. This correlates with significantly reduced dietary intake at this age. By young adult age, plasma fatty acids are comparable or elevated above the wildtype levels which correlate with normalized dietary intake at this age. Fatty acid profiles in mature mice are currently being determined. We computed the desaturation ratios (16:1/16:0 and 18:1/18:0) and find that both are significantly decreased in post-weaning CF mice. Using the rationale of Aldámiz-Eschevarría et. al. (Ped. Res, 2009 ), we determined various fatty acid ratios and find results similar to those reported in CF patients (specifically, elevated AA/LA and LA/DHA ratios) in both post-weaning and young adult mice. We also examined fatty acid profiles in the livers of all but neonatal mice. Our results show that palmitic and stearic fatty acids are elevated in postweaning CF mice but not in young adult mice suggesting that transport of those fatty acids from the liver may be affected in post-weaning CF mice. In summary, our preliminary results indicate that F508del mice have (i) normal fatty acid profiles while on maternal nutrition, (ii) deficient nutrient intake and essential fatty acid deficiency post-weaning, and (iii) normalization of dietary intake and fatty acid profile by adult/mature age. Based on our findings, we conclude that growth deficiency in CF mice has a complex etiology, involving an interplay between developmental stage and dietary intake. These studies are supported by the NIH and CF Foundation. Introduction: It is well known that underweight in patients with CF is correlated with a more rapid decline in lung function. Weight gain can improve lung function and weight is even known as an independent predictor of survival like lung function. We wanted to elucidate the influence of overweight and adiposity (BMI >90. percentile) on the long-term changes in lung function. Additionally we investigated the influence of pancreatic insufficiency and the genotype on body weight. Methods: Data from the German CF-registry were used. The registry was founded in 1995 and actually includes the annual data of more than 8000 patients. All patients gave their informed consent for being registered. In a retrospective case-control study (1:2) the development of FEV1% in patients whose BMI exceeded the 90th percentile over a 10-year period (1999 until 2009 ) was compared to matched controls with normal weight. Normal weight was defined as a BMI between the 25th and the 75th percentile. Furthermore the controls were matched for age (± one year), gender, lung function (FEV1 ± 7%) in 1999 and the same status for Pseudomonas in 1999 and 2009. We looked at the genotype and the status of pancreatic insufficiency, defined by the substitution of pancreatic enzymes. Results: From 155 patients with overweight in 1999, 28 were still overweight in 2009 (12 male, 16 female). The mean age in 1999 was 18.2 years. Lung function measurements were made at both time points in 23 of those patients. Out of 516 patients who had a normal weight in 1999 and 2009 n=56 were matched. Both groups showed the same annual decrease in lung function. There was an 8% decrease in FEV1% in the obese patients compared to 10% in the controls over the observation period (p>0.05). We found 82.6% of the overweight patients and 87.5% of the controls were pancreatic insufficient. In the overweight patients group 47% were ∆F508 homozygous compared to 23% in the control group (Fisher's exact testing p=0.05). Conclusion: Over a period of 10 years the comparison of the lung function (FEV1%) in overweight patients compared to patients of normal weight showed no advantage for the patients with overweight. It is important to remember that we also matched for Pseudomonas aeruginosa status to exclude a major confounder for changes in lung function. The percentage of pancreatic insufficient patients was the same in both groups. ∆F508 homozygosity was more frequent in the control group. Since there are known disadvantages of overweight and adiposity, we therefore conclude that patients with CF should aim for a normal weight between the 25th and the 75th percentile. Overweight is no advantage in CF patients. Background: Children with CF are at risk for essential fatty acid and choline deficiency, and for CF related liver disease. AST, ALT, GGT, alkaline phosphatase (alkphos) and bilirubin are used to follow the course of liver disease, but do not provide a complete picture of hepatic protein metabolic status. The effects of supplemental calories, fat and choline on serum amino acid profiles and hepatic protein metabolism in CF are not known. Objectives: To describe changes in amino acid profiles in children with CF and PI receiving 18 months of daily supplementation with LYM-X-SORB™ (LXS), a novel organized lipid matrix with choline and fatty acids v. a placebo with similar calorie and fat content. Subjects with CF and PI and mild-to-moderate lung disease (FEV 1 >40% predicted) participated in a double-blind randomized placebocontrolled supplementation trial of LXS containing choline (591-887mg choline/d) versus placebo (78-117mg choline/d). Both supplements had similar calorie (303-456 kcal/d)and total fat content (11.4-18.3g fat/d; ω6:ω3 =5:1) with dose depending on subject age. Fasting amino acid profiles were obtained at baseline, 3, 12 and 18 months visits and included branched chain amino acids (BCAA; leucine, isoleucine, valine) and aromatic amino acids (AAA; phenylalanine + tyrosine), AST, ALT, alkphos, GGT, total protein (TP), albumin and bilirubin. Results: Forty-nine subjects (20F, 10.7±2.7 y; FEV 1 96±22% predicted, 53% dF508 homozygotes) completed 18 months of daily supplementation with LXS (n=22, 10F) or placebo (n=27, 10F). The 2 groups did not differ by age, gender, growth status or FEV 1 at baseline. The table presents changes for all subjects combined, as there were no significant differences between the 2 supplementation groups in changes over time. Compared to baseline, BCAA were significantly lower at 18 months and AAA were lower at both 12 and 18 months. BCAA:AAA was higher at 12 months. TP was higher at 18 months. Other liver function tests did not change significantly over time or vary by group. Conclusions: Supplementation with extra calories and fat (either LXS or placebo) for 18 months decreased serum aromatic amino acids and improved the BCAA:AAA ratio in subjects with CF and PI, suggesting improved hepatic protein metabolism. The additional choline did not result in additional changes to the amino acid profile. Other measures of liver function did not change with supplementation. Supported by NIDDK (R44DK060302), CTRC (UL1RR024134), the Nutrition Center at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, and Avanti Polar Lipids, Inc. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease. Increased survival and improved diagnostics have expanded the adult CF patient population. Historically, patients with fewer gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations of CF tended to survive longer. This report describes the clinical presentation of a 69 year old female with cystic fibrosis who developed pancreatic insufficiency. Over 6 months this patient lost 24 pounds and her FEV1 decreased by 12%. She developed symptoms of malodorous stools, increased stool frequency, and bowel urgency. Serum cholesterol fell to 110 mg/dl. Work up included checking fecal elastase which documented pancreatic insufficiency. Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy was initiated and symptoms of steatorrhea resolved. As the population demographics of cystic fibrosis evolve, clinicians must keep CF disease progression in all organs in mind. Diet history, weight history and lab results are important to assess the clinical picture and anticipate the development of pancreatic insufficiency. Background: Choline deficiency has been described in patients with CF. As a key membrane phospholipid, choline is required for methyl metabolism, cholinergic neurotransmission, trans-membrane signaling, lipid cholesterol metabolism and transport. MRS of the calf muscle detects muscle intra-and extra-myocellular lipids and choline content. The effect of choline supplementation on muscle lipid and choline content in CF has not previously been reported. Objective: To describe muscle choline and fat content using MRS of the calf muscle in subjects with CF and PI (10-17 yrs), before and after 12month daily supplementation with choline-rich LYM-X-SORB TM v. placebo, compared to healthy controls matched for age, sex, and body size. Methods: Subjects with CF and PI participated in an 18-month doubleblind randomized placebo-controlled supplementation trial of LYM-X-SORB TM , a novel organized lipid matrix containing choline (591-887mg choline/d) v. placebo (78-117mg choline/d). Both supplements had similar calorie (303-456 kcal/d) and fat content (11.4-18.3g fat/d) with dose dependent on age. Fasting MRS scans (1.5T Siemens Avanto Whole Body Scanner) were obtained on subjects with CF before and after 12-month supplementation with LYM-X-SORB TM or placebo, and on healthy subjects on one occasion. Muscle Proton MRI/Spectroscopy (Siemens Extremity coil) using Chemical Shift Imaging (CSI, TR=1.7s, TE=30ms, spectral width=1KHz, and 4 averages) with/without water suppression was obtained from regions in the soleus muscle. Percent muscle choline (MC%) and intra-(IMF%) and extra-myocellular (EMF%) fat content were determined. Height (HAZ), weight (WAZ), and BMI (BMIZ) Z scores were calculated. Results: Compared to healthy controls (n=10 [7 male], 14.0±3.0 y) subjects with CF (n=14 [10 male],12.9±1.5 y) had significantly lower MC% at baseline (0.09±0.02 v. 0.12±0.03%, p=.001), but similar IMF% and EMF%. Group, age and WAZ significantly predicted MC% at baseline (F=9.1, R 2 =0.59, p<.001). After 12 months, MC% significantly increased (p=0.03) in subjects with CF on LYM-X-SORB TM (n=8, 0.12±0.04%), but not for those on placebo (n=6, 0.09±0.02%). Age and HAZ predicted MC% at 12 months (F=6.1, R 2 =0.47, p=.003). IMF% was higher in subjects with CF compared to healthy controls at 12 months (2.2±1.1 v. 1.0±0.6%, p<.01). Conclusion: Calf muscle choline content by MRS was significantly lower in subjects with CF and PI compared to healthy matched children, and was associated with age and growth status. Muscle choline content increased after 12 months of LYM-X-SORB TM supplementation in children with CF, associated with better growth status. The results suggest choline status in CF can be improved with daily choline supplementation. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a lethal inherited disease, characterized by chronic pulmonary infection, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, and markedly reduced growth and low BMI which directly correlates with pulmonary function and survival of CF patients. This observation has led to improving and maintaining BMI as a clinical goal in CF. To achieve this goal, CF patients are recommended to consume hypercaloric diets (110-200% daily intake) high in saturated fat (>40% kcals). A recent review by Stallings et al concluded that this approach has been successful to increase body weight in some CF patients; however, a similar conclusion could not be made about patients' height. We previously showed that similar to CF patients, CF mice have markedly reduced growth, both weight and length and low adipose stores. Thus, we are investigating the use of mice models to test strategies for increasing morphometric indices in CF. Here we compare the effects of increasing the caloric content of diet to the effects of inducing hyperphagia. Our dietary strategy is to feed CF mice a high-fat, high-sucrose hypercaloric diet (HFHS, 58% fat as kcals) to simulate a CF patient diet. This diet results in morbid obesity in non-CF mice and, as we have found no evidence of fat malabsorption in CF mice fed a standard chow, we reasoned that a high-fat diet should promote weight gain. To induce hyperphagia, we used a genetic strategy in which we generated CF mice lacking functional leptin receptors (the ob allele). Both the dietary and genetic strategies use the R117H mouse, as it has comparable growth deficits to other CF mice, but less prone to lethal intestinal obstruction. Like mice on HFHS diet, ob/ob mice become grossly obese even on a low-fat diet, and thus we use this strategy to determine the capacity of the CF mouse to induce de novo lipogenesis and store lipids. Our preliminary results (Table 1) show that CF mice fed a high-fat diet had marginal weight/adipose tissue gain, while non-CF mice became obese. Fecal fat analyses revealed marked fat malabsorption by the CF mice and CF mice accrued only ~1/5th the adipose tissue compared to WT. We suspect that dietary lipids may be depositing in other organs than adipose tissue, e.g. liver and skeletal muscle. Indeed, analyses of liver samples revealed higher triglyceride content. Interestingly, both WT/LepR and CF/LepR mice fed the low-fat diet became grossly obese indicating high rates of de novo lipogenesis, adipogenesis, and triglyceride deposition. These results indicate that manipulation of metabolic pathways, such as leptin signaling, provides the ability to achieve weight gain in CF mice thus suggesting ways to optimize weight gain for CF patients. These studies are supported by National Institutes of Health and Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. , 2005) . While bone disease in CF is multifactorial, vitamin D malabsorption is hypothesized to play a large role in the development of low bone mineral density (Hall, 2010) . Purpose: The aim of this project was to determine the best predictors of serum 25-hydroxy vitamin D [25(OH)D] insufficiency in pediatric patients with CF. Methods: Approval was obtained from the UAB institutional review board. Patients age 0-20 with a serum 25(OH)D < 30 ng/mL and diagnosis of CF were included. Participants were excluded if they did not have a 25(OH)D measurement from 2010, or were pancreatic sufficient. Upon enrollment, covariates BMI, FEV1, vitamin D intake, previous vitamin D supplementation, sun exposure, age, gender, race, and CF genotype were obtained. Vitamin D intake and sun exposure data were collected through a survey that included a food frequency questionnaire and questions about sun exposure during winter. Descriptive statistics of mean, standard deviation, median, and range were calculated for all variables. To measure the association between serum 25(OH)D and covariates, a simple linear regression model was built for each covariate. All covariates achieving significance of 0.10 were included in a multivariate regression. A forward selection using 0.05 entry criteria was used to identify a parsimonious regression model. Analysis was performed using SAS version 9.2. Results: Thirty-one males and 21 females were included. Forty-four participants were Caucasian, five were African-American, two were Hispanic, and one was classified as other. The mean age was 11.8 years. The median serum 25(OH)D level was 25 ng/mL with a range of 11 to 29 ng/mL. Simple linear regression models identified associations between 25(OH)D levels and age (P=.0030), FEV1 (P=.0079), prior vitamin D supplementation (P=.0283), and a marginal association with BMI (P=.0658). No associations were observed for gender (P=.4450), sun exposure (P=.4442), or vitamin D intake (P=.1071). The forward selection multivariable regression approach selected age as the only predictor of serum 25(OH)D (r-squared=16.3%). Discussion: This study indicates that as age increases, serum 25(OH)D levels decrease. These results are consistent with findings from the literature. It is important to note that dietary and supplemental vitamin D intake and sunlight exposure did not significantly predict patient vitamin D status in this study. This further highlights the need to identify the most efficacious form of vitamin D supplementation in pediatric patients with CF. Limitations of this study include a small sample size and self report of dietary vitamin D intake and sun exposure. Future research should focus on ascertaining optimal vitamin D supplementation for children with CF, mechanisms of vitamin D insufficiency, and further exploration of the relationship between age and vitamin D insufficiency. Introduction: Up to 50% of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients have delayed gastric emptying (DGE). DGE is associated with gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and other significant consequences such as malnutrition, esophagitis, and pulmonary disease. Cisapride is a prokinetic agent which can improve symptoms of GER in non-CF patients. In North America, use of cisapride has been limited since 1998 because of concerns related to possible QTc prolongation by the medication. In our CF clinic, we have used cisapride since 1979 for patients with DGE and/or GER who were refractory to domperidone or ranitidine. After documenting normal QTc, we obtain special access approval for cisapride. This has provided a unique opportunity to assess the effects of cisapride on gastric emptying and GER, and any adverse cardiac effects in CF patients. Aim: To determine the effect of cisapride on gastric emptying in CF patients. Secondary objectives are to assess for prolongation of QTc's. Methods: A retrospective chart review was done of 116 patients whom were attending the CF clinic at BC Children's Hospital as of Jan 2010. Gastric emptying (GE) was evaluated using a Technetium (Tc99m) gastric emptying study. The percent of technetium retained in the stomach at 90 minutes was measured and the time at which 50% remained in the stomach was calculated (t 1/2 ). GER was measured using a 1 hour dynamic Tc99m gastric reflux study and the severity of reflux graded according to the number of reflux episodes observed in the esophagus (<10 = mild; 10-20=moderate; >20 = severe). Data from the first GE or GER study while on cisapride was compared with the most recent study before starting cisapride. All patients on cisapride followed a monitoring protocol which includes a baseline EKG, an EKG at 1 week, 6 months, and yearly while on the medication. Results: Twenty patients were taking or had taken cisapride and baseline GE studies were available in 17. The mean t 1/2 pre-cisapride was 160.6 min (normal 45-90 minutes) and t 1/2 post-cisapride was significantly decreased at 122.9 min (p=0.04). The % GE at 90 minutes showed a nonsignificant improved trend pre-and post-cisapride: 32.1% vs 42.2% (p=0.08) (normal >50%). There were 8 patients with pre-and post-GER studies. Post-cisapride, there was a trend towards less severe GER (pre: 2 mild, 4 severe; post: 4 mild, 1 severe). All patients followed the clinic protocol and there were no serious adverse events. The mean QTc was 0.405 for all EKGs assessed with a range of 0.313 to 0.456. The mean QTc at the start of cisapride was 0.401 and the mean value at one year was 0.408. The mean weight, height, and BMI percentiles did not change. Values pre-vs post-treatment were 27 vs 25 (p=0.4), 21 vs 20 (p=0.8), and 42 vs 42 (p=0.9). Conclusion: Cisapride was effective in improving GE in cystic fibrosis patients with delayed emptying although no improvement in nutritional status was seen at 6 months. There were no cardiac side effects associated with the use of cisapride in our clinic. Optimal feeding for infants with cystic fibrosis (CF) exhibiting growth faltering is unknown. For infants with weight loss or inadequate weight gain, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) recommends calorie-dense feeding. However, clinical data related to this practice is scarce. Objectives: To characterize calorie-dense formula feeding practices and growth in infants with CF. Methods: The study population included 103 infants who were born in 1994-2006 and identified through the Wisconsin Routine CF Newborn Screening Program. Infant feeding and weight data from diagnosis to one year of age were obtained by extensive medical record review. Infants with meconium ileus (MI, n=24), pancreatic sufficiency (PS, n=9), or pancreatic insufficiency without MI (PI, n=70) were represented in this cohort. PS was defined as having at least one mutation known to be associated with PS and not taking pancreatic enzymes. Fifty-three infants (51%) started with exclusive or partial breastfeeding (BF) and the other 50 (49%) infants started with standard formula (FM). Infants who consumed formula at any time during infancy that contained ≥ 22 Kcal per ounce were defined as consuming calorie-dense formula (FM22+). Weight-for-age z-score (WtZ) was computed for birth weight and weight through age one year. WtZ patterns were defined as 'improved,' 'stable,' or 'declined' when WtZ at 12 months was higher than, similar to, or lower than WtZ prior to receiving FM22+, respectively. Results: Of the 103 infants, 43 (41.7%) received FM22+ at some time during the first year of life. Overall, proportionately more MI (67%, n=16) and PI (37%, n=26) infants were fed FM22+ compared to PS (n=1, 11%), p=0.005. A similar percentage of BF infants (43%, n=23) and FM infants (40%, n=20) received FM22+ during infancy, p=0.40. FM22+ was introduced at 4.0 (± 3.1) months with average duration of 7.7 (± 3.9) months. Of the 43 infants who received FM22+, WtZ at birth was -0.5 ± 0.9. Seven infants had only one weight measurement prior to receiving FM22+, which was at birth (birth WtZ -1.1 ± 0.9). The remaining 36 infants (birth WtZ -0.4 ± 1.0) had at least two weight measurements before receiving FM22+. Among these 36 infants, WtZ declined between birth and the visit prior to receiving FM22+ by -0.6 ± 0.7 (p>0.0001). WtZ of 43 infants who received FM22+ was -1.0 ± 0.8 at the visit prior to receiving FM22+ (at age 3.3 ± 3.1 months). After receiving FM22+, WtZ at age 12 months (12.2 ± 1.0 months) was -0.9 ±0.9, which was similar to WtZ prior to receiving FM22+ (p=0.37). WtZ pattern improved in 40% of infants (n=17), stabilized in 30% of infants (n=13), and declined in 30% of infants (n=13) after receiving FM22+. Conclusion: This study revealed that about 42% CF infants received FM22+ and, on average, growth faltering was observed before FM22+ introduction. Use of FM22+ prevented further declines in WtZ in 70% of infants, however 30% infants continued to exhibit growth faltering after receiving Objectives: Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients have well-described alterations in essential fatty acid levels, such as reduced levels of linoleic acid (LA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), and increased levels of Mead acid (MA) and arachidonic acid (AA), that are reversible by exogenous DHA supplementation. Recent work suggests that these changes are mediated by increased expression and activity of ∆6-desaturase (D6D) in CF. However, the mechanism is unknown. Because expression of D6D is thought to be regulated primarily at the transcriptional level, we hypothesized that its overexpression in CF may be due to increased transcriptional activation. Studies have revealed two functional sterol regulatory elements (SRE), binding sites for sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c), and a functional peroxisome proliferator response element (PPRE), binding site for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor α (PPARα), in the D6D promoter. The objective of this study is to determine whether increased D6D expression in CF is due to transcriptional upregulation and if these changes are mediated by SREBP-1c and/or PPARα. Methods: Experiments were performed using immortalized human bronchial epithelial cells (16HBE) stably transfected with a partial sequence of CFTR in the sense or antisense orientation. Cells transfected with the sense sequence (WT) express CFTR normally, while CFTR expression and activity are absent in those transfected with the antisense sequence (CF). Transcriptional activity of the D6D promoter was evaluated using a firefly luciferase promoter gene downstream of the distal 851 nucleotides of the D6D promoter. Transcriptional activity was measured by luciferase assay, using Renilla luciferase as an internal control. To determine the role of SREBP-1c and PPARα on ∆6-desaturase expression, cells were transiently transfected with siRNAs for either SREBP-1c or PPARα, and ∆6-desaturase mRNA levels were measured by RT-PCR. Results: Luciferase activity from the D6D-luciferase reporter gene is significantly higher in CF cells than in WT cells, indicating increased transcriptional activation of D6D in CF cells. Supplementation with DHA significantly reduces luciferase activity. Although SREBP-1c mRNA levels are elevated in CF cells, mutation of one or both SREs in the D6D promoter did not significantly reduce luciferase activity in CF cells. Furthermore, an 80% reduction of SREBP-1 expression by RNA interference (RNAi) led to only a minimal reduction of D6D expression (20%). Similarly, mutation of the PPRE in the D6D promoter did not significantly reduce luciferase activity in CF cells and 80% reduction of PPARα expression by RNA interference (RNAi) did not change D6D expression in CF cells. Conclusions: Increased D6D expression and its regulation by DHA are mediated by regulation of gene expression at the D6D promoter. However, neither SREBP-1 nor PPARα, known regulators of D6D expression, appear to be responsible for these changes. Thus, D6D expression and activity in CF are likely regulated by a novel pathway. Future studies will attempt to identify the factors responsible for regulating this important pathway in CF pathophysiology. Ray, E.M. 1 ; Shapiro, A.J. 2 ; Lin, F. 3 ; Dellon, E.P. 2 1. School of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Pediatrics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 3. North Carolina Translational and Clinical Sciences Institute, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Background: Although respiratory disease is the primary cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), CF-associated liver disease (CFALD) is a major medical issue which significantly impacts quality of life and long-term survival. There is no universally accepted definition of CFALD, and predicting who will evolve from intermittent or recurrent liver enzyme anomalies to CFALD is not currently possible. Thus, clinicians treating CF are challenged by findings of intermittent and recurrent elevations in liver enzymes, and abnormalities are often attributed to effects of recent or concurrent antibiotic therapy. Objectives: To understand the role of antibiotic use in children with intermittent or recurrent liver enzyme elevations. Methods: Using structured chart review in one large CF center, we developed a 5-year comprehensive data set to examine the annual antibiotic timelines and exposures for 3 groups of children with CF in relation to their annual hepatic enzyme screenings: 1) 46 children with CF prescribed ursodiol for persistent liver enzyme elevations, 2) 43 children with intermittent (≥3 out of 5) annual elevations in liver enzymes, and 3) 57 children with mild (≤2 out of 5) annual elevations in liver enzymes. Detailed information about annual antibiotic use, including class of antibiotic agents, number of annual exposure days per class, and time relation of antibiotic use to annual laboratory screening tests, was recorded. We used generalized estimating equations (GEE) with adjustments for gender, race, CFTR mutations, and age to determine associations between antibiotic use and liver enzyme anomalies. We also used a linear mixed effects model to compare the rate of antibiotic use amongst our three groups. Results: Our adjusted analysis showed that antibiotic use is not associated with annual liver enzyme elevation (AST, ALT, or GGT) in our CF population. Antibiotic use in the 6 weeks prior to measuring liver enzymes was not associated with liver enzyme elevations (p= 0.14, 0.74, and 0.58 for AST, ALT, and GGT, respectively). Comparison of our three groups revealed no significant difference in frequency of antibiotic use among them (p= 0.25). Conclusions: Antibiotic use does not fully account for the persistent, intermittent, or mild liver enzyme elevations that are frequently seen in children with CF at our center. Those children with intermittent or persistent liver enzyme elevations may have innate yet unrecognized CF-related hepatic dysfunction and may be at risk for CFALD. Thus, physicians should consider close monitoring of children with intermittent or persistent elevations in liver enzymes and not dismiss abnormalities as effects of antibiotics. Supported by grants from the CF Foundation; the National Institute for Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney Diseases; and Award Number UL1RR025747 from the National Center for Research Resources (NC TraCS Institute). among participants receiving UV therapy. Larger improvements were observed with vitamin D3 therapy (from 21.2 (SD=10.18) ng/dL at baseline to 47.1 (SD=20.5) ng/dL at 12 weeks) and vitamin D2 therapy (from 24.4 (SD=10.3) ng/dL at baseline to 32.7 (SD=9.7) at 12 weeks). In the case series, 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels improved from 21 ng/mL at baseline to 27 ng/mL after 8 weeks (p=0.05). The non-RCT reported an increase in mean 25-hydroxyvitamin D from baseline 23.8 (SD=4) ng/mL to 50.4 (SD=16.2) ng/mL associated with combined UV radiation and vitamin D3 supplementation and an increase from baseline 22 (SD=7.5) ng/mL to 24.5 (SD=8.3) ng/mL associated with vitamin D3 supplementation only. At the end of this study, participants receiving both interventions had significantly higher 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels (p<0.001) than those receiving vitamin D3 supplementation alone. Conclusion: Current evidence suggests that UV therapy is beneficial in patients with CF, especially when administered with vitamin D supplements. However, study limitations such as small sample sizes, baseline variability in comparison groups, low adherence, and high dropout rates decrease the strength of this conclusion. Background: Unhydroxylated vitamin D (e.g. ergocalciferol, cholecalciferol) is the most common form of vitamin D supplementation. However, fat malabsorption is common in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). In non-CF populations, hydroxylated (polar) forms of vitamin D (e.g. calcidiol (25hydroxyvitamin D), calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D)) have been shown to be more efficiently absorbed. In addition, it is postulated that unhydroxylated forms of vitamin D could benefit patients with CF by improving parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels, increasing calcium absorption, and consequently improving serum calcium levels and bone mineral density (BMD). However, the efficacy and safety of these agents in CF has not been established. We conducted a systematic review of the benefit and safety of supplementation with hydroxylated vitamin D in patients with CF. Methods: This systematic review was part of a broad evidence review of multiple questions to inform the development of CF Foundation clinical practice guidelines on vitamin D. We conducted electronic searches of MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CENTRAL in September 2010 to identify studies of any design comparing the use versus nonuse of hydroxylated vitamin D supplements in patients with CF. We also searched the reference lists of eligible studies. Results: We identified 2 studies including 83 participants. A non-randomized controlled trial assessed oral calcidiol supplementation in 73 children and adults with low BMD. Participants received either 0.7 µg/kg/day of calcidiol or no intervention. Calcidiol was associated with greater improvement in BMD Z-scores (from -2.9 at baseline to -2.5 at follow-up, p=0.002) compared to the control group (from -2.3 at baseline to -2.1 at follow-up, p=0.022). A before-after study assessed supplementation with 0.5 µg oral calcitriol twice daily for 14 days in 10 adults. The authors reported no significant improvement in mean 25-hydroxyvitamin D (58.6 (SD=5.9) nmol/L at baseline versus 61.6 (SD=7.2) nmol/L at follow-up, p>0.05) or mean 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (62.1 (SD=5.8) pmol/L at baseline versus 70.6 (SD=7.3) pmol/L at follow-up, p>0.19). However, they reported a statistically significantly lower mean PTH level at follow-up 5 hours after a high calcium meal (11.2 (SD=2.7) pg/mL) compared to study baseline (21.9 (SD=3.6) pg/mL) (p=0.03). While there was no significant improvement in serum calcium levels, fractional calcium absorption (FCA) was higher at the end of the study compared to baseline (p<0.01). No specific FCA results were provided. No adverse events were reported in either study. The included studies showed that hydroxylated vitamin D supplements were safe but provided inadequate evidence for improvement in serum vitamin D levels in CF. Calcidiol was associated with improvements in BMD. While calcitriol was not associated with improvements in serum calcium, it was associated with a significant reduction in PTH and a significant improvement in FCA. The studies used different agents, precluding quantitative synthesis of results. We recommend studies comparing hydroxylated with unhydroxylated forms of vitamin D supplementation and more consistent assessment of outcomes (e.g. 25-hydroxyvitamin D, BMD). (2005) recommends supplementation with 800 IU of ergocalciferol in all patients aged 1 year or older, with higher doses in vitamin D deficiency. However, it has recently been suggested that ergocalciferol is not as effective as cholecalciferol in improving vitamin D levels in patients with CF. We conducted a systematic review of the benefit and safety of supplementation with ergocalciferol compared to cholecalciferol in patients with CF. Methods: This systematic review was part of a broad evidence review of multiple questions to inform the development of CF Foundation clinical practice guidelines on vitamin D. We conducted electronic searches of MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CENTRAL in September 2010 to identify studies of any design comparing supplementation with ergocalciferol to cholecalciferol at any dose for any duration in patients with CF. We also searched the reference list of the eligible trial. Results: One randomized controlled trial (RCT) including 28 clinically stable participants was identified. Participants received 12 weeks of either 50,000 IU ergocalciferol (oil-based) weekly, 50,000 IU cholecalciferol (powder-based) weekly, or ultraviolet (UV) therapy 5 times a week. The authors reported greater improvement in serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level associated with cholecalciferol (from mean 21.2 (SD=10.18) ng/dL to 47.1 (SD=20.5) ng/dL) than with ergocalciferol (from mean 24.4 (SD=10.3) ng/dL to 32.7 (SD=9.7) ng/dL). In the cholecalciferol group, 9 (100%) participants were vitamin D sufficient at the end of the study (2 (22%) sufficient at baseline) compared to 6 (60%) participants vitamin D sufficient at the end of the study (4 (40%) sufficient at baseline) in the ergocalciferol group. While both groups experienced reductions in parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels, these reductions were not reported to be statistically significantly different (from 49.8 (SD=46.7) pg/mL to 40.0 (SD=47.6) pg/mL in the cholecalciferol group and from 129.9 (SD=47.3) pg/mL to 86.1 (SD=40.8) pg/mL in the ergocalciferol group, p=0.86). All participants were 80% compliant or better and there were no instances of hypercalcemia or other adverse events. When compared with no supplementation of vitamin D, cholecalciferol was shown to be effective in improving serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels in 2 studies while the evidence for ergocalciferol was conflicting. Ergocalciferol was shown to be effective in 2 studies, but ineffective or only marginally effective in 5 studies. Conclusions: There is insufficient evidence on the comparative benefit between supplementation with ergocalciferol and cholecalciferol in CF. We identified one RCT which found both interventions to be safe and effective in achieving or maintaining optimal vitamin D status, with cholecalciferol being more effective. However, the formulations of the two interventions differed (oil-based versus powder-based) and study duration was insufficient to ascertain longer-term impact on vitamin D levels and bone mineral density. We recommend more comparative studies with longer follow-up. Background: Serum concentration of vitamin D influences several outcomes (serum albumin levels, bone mineral density, lung function, etc.) in cystic fibrosis (CF). Lung function is indicative of the severity of disease in CF. The correlation between 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and FEV1, an important measure of lung function, is poorly understood in patients with CF. We conducted a systematic review to evaluate the correlation between 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels and lung function. Maternal and infant outcomes are positive for most women with cystic fibrosis who have sub-optimal body mass index. Prepregnancy maternal BMI and FEV1 remain strong predictors of these measures 6 months after delivery. There is much variability in the health outcomes during pregnancy regardless of weight and pulmonary status, suggesting that all women with CF remain at risk for adverse health outcomes due to pregnancy and should be monitored closely and frequently during this time. Nutrition interventions to promote adequate weight gain and overall optimal nutritional status for pregnancy should begin in the prenatal period, and continue throughout the patient's pregnancy. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Disease is common in the CF exocrine pancreas eventually leading to complete destruction of the exocrine organ, while disease of the endocrine pancreas leads to CF related diabetes (CFRD). Because early beta cell pathology in CF is not well described in humans, we studied neonatal CF and non-CF pig pancreas using insulin immunostaining to determine the cellular distribution and density of beta cells. In both groups, beta cells were loosely organized as varying sized small islets to solitary cells within the parenchyma. CF pig pancreas had reduced lobularity with corresponding increased interlobular connective tissue as has been reported. Interestingly, most of the CF beta cells were restricted to within or immediately adjacent to these remnant lobules. In contrast, the interlobular space had an absence of beta cells (as well as islets). We then examined the amount of beta cells in whole pancreas tissue (average ~3-4 cm 2 / tissue section) and found that beta cell tissue density did not differ between CF and non-CF groups (NS, Mann-Whitney test). However, when we examined the amount of beta cells in lobular tissues, CF pancreas had increased beta cell tissue density compared to non-CF groups (P<0.05, Mann-Whitney). The results of this study give some insight into CF pathogenesis and have implications for future studies. 1) The extent of beta cells, as assessed by insulin immunostaining, does not appear to be altered at birth and suggests morphologic changes may be a result of postnatal pathophysiology. Importantly, this work does not completely rule out pathophysiologic differences between groups at birth. 2) Consistent with islet derivation from developing duct progenitors, beta cells are generally restricted to the diminutive lobules of the CF pig pancreas and are lacking from the expanded interlobular spaces. Accordingly, generous sampling of CF pig pancreas is essential to prevent artifactually low or high estimation of beta cell populations. 3) Increased beta cell numbers within the remnant lobules of the neonatal pig pancreas may reflect the findings of early autopsy studies where CF infant pancreas was sometimes described in pathology reports to have increased islets. Future fetal and postnatal studies combined with clinical analysis of endocrine pancreas function will further define the role of beta cells in the pathogenesis of CF related diabetes. The frequency of CF related diabetes (CFRD) continues to rise. The presence of CFTR in rat pancreatic islets was recently described, but was primarily on glucagon secreting alpha cells. Previous clinical studies demonstrated a reduced glucagon response to hypoglycemia in pancreatic insufficient CF subjects. As Cftr knockout (Cftr-/-) mice do not develop pancreatic disease, defects in glucagon response would be indicative of intrinsic cellular abnormalities. We hypothesized that Cftr-/-mice would have reduced responses to insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Female Cftr-/-mice were compared to heterozygote and wildtype controls for this experiment. All mice, ages 9-14 wks, were fasted for four hours prior to study initiation. Fasting blood glucose, insulin and glucagon concentrations were obtained from control mice (n=3-6). Following a baseline blood glucose value, insulin-treated mice were injected with 0.2 units of insulin aspart, to induce hypoglycemia (n=5-6). Blood glucose concentration was monitored at 10, 30, 50, 70, 90 and 120 min., until blood glucose fell below 60 mg/dL, or there was visual evidence of hypoglycemia. Serum insulin and glucagon concentrations, following insulin-induced hypoglycemia, were then compared to control mice concentrations. Insulin concentrations were significantly increased in Cftr-/-, heterozygote and wildtype mice following insulin injection (p<0.05). Glucagon concentrations were increased following the induction of hypoglycemia (Cftr-/-and heterozygote mice p<0.01, wildtype mice p=NS). However, there was no significant difference in glucagon concentrations (mean±SD, pg/mL), between the three groups, following insulin-induced hypoglycemia (Cftr-/-465.2 ± 234.6, heterozygote 527.2 ± 176.5, wildtype 335.7 ± 240.9). Despite previous evidence of CFTR expression on pancreatic alpha cells, Cftr knockout mice have similar glucagon responses to insulininduced hypoglycemia, compared to heterozygote and wildtype controls. Cftr knockout mice may not undergo the same endoplasmic reticulum stress compared to deltaF508 mice. Additional studies are underway to compare differences in these animals. Background:Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) increases morbidity and mortality in CF patients. Abnormal glucose excursions can already be observed in pre-diabetic CF patients and those with normal glucose tolerance when compared to healthy controls. During this pre-diabetic phase, patients loose lung function years before the diagnosis of CFRD. The mechanisms of this deterioration of lung function are unknown and could be related to repeated hyperglycaemic excursions that can potentially affect the immune system and in particular lymphocytes. Hyperglycemia has been shown to promote altered immune responses and could affect T lymphocytes subtypes and cytokine production. Th17 cells have been shown to be present in the lungs of CF patients. Th17 cells secrete IL-17a, a cytokine implicated in many autoimmune diseases and increased levels of IL-17a are possibly involved in airway tissue destruction. Hypothesis: Compared to healthy control subjects; CF patients would present an increase in IL-17a production by Th17 cells which will be further exacerbated in hyperglycaemic conditions. Subjects and methods: Peripheral blood lymphocytes were isolated from 8 control subjects and 10 CF patients (2 with normal glucose tolerance, 2 pre-diabetics and 6 CFRD) and cultured in medium containing either 5 mM of glucose (normoglycaemic conditions) or 25 mM of glucose (hyperglycaemic conditions) for 24 or 48 hrs. To evaluate the proportion of cells producing IL-17a, cells were stained for surface markers (CD3, CD4, CD25), and intracellular FOXP3 and IL-17a to identify cell subsets producing IL-17a, and then analyzed by flow cytometry. Results: When cultured under normal glycemic conditions for 24 or 48 hrs, no difference was observed between CF patients and controls for IL-17a production by Th17 cells. However, we found that under hyperglycaemic culture conditions for 24 hrs and 48 hrs, a greater proportion of CD3+ CD4+ CD25cells secreted IL-17 among lymphocytes isolated from CF patients compared to controls. Conclusion: Th17 lymphocytes from CF patients cultured under hyperglycaemic conditions produce more IL-17a than those of healthy counterparts. Our data suggests that frequent glucose excursions in CF patients might contribute to increased Il-17a secretion which could possibly contribute to tissue inflammation. Further studies are needed to elucidate mechanisms involved in the increased IL-17a secretion by IL-17a secreting T cells in CF patients in hyperglycaemic conditions. Values are mean ± SD Objectives: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) without fasting hyperglycemia (CFRD FH-) is associated with low microvascular and no macrovascular complications and insulin therapy is a significant treatment burden for patients, with complex and time consuming medical care. Therefore therapy of CFRD FH-has been started with oral repaglinide in some of our patients in the past ten years. We evaluated the effect of repaglinide therapy on diabetes control, nutritional and respiratory status in those patients with CF. Methods and Patients: This retrospective study included patients cared for at our adult CF center who were diagnosed with CFRD FH-between May 2000 and May 2010 and initially treated with repaglinide. CFRD had been diagnosed after a standard oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) with normal fasting oral glucose levels, but 2-h glucose м 200 mg/dl (11.1 mmol/l). Subjects were monitored until May 2010. Clinical outcomes, including weight and BMI, respiratory function, hemoglobin A1c, were evaluated quarterly, at each visit to the CF center. We also evaluated the time until insulin therapy started and the reasons for this change of regimen. Results: Twenty-five patients (16 females -64%) began repaglinide therapy at a mean age of 27 (17-41) years. All had exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and negative GAD and IA2 antibodies. Mean age at diagnosis of CF was 5 (0-26) years. All patients but 2 had severe CFTR genotype and 12 patients (48%) were F508del homozygous. At diagnosis of CFRD, mean BMI was 19.17 ± 1.99 kg/m 2 , mean FEV1 56.6 ± 23.0 % pred., mean FVC 67.1 ± 19.6 % pred., mean A1c 6.7 ± 0.7 %. At one year of repaglinide regimen, mean A1c was 6.4% in the 24 patients still treated with repaglinide, A1c had been stable in 12 patients, nine patients had had a mean increase of 0.7% and 3 patients a mean decrease of 0.55%. The mean dose was 5 mg/day. At 2 years, mean A1c had decreased by 0.9%, patients had gained weight (mean: +1.65 kg) and mean FEV1 had improved. Nevertheless, after 2 years, there was a tendency to worsening of health. Sixty-four percent of the patients had at least one episode of hypoglycemia, but none were severe. The mean follow-up was 66 months. Nineteen patients (76%) were treated with insulin after a mean time of 29.3 (6-84) months. The reasons for insulin therapy were: poorly controlled diabetes in 13 patients (increase in A1c in 6 patients, high postprandial blood glucose in 5 patients, hypoglycemia in 2 patients), lung function decline in 5 patients (including 4 with poorly controlled diabetes), weight loss in 2 patients (who had also uncontrolled diabetes and lung function decline), lung transplantation in 3 patients, desire for pregnancy in one patient and initiation of enteral feeding in one patient. Conclusion: Improvement of CFRD remains transient after treatment of CFRD with repaglinide. It may allow some patients to accept treatment of diabetes. However regular monitoring is essential and a change to insulin should be prescribed at the slightest sign of deterioration, not only on blood glucose, but also on nutritional and respiratory status. Shipp, A.R.; Siragusa, A.; Crews, B.; Scott, P. Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA Background: In 2007, our pediatric cystic fibrosis (CF) care center recognized the need for a formal transition process and subsequently developed a program called Journey to Independence. Program objectives include: Assess patients' transition readiness; offer opportunities for patients to discuss concerns and ask questions independent of parent input; establish edu-cational goals and create homework assignments to help patients meet those goals; and increase involvement with the adult care team. Methods: The Journey to Independence program is comprised of five stages: Scout (ages 8-10 years); Explorer (ages 11-13); Trail Guide (ages 14-15); Deputy (age 16); and Park Ranger (ages 17-18). To date, we have implemented the Deputy and Park Ranger stages of the program. Each stage includes five components with specific educational objectives. To obtain the objectives in each stage, patients are required to complete various ageappropriate homework assignments or hands-on activities. Examples of objectives for the Park Ranger stage include: "Understand CF" -prepare for the final transition to adult care by engaging in a dialogue about the adult CF care center; "Respiratory" -practice good self-care by describing the daily medication and treatment regimens (My Med Sheet); "Nutrition" -plan menus that meet patient health goals (My Meal Plan); "Treatment" -determine whom to call with certain health related questions (Make the Right Call); and "Lifestyle" -identify and describe how to meet potential challenges of self-care (Challenges of Independence). There are a total of 25 assignments or activities throughout the program -five for each stage. Upon completion of the program, patients attend a formal Adult Transition Clinic, in which they are seen by both the pediatric and adult care teams. This clinic is held at our pediatric care center and serves as the final step in the Journey to Independence. Results: Since January 2008, a total of 18 patients have transitioned to adult care. Nine additional patients are scheduled to transition to adult care in 2011. In late 2010, the Journey to Independence secured an educational grant from a specialty pharmacy, which provided the necessary funding for additional program development. With this support, our team was able to develop all remaining stages of the program, including printed educational materials. Having previously introduced the final two stages of the program -Deputy and Park Ranger, the additional stages -Scout, Explorer, and Trail Guide -will be launched in the summer of 2011 for approximately 70 patients. Conclusion: In 2007, our pediatric CF care center recognized the need for a formal adult care transition process and subsequently developed the Journey to Independence program. This program represents an effort to educate our patients more systematically and comprehensively than we have done in the past. It has been well received by patients, parents, and staff at both the pediatric and adult care centers, and we have met our initial objectives. Our ultimate goal is to transition highly educated, motivated and adherent patients, who can function independently when they first see our adult care counterparts. Jessup, M. 1 ; Hauser, J. 2 ; Cameron-Tucker, H. 3 ; Cummings, E. 3, 4 ; Turner, P. 3, 4 ; Blizzard, L. 3 ; Reid, D. 5 1. Research Centre for Clinical and Community Practice Innovation, Griffith University/Gold Coast Health, Gold Coast, QLD, Australia; 2. Royal Hobart Hospital, Hobart, TAS, Australia; 3. Menzies Research Institute, Hobart, TAS, Australia; 4. School of Computing, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, Australia; 5. Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, QLD, Australia Introduction: Transition to adult cystic fibrosis (CF) care assumes concomitant self-management. The aim of this pilot study was to assess a mentor-based behavioural modification intervention to enhance self-efficacy, with some individuals utilizing an information and communication technology (IT) tool -a modified mobile phone -for self-recording of symptoms with immediate visual feedback on clinical status. Methods: In this single-blind, randomized controlled trial (RCT), CF adolescents and adults were randomized to one of three arms: mentor (M), mentor plus mobile phone for self-recording of daily symptoms (M + IT), or control (C). The primary outcome was self-efficacy, and secondary outcomes were CF-related and generic quality of life (QOL), participant feedback on their experience via semi-structured interviews, lung function and acute healthcare utilization. Results: In the seventeen participants (median age 21 years, range 14-48 years), self-efficacy increased significantly in the M and M + IT groups compared to C (p<0.05); with a mean improvement in FEV1 of 133 mls in the M and M + IT arms combined, which was significant compared to C (p<0.01). QOL scores were unchanged. Hospital admissions were significantly reduced in the M + IT arms combined, compared to pre-intervention (p<0.05). Participants reported increased accountability. Conclusion: This pilot RCT demonstrates mentorship has positive effects over six months on self-efficacy, lung function and acute health-care utilization in adults with CF. Rationale: With patients surviving well into adulthood, transition to adult providers is to be expected for most patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Frequently, transition is not discussed until late adolescence and early adulthood. There is a need for healthcare providers, parents and patients to start the transition process early to increase the likelihood of a successful transition to adult care. Program Description: TeamUP is a program developed by students in the graduate school of health policy at Carnegie Mellon University in collaboration with healthcare providers at the Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh. The program was developed with the intent to empower patients and transform young patients into healthy, confident and able adults, beginning in the early pediatric setting. The program optimizes transition by providing patients a comprehensive program complete with developmentally appropriate tasks and activities that are consistent from early childhood to adolescence. TeamUP focuses mainly on the patient who is at the center of transition. Patients who are empowered to ask questions of their doctors will have a greater confidence in their ability to guide their own healthcare. The goal is to create a patient who has an understanding of their condition(s), medication(s), and potential complications. TeamUP uses Interactive Multi-tier Stages, encourages use of hospital resources, teaches medical and social skills, and is easy to use. The program materials include a development kit and step-by-step handbooks aimed at guiding healthcare providers, patients and parents through the transition process. TeamUP is a personalized a program that is broken down into 5 phases to address the needs of children and adolescents through the age of 22. Results/Future Direction: To date, our CF center has 30 patients enrolled in TeamUP. Results of surveys suggest that patients and families do not think of transition especially in the 3-12 year age range. Our goal is to change perceptions of transition so that patients and parents of patients with CF start thinking about transition early in order to build the skills needed to be an informed adult that can successfully handle the tasks necessary. Our program is beginning with children aged 3-12 years old. There have been increased concerns about psychiatric distress among adults with cystic fibrosis. Although several well-designed studies are underway, as yet few published data are available, and prevalence estimates vary widely. Moreover, little is known about important clinical or demographic factors that might contribute to risk for psychiatric morbidity. This report provides initial findings regarding depression and anxiety symptoms from an ongoing study of adult patients in Arkansas. Mean age was 27.5 (9.7), mean education was 13.4 (2.0) years, and most participants were white. Depression and anxiety were assessed with the Hospital Anxi-ety and Depression Scale (HADS), a standardized measure which avoids confounding distress with symptoms of medical illness. The proportion of participants exceeding cut-off scores for depression was 15.9%, and 31.8% exceeded cut-off values for anxiety. In multivariate analyses, depressive symptoms were concurrently associated with older age (β= .42, p <.001), lower education (β= -.23, p =.02), greater number of hospitalizations within the past year (β= .27, p =.02), and less religious commitment (β= -.41, p <.001). Anxiety was significantly related to lower religious commitment (β= -.37, p =.01), and marginally tied to older age (β= .27, p =.053). Disease characteristics (e.g., pulmonary function, BMI) were less robust predictors of these outcomes. Identification and treatment of psychosocial morbidity requires additional attention in cystic fibrosis centers. Further investigations will be important in refining prevalence estimates, tracking changes over the trajectory of the illness, and identifying potential markers for risk and resilience. In particular, increased age and lower religiousness appear to be associated with distress, and merit further scrutiny. There have been longstanding concerns about adherence among cystic fibrosis patients, in view of the highly demanding treatment regimens that these individuals must manage. Adherence to airway clearance procedures has been particularly problematic. Compared with research on children with cystic fibrosis, however, fewer studies have focused on adherence among adults. This study examined levels of self-reported adherence among patients in a cystic fibrosis clinic serving a rural Southern state. Participants were adults (18 years and older), average age was 27.5, and mean household income was modest. Adherence to airway clearance was assessed with items from two validated instruments, the Cystic Fibrosis Treatment Questionnaire and the Medication Adherence Report Scale. Only 38.1% of participants reported being fully adherent to airway clearance therapy in the past month, and an additional 14.3% indicated that they had missed no more than two chest treatments per week. Better adherence (as a continuous variable) was significantly related to greater number of hospitalizations within the past year (p = .04), and need for home intravenous antibiotics within the past year (p = 04). It was marginally associated with poorer pulmonary function (FEV 1 % predicted: r = -.27, p = .08), greater depression (r = .29, p = .07), and increased illness-related stress (r = .27, p = .08). Results highlight pronounced difficulties with adherence among adults with cystic fibrosis, and tentatively suggest that those who are struggling more sometimes might experience greater motivation for self-care. Attaining a more sophisticated understanding of adherence to airway clearance remains an important priority for further research. Aims and Method: CF is a complex disease and patients face substantial physical and psychological problems. The emotional impact is as signif-icant as the physical symptoms. CBT is an evidence-based treatment for emotional adjustment problems. It addresses unhelpful thinking and worrying and promotes understanding of how thoughts, mood, behavior and physical symptoms interact. CBT can be learnt by members of the CF team and used to support patients. Patients attending our clinic underwent screening for anxiety and depression using the Hospital Anxiety and Depression (HAD) Scale. Those with high scores were offered CBT provided by a nurse who had undertaken a postgraduate diploma in CBT, supported by a clinical psychologist. Results: Thirty-three patients were offered CBT and 20 (61%) completed a course of treatment; 11 (55%) were female. Their mean age was 30 (range 19 to 49) years. Their mean FEV1 was 1.85 (range 0.76 to 3.64) L. Overall 18 (90%) had high scores for anxiety (HAD score ≥8) and 12 (60%) had high scores for depression (HAD score >8), with 7 (35%) having both anxiety and depression. There were significant falls in HAD-anxiety scores from a mean 11.9 (SEM 0.9) to 7.6 (SEM 1.0), p<0.01, and in HAD depression scores from a mean 9.6 (SEM 1.1) to 5.8 (SEM 0.7), p<0.01 post-CBT. The average number of consultations was 4.5. Six patients were referred on to a clinical psychologist for further therapy. Conclusion: CBT shows promise as an effective treatment which reduces anxiety and depression in patients with CF, across a range of ages and disease severities. CBT techniques can be learnt by members of the CF team and used to support patients. Introduction: Many CF adults continue work long after CF symptoms meet the Social Security criteria for disability benefits. This study examines why CF adults forgo Social Security Benefits and continue work after they are eligible for benefits. Method: The study surveyed participants in the CF Insurance Access Program (CFIAP). CFIAP helps CF adults obtain Social Security benefits. CFIAP had 196 participants at the time of the survey; 26 CFIAP participants responded to the survey. The survey inquired about FEV1, the frequency of physician interventions and the frequency of antibiotic use. Results: Sixty-two percent of respondents (16 of 26) continued work even after their FEV1 fell below 50%. Of these, 19% continued work with an FEV1 from 41% to 50%. Sixty-two percent continued to work with an FEV1 from 31% to 40%. Nineteen percent continued to work with an FEV1 from 21% to 30%. One had an FEV1 greater than 50% and 9 did not disclose their FEV1. CF adults continued work despite numerous physician interventions. Seventy-seven percent (20 of 26) were hospitalized in the 12 months prior to stopping work. Twenty percent (4 of 20) were hospitalized once in the prior 12 months, 15% were hospitalized twice, and 65% were hospitalized 3 or more times in the prior 12 months. CF adults continued work despite persistent pulmonary infection and treatment with antibiotics. Eighty-five percent (22 of 26) used intravenous or inhaled antibiotics at least 6 times in 12 months and 42.5% had continuous use of antibiotics in the last 12 months of work. Twenty respondents stated their reasons for continuing to work, and all stated more than one reason. Eighty-five percent stated continuing work was necessary to meet financial obligations; 55% said they could not stop work because they needed the job's health insurance; 35% said they were unaware how to qualify for benefits. Ten percent said they could not afford the cost of COBRA and 5% stated that they had no health insurance option for the 29 month Medicare waiting period. Ninety percent stated that they enjoyed work as a reason for continuing work, and almost all of these (17 of 18) stated one or more reason. Eighty-five percent (6 of 7) of those who identified financial need or need for insurance also stated that they were unaware that they were eligible for Social Security benefits. Discussion: Most cited the need for income or health insurance as the reason for continuing to work. Yet, SSI and SSDI provide an income benefit and a health insurance benefit. Eighty-five percent of those who cited the need for income or health insurance benefits also stated that they were unaware that they were eligible for Social Security benefits. Unawareness of Social Security eligibility standards explains the delay in applying for benefits. Those aware of Social Security still continued to work because they could not forgo income during the 5 month income benefit waiting period. Others could not fill the 29 month Medicare waiting period with a COBRA extension, either because COBRA was unavailable or because the respondent could not afford COBRA. Conclusion: Transitioning adults need regular counseling on the availability of Social Security benefits, how to qualify and when to end work. Proper counseling enables transitioning adults to end work, prepare for the waiting periods and make other financial preparations for life after work. Working CF adults often presume that ending work will result in decreased income with no substantial change in their health status. This study examines whether health outcomes improve when a CF adult transitions from working to receiving Social Security disability benefits. Method: The study surveyed CF adults participating in the CF Insurance Access Program (CFIAP). The CFIAP is a project of the CFF Patient Assistance Foundation. The CFIAP helps CF adults obtain Social Security benefits. The CFIAP had 196 participants at the time of the survey. Of those, 107 had received a favorable determination by the Social Security administration, with 89 applications still pending. Twenty-six CFIAP participants responded to the survey. The survey inquired about FEV1 at the time the respondent stopped work, and about FEV1 at the time of the survey, which was least six months after the respondent stopped work. Results: The survey showed that 17 respondents reported their FEV1 both at the time they stopped work and at least six months after they stopped working. It showed that 59% (10 of 17) experienced higher FEV1 after they stopped working; 18% had a lower FEV1; 23% maintained a stable FEV1. If one regards both improved and stabilized FEV1 as positive health outcomes, then 82% (14 of 17) experienced a positive health outcomes after they stopped work. Among those who experienced an increase in FEV1, their average FEV1 when they stopped work was 42.6%. The average FEV1 at least six months later was 50.6%. The average increase in FEV1 was 8.4 percentage points. The average increase in FEV1 was 18.9%. The highest increase was a 73% increase from 40% to 69% FEV1. The lowest increase was a 6% increase from 46% FEV1 to 52% FEV1. The three whose FEV1 decreased had an average FEV1 of 41% when they stopped work. Their average FEV1 at least six months later was 37.3%. The average decrease in FEV1 was 3.7 percentage points. The average decrease in FEV1 was 8%. Discussion: The demands of employment may have adverse affects on maintaining a CF adult's health, especially when the worker with CF has a FEV1% below 50% and when there is steady progression in the severity of symptoms. Working hours, preparing for the workday and commuting time may all interfere with the prescribed treatment regimen. Work also imposes varying degrees of work related stress. Also, work may increase fatigue and reduce time for rest and recovery. The demands of work may also adversely affect proper nutrition. Stopping work and receiving Social Security disability benefits (which includes an income benefit and health benefit coverage) has several anticipated beneficial effects on health. The CF adult has adequate time to fully adhere to their treatment regimen, including maintaining proper nutrition. The patient has reduced stress and fatigue and has increased time for rest and recovery. Conclusion: Stopping work and receiving Social Security disability benefits results in substantial measurable improvement in health outcomes measured by FEV1. Consequently, CF Care Centers should regularly counsel patients on the availability of SSA benefits, SSA eligibility standards and how the CFIAP can help them obtain benefits. cantly higher scores in 2010 compared to 2006 (though still in the 'normal' range), whilst the 'elevated anxiety' group remained relatively stable. A parallel result was found for patients with either 'normal' or 'elevated' symptoms of depression. Conclusion: The percentage of patients who reported elevated anxiety and depression scores was in line with previous reports on anxiety and depression in CF populations, and slightly higher compared to those of healthy populations. As expected, lung function significantly decreased over the four year period. Changes in lung function were not related to changes in symptoms of anxiety or depression. For patients with 'normal anxiety' or 'normal depression' in 2006 an increase in symptoms of anxiety and depression was observed in 2010. In contrast, patients with 'elevated anxiety or depression' in 2006 did not report significantly more symptoms after four years. Chronic illness is often related to higher incidence of symptoms of anxiety and depression. The present results show that changes in disease severity (lung function) are not necessarily associated with an increase in these symptoms. It is important to identify factors that are related to the increase (or decrease) of symptoms of anxiety and depression in patients with CF, eg. personality characteristics, social support or SES. A better understanding of changes in psychological well-being over time will help CF teams to provide support and counseling. Socioeconomic factors (SEF) are important in outcomes of various diseases. Evidence shows decreased survival for pediatric CF patients of low socioecomonic status. Pediatric patients with Medicaid have lower FEV1 and 3.7X higher risk of mortality. Lower household income also increases their incidence of death. Little is known about SEF affecting outcomes in adult CF patients. Our aim was to determine rate of decline in lung function and number of exacerbations based on SEF. Methods: Patients over 18 years at USC adult CF center during 1/2005-12/2010 had their medical records retrospectively reviewed. IRB approval was obtained. SEF evaluated included age, gender, ethnicity, type of insurance, education, income. Statistical Analysis: Outcome variable, FEV1, was recorded for each patient at the initial clinic visit,1 and 2 year intervals. We tested fixed and random effects using repeated measure analysis of co-variance (ANCOVA). For continuous independent variables, we performed multivariate linear regression of FEV1. Results: In the study, 220 patients (110 men, 110 women) with mean age 30 yrs and BMI 21.9 kg/m 2 were Caucasian (81%) and Hispanic (16%). Education levels included some high school (1.4%), high school graduate (22.7%), some college (41.4%), college graduate (29.6%), or postgraduate (5.0%). More than 50% declined to state their household income. Insurance status comprised: PPO (45%), Medi-Cal (32%), Medicare (17%) and HMO (5.4%). Initial visit FEV1 was significantly associated with age, BMI and education level. FEV1 increased by 2.4% (95% CI 1.7% -3.2%) for every 1-point increase in BMI (p<0.01), but decreased by 4.1% (95% CI 3.3% -5.0%) for every 5-year increase in age (p<0.01). Although male and female patients did not differ significantly in FEV1 at any single time point, the rate of FEV1 decline was significantly different over a 2-year follow-up period. FEV1 tended to remain stable in male patients while it declined in female patients (mean diff 1.2% in males vs. -4.1% in female; p<0.01). FEV1 increased for postgraduate women, but decreased in women with lesser degrees (mean diff 6.6% vs. -6.0%; p<0.01). Ethnicity and insurance status did not impact FEV1 trends. Number of exacerbations during the first year was significantly associated with FEV1 and gender (higher FEV1 and male gender had fewer exacerbations). Education had no direct effect on number of exacerbations. Discussion: In our analysis, we have found that female gender and their education level have a dramatic positive effect on their FEV1 and rate of decline. Ethnicity or insurance status did not statistically impact FEV1 percentage trends. Although improvements in BMI showed an improved FEV1, an incremental increase of 5 years in age may offset this benefit. We were not able to assess the impact of income on the effects of FEV1. Number of exacerbations were related to FEV1 and male gender. Fukushima, L. 2 ; Evangelista, L.G. 1 ; Rao, A.P. 2 ; Afshar, K. 2 1. CF, USC, LA, CA, USA; 2. Div Pulmonary/Critical Care, USC, LA, CA, USA Background: Almost 45 percent of the CF population in the United States now survives to adulthood. Adult CF patients may be at increased risk for cognitive impairment due to increased incidence of hypoxemia and hypercapnia. In addition, the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene has also been reported to be a neurotransmitter expressed in the hypothalamic region, which could also negatively impact neurocognitive function. The aim of this study was to assess cognitive function in adult CF patients. Methods: Subjects were recruited at a routine scheduled out-patient CF clinic visit. Data collected included demographics (age, gender, race), medications used, height, weight, BMI, pulmonary function tests, oxygen saturation, and serum vitamin levels. Subjects completed the Beck depression inventory (BDI) and mini mental status examination (MMSE). The BDI is a well used self reported screening tool for depression. The MMSE is a widely validated screening tool for cognitive impairment. Other factors that may influence the cognitive functioning of adult CF patients include overall nutritional status (BMI), deficiencies in vitamins A and E, presence of hypoxemia and severity of lung function, and presence of depression. This is a descriptive study. In comparing the male vs. female subjects, we used paired student t-test and Fisher's exact test, and 2X3 contingency tables. Results: A total of 18 subjects were recruited; 9 males and 9 females; 13 Caucasians: 5 Hispanics. The average age was 28.6 years + 6.7 years, age range (22-47), median age 26.3 years. The average height (cm) was 164.9 + 5.7, weight (kg) was 60.4 + 18.9, BMI score 44% (8 subject) with normal score, 33% (6 subjects) noted a mild mood disturbance, 11% (2 subjects) were scored as mild clinical depression, and 11 % (2 subjects) with moderate depression. In comparing the male vs. female subjects, average age in males was 27.7 + 8.2, females 29.49 + 4.9, male weight (cm) 61.5 + 25.3 vs. female 59.2 + 10.9. Males were significantly taller than female subjects 167.8 cm vs. 162.1 cm, p=0.04. There was no significant difference between males and females in age (p=0.64), weight (p=0.73), BMI (p=0.20) FVC % predicted (p=0.99) FEV1 % predicted (p=0.87), FEF 25-75 % predicted (p=0.58), oxygen saturation on room air (p=0.74), BDI (p=0.10), distribution of ethnicity (p=0.44), or in MMSE scores (p=0.5). Impression: In this study of mild normoxic adult CF patients, we did not find gross evidence of neurocognitive dysfunction on the MMSE. There was evidence of mild depression in this population using the BDI. These findings suggest that the CFTR gene does not play a significant role in increasing the risk of neurocognitive impairment. Further study is needed to determine the risk factors of neurocognitive impairment in the adult CF population, particular in those patients who have hypoxemia and malnutrition. Alpern, A.N.; McLean, K.A.; Quittner, A.L. Department of Psychology, Univ Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA Background: Adolescents with CF face unique stressors that require effective coping strategies. The efficacy with which adolescents cope is likely to affect important psychological and health outcomes, such as healthrelated quality of life (HRQOL). Although coping may be an important moderator of adjustment, previous studies have utilized generic coping measures that are not specific to the disease or context. Using the Role-Play Inventory of Situations and Coping Strategies (RISCS; DiGirolamo et al., 1997), a context-specific coping measure for adolescents with CF, the current study examined whether coping efficacy moderates the relationship between disease severity and HRQOL across several domains of functioning. Methods: In the context of a multicenter, randomized controlled trial, 91 adolescents 10 to 17 years completed the RISCS to assess coping efficacy in the areas of Treatment Adherence, Future Issues, Medical Procedures/Symptoms, and Friends/School Issues. The RISCS consists of 25 vignettes that describe frequent, problematic situations reported by adolescents with CF. For each situation, adolescents specified the frequency and perceived difficulty of the problem, and then generated a coping response, which was rated for efficacy using empirically-derived criteria. Adolescents completed the CFQ (Quittner et al., 2000) , a disease-specific measure that assesses HRQOL in several domains, including Physical Functioning, Respiratory Symptoms, Eating Problems, Digestive, and Social Functioning. Demographic and medical information was collected by chart review. Results: Preliminary analyses of a subset of participants (N = 40) revealed that effective coping in the Treatment Adherence domain was correlated with better CFQ Respiratory Symptoms, controlling for FEV 1 (r = 0.75, p < .05). Controlling for BMI %, effective coping in the Medical Procedures/Symptoms domain was associated with fewer CFQ Eating Problems (r = .93, p < .01). Following a median split, disease severity was associated with decreased Social Functioning for those with poor coping skills (FEV 1 : r = -.57, p < .05; BMI percentile: r = -.77, p < .01), but not for those who demonstrated effective coping. FEV 1 was correlated with better CFQ Respiratory Symptoms for adolescents with effective coping skills (r = .56, p < .01), but not for poor copers. Similarly, higher BMI % was associated with better CFQ Eating and Digestive Symptoms for those with effective coping skills (Eating: r = .54, p < .01; Digestion: r = .46, p < .05), but not for those with poor coping. Conclusions: These results suggested that coping skills moderate the relationship between disease severity and HRQOL, and partially account for differences in HRQOL across individuals with comparable disease severity. Specifically, effective coping buffered against the negative effects of disease severity. These findings highlighted the importance of identifying those with poor coping skills and creating targeted interventions. Future analyses will use structural equation modeling in a larger sample to examine the moderating role of coping efficacy on illness-related stress and HRQOL. Funding was provided by NIH (HL #47064). Despite the promising advances in medications and treatments, cystic fibrosis (CF) continues to be a life-limiting and life-shortening disease. Advance care planning provides patients and their families the opportunity to have some control over their health-related quality of life, especially during end-of-life stages. The CF care team can provide this opportunity to patients and families by implementing a standardized approach to addressing health-care related quality of life with all patients at some point during the progression of their disease. Our goal for this protocol is to ensure the CF care team addresses health-related quality of life by discussing relevant topics such as the patient's values and wishes, health concerns, and the ben-efits and burdens of current and future treatment options when the patient is not in crisis. A literature review of current advance care planning best practices for CF Centers and chronic care in general was conducted. It was found that there were not currently any identified best practices for advance care planning for CF Centers, so a brainstorming session was held with the CF care team (including an adult patient that serves on the quality improvement team) to prioritize what should be included in advance care planning for people with CF. Four major topics were identified: 1) Quality of Life, 2) Lung Transplant, 3) Advance Directives and Life-Sustaining Treatments, and 4) Referral to Palliative Care and/or Chaplain Services. It was decided that the topics will be discussed with patients and families during outpatient clinic visits over a course of time. It was decided that the initiation of the Advance Care Planning protocol could be triggered in two ways: a) patienttriggered when a patient started asking questions about advance care planning or b) health status-triggered when a patient's baseline lung function dropped below 50%. The team social worker will be the primary point person on the delivery and coordination of the protocol. Finally, a standardized Advance Care Planning protocol was developed reflecting all of this information. Implementation of the Advance Care Planning protocol is scheduled for September 2011. A list of patients with baseline lung function below 50% will be compiled, and the team social worker will initiate the protocol with these patients per the health status-triggered route. Moving forward, patients with newly presenting baseline lung function below 50% will be identified in bi-monthly, pre-clinic meetings. The protocol will be implemented via the patient-triggered route as patients initiate conversations with the CF care team. A subcommittee of CF care team members will meet with the Pediatric and Adult Palliative Care teams within the hospital network to determine the role these providers will play in advance care planning. A satisfaction survey looking at patients' feelings about health-care related quality of life will be given to patients identified in the health-status triggered route prior to the initiation of the protocol. A post-survey will be administered one year after initiation of the Advance Care Planning protocol to determine if patients feel their quality of life has been affected by the implementation of this protocol. We sought to measure medication adherence to common cystic fibrosis (CF) medications in the Kaiser Permanente Southern California region using the fully integrated pharmacy and electronic health record by calculating the modified medication possession ratio (MPRm) and to determine if associations existed between medication adherence and several variables hypothesized to impact adherence. Methods: With ready access to pharmacy data, including the medication pick-up and refill dates, the modified MPRm ratios were measured for pancreatic enzymes, tobramycin inhaled solution (TOBI), dornase alfa (Pulmozyme), and azithromycin (Zithromax). Patients were screened with a telephone questionnaire for depression and anxiety using the Hospital and Anxiety Depression Scale. Correlations between medication adherence and the following variables were calculated: education, age, gender, number of visits to the pulmonologist, the distance to the pulmonologist, body mass index (BMI), the FEV1, co-morbid diagnosis of diabetes and symptoms of depression and anxiety. Results: Non-adherence was defined as an MPRm <80%. Non-adherence was identified in 37% of patients taking Zithromax (N=49), 69% of those on pancreatic enzymes (N=87), 52% of those on Pulmozyme (N=67), and 86% of those taking TOBI (N=35). Compared to children, older patients were less adherent to TOBI (p=0.02), Pulmozyme (p=0.02), and pancreatic enzymes (p=0.001). Patients who were seen more often by their pulmonologist were more adherent to Zithromax (p=0.05, N=48). Children of anxious caregivers were less adherent to Pulmozyme (p=0.02, N=12). Conclusion: Considerable variability was found in adherence to CF medications, with a significant proportion of patients evidencing MPRm We can assume that being the mother of a single ill child carries an emotional burden that increases anxiety, since it raises the needs of practical responses during everyday life. The contemporary presence of one or more healthy children instead, is linked to a higher depression level, since it increases mothers' doubts about their capacity of being a resource to fulfill the needs of their children. The final results of our study are preliminary ones, since they are related only to the CF Centre of Florence. They have to be spread and integrated with the data from other CF Italian Centers, which have already taken part in TIDES. We think it could be interesting to add the variable about the presence of two ill children in the family. Background: Numerous studies have demonstrated that in patients with chronic disease markers of disease severity are only modestly associated with quality of life (QoL), whereas depression, anxiety and self-esteem are important correlates. Few studies of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) have looked at the associations between these variables. The aim of this study was to examine whether CF patients with symptoms of depression and anxiety and lower self-esteem report diminished QoL. Methods: The sample consisted of 47 adolescents and adults (≥14 years) with CF from 4 CF Centres in Slovakia (24 males -51%, mean age 23.9±10.0 years). Patients completed the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire (CFQ-R), Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) and Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (RSE). Multiple linear regression analysis was used to explore the data. Results: After controlling for relevant sociodemographic (age, gender) and clinical variables (FEV1, BMI) symptoms of depression and anxiety were significantly associated with lowered QoL in 3 out of 12 CFQ-R domains: Emotional Functioning, Eating Disturbances and Weight. Selfesteem was found to be significantly associated with 5 CFQ-R domains: Physical Functioning, Vitality, Emotional Functioning, Social Functioning, and Health Perception; even when controlling additionally for symptoms of depression and anxiety. After entering all variables into the equation the total explained variance for CFQ-R domains varied between 9-41%. Conclusions: QoL is an important clinical outcome measure in CF. Clinicians need to be sensitive to symptoms of depression and anxiety as well as levels of self-esteem in patients with CF, because they seem to be important determinants of QoL. Psychological interventions aimed on increasing the self-esteem may potentially improve QoL among patients with CF. Displayed values are betas. * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001 Methods: Participants include N=30 adults living with CF who are treated at a multi-disciplinary CF hospital based clinic in a medium size Canadian city. Study participants are recruited during their regular CF clinic and asked to complete a psychological questionnaire package which includes measures on CF treatment regimen expectations and treatment adherence. CF patients also provide information regarding their CF symptoms, quality of life, and provide consent for their medical chart to be reviewed to obtain information on their pulmonary function test, hospitalization and acute exacerbations. Members of the CF health care provider team are also asked to complete a treatment regimen form corresponding to each CF patient. Data collection is currently ongoing. Results: Data will be analyzed using quantitative analysis. Correlations in treatment expectations between CF patients and their health care providers will be performed to examine concordance rates. As well, these concordance rates will also be correlated with CF patients' adherence rates, CF symptom reports, quality of life, and pulmonary function tests. Conclusion: The clinical and educational implications of these findings for developing clinical tools to enhance CF quality of life and help adults living with CF optimize their treatment adherence through the use of comprehensive interventions that can be tailored to the unique treatment regimen needs of individual CF patients will be discussed. Thomas-Diceman, A. 1 ; Tullis, E. 1,2 ; Stephenson, A. 1 1. Adult Cystic Fibrosis Program, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2. University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Background: The median age at death in Canada for individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF) is 30 years. Dealing with end of life issues is challenging for both the dying individual and their family. As health care providers, we need to better understand the circumstances around death to ensure that we are meeting the needs of our patients and families at this difficult time. Purpose: 1) To understand the circumstances around death and end of life processes in our adult CF population; 2) To describe and evaluate the impact of our program's after-death bereavement program on the CF team and families. Methods: This is a retrospective cohort study of all CF patients aged ≥ 18 y of age followed at the St. Michael's Hospital Adult CF Program who died between 2007 and 2010. Data about the care provided at the end of life were collected. Specifically, age at death, sex, location of death, transplant status at the time of death, if advance directives were documented and involvement of palliative care were recorded. The bereavement care offered by our program was reviewed. After a death, all members of the CF team sign a sympathy card which is sent to each family and once per year, a memorial service is held at the hospital to remember those that have died in the prior year. Team members provide input on, attend and take part in the service. Families are invited. The CF clinic director offers personal anecdotes and stories about the person who has died and each family is given a rose and invited to light a candle in honour of their loved one. Refreshments are available and the CF team and families share their stories. A questionnaire developed to evaluate the impact of our bereavement care was mailed to family members who had participated in prior years. Results: A total of 50 individuals died between 2007 and 2010. Data collection and analysis is ongoing however preliminary data (n = 32 deaths) for years 2009-2010 is summarized here. The mean age at death was 33.8 years (range 21-59 years). Two individuals died out of hospital. The remaining individuals were hospitalized at the time of death. A total of 26/32 (81%) individuals had been listed for transplant: 23 people for bilateral lung, 2 for liver and 1 for lung-liver. Of those individuals listed for transplantation, 21/26 (81%) had received a transplant prior to death. The location of death within the hospital was available on 18/30 subjects (data collection is ongoing). Fourteen subjects were intubated on a ventilator and died in the intensive care unit. Eleven of the 14 subjects were post-lung transplant. Spiritual support with chaplaincy was offered to all patients. The memorial services held in 2009 and 2010 were attended by 18 families. Feedback indicated that the service was a source of great comfort, closure and was an extremely positive experience. Analysis of questionnaire data evaluating the bereavement process is ongoing. The majority of our patients die within the hospital setting. A small percentage died prior to transplantation. Families and the multidisciplinary team found the memorial service a great source of comfort and closure following death of a patient or loved one. Life expectancy and quality of life have improved for individuals with CF over the past several decades, so that CF is no longer just a childhood disease. Most individuals with CF now enter the period of emerging adulthood with the prospect of getting a job or pursuing higher education. However, little is known about how individuals with CF make decisions about what to do after high school, and the impact of family, teachers, CF caregivers, or CF disease status on these decisions. The goal of this study was to gain a better understanding of how young adults with cystic fibrosis make decisions about whether or not to attend college, and the life experiences of young adults with CF during the post-high school period. Method: After obtaining IRB approvals, a convenience sample of young adults was recruited to participate in individual interviews. Guided by a set of standardized questions, retrospective semi-structured interviews were conducted and tape recorded. The tapes were transcribed, and analyzed with the aid of ATLAS-ti, a qualitative research software program. Results: Eight individuals (3 female, 5 male) participated in the study. Participants ranged in age from 18 -47, with an average of 28.4 and a standard deviation of 10.0, with a pronounced positive skew (6 participants were under age 31, one subject was 38, and one was 47). Seven of the eight participants completed their high school degrees on time, and one later earned a GED. Six of the participants went to college; one participant did not pursue higher education and instead worked full time, while another completed a vocational program. Most of the participants who went to college chose to attend a school in reasonable proximity to their CF center. Participants expressed a wide range of concerns about -and ability to adapt to -academic, health, social/emotional, and vocational challenges. Prior family expectations and educational experiences significantly affected post-high school plans. Some individuals made very good use of accommodation services in college while maintaining accountability for their education, while others struggled in one or both of these areas. Concerns about dating and reproductive issues were common. We observed that participants who were relatively healthy or who moderated their expectations to match their health status had better educational and vocational outcomes than those who did not do so. Conclusions: Due to improvements in CF care, many individuals with CF enter emerging adulthood with good prospects for educational and vocational opportunities. However, health related issues may create academic and vocational barriers and social/emotional concerns that should be considered in the context of comprehensive patient care. The rate of decline in pulmonary function is a significant issue for adolescents with CF. Identifying factors associated with slowing disease progression is an important step in improving health outcomes. Given the importance of religion and spirituality (hereafter, R/S) in the lives of many Americans, including adolescents, the specific aim of this study was to determine if associations exist between a pulmonary outcome measure, the rate of decline in FEV1% predicted over a 3-year period, and R/S Spear, S.L.; Brannon, E.E.; Sullivan, S.M.; Chamberlin, L.; Barnett, K.A.; Powers, S.W. Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Ctr., Cincinnati, OH, USA Background: Positive nutrition and growth outcomes present following a randomized control trial of a behavior-nutrition (BN) treatment for toddlers maintained at 2-year follow-up yet declined for several children between follow-up years 2 and 4 1 . Declines suggested that booster BN treatment would be beneficial. Aims: To identify the number of booster sessions families would use when offered. To examine the impact of booster treatment on energy intake following treatment and 6 and 12-month follow-up. Methods: Eight families in the Powers et al. trial 2 participated in one booster session and then choose the number of additional sessions needed (up to 5 total). Session content included recommendations to target challenges reported in a semi-structured interview 3 and during booster sessions. Families completed 3-day food recalls before and after booster treatment, and at 6 and 12 month follow-up. Energy intake was analyzed using NDS software. After excluding one family due to atypical intake at the pre-booster time point, 7 children were included in the final analysis. One child was lost to follow-up after the first booster session. Results: Mean age of children at the first booster session was 8.1 years (SD=0.6) with a mean body mass index percentile of 65.2 (SD=27.1). Five participants were male. Five of seven families received booster treatment beyond the initial session. Average number of total booster sessions per family was 3 (range=1-5). Average energy intake increase for the sample was 272 calories (SD=313) from pre-to post-treatment. Four of the seven children had an average increase of 514 calories (SD=115). The remaining three children's average calories were stable, respectively (M=-52, SD=10). See Table 1 for 6 and 12-month outcomes. Conclusions: Calories increased for over half of the children following treatment and maintained at 12 months for nearly all children. Notably, the children who received the maximum number of sessions experienced the least gains in energy intake at post-treatment. Achieving adequate CF nutrition is complex and is affected by a number of factors 3 . Future research examining the need for and effectiveness of booster treatment is warranted with a larger sample. Supported by: NIH grants K24 DK059973 and T32 DK063929 (PI-SWP) and UL1-RR026314-01 NCRR/NIH (REDCap database). Objective: To identify the relation between perception of cystic fibrosis disease severity, satisfaction with the health status by parents of Brazilian children and adolescents and Shwachman-Kulczyki clinical score. Methods: Cross-sectional quantitative study involving parents of Brazilian children and adolescents aged 8 to 18 years old. The data collection was conducted from January to October 2009, in outpatient reference centers in four Brazilian states. To evaluate the perception of cystic fibrosis disease severity, parents answered two questions: the first, to rate from 0 to 10 the current health status of their child; and second, to relate it to their satisfaction (very satisfied, neither satisfied nor dissatisfied, dissatisfied). Shwachman-Kulczyki clinical score was verified by patient's pneumologist. To analyze the statistical significance between proxy perception of severity median scores and the Shwachman-Kulczyki clinical score in different categories, Kruskal-Wallis test was used. Chi-square was used to evaluate the association between satisfaction and the clinical score. Finally, the relation between proxy perception of severity median score and proxy satisfaction was verified using Mann-Whitney test. All tests used an α value equal to 0.05. Results: Forty-two parents participated in this study. The mean age of children and adolescents was 11.8 years. Severity categories according to Shwachman-Kulczyki clinical score were: excellent (n=14); good (n=13); and average (n=15). Almost 63% of parents gave a score of 8 to the health status of their child, therefore in this study the perception of severity median score is not discriminated by proxy according to categories of Shwachman-Kulczyki clinical score (p = 0.363). There was no association between proxy satisfaction and clinical score because 77% of parents indicated that they were dissatisfied with the health status of their children (χ2 = 3.067; p = 0.215). Surprisingly, the relationship between proxy perception of severity and proxy satisfaction was inverse (p = 0.009), meaning that parents who answered that they were dissatisfied gave higher scores to the health status of their children. Conclusions: No relationship was found between perception of cystic fibrosis disease severity, satisfaction with the health status by parents, and Shwachman-Kulczyki clinical score. This could be, first of all, because the clinical score focuses on pulmonary disease while parents' evaluation considers their child as a whole. Secondly, studies have shown that parents' views tend to be different than their child's, and the child's evaluation of health status may be closer to the clinical score. Regarding the inverse relationship between proxy perception of severity and proxy satisfaction, our hypothesis is that parents are dissatisfied with the fact that their child has cystic fibrosis, but the current health status may be better than it was at an earlier time. Al-Jaghbeer, M.; Shah, A.R.; Griffith, R.; Lomas, P.; Cohen-Engel, E.; Cahill, C.; Bustami, R.; Ward, T. Internal Medicine, Morristown Medical Center, Morristown, NJ, USA Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common life-shortening disease affecting Caucasians. Many individuals with CF report disturbed sleep (frequent awakenings, insomnia, hypersomnia), although limited data have been reported. The causes of the sleep disturbances are multi-factorial. Many individuals with CF also use over-the-counter and prescription sleep aids. However, their use, side effects, and effectiveness have not been documented. Many sleep aids (alcohol, antihistamines) also have detrimental effects on sleep. This study attempts to assess the prevalence of sleep lighted the critical mental health needs of patients with CF and to my knowledge there has not been a study published on the mental health providers and care provided in the CF Centers. Design: This study is a national survey of Cystic Fibrosis Centers in the United States. Electronic questionnaires will be emailed to each center's research coordinator to complete. Non-responders will be contacted and requested to complete the survey. Estimated time to complete the study is 4 months, of which 2 months will be used to collect data. Participants and Setting: Eligible participants will include the 110 accredited National Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Centers in the United States. Materials/Methods: An electronic questionnaire designed to assess mental health service providers and services. Areas of exploration will include: 1) Cystic Fibrosis Center characteristics; 2) hospital characteristics; 3) mental health team composition; 4) percent utilization of mental health providers; 5) mental health services provided; 6) sources of funding for mental health; 7) perceived barriers to mental health care at their center. Results: The results will be described using descriptive statistics (frequencies, means). Correlations between variables will be explored. Significance: The results of this study will be the first to describe national mental health services for patients with cystic fibrosis. This study would provide the foundation to understand the different models of collaborative mental health throughout CF Centers in the United States. In conjunction with the TIDES data, knowledge of mental health care systems would allow for the development of integrated and comprehensive preventative and interventional strategies. 574ଙ expedite transition to home to complete IV therapy, and improve patient satisfaction. Background: CF patients are often hospitalized for pulmonary exacerbations and treated with IV antibiotics for 10-21 days via a PICC. There is often a delay in patients receiving PICC placement upon admission, however leading to delayed initiation of drug treatment and lengthier hospital stays. The hospital recently opened a general procedure unit (GPU) for sedated and non-sedated procedures to assist in early PICC placement. The CF center nursing coordinator works as a liaison for the inpatient and outpatient teams to facilitate PICC placement in the GPU in a timely manner. Methods: A retrospective review of CF patients receiving PICC placements and completing IV antibiotic therapy at home from January to June, 2010 and January to present in 2011 was obtained. A care map for placement of PICCs in the GPU was developed in January 2011, which involves coordination with the inpatient and outpatient CF teams, the sedation team, the procedure room team, and the IV team. The general admission form was modified to include the option of having a PICC placed prior to admission and the use of sedation, if necessary. Prior to admission, a list of upcoming admissions and PICC procedures was sent to the multidisciplinary teams to further improve the coordination of care. Length of hospital stay and time to PICC placement data were compared before and after the development of the PICC placement care map and utilization of the GPU for this procedure. Results: There were 28 CF patients from January 2010 to June 2010 that had a PICC placed for IV antibiotic administration to treat a pulmonary exacerbation. The average time from admission to PICC placement was 16.4 hours. The average length of stay for these patients was 5.1 days. Beginning in January 2011 and through the present, coordination of early PICC placement in the GPU led to 5 patients receiving PICCs for IV antibiotic therapy. The average time to PICC placement was 1.6 hours. Length of hospital stay for these patients was 3.4 days. Patient-family satisfaction with coordination of care and early PICC placement in the GPU was high. Conclusion: PICC placement in the GPU on the day of admission has improved the quality of care provided to our CF patients, decreased length of hospital stay, expedited discharge in order to complete IV therapy at home, and met the hospital's goal for discharge within 5 days for patients pursuing home IV antibiotic therapy. Patient satisfaction with early PICC placement and coordination of care was high. Coordination of care between outpatient and inpatient CF teams from various departments has improved efficiency of care. Rakhshan, E. 2 ; Fukushima, L. 2 ; Benitez, D. 1 ; Borok, Z. 2 ; Rao, A.P. 2 ; Afshar, K. 2 1. CF, USC, LA, CA, USA; 2. Div Pulmonary/Critical Care, USC, LA, CA, USA Pulmonary exacerbations (PE) are the most common cause of hospitalization (48%) in patients (pts) with cystic fibrosis (CF). Depending on the severity of lung dysfunction and adherence to maintenance therapy, patients may have an annual PE rate ranging from 0 to 5. Management of CF patients experiencing a severe PE include aggressive airway clearance therapy, continued exercise regimen, inhalation therapies and institution of intravenous (IV) antimicrobial agents. The Adult CF Program is a large academic program with ~200 patients. The goal of this study was to compare calculated time from admission to time of initial dose of IV antibiotics and time to initiation of respiratory therapy before and after initiation of pre-printed admission order sets. Methods: Charts of all CF patients hospitalized for PE at the USC from 11/2010 to 2/2011 were retrospectively reviewed. These months were chosen because standardized pre-printed order sets became effective 1/2011. IRB approval was obtained. Data collected include: time from admission to time of initial IV antibiotics, time to first respiratory therapy (RT) session, and the unit's familiarity with CF inpatient care. Results: Seventy-four CF patients were admitted during the study period. Group 1 included 32 admissions from November to December 2010. Group 2 included 42 admissions from January to February 2011. If documentation was not available for the time of initial IV antibiotics or RT, pts were excluded. For the IV antibiotic portion of the study, we excluded 5 pts in group 1, 2 pts in group 2. For the respiratory interaction portion of the study, we excluded 14 pts from group 1 and 20 pts from group 2. Analysis was done only for patient admissions that met criteria. Average time in group 1 to receiving the first dose of iv antibiotics was 84 min, while group 2 had an average time 64 min (P=0.69). For time to first RT session, for group 1 average time was 289 min while for group 2 average time was 253 min (P=0.57). Group 1 pts were admitted to an experienced CF unit, whereas, group 2 pts were admitted to both experienced and semi-experienced units. When evaluating the average time to antibiotic administration, the unit admission did not make any difference (Group 1 (P=0.95); Group 2 (P=0.23)). Patients admitted to the experienced unit had an average time to RT of 194 min compared to an average time of 556 min for admissions to the semi-experienced unit (P=0.29). Discussion: The time to first IV antibiotics was unchanged irrespective of pre-printed order sets or admission to level of CF experienced units. There were noticeable differences in the average time to RT. Plausible explanations include a slightly higher number of admissions in group 2 (36 vs. 31) and the CF experience of the unit to which patients were admitted. Education has been provided to equalize knowledge on the two units of inpatient CF care pathways. Additional analysis with a longer time period will need to be performed in order to determine factors accounting for discrepancies between these times. The relocation of inpatient services for adults with CF allowed for multiple interventions to improve the patient experience during the hospitalization. Multidisciplinary rounds are one tool to improve care coordination. Methods: Representatives from all hospital service areas involved in the care of the CF population meet weekly with the CF nurse practitioner and physicians the morning after the CF outpatient clinic to discuss each admitted patient. The meeting occurs in a conference room on the inpatient unit. Patients are invited to meet individually with the CF team. Representatives from each department introduce themselves to the patient, explaining their roles within the CF inpatient team and asking the patient for suggestions on improving both care and service. The department representatives then work together to create a schedule for the patient that minimizes multiple, overlapping interventions (i.e., a physical therapy session set for the same time as a respiratory therapy treatment). After the CF team has finished discussing the inpatients, team members often remain at rounds for a few minutes to discuss issues related to the CF inpatient unit. Hospital administration fully supports the rounds and is available as needed to assist with more complicated hospital system concerns. Results: Informal surveys of hospitalized CF patients support continuing multidisciplinary rounds. Originally rounds were held at the patient's bedside, but space constraints and infection prevention practices made this impractical (one patient reported feeling like a "zoo animal on display"). The move to a nearby conference room was appreciated by all participants, including the patients. Patients report a sense of empowerment with their care, and appreciate meeting each care team member. Concerns that have been voiced by several patients have been taken to hospital administrators, who have facilitated further discussion across departments to improve care. We conclude by underlining how telemedicine represents a promising new tool for patients and health professionals, and that under certain conditions it can prove helpful, improving working conditions and also reducing costs. However, its usage has to be followed by precise studies about its efficacy, and also by paying particular attention to the partly new issues that derive from it. Nicholls, S.G. 1 ; Southern, K.W. 2 1. Politics, Philosophy and Religion, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom; 2. Division of Child Health, Royal Liverpool Children's NHS Trust, Liverpool, United Kingdom Background: Newborn bloodspot screening (NBS) is an international population health intervention. Despite decades of NBS there is a paucity of data relating to parental information use when making decisions to accept screening. Studies have noted a range of sources but there is little evidence as to why parents use certain types of information materials nor the relative importance placed on these. The present study addresses this deficit. Methods: An exploratory sequential mixed methods approach using semi-structured interviews and a self-completion postal questionnaire. Results: Consistent with Wilson's (1999) model of information-seeking, parents could be distinguished as active-seekers or passive-receivers of information. In the UK the main contact is the midwife and survey results indicated that the midwife was the principal information source; only half of parents used official leaflets. Barriers to use included provision post-natally and the inclusion with other, non-medical, leaflets and booklets. Multinomial logistic regression confirms the significant effect of the most important source in explaining the number of information sources used (Likelihood Ratio Chi-square = 19.322, df=6, p=0.004). Passive-receivers tended to cite their primary healthcare contact (the midwife) as the most important source and were more likely to use only that one source. Active-seekers sought out information not only from different perspectives but from more sources. Discussion: The main practitioner contact (here the midwife) is the principal source of information for parents, irrespective of information-seeking behaviour, although their perceived importance varied. This person is best placed to act as a gate-keeper for parents seeking information about NBS. Parents should be provided with information in the pre-natal period in order to maximise information uptake. This should be supported by additional written materials. These materials should be clearly referenced. We developed a decision aid to support adults with cystic fibrosis who are considering whether or not to be referred for lung transplantation. A randomized controlled trial of the decision aid found it to be an effective decision support tool. The objective of this study was to build an effective and sustainable approach for implementing the patient decision aid into clinical practice. Methods: We used the action cycle of the Knowledge to Action Process Framework to guide the implementation process. We surveyed healthcare professionals working in 23 Canadian adult CF clinics; the survey questions included statements about attitudes, knowledge and willingness to use the decision aid. The survey responses were rated by the participant from a score of one = strongly disagree, to five = strongly agree. The participants were invited to attend a presentation at NACFC that discussed shared decision making, how to recognize decisional conflict and how to administer tools to prepare patients for shared decision making. This presentation was followed up with a one day workshop which was designed to enhance their knowledge and skills in decision support and to determine interventions to facilitate implementation of the decision aid and monitoring of its use. The participants are currently participating in bi-monthly conference calls discussing any issues influencing implementation of decision support within their CF program. The implementation program will continue for one more year. Results: Thirty of 46 (65%) healthcare professionals consented and returned their survey. The participants rated the decision aid as acceptable (mean survey score = 4.2, SD 0.6); simple to use (mean survey score = 4.1, SD 0.7) and felt that it would improve patient decision making (mean survey score = 4.1, SD 0.7). They felt comfortable offering the decision aid to their patients (mean survey score = 4.7, SD 0.6). Some barriers were identified-participants felt they needed to enhance their knowledge about supporting patients making health decisions related to their CF (mean survey score= 3.3, SD 1.2) and that they needed to enhance their skills in helping patients make informed decisions (mean survey score= 3.5, SD 1.0). Finally, some participants stated that process changes would be required to use the decision aid in their current clinic setting (such as scheduling decision-support meetings with patients outside of clinic to allow more time). Currently, participants are using the knowledge and skills learned in the workshop to provide enhanced decision support. Participants are distributing and reviewing the CF decision aid with their CF patients who are considering whether or not to be referred for lung transplantation. Conclusion: An interactive knowledge translation and implementation program has the potential to increase the use of clinical research tools that have been proven to be effective in randomized controlled trials. Optimal learning styles vary from person to person, and most often people learn best through a combination of visual, verbal, and written information. Targeting multiple learning styles is particularly important when teaching children, low literacy populations, and persons who are receiving a lot of information at one time, such as with a new diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (CF). When a cohort of patients at our CF center were surveyed on which learning style fits their education needs best, 30% of the patients chose the response "demonstration/hands-on learning." A review of the educational materials available on CF nutrition and pancreatic insufficiency revealed that no resource utilizing a visual or demonstration method is currently available. Considering the patient survey results and the lack of a readily available tool to meet those needs, the development of a magnetic board including pictures of parts of the body and gastrointestinal tract involved, foods for demonstration, and enzymes of all brands and dosages was developed and named "The CF Dietitian's Sidekick." The 3 primary goals of the CF Dietitian's Sidekick include the explanation of pancreatic insufficiency, how enzymes work in the body, and the ideal way to take enzymes for optimal growth and nutrition status. Education and demonstration was performed with three pediatric patients and their parent(s) and six families of newly diagnosed patients to pilot the resource and gather feedback. Education with the magnetic board included the following: a) digestion and absorption in a person without CF, b) explanation of mucus blocking enzyme release from the pancreas, c) digestion and absorption in a person with CF with and without enzymes, d) patient recognition of the enzyme they take, e) the importance of timing when taking enzymes, f) the need for additional calorie, fat, protein, and vitamin intake, and g) growth outcomes when enzymes are taken properly versus when they are not. Pilot patients and families educated with The CF Dietitian's Sidekick returned demonstration and offered positive feedback on its effectiveness. 
