23bb9b0b98e899ade15597429cc6dac5e2d92b19
Abstracts Scientific Papers Honorary Lectures Categorical Courses Refresher Courses Workshops State-of-the-Art Symposia



From the middle 1980s to the middle 1990s, thin section CT has been shown to provide improved c1arity of parenchymal abnormalities, thus enabling a better and more confident characterization of disease processes even in severely involved areas. This progressive improvement in CT assessment of diffuse infiltrative lung disease has been possible by means of pathologic-CT correlations which have led the radiologists to understand the pathologie substratum of CT abnormalities. Among the various CT signs evaluated by pathologic-CT correlations, ground glass opacity has raised particular attention as it was expected to reflect an active inflammatory process. Whereas this assumption was validated, it has been shown that this CT feature could also correspond to mild forms of lung fibrosis. Several micronodular patterns have been progressively described: (a) well-defined micronodules, suggestive of inflammatory lesions located within the interstitium; (b) ill-defined micronodules, related to bronchiolar changes of various origins. The clinical significance of subpleural micronodules, mainly observed in sarcoidosis, silicosis and Iymphangitic carcinomatosis, was established by means of lung biopsies or correlative studies using surgical specimens, scanned immediately after surgery. The purpose of this lecture is to help the radiologist memorize the significance of the most frequently encountered CT features by means of descriptions of their corresponding pathological substratum. The range of lung diseases in which there is a significant component of small airways involvement at a pathologie level is wide and includes conditions usually regarded as interstitial in location, as weil as those centred on the airways. Clear definition of the terminology is desirable but there remains considerable confusion in the c1inical and pathological literature. The apparently simple term "small airways disease" is defined differently by pathologists, physiologists and physicians. Diseases affecting the small airways are difficult to detect by conventional radiographie and physiologie tests. Widespread involvement occurs before symptoms and abnormalities on lung func!ion testing become apparent. Obstruction of the bronchioles may be detected indirectly on CT because regional under-ventilation results in reduced perfusion which in turn is shown as areas of decreased attenuation of the lung parenchyma, the so-calied mosaic pattern typicaily seen in constrictive obiiterative bronchiolitis. When there is considerable inflammation of the bronchioles with concomitant exudate the airways may become visible on CT, for example in cases of diffuse panbronchiolitis. An understanding of the distribution of disease in relation to the airways at a pathologie level allows some prediction of the likely CT appearances in this wide spectrum of conditions, and thus helps to refine the differential diagnosis. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP): quantitative and qualitative comparison between free breathing sequences (3D turbo spin echo and inversion recovery turbo spin echo) and respiratory triggered 3D turbo spin echo sequence N. Papanikolaou, A.H. Karantanas, A. Ghiatas, N. Gourtsoyiannis; Athens/GR Purpose: To assess respiratory triggering technique in improving the image quality of turbo spin echo (3d TSE) sequences for visualisation of pancreatobiliary tree. Methods and Materials: Twenty-five patients were examined with nontriggered (noRT) 3d TSE, 3d IR-TSE and respiratory triggered (RT) 3d TSE sequences. All images were reviewed independently while qualitative comparison was made by grading relative conspicuity of pancreatobiliary tree and evaluating the respiratory degradation of the images. Quantitative comparison was made by calculating signal to noise ratio (SNR) of common bile duct (CBD), main pancreatic duc! (MPD) and gallbladder (GB). Contrast to noise ratio (CNR) between CBD and liver and GB and liver were additionally calculated. Results: Respiratory triggering improved the conspicuity of all pancreatobiliary segments (p < 0.05) except CBD where non-RT and RT techniques proved statistically equivalent (p > 0.05). All three sequences provided statistically equivalent SNR of CBD, GB and MPD. In addition equivalent CNR was provided between CBD, GB and Iiver by all three sequences. Conclusion: 3D TSE sequences may offer better conspicuity of the pancreatobiliary tree due to efficient reduction of motion artifacts. Steady patient respiratory cycle is mandatory prerequisite in achieving optimal image quality. Purpose: To evaluate, whether application of negative oral contrast agent improves the diagnostic reliability of magnetic resonance cholangiopancreaticography (MRCP). Methods and Materials: We examined 50 patients with lesions (tumors, stones, inflammation, stenoses) of the hepatobiliary and pancreatic system as weil as patients after choledochojejunostomy. All examinations were performed on a 1.5 T system (Philips ACS NT). MRCP was performed as a single slice (100 mm) RARE slab in breathhold technique. The MRCP examination was acquired before and after oral application of negative oral contrast agent (Lumirem, Laboratoire Guerbet, Aulnay sous Bois, France). The images were evaluated by two readers (E.F., F.F.) in consensus. Results: Diagnoslic reliability of MRCP was significantly improved by the effect of the negative oral contrast agent. In plain images the region of interest was overlayed by high-intensity fluid in the stomach and the duodenum, as weil as as other small bowel structures. By application of Lumirem the visualization of hepatobiliary and pancreatic ducts was facilitated due the lack of overlaying intestinal fluid. Especially the region of the papilla Vateri could be judged more reliably. 108 patients, who have undergone eholeeystectomy, 83 with suspected panereatobiliary disease and 25 patients without symptoms referrable to the biliary tract or panereatie duct. MRCP findings correlated with those at Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), cross-sectional imaging and elinical follow-up. Results: MRCP was successful in all patients. 48 patients had normal MRI findings and required no further intervention. In 60 patients ductal dilatation was shown. Choledocholithiasis was depicted in 21 of them. Other findings were benign strictures of the bile ducts and the papilla (16), cholangiocareinoma (7), pancreatic carcinoma (4), chronic pancreatitis (6), cystie malformation of the bile ducts (6). The overall aecuraey of the method was 98%. False positive results were due to pneumobilia and multiple strietures. MRCP delineated the pancreatobilliary tract, so that ERCP was obviated at first by excluding choledocholithiasis and helped determine therapeutic options. Conelusion: MRCP offers a non-invasive, accurate evaluation of the pancreatic and biliary tracts in the care of post-cholecystectomy patients. Purpose: To eompare magnetic resonance cholangiography (MRC) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC) in the diagnosis of hilar cholangiocarcinomas (Klatskin's tumors) and to evaluate the use of complementary MR imaging of the Iiver. Methods and Materials: MRC and ERC studies were performed in 21 patients with proven Klatskin's tumors within a 2 weeks period. ERC was performed in standard technique by an experienced endoscopist. MR studies were performed in breathold technique on a 1.5 T imager. For MRC heavily T2-weighted thick-section RARE and thin-section HASTE sequenees were performed. Complementary Iiver imaging included T2weighted HASTE and T1-weighted FLASH sequences pre and post gadolinium. Blinded reading of MRC, ERC and MR imaging was performed. Results: MRC detected 21/21 Klatskin's tumors, whereas ERC detected only 19/21 tumors (90%). In 2 patients with preexisting primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) and hilar cholangiocarcinoma , ERC findings were false negatively interpreted as related to PSC only. On complementary MR imaging, tumor in the hepatic hilum was depicted in all 21 cases, and in 6 cases satellite tumors or hepatic metastases could be demonstrated. Conelusion: Our preliminary data suggest that MRC performes at least as good as ERC in the diagnosis of Klatskin's tumors. Additional MR imaging of the Iiver is a helpful adjunct for staging these tumors. Common pitfalls in the evaluation of choledoeholithiasis at MR cholangiography Methods and Materials: 20 consecutive patients c1inically diagnosed to have schistosoma mansoni and confirmed by liver biopsy and or ultrasonographie periportal fibrosis were included in this study. They were given 600 ce of water to drink at the end of a routine upper abdominal scan. No paralytic agents were used. Patients were scanned using a 5 MHz or a 7 MHz ultrasound probes. Results: Gastric walilayers were clearly demonstrated in all 20 (100%) of patients namely mucosa, submucosa, musculosa and serosa. Diffuse gastric wall thickening is considered (type I). This was seen in 16 (80%) of the 20 patients. Their wall thickness varied from 6-10 mms. Focal polypoid wall thickening (type 11) was noted in 2 (10%). The polypoid mucosa was characterised by distortion of the gastric wall layers. This excluded normal rugae. Presence of circumferentially polypoid mucosa (type 111) "shark mouth appearance" was seen in 2 (10%) of the 20 patients. If no varices were visable the subgroup should be 1a, Ila, or lila respectively. Associated gastric varices were seen in the four (20%) of the 20 patients with either focal polypoid mucosa IIb (one patient) or circumferentially polypoid mucosa IIlb (three patients). Conelusion: WETCUS is a non-invasive screening technique for BCG that can replace endoscopic ultrasound in portal hypertensive patients. We suggest a simple classification for BCG. 20 Volume-rendered spiral-CT virtual gastroseopy: initial elinieal experienee V. Panebianco, A. Laghi, P. Pavone, C. Catalano, R. Giura, R. Passariello; Rome/I Purpose: to evaluate the technical feasibility and the diagnostic accuracy of volume-rendered virtual gastroscopy. Methods and Materials: Five volunteers and thirteen patients with known gastric disease underwent virtual gastroscopy. Non-contrast spiral CT (Somatom Plus 4, Siemens, G) examination of the upper abdomen was performed. The stomach was distended with air and glucagon was administered in order to reduce persistaltic movements. Images were obtained with 5 mm collimation, pitch 1-1.6,3 mm reconstruction. Reconstructions were performed on a 02 workstation (Silicon Graphichs, Mountain View, CA, USA) using Vitrea 1.0 software (Vital Images, Fairfield, lowa). Results of virtual gastroscopy were correlated with conventional gastroscopy in all the patients. Results: Image quality was graded as optimal in 17 cases. In one case, the stomach was not distended and images were not diagnostic, due to uncooperative patient. Virtual endoscopy images correclly depicted gastric tumors in all the cases; in atrophie gastritis the loss of mucosal plicae was evaluated; mild alterations of the mucosal surface as weil as one case of early gastric cancer were missed. Conelusion: virtual gastroscopy is a noninvasive imaging modality for the evaluation of gastric lumen. Preliminary results are promising, although further technical improvements are necessary for evaluating gastric mucosa. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to correlate gastric wall layers visible at MRI to the anatomical structure of the gastric wall. Methods and Materials: Postmortem specimens of the prepyloric antrum of 5 human stomaehs were imaged by an experimental 2.4 T MR-unit (Bruker). T2-weighted multi spin-echo imaging (TRITE 2000/80 ms) of the gastric specimens was performed. After MR-imaging had been completed the specimens were embedded in paraffin, cut into slices of 6 nm and stained with HE. The anatomical layers of the gastric wall visible on microscopic evaluation were compared with those revealed by MRI. Results: At MRI four layers of the gastric wall were visible. There was a typical signal intensity (SI) pattern of the gastric wall that corresponded to its anatomical layers as folIows: most inner layer -intermediate SI =mucosa. second layer -hypointense SI = muscularis mucosae. third layer -hyperintense SI =submucosa. Conelusion: In-vitro MRI enabled differentiation of four layers of the gastric wall with a typical signal intensity pattern which exactly corresponded to the anatomical layers of the gastric wall. Thus MRI may have potential for the local staging of gastric cancer. Purpose: In an experimental setting MRI was performed to evaluate the MR-morphology of early gastric cancer. Methods and Materials: 65 stomaehs resected for gastric carcinoma were imaged by a 1 T MR-unit (Siemens Magnetom Expert) with the following sequences: T1-SE (TRITE 450/15 ms), a T2-TSE (3500/85 ms) and an opposed phase sequence (500/10/75°) with a FoV of 12-20 cm, 3-4 mm slices and a matrix size of 256 x 256. Histology revealed 12 specimens with early gastric carcinoma (T1-carcinoma). The MRstudies of these specimens were retrospectively evaluated for the site, signal intensity, morphology and infiltration depth of the tumors. Results: 10 of 12 (83%) T1-carcinomas were diagnosed on MRimages. 2 early gastric cancers at the bottom of an ulcer were not visible. The T2-weighted sequences were best suited for tumor diagnosis. The carcinomas (size 1-7 cm) showed homogeneous hypointense signal intensity on T2-weighted images, thickening of the gastric wall and destruction of its layered pattern. In 8 of 10 carcinomas not more than the first and second inner layer of the gastric wall was invaded. Conelusion: Experimental MRI does not only allow accurate diagnosis of early gastric cancer but also accurate T-staging in the majority of T1-carcinomas of the stomach that are visible on MR-images. 11:50 23 Differential patterns of gastrie wall in spiral-CT study E. Biscaldi, E. Bovero, J.L. Ravetli, GA Rollandi; Genoa/I Purpose: To describe the Spiral-CT appearance of gastric wall in patients with neoplastic and inflammatory diseases. Methods and Materials: We examined 48 patients (22 m, 26 f; 3 gastric MALT, 4 gastric Crohn, 1 Menetrier, 5 gastric ulcers, 6 gastric carcinomas), after gastric distension by 1000-2000 ce of tap water and by ipotonisation, by Spiral-CT (GE High Speed), during a bolus of iodinated contrast medium (Iopamiro 300 mgl/100 ml, 4 ml/s). We used two volumetrie acquisitions: during arterial phase (delay time 15-24 s, with bolus tracking), and during portal phase (delay from start acquisition 60-80 s); 3 mm slice thickness, pitch 1:1, 120 kV, 300 mAs, 0.8 s scan time, 1 mm reconstruction index. Results: The enhancement of gastric wall was high in all cases; involved segments were thickened in inflammatory and in malignant diseases. The wall had multilayered structure in Crohn disease and in MALT. Three layers were seen in Crohn; two layers were visible in MALT (submucosa was detectable). Homogeneous hyperdense wall was seen in other diseases Conelusion: Spiral CT allows detection of a different structural patterns in different pathologie conditions affecting the gastric wall. A standard technique using a 4F pigtail catheter was used. AP and decubitus views of the renal arteries were obtained. In aseparate 3 month period, 11 consecutive patients referred for angiography for the investigation of active GI haemorrhage underwent both iodinated contrast arteriography and C02 arteriography. Selective mesenteric catheterisation was performed in all cases. In both groups, carbon dioxide was delivered using the AngioDynamics C02JECT system. Results: 29/30 patients had renal arteriograms of diagnostic quality; 23 were supplemented with iodinated contras!. 6 patients had a C02 angiogram that was considered non diagnostic. 4/11 patients had an abnormality on the iodinated contrast mesenteric angiogram. In 2 cases, this represented active haemorrhage which in 1 case was also demonstrated on the C02 study. In the other 2, cases a non bleeding vascular abnormality was idenlified which was not seen on either of the corresponding C02 studies. Conelusion: C02 renal arteriography is capable of producing diagnostic images. However mesenteric C02 arteriography was more difficult to interpret, failed to show any advantage over iodinated contrast arteriography and did not demonstrate non bleeding vascular lesions. Purpose: The purpose of this prospective study was to compare the diagnostic efficiacy of conventional CE-MR-Angiography (MRA) with dynamic multiphase turbo-MRA (t-MRA) and intraarterial digital subtraction angiography (DSA) and to optimize the relation of acquisition time to voxel size and other sequence parameters. Methods and Materials: 60 consecutive patients with suspected renovascular disease were prospectively examined in two randomly selected groups (1) with three-dimensional, breath-hold, contrast-enhanced MR angiography (AT 16 sec.ITR 4.0 mslTE 1.6. ms/30 0/360 mm FOV/160 x 256 matrixlEff. thick. 3 mm) and (2) Purpose: To evaluate CTA for the detection and grading of renal artery stenosis Methods and Materials: 40 patients with suspected renal artery stenosis were examined with EBT ("Evolution XP") using continuous volume scanning (3 mm collimation, 2 mm increment, 50% overlap, 200 msec exposure time, 90 ml contrast medium, 4 mi/sec f1ow, 15 sec scan time, scan range 14 cm). Contrast enhancement was measured in the aorta and renal arte ries. A four-step-grading of stenosis was applied (I: 0-49%, 11: 50-69%, 111: 70-99%, IV: occlusion). All patients with grade III-IV stenosis received DSA. Pulsatile artefacts on MIP and MPVR presentation were scored on a three-step-scale (1: none, 2: smaller, 3: interrupting vessel contour). Results: 99 renal arteries with density values about 230 HE were evaluated. Grade 3 pulsatile artefacts were found in 6 cases. 20 patients received DSA. The grading of stenosis was identical in EBT and DSA in 18 cases, 1 discordant case occurred in severe calcified stenosis and 1 case in pulsatile artefacts grade 3. All accessory arteries (19) shown in DSA were demonstrated in EBT. Conelusion: EBT is a new technical approach to CTA of renal arteries. Our first experience showed a high suitability of EBT-CTA for the detection and grading of renal artery stenosis. Purpose: To evaluate 3D single-dose gadolinium-enhanced MRA Duplex Sonography (DS) and arterial DSA, for the detection of renal artery stenosis (RAS). Methods and Materials: 41 patients suspected of RAS were imaged on a 1.5 T magnet using a 16 sec breath-hold T1-weighted GRE sequence: TR 3.8, TE 1.3, flip angle 30 0 , 160 x 256 matrix, FOV 350, slice thickness 2 mm. After a MASK sequence, the enhanced sequence was acquired with a 0.1 mmol/kg bolus of gadolinium. MRA were reviewed in a blinded fashion by 2 independent experienced readers. Results: MRA depicted 74 main renal arteries on the 80 arteries depicted by DSA versus, 75/78 with DS. MRA depicted 16/18 accessory arteries versus 0 with DS. Second order renal artery branches were not reliably analyzed. MRA correclly graded 43/48 arteries with a 0-49% stenosis, 22/26 arteries with a 50-100% stenosis (of which 2 occlusions). Sensitivity and specificity for the detection of significant RAS (> =50%) ofthe main renal artery were respectively 85% and 90% for MRA, 66% and 86% for DS. MRA positive and negative predictive value were respectively 81% and 92%. However, visualization and grading of stenosis was diffcult for renal artery branches. Conelusion: Gadolinium-enhanced MRA is more accurate than DS for the detection of main RAS. was inconclusive. The evaluation of intrarenal segmental arteries was insufficient by MRA. In group 1 MRA and IADSA or operat ion both showed 4 renal artery main stem stenosis, 3 significant iliac artery stenosis proximal to the transpl ant anastomosis and 1 iliac stenosis distally of the transplant. All stenosis were slightly overestimated by MRA. There were no falsepositive or false-negative results . In group 2 we found no transplant artery stenosis. Patients mostly suffered from graf! rejection . Conclusion: Contrast enhanced MRA can provide accurate imaging from the iliac arteries, the renal transplant artery anastomosis and main stem in a non invasive procedure. Purpose: To compare color-Doppler ullrasound (CDU) with ultrafast breath-hold 3D gadolinium-enhanced MRA in detecting renal artery stenost s, Methods and Materials: 45 patients with clinical suspicion of renovascular disease were prospectively examined with CDU and with MRA . CDU was performed in both proximal main artery (morphologic evaluation and peak systolic velocity) and intrarenal vessels (acceleration time). MRA was performed on a 1.5 T GE Echospeed magnet with a phased-array multicoil using fast 3DSPGR or efgre 3D sequences with short TRITE with gadolinium injection (0.1 mmol/kg) by aPower injector. Correlation with IADSA (standard of reference) was performed in all patients in order to evaluate number of renal arteries and degree of stenosis. Results: 4% of CDU were nondiagnostic. The number of accessory renal arteries detected with MRA (12/13) was statistically significant higher than CDU (3/13) (p =< .05). At IADSA 52 stenosis were found : 30 of them were graded significanl (>50 %). In the assessment of all stenoses , sensitivity and accu racy were 94% and 91% for MRA compared with 71% and 76% for CDU. respectively (p < .05). The sensitivity of MRA (100%) in the diagnosis of >50% stenosis was higher than CDU's (79%) (p < .05). Specificities, accuracies and NPV in the diagnosis of >50% stenoses were 93%, 95% and 100% for MRA and 93% , 90% and 87% for CDU. Conclusion: Breath-hold gadolinium-enhanced MRA is superior to CDU in accessory arteries detection and is a reliable technique in renal arteries stenosis identification . Although the specificity is similar , MRA shows better sensitivity and NPV than ultrasound for evaluation the stenoses. Methods and Materials: Between January 1995 and July 1997, 142 kidneys in 72 hypertensive palients were studied with DUS and intraarterial digital subtraction angiography (DSA). The technique combining direct insonation of the renal artery (DDUS) and quantitative analysis of early systolic upstroke of distal Doppler waveform (IDUS) was performed in each kidney. Achieved feasibility for DDUS was 85% and for IDUS 98%. The diagnostic criter ia for RAS (diameter reduction 50% or more) were as folIows : DDUS -maximum systolic velocity more than 150 crn/s, IDUS (according to Stavros) -acceleration time more than 70 ms, acceleration less than 300 cm/s2. The results were compared to those from DSA in a prospective unbiased manner. Forly nine kidneys with RAS were found in DSA. Based on DSA as a gold standard, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPH) and negative predictive value (NPH) tor the detection of RAS by means of DUS were calculated . Results: DUS yielded the sensitivity 94%, specificity 75% , PPV 67% and NPV 96%. Conclusion: According to our results , Doppler ultrasonography is c1inacally applicable for the detection of RAS. Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of Doppler US in assessing accessory renal arteries (ARA) . Methods and Materials: One-hundred-sixty-seven hypertensive patients (age 21-67; mean: 46 ± 11) were enrolled in this prospective study. Patients underwent angiography for interventional treatments or surg ical planning. Feasibility, sensitivity, and specificity of the anterior and trans-Iumbar Doppler US approaches were evaluated. Gold standard was provided by angiography. Results: Angiography detected 30 ARA , normal in 12 cases and stenosed in 18 cases. Doppler US detected 26 ARA in the anter ior approach (sensitivity 70%, spec ificity 88%) and 28 in the trans-Iumbar (sensitivity 90%, specificity 89%) approach . The difference with respect to angiography was statistically significant (p < 0.001) . Conclusion: The anterior approach is affected by a higher number of false negative cases, that were represented by ARA with fibromuscular dysplasia. By contrast these cases were correctly detected with the trans-Iumbar approach, that seems to be most reliable. The purpose of this research was to evaluate the diagnostic efficiency of Spiral CT angiography in the visualization of renal vasculature and detection of renal artery stenoses. Spiral CT angiography with Picker PO 5000 device was carried out in 30 patients. In each case the non ionic contrast medium (Ultravist or Omnipaque 300 mgJ/ml) was administered intravenously with automatie injector. The dose of contrast medium was 120 ml with the speed 3 ml/s and scan delay 25 s. The applied slice thickness varied from 2 to 4 mm with 2 mm index. After the standard axial spiral scanning the MIP and 4D Angio reconstructions were obtained with the program installed in the PO 5000 software. All of the patients underwent also the renal angiography with a standard technique. Results of the examinations were compared later, after the evaluation by 2 independent radiologists. In each case we obtained an adequate and reliable image of the renal arteries anatomy in both studies. Using spiral CT angiography in one case we recognized the occlusion of the anterior branch of the left renal artery, and in five cases renal arteries stenoses -one of them revealed false positive after the angiographic evaluation. Adequate visualization of the renal vasculature is possible using the described technique of spiral CT angiography and it's surely the promising method for the evaluation of renal artery stenoses. Purpose: To explore the effect of continuous education of the various disciplines on the screening performance. Methods and Materials: At the end of 1997 the implementation of the nationwide mammographie screening has been completed in the Netherlands, resulting in 660.000 tests per year involving the age cohort 50-69 and with a screening interval of two years. All radiologists, radiographers and pathologists participating in the screening programme are trained in the National Expert and Training Centre in Nijmegen, the Netherlands, before the commencement of the screening. The Centre has the task to evaluate the medical performance of the various disciplines by means of site visits of the regional screening centres. At these visits, first, the overall screening results of the first and subsequent rounds are evaluated, second, mammograms of a one-day production are reviewed for positioning-and technical quality and third, screening and diagnostic mammograms of interval and screen-detected S1. 11 cancers are reviewed. Results: Results of site vlsits will be presented and reasons for regional variations will be discussed. Conclusion: We conclude that training should be done before the commencement of the screening, that a continuous follow-up of the results is mandatory and that the various disciplines should be retrained continuously, both centrally and at the site by self-education. Purpose: To study the acceptance of technical quality control (OC) procedures during breast cancer screening conform the European Guidelines in a decentralized health care system. Methods and Materials: Ouality control procedures of mammographie equipment, developer, film-screen-cassette systems, darkroom and Iightboxes have been implemented based on the European Guidelines in private radiological practices, small regional hospitals and in larger screening units. Costs and necessary daily time investment were maximally reduced. Major efforts went into sensibilization and explaining the quality control framework. After aperiod of 1 year, a survey was sent to 15 centers that complied to the European regulations. Results: For 13/15 centers, systematic OC was not performed on a regular basis before. The survey showed that OC procedures were easily accepted by the local personnel (100%). Eight centers confirmed that they are now in a stronger position with regard to service technicians. All centers had concrete results of the OC procedures. Two (smaller) practices questioned the cost effectiveness of the whole procedures. Only 1 center reports on a reduced throughput due to the necessity of the OC procedures. A major effect is the sensibilization for a more global quality management in the radiology department, Conclusion: OC was weil accepted in our region. Purpose: To assess the effects of mammographie parenchymal patterns on the risk of breast cancer detected at first screen, second screen and in the interval between two screens. Methods and Materials: We conducted a nested case-control study within a screening cohort in East Anglia. The study population consisted on 502 prevalence screen cases, 198 interval cancer cases and 175 first incidence screen cases, and 2601 matched controls. The mammographie parenchymal patterns of breast tissue were assessed according to Wolfe's classification. Statistical analysis was by conditional logistic regression. Results: Overall, 67% of cases and 59% of controls had high-risk pattern (P2 + DY) mammogram. The risk associated with P2 or DY mammographic patterns compare to N1 was higher for interval cancers (OR of 2.2 and 2.4 respectively) than for screen-detected cancers (OR of 1.7 and 1.1 respectively). For interval cancers in the first 18 months after the last negative mammogram, the risk was particularly elevated (OR of 3.8 for P2 and 4.1 for DY compared to N1). High risk associated with P2 and DY patterns was concentrated on invasive ductal grade 3 cancers (OR's of 2.7 and 3.8) rather than grade 1 or 2 cancers (OR's of 1.6 and 1.2  Purpose: Measuring advanced breast carcinomas (ABC) is of major importance to evaluate efficacy of initial chemotherapy. We are trying to evaluate breast CT in measuring the size and volume of those tumors , and the dynam ic enhancement before and after chemotherapy. Methods and Materials: 58 ABC underwent CT precontrast slices of the breast , adynamie study after IV contrast, then a conventional CT of the breast after reinjection of contrast. 30 patients had a helical CT of the breast. 40 ABC underwent surgery, allowing pathological correlation. Results: After chemotherapy, the decrease of tumor was significiant in 31 cases (53%) and was correlated to the decrease of dynamic enhancement. Tumor volume was not modified by treatment in 27 ABC (47%) and dynamic study showed an increased (n = 10) or an unchanged enhancement (n =17). Residual tumor (n =40) sizes were similar to enhanced CT tumor size (+/-12%). Conclusion: Evaluation of local efficacy of chemotherapy on ABC can be perform with breast CT. This study shows an acceptable correlation between pathology and CT. Correlation between tumor volume decrease and enhancement decrease after treatment may be a possible new parameter related to prognosis . Purpose: To assess the HCT performan ce in nodal staging of breast cancers . Methods and Materials: Sixteen patients with positive FNAC for breast carcinoma underwent HCT before surgical excision and axillary dissection (matrix 5122 ; field of view 35 0 42 cm; 120 kV; 150 or 200 mA; X-ray beam 5 rnrn: pitch 1). A 30 s scan of 15 cm of body length was acqu ired before and 1, 3, and 8 minules after i.v, bolus injection of nonionic iodined contrast agent. The nodes >1 cm in diameter without inner fat at plain scans were recorded, as weil as the nodes with enhancement >70% at least in one of the three post-contrast scans. Results: Primary cancers were 15 invasive ductal and 1 invasive lobular carcinomas, ranging in diameter 4-30 mm ; metastatic involvement of one ore more nodes was pathologically proved in 12/16 patients. Plain HCT showed 45% sensit ivity and 100% specificity for nodal metastatic involvement, while enhanced HCT showed 100% sensitivity and 80% specificity. Positive predictive values were 100% for plain HCT and 92% for enhan ced HCT; negative predictive values were 45% and 100%, respect ively. Conclusion: Contrast admin istration allowed a better HCT performance in detecting nodal metastatic involvement from breast cancer. CT cortical bone mineral density and thickness (cBMD, cTh) and tibial DXA BMD were computed. Intcrgroup differences were assessed by analysis of variance and reported as percent variation of the measurement explained by group assignment. Results: SOS correlated significantly with cBMD, cTh and DXA BMD (all r2 = 0.4). Multiple regression with both cBMD and cTh against SOS yielded r2 = 0.5, both parameters contributed equally. We found the following significant intergroup differences: cBMD 45%, cTh 42%, DXA BMD 35% , SOS 30% variation. SOS intergroup difference became non-significant when corrected for either CT parameter, but not when corrected for DXA BMD. Conclusion: Our findings suggest that the SOS measurement depends on both bone thickness and dens ity and does not add new information to these parameters, whereas it adds information to the DXA measurement. Purpose: The aim of this study is to have a reference data of local italian population of densitometric examination in order to refine the control diagram tailored on american people with possible difference in genetic and enviromental factors as weil as technical equipments . We also tried to identify a proper statistical approach for graphical rappresentation of bone mass curve in relation to the age, and possibly to the fracture risk. Methods and Materials: Mineralometry was performed with QCT on 994 italian women (16-85 years old). For the QCT we used a Philiphs scanner following the Cann and Genant technique . Results: The average value af BMD obtained for the entire population sampie was 104.2 +/-39 mg/mI. The comparison of our values and the USA data revealed lower values for BMO in italian women. There were significative decline in BMD at age of 47-57 in premenopausal period . Using a non-parametric methods of analisys a reference curve for italian population was obtained (with range of normality of +/-DS). All patient with osteoporot ic fracture show BMD values less than 100 mg/mI. Below the normality range ot our curve the percentage of fracture is progressive with age and the reduced BMO. Conclusion: The local population reference curve represents the more appropriate standard for evaluating osteoporosis and the fracture risk. 11:10 50 Associations between quantitative ultrasound at the finger phalanges and radiological results from hand X-rays in rheumatoid arthritis P. Roeben, R. Barkmann , C.-C. Glüer; KiellD Purpose: Recent studies have shown that Quantitative Ultrasound (QUS) measurements at the finger phalanges can discriminate between patients with rheumatoid arthr itis (RA) and patients with other long-term steroid-treated diseases. We investigated, if QUS parameters are also associated with radiological results obtained from hand x-rays in RA. Methods and Materials: The distal metaphysis of the proximal phalanges and the PIP joints li-IV of both hands of 23 females suffering from RA were investigated. Amplitude dependent speed of sound (AD-SoS) was measured in a transmission mode using the DBMSonic 1200 (IGEA, Italy). X-rays were used to determine Larsen-stage , joint gap narrowing and the relative width of the medullary canal at the PIP joints and proximal phalanges. Results: At all sites a significant (p < 0 .0001) discrimination be tw een Larsen stage 0-1 and 11-111 as weil as between 0-1 and IV-V could be found. AD-SoS at the metaphysis correlated with the relative width of the medullary canal (R = 0.7, P < 0.0001) . There was no significant correlation between AD-SoS and joint gap narrowing. Conclusion: Quantitative Ultrasound of the finger phalanges can determine the severity of RA. If confirmed in larger studies this method might become a sensitive tool for the assessment and monitoring of rheumato id arthritis .  Purpose: To evaluate the usefulness in diagnosis of osteoporosis of a new ultrasound imaging device, the Ubis 3000. Methods and Materials: Participants for the study were 186 postmenopausal women. Bone mineral density (BMO) was determined by dual X-ray absorpliometry. Broadband Ultrasound Attenuation (BUA) and Speed of Sound (SOS) measurements of the calcaneus were performed using an ultrasonometer with transmission imaging. The automatie ROI was defined as the circular region , 15 mm in diameter, of minimum attenuation in the posterior part of the calcaneus. Results: The reproducibility values (CV%) were 1.35% for BUA and 0.24% for SOS. Significant correlations were found between ultrasound parameters and BMO measurements at the spine and hip (r = 0.64 and 0.68 respectively, p < 0.0001 for BUA, r = 0.48 and 0.49 respectively, p < 0.0001 for SOS) . There was a decrease in ultrasound parameters with the area of the posterior region of the calcaneus which was significant for BUA (p < 0.001) but not significant for SOS. This might be attr ibuted to substantial differences in the slze of the calcaneus among individuals. Concluslon: Broadband ultrasound attenuation imaging improves the precision of ultrasound measurements. Both ultrasound parameters were highly correlated with lumbar and hip BMO. The optimal ROI size depends on the size of the calcaneus of each patient. Purpose: Some asthmatics are smaller than age and sex matched controls. This is said to be caused by glucocorticoids . To determine, whethe r these asthmatic children have disturbances of bone mineralisation independent from the steroid-therapy BMI and serum electro lyt levels has been examined. Patients and Methods: BMI of 120 asthmatic children, includ ing 27 female and 93 male , mean age 11.9 ± 10.0 years have been exam ined by SPA 47 had used topical corticoids before. Using the regional normative data the Standard deviation Score (SDS) has been evaluated . Serum levels of calcium and alkaline phosphatase have been determined. T-test and cross -table-testing were used. Results: 1. Relat ing to normative data 6 females (22.2%) and one male (1.7%) showed retarded BMI-SOS. 2. 15 patients (12.5%) had low calc ium levels (2.03 ± 0.08 mmol/l) , including 5 females. 3. 6 females (22.2%) and 29 males (33%) have a very high alkaline phosphatase level (boys: 22.18 ± 7.7 mmol/l; girls: 18.1 ± 3.0 mmol/l) . 4. No significant difference between users and nonusers of glucocorticoids has been determined. Conclusion: An increased number of asthmatic females has a retardation of BMI, hypocalcaemic and hyperphosphatasaemic blood levels. The changes da not depend on glucocorticoids. Probably hormonal disturbances or atopy itself causes these symptoms. (Submitted by Internet) HRCT scans (p < 0.01). The rating of the 7-mm reconstructions was 1.5 compared to 1.4 for the prior spiral CT scans (n.s.). The coronal reconstructions were of diagnostic quality, and depiction of details was only slightly reduced compared to the axial scans (1.9 versus 2.1). Diseussion: With EBT, it appears to be possible for the first time to combine the indications and advantages of HR and spiral CT in a single examination. A nearly isotropic voxel geometry yields reconstructions of diagnostic quality. Further studies are needed to evaluate the c1inical potential of coronal imaging of the ehest, Purpose: To quantitate motion degradation at inspiration vs. expiration and to evaluate the effectiveness of volumetric acquisitions (VAHRCT). Methods and Materials: A 5 mm VAHRCT was performed in 46 consecutive bone-marrow transplantant recipients at risk for obliterative bronchiolitis at three levels. The effective scan time per image was 0.7 seconds. Grading of scans was: 0 = no motion; 1 = motion, but diagnostic quality; 2 = not diagnostic. Results: 552 images (46 x 3 levels x 4 images) were evaluated and graded for each lung separately. 16 patients had abnormal pulmonary function (FEV1 < 80% predicted). All acquisitions at inspiration were diagnostic and only one at expiration was not. There was a 6% incidence of nondiagnostic volumetrie acquisitions at expiration compared with an overall prevalence of 34% Grade 3 scans. Motion degradation was consistently worse on expiration images, towards the lung bases, and on the lett: Conelusion: Low-dose spiral CT including MIP is an adequate alternative to standard-dose incremental CT for depiction of nodular patterns in the lung. For unknown patterns, SD-I continues to be the gold standard. 58 Reduetion of eontrast material dose and artifaets by power injeetion with saline solution bolus in spiral CT of the thorax P. Haage, T. Schmitz-Rode, D. Hübner, W. Piroth, RW. Günther; Purpose: Evaluation of a new combined method of contrast material bolus followed by saline solution flush for thoraeie spiral computed tomography (CT). Methods and Materials: 380 patients with suspected or proven mediastinal or hilar masses received a spiral CT of the thorax using 60 ml of contrast material pushed with 30 ml of injectable saline solution. 50 of these patients had been examined before using our previous protocol applying a volume of 75 ml of contrast material without subsequent saline solution. Mean attenuation values were measured in the superior vena cava, the pulmonary trunk and the ascending aorta. Furthermore image artifacts and mediastinallhilar depiction were graded and compared. Results: Mean attenuation values were significantly higher in the regimen without saline solution flush causing more surrounding artifacts. Both protocols allowed comparable evaluation of mediastinal and hilar structures. Conelusion: Power injection of contrast material followed by saline solution bolus in thoracic spiral CT allows reduction of contrast material volume to 60 ml without loss of information. In addition artifacts caused by beam-hardening in the superior vena cava are significantly lowered. In (R) 1.34 1.49 1.62 In (L) Conelusion: VAHRCT significantly reduces the need to repeat individual scans due to motion artifact and is especially recommended when expiration HRCT is needed. Purpose: Intraindividual comparison of standard-dose incremental (SD-I), low-dose incremental (LD-I), low-dose spiral CT (LD-S), and MIP in the diagnostic assessment of interstitial lung disease. Methods and Materials: Fitty-six patients underwent HRCT of the lung according to the following protocol: 5 axial slices with 400 mAs (SD-I) alternating with 5 slices with 50 mAs (LD-I) at 1.5/40 (slice thickness/distance in mm), as weil as 5 spiral scans (1 cm length) with 50 mAs (LD-S) at 1.5/1.5 and a reconstruction interval of 1 mm. Intraindividual statistical comparison (Student's t-test) of the SD-I, LD-I, LD-S, and MIPs from the spiral scans was performed by five blinded readers (4 countries) with respect to conspicuity of pathology 11:50 63 Influence of radiation therapy on lung tissue in breast cancer patients: CT-assessed density changes 12 years after eompletion of radiotherapy G. Svane, S. Rotstein, I. Lax; Stockholm/S Radiation induced heart and lung complications can become a major problem in the future as breast conserving treatments in combination with radiotherapy is gradually increasing. Very few patients suffer from radiation induced acute pneumon itis but recently long-term effects Iike increased mortality in heart deseases has been reported . The importance of long-term effects on lung tissue is still under debate and need further investigations. Methods and Materials: The material consists of sixteen disease-free breast cancer patients primarily operated with a partial mastectomy or a modified radical mastectomy (MRM) . All patients were given adjuvant radiotherapy. CT-examinations of the lung with at least three scans in transverse sections were performed to determine lung density before treatment, three and nine months after completion of radiotherapy to follow the early effects on lung tissue and in order to investigate the long-term effects the examinations were repeated 4 and 12 years efter radiotherapy. Lung density was determined fro m the mean of the pixel values within the anterior-Iateral quarte r of the lung. Results: All visible focal radiological findings decreased in size as weil as in number when the examinations within the first year after radiation therapy were compared with the exam inations at 4 and 12 years. These findings were all within the anterior-Iateral quarter of the lung where the radiation dose was highest. The differences in lung density among those with and those without radiolog ical focal findings were statistically significant at the examinations at 3 and 9 months respectively but did not persist at 4 and 12 years. However, in patients without focal findings the general lung density increased 1.4 at four years compared to before start. Conclusion: The results indicate a 2-phase development of radiation induced lung damages. An acute phase with visible focal findings and a late phase with a general increase in lung density. to a slice thickness of 2.5 mm and an increment of 1.3 mm during the native phase. Thereafter a contrast enhanced scan with the same slice thickness and increment was acquired but with standard 165 mAs. Both series were fused to various slice thicknesses using multiplanar reconstruclion. Depiction of anatomica l structures and image noise of the !wo series were compared. Doses were measured using a standard body phantom. Results: Low dose CT scans lead to increased image noise which can be significantly reduced by fusing to a higher slice thickness to 1/2 to 1/3. There is no significant difference in the depiction of anatomical structures between low and high dose CT scans. The low dose protocol leads to a dose reduction to 1/20 (1 mGy per slice). Conclusion: With suitable low dose scanning protocols using Multiple Detector Helical CT scanners and new reconstruction techniques the dose for CT scans of the ehest can be reduced to 1/20 without compromising the diagnostic value.  Purpose: Spiral-CT enables true volumetr ie scanning with high geometrie resolution and long z-axis coverage due to data aquisition with thin-sections and high pitch. In order to evaluate the detection rate of segmental-/subsegmental bronchi SOT-cr of the lung was performed . Methods and Materials: In 30 patients with unremarkable bronchial anatomy spiral-CT of the total lung was performed in baso-apical orientation during a single breathhold utilizing 3-mm-thick sections and pitch 3 and additional secondary reconstruct ions to 1.5-mm slice intervals in standard algorithm. Afterwards the study was viewed in a cine-Ioop to evaluate the detection of various segmental ( Results: 16% of all examinations were indicated to resolve questions risen by plain ehest film, 10% to confirm or exclude pulmonary ernbolism, 10% to confirm or exclude aort ic disseetion. In 10% a focus of infection was sought. 57% of CT scans had an impact on therapy, in 7% further diagnostic tests were prompted. Among a total of 588 clinical decisions based upon ehest CT, the most frequent therapeutic conclusions consisted in: minimally invasive CT guided interventions in 17%, pharmacological therapy in 13%, bed side interventions in 13%, and surgical intervention in 13%. Conelusion: Chest CT has a strong impact on patient management in emergency and critical care medicine . CT guided interventions are frequently used in critically ill patients. Important indications for spiral CT are assessment of patients with suspected pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection. Purpose: To assess the contribute of endorectal coil -MR imaging in the local staging of prostate carcinoma. Methods and Materials: Fourty consecutive patients affected with hystologically proven prostatic carcinoma , were evaluated byendorectal coil MR imaging at high field strength (1.5 T) . In each patient a sagittal T1-weighted and axial and coronal T2-weighted sequences were performed . In 14 patient an axial Fast Multiplanar Spoiled Gradient Recalied (FMPSPGR) dynam ic sequence after i.v, injection of Gadolin ium DTPA was also performed. Basing upon the current literature criteria an MR staging of local spread of the tumor was done. All the patients underwent radica l prostatectomy and hystologic macrosections were obtained from the surgical spec imens . A comparative evaluation of MRI and hystolog ical staging was done and the accuracy of MRI in detecting capsular penetration , seminal vescical involvement and prostatic apex involvement was assessed. Results: MRI correctly staged 31 out of 40 cases (78%). The MRI accura cy was respectevely 80% in detect ing capsular penetration (sensitivity: 85 .7%, specificity 73.6%); 87.5 % in seminal vescical involvement (sens itivity 88 .3% , specificity 89 .2%) and 72.5% in prostatic apex involvement (sensitivity 79.1 %, specific ity 62.1%). Dynamic evaluation after Gadolin ium DTPA did not improve the staging accuracy. Conclusion: In our series MRI showed a good accuracy in detect ing seminal vescical involvemen t and a moderate accura cy in demonstrating capsular penetration and apex involvement. 10:50 66 Dynamic MR enhancement with substraction images in prostate cancer: correlation between morphology and MRI stage and pathological findings C. Roy, S. Guth, C. Tuchmann , H. Lang, Ch. Saussine, D. Jacqm in; StrasbourglF Purpose: To assess the usefulness of MR enhancement characteristics in detecting and staging prostate carcinoma . Methods and Materials: Dynamic FLASH MR enhancement studies follow ing bolus Gd-DTPA were performed in 16 patients with biopsy proven prostate cancer in the peripheral zone (PZ). After a first sequence without injection , four sequen ces were repeated at 20 s, 45 s. 70 s, 95 s respectively after bolus injection. Substraction images and ROI measurements were correlated with high resolution T2W images to identify the presence, localization, and tumoral staging of abnormal regions in PZ. Correlations were done (T 2 W substraction images and ROI) with histopathological findings obtained by biopsyguided ultrasound. Results: Significant differences were noted between normal and tumour tissues with a maximum tumour Gd-DTPA concentration between 45 and 70 s of delay. There was no additional findings for localization in comparison with T2W images. These later provided better images quality. For tumoral staging, the classical T 2W was always more accurate. There was no correlation between the maximum amplitude or washout delay and histological findings. Conclusion: Dynamic MR Enhancement with substraction images did not provide additional information concern ing localization and staging of prostate cancer, by comparison to classical T 2W images . Purpose: To improve the visualization of the neurovascular bundle and to determine the c1inical significance of initial results obtained with this new method. Methods and Materials: Ten patients with c1inically suspected prostate cancer were examined with a comb ined endorectallbody phased-array coil on a 1.5 Tesla MR imager. The prostate was imaged with axial and coronal T2-we ighted TSE sequen ces and an axial T1-we ighted seque nce before and after contrast agent administration. In addition, fast contrast-enhanced (GD-DTPA) angiography (512 matrix) with visualization of the arterial and venous phase was performed. Peristais is was suppressed by Buscopan . All patients underwent prostatectomy. Results: The internal iliac vessels were visualized bilaterally in all cases. The inferior vesica I artery was Iikewise depicted anterior to the endorektal coil, The venous plexus surrounding this artery was seen during the venous phase. Not surprisingly, the nerves could not be seen directly. All cancers investigated were restricted to the prostate . Conclusion: The technique of fast contrast-enhanced MR Ang iography visualizes the neurovascular bundle in a quality that has so far only been achieved with conventional angiography. In the further course of the study, it is planned to investigate the correlation of nerve lesions leading to incontinence and impotence with vascular lesions of the neurovascular bundle. Purpose: To assess the effectiveness of MR imaging to predict the positive biopsy results in the diagnos is of prostate cancer for patients at intermediate-risk. Methods and Materials: We performed a prospective endorectal MR imaging study with 81 patients at intermed iate-risk to detect prostate cancer. Intermediate-risk was defined as: Prostatic-specific antigen (PSA) levels between 4 and 10ng/ml or PSA levels > 10 ng/ml but negative digital rectal examination (DRE) or PSA levels progressivaly higher (0.75 ng/mllyear). A transrectal sextant biopsy was performed after the MRI exam, and also of the area of suspiction detected by MRI. Results: Cancer was detected in 23 patients (28%). Sensitivity, specificity, positive (PPV) and negative (NPV) predictive values of endorectal MRI were 69.5%, 76% , 53% and 86% respectively. Positive biopsy rate (PBR) was 62.5% when the PSA levels wher e > 10 ng/ml with a positive MRI , and 15% with a negative MR1. For patients with PSA levels in the range 4-10 ng/ml and positive DRE, cancer was detected in 57% of cases when MRI was positive and 14% when MRI was negative . However, the PBR for patient s with PSA levels in the range 4-10 ng/ml and negative DRE was 12.5% and 28 .5% for MRI-negative and positive, respectively. Conclusion: Endorectal MR imag ing was not a sufficient predictor of positive prostate biopsy for patients c1inically at intermed iate-risk. We should not obviate to perform systematic biopsies in patients with endorectal MR negative results , as it will miss a significant number of cancers. Purpose: In this study, quantitative Gd-DTPA enhanced dynamic transplant renal MRI results were compared with biopsy findings in the differentiation of acute rejection and cyclosporin toxicity as a noninvasive method. Methods and Materials: 26 patients with trans plant renal dysfunction underwent dynamic MRI and percutaneous biopsy. During iv injection of 2 ce Gd-DTPA, 128 sequential images were obtained using a tur-boFLASH sequence through a single slice. 9 patients had acute rejection and 5 had cyclosporin toxicity. Signal/time curves were obtained and maximum, minimum gradient, initial and end gradient times, peak intensity, peak strength, initial and final signal mean values, signal ratios, initial and final signal mean differences between medulla and cortex were calculated. Results: Maximum gradient, peak intensity, final mean signal were lower and initial mean signal difference between medulla and cortex were higher in 8 out of 9 (%89) patients with acute rejection. Maximum gradient and final signal mean values were higher than acute rejection group and lower than other pathologies in most of the patients with cyclosporin toxicity Conclusion: As a non-invasive method, dynamic MRI is a promising method to differentiate acute rejection from cyclosporin toxicity at the evaluation of transplant kidney disfunction. Purpose: Aim of this study was to evaluate the cortical vessels in renal transplant chronic rejection, which is the most common cause of renal transplant fai/ure. Methods and Materials: We studied 56 renal transplants: 20 normally functioning grafts (Group I) and 36 presenting with biopsy diagnosed chronic rejection (Group 11). Power Doppler US, using a 7.5 MHz probe, was performed before and after slow injection (70-120 sees) of 10 ml echo enhancer (Levovist SHU-508-A, concentration 200 mg/mi). Morphological evaluation (Pattern Type and Grade) and quantitative evaluation (mean pixel value) were performed. Results: The morphological evaluation showed an improvement of Pattern Type and Grade resulting in a better depiction of the interlobular vessels in nearly all patients. Thus areas lacking in colour signal before echo enhancer were visible after contrast enhancement. Group I presented astronger enhancement as compared to Group II and also the quantitative evaluation of mean pixel values showed a statistically significant difference between the two groups. Conclusion: Power Doppler US examination using echo enhancer permits a better visualization of the cortical vasculature, a correct evaluation of the damage and a quantitative differentiation of normally functioning grafts and chronic rejection. Purpose: Aim of this work in progress is to evaluate the morphological and quantitative aspects of wash-in wash-out curves in normal grafts and in trans plant pathologies. Final aim will be to differentiate renal transplant diseases. Methods and Materials: Until now we have studied 10 normally functioning grafts (control group), 8 biopsy diagnosed cases of chronic rejection, and 4 cases of acute rejection and ATN. Color Doppler sonography, using a 7.5 MHz probe, was performed after bolus administration of 10 ml of echo enhancer (Levovist SHU-508-A, concentration 300 mg/mi). Wash-in wash-out curves were studied for a duration of 150 sees after injection of echo enhancer and post processed and subsequently morphologically and quantitatively analyzed. Results: We have been able to differentiate normally functioning grafts from transplant diseases on the basis of the morphological results, as analysis of the waveform morphology evidence this difference. Also a quantitative differentiation has been evident as the mean pixel values showa statistically significant difference between the groups of patients. Conclusion: The preliminary results show that it is possible to differentiate normally functioning grafts from transplant diseases through a correct analysis of the wash-in wash-out curves. Purpose: Levovist has a stimulated acoustic emission in renal parenchyma called "burst"-mode. The purpose of this study was to evaluate this effect for the detection of renallesions with Contrast Harmonie Imaging (CHI). Methods and Materials: Ten patients with suspected renallesions received the ultrasound contrast agent Levovist (Schering, Germany) as a bolus injection in the concentration of 300 mg/mI. Five minutes after injection the kidney was scanned in "burst"-mode and examined with CHI. The ultrasound device used was a Siemens Sonoline Elegra. All examinations were recorded on videotape. The findings were compared with conventional gray scale ultrasound. Results: CHI demonstrated impressive hypoechogenie renallesions as defects in the parenchymal enhancement of the kidney. Compared with conventional ultrasound CHI and "burst"-mode were superior in detection of small and isoechogenie renallesions. However, hyperechogenie lesions are not visible with this method. Conclusion: CHI and "burst"-mode are new methods in the detection of hypo-and isoechogenie renallesions. The accuracy of this method has to be evaluated with more patients and compared with new parenchymal contrast agents. Purpose: Ta compare the diagnostic accuracy of spiral Cl ultrasonography (US), plain radiography (RAD) , and nephrotomography (TOM) in detecting residual renal calculi following extracorporeal shock wave Iithotripsy (ESWL). Methods and Materials: 31 consecutive adult patients with suspected residual renal calculi on plain radiographs obtained 30-40 days after ESWL were examined with RAD, TOM, US arid unenhanced spiral CT (3-mm collimation, pitch of 1.0). Two radiologists reviewed the imaging stud ies, performed within a 3-hour period , 75-105 days after ESWL, and assigned one of five confidence levels for the presence or absence 520 of renal calculi. The concordance between the imaging modalities was evaluated . Results: CT showed 64 renal calcul i in 19/31 (61%) patients , US 28 calcul i in 12/31 (38%) patients, TOM and RAD 21 calculi in 12/31 (38%) and 13/31 (42 %) patients , respectively. Diagnostic confidence was significantly (p < .05) improved with CT. The concordance between the imaging modalities was poor (kappa coefficient < 0.53) with a calculus-based analysis, and better with a patient-based analysis (kappa coefficient TOM/CT and US/CT: 0.57, kappa coefficient RAD/CT 0.63). Conelusion: Unenhanced spiral CT is more sensitive and accurate than ultrasonography, radiography. and nephrotomography in detecting residual renal calculi after ESWL . Purpose: To evaluate the morphological and functional characteristics in MRI of diabetic nephropathy in order to verify if this techn ique is able to detect abnormalities in early phases of the disease. Methods and Materials: MRI exam inations have been performed using a Philips 1.5 T ACS 11 unit with a coronal spin echo sequence (TRITE = 600/19 ms) and adynamie turbo fast field echo sequence (TRITE = 12/5 rns, f1ip angle 25°), following bolus injection of paramagnetic contrast agent (0.1 mmol/Kg, at 2 ml/s) . Twenty-two patients with diabet es meIlitus have been examined using this protocol. Sixteen patients had type 1 diabetes and 6 had type 2 diabetes. Fifteen patients had creatinine values <1.5 mg/dl, 4 had mild renal insufficiency (creatinine values <3.0 mg/dl) and 3 had severe renal insufficiency (creatinine values >5.0 mg/df). The duration of the disease ranged between 5 and 15 years. Both qua litative (ar morphologieal) and quantitative parameters have been evaluated . Quant itative measurements included the peak values of the signal intensity, the time to peak and the ratio peak/time to peak of the cortex, the medulla and the excretory system. The data have been correlated with creat inine, clearance creatinine and album inur ia. Results: Morphological chang es were seen only in patients with severe renal failure. In the other patients onfy functionaf changes were noted, mainly in cases with micro or macroangiopathy and cons isted in increased peak and time to peak in the cortex, the medulla and the excretory system. The lack of inversion of the signal intensity in the medulla and excretory system seems to be the most early sign. A correlation with creatinine and c1earance has been shown . Conelusion: Dynamic MRI seems able to provide useful data to distinguish between glomerular from angiosclerotic changes in the kidneys in patients with diabetic nephropathy. Spiral-CT is superior to duplex-ultrasound, DSA is necessary only in patients with complications needing intervention. Purpose: To demonstrate percutaneous revascularization techniques and their outcome in patients with abdominal aortic branch vessel obstruct ion due to aortic dissection. Methods and Materials: 10 consecutive patients underwent percutaneous treatment. There was hypoperfusion of a renal artery (n =7), the superior mesenteric artery (n =5), the celiac trunk (n =2) or an iliac artery (n = 7). Treatment consisted in fenestration (n = 4), fenestration plus true lumen stenting (n = 2), or true lumen stenting alone (n = 4). They underwent the following surgery: ascending aortic graft ing (n =3), infrarenal aort ic grafting (n = 1), splenectomy (n = 1), bowel resection (n = 2). Results: There were no procedural complications. The lower extremity ischemia could be cured in all patients. Flow was restored in all splanchnic and renal arteries, but clinical improvement was noted just in 4/7 patients with renal artery compromise and in 5/7 with mesenteric or celiac ischemia. Two out of three patients with Iiver or bowel infarction at admission died odf multiorgan failure . The third death in our series was due to thoracic aortic rupture. The in-ho spital mortality was 30% (day 1 to 20 post intervention). Purpose: Development of a mixture of two contrast media for intraarticular injections on the basis of Gd-DOTA and iobitridol (lob). Methods and Materials: T1-and T2-relaxivity values were assessed with 60 different mixing ratios of Gd-DOTA and lob on a 1.5T Gyroscan-NT. The optimal concentration was determined for the appropriate sequences. Shoulders of 80 patients were instillated with 15 ml of (600 mg iodine/kg) in four pigs, a volume protocol was obtain~d f~r 3D coronary arteriography, followed by a cine protocol 15-60 rmn p.r, for ventricular function studies. For comparison, four pigs underwenl lhe same protocols after injeclion of iopromide (800 mg iodine/kg). Depiction of the coronary arteries in the 3D angiograms and delineation of the endocardial border in the functional studies were graded qualitatively as poor or good. .. . Results: 3D rendering of the coronary arteries was poor after injection of iopromide-liposomes (168 ± 12 HU) and good after iopromide administration (383 ± 14 HU). The functional studies after injection of iopromide-liposomes showed a homogeneous opacification of all cardiac cavities with good evaluation of ventricular function 15-60 min p.l., which was not possible after injection of iopromide. Conclusion: Liposomes-carrying iopromide are useful as blood pool agents for repeated and prolonged studies of cardiac function by EBCI. They might allow performance of cardiac function studies before and after exercise with a single administration. In contrast, they are not suited for 3D coronary angiography. 824 11:00 100 Prospective randomized study for an injection protocol for intravenous contrast media in thoracic and abdominal spiral CT using a NaCI-bolus P. Gocke, C. Gocke, H. Eich, V. John, R-D. Müller; EssenlD Purpose: Optimization of an injection protocol for intravenous contrast media application in thoracic and abdominal spiral CT using a NaCI-Bolus to save contrast media without loss of contrast enhancement. Methods and Materials: In a group of 600 patients, our standard contrast media application protocols were compared with alternative protocols, in which the last 10 ml of contrast media were replaced by a NaCI-bolus of 30 ml. To evaluate contrast enhancement HU were measured in the regions of interest: pulmonary artery and Aorta thoracica at the level of tracheal bifurcation in thoracic CT, portal vein and inferior vena cava at the end of the first/start of the second spiral scan in abdominal CT, respectively. Results were checked using tests of Kolmogorov-Smirnov, Levene's test and Students t-test. Results: Contrast media was injected in each case via a 17G intravenous cannula, placed in a cubital vein. In thoracic spiral CT replacement of the last 10 ml of contrast media by a NaCI-bolus of 30 ml leads to a significant higher enhancement (p < 0.05). This is due to utilization of contrast media that would otherwise stay in the brachial veins but is washed out by the NaCI-bolus. Additionally, image quality is improved by reducing artifacts in the upper thoracic aperture: the subclavian vein is nearly washed from contrast media, reducing hardening artifacts to a minimum (scan direction: caudo-cranial). Cost savings are belween DM 5,00.-and DM 11,00.-depending on the price for contrast media. In abdominal spiral CT, replacement of the last 10 ml of contrast media by a NaCI-bolus of 30 ml leads to a slightly minor contrast enhancement (p < 0.05) and is therefore not recommended. Conclusion: Using a NaCI-bolus, in thoracic spiral CT 10 ml of contrast media can be saved with no loss of enhancement and improved image quality (upper thoracic aperture). Cost savings are about DM 8,00.-per investigation. In abdominal CT, using of a NaCI-bolus leads to a rrunor enhancement and is not recommended. 148 ± 25 9 with GR sequences, 155 ± 20 9 with FGR and 162 ± 29 with EPI GR sequences. Mean ejection fraction was 50% ± 9 for GR sequences, 48% ± 7 for FGR and 46% ± 8 for EPI GR. The analysis of variance showed an high concordance between the three techniques. Purpose: We examined myocardial motion in healthy volunteers and patients suffering from localized disturbances of myocardial motion using a new black blood prepared gradient-echo sequence. Methods and Materials: All examinations were carried out on a 1.5 T scanner (Magnetom Vision, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). We used a black blood prepared segmented gradient-echo sequence (TE = 6.8 ms, TR = 11.25 ms, 250 mm FOV) with first order motion compensation along all three dimensions. Examinations included ECGtriggered breathhold acquisitions with a reference scan and three motion-sensitive measurements (in X-, y-and z-direction) for each slice. We examined 12 healthy volunteers and 20 patients with localized disturbances of myocardial motion due to non-acute myocardial infarction. Disturbances of myocardial motion were demonstrated using echocardiography. All patients showed corresponding perfusion defects in 99mTc-MIBI-SPECT at rest. Results: In healthy volunteers we found a high interindividual consistency of both radial and rotational veloeitles. We could also demonstrated a counterrotation of the basal versus the apical slices. In 14 of 16 patients we found localized areas of disturbed motion that corresponded weil with the perfusion defects demonstrated by 99mTc-MIBI-SPECT. Four of twenty patients could not be evaluated due to variations of the heart position between subsequent breathhold periods. Conclusion: Measurements of myocardial motion using a segmented gradient echo sequence provide reliable velocity data both in healthy volunteers and patients with localized disturbances of myocardial motion. Purpose: To evaluate correlation in detecting left ventricular ejection fraction with MR-imaging and angiocardiography in patients with different cardiac diseases. Methods and Materials: 27 patients (mean age: 57 years) underwent cardiac MR-imaging at 1.0T (Gyroscan T 10NT, Philips). Three experienced radiologists detected the 'volume-ejection-fraction' (VEF, 3dimensional) and 'area-Iength-ejection-fraction' (ALEF, 2-dimensional) independently without acquaintance of angiographic measurementresults. For calculation the 'cardiac-application-software' (Philips) was used. MR-sequences: short axis: FFE-EPI, breath-hold-technique, ECG-gating, TR: 857 ms, TE 11 ms, slices: 8-10, slice-thickness: 8 mm; long axis/4-chamber-view: TFE, breath-hold-technique, ECGgating, TR: 9.6 ms, TE: 4.5 ms, 3 slices, slice-thickness: 8 mm. Statistical analysis was performed using SAS-software (Anova). Results: Mean deviaton from ALEF detected by MR and angiographically estimated ejection-fraction (Simpson's formula) was 6.6% (sd: 14.8%; r = 0.80). Mean deviation in MR-measurements of VEF and ALEF was 1.9% (sd: 8.65; r = 0.89). MR-quantification of VEF and ALEF did not reveal statistically significant differences concerning inter-and intraobserver-reliability. The average MR-study lasted about 30 minutes. Conclusion: MR-assessment of VEF and ALEF at 1.0Tesla can be performed reliably using the 'cardiac-application'-software. Correlation of quantification of ejection-fractions acquired by invasive angiocardiography and MRI is acceptable. High inter-and intraobserver-reliability in MR-measurements demonstrate the method to be investigatorindependent. ms/1.25 x 0.8 mm2) at rest and during hyperemia (dipyridamole 0.56 mg/kg). From the MR-data LV mass, global left-ventricular (LV) functional parameters were derived. To obtain estimates of MBF in ml/min/g, CSF was divided by the mass of drained myocardium. N13 ammonia PET was used to measure MBF at rest and during hyperemia (dipyridamole 0.56 mg/kg) in 64 regions covering the LV. Results: PET and MR measurements of CFR agreed with a mean difference of 0.6 ± 13.4% (mean ± SD) and estimates of MBF in ml/min/g were similar (3 ± 17%). Intra-and inter-observer variabilities for CSF were 0 ± 9%/5 ± 7%, and for CFR 3 ± 8%1-2 ± 9%. Conclusion: MRI using eine-PC sequences is reliable to calculate coronary flow reserve and myocardial blood flow in rest and dipyridamol stress. (Submitted by Internet) Purpose: Comparison of a breath-hold, velocity-encoded, phasedifference magnetic resonance (MR) sequence for intracardiac shunt flow measurement with the invasive shunt size determination by oximetry. Methods and Materials: 11 patients with different cardiac shunts (7 ASD/3 VSD/1 PDA) and foul' healthy individuals were investigated at a 1.5 Tesla Siemens Vision system. For flow measurements a breathhold, veloeity-encoded, phase-difference magnetic resonance (MR) sequence was used ('through plane', FLASH 2D-sequence, TR/TE 110/5 ms, 'velocity encoding' 250 cm/s). Mean flow (mIlR-R interval) in the ascending aorta, the pulmonary trunk and the right and left pulmonary artery was determined. The ratio of the mean flow in the pulmonary eirculation (Op: sum of the mean flows in the right and left pulmonary arteries) and the systemic circulation (Os: mean flow in the proximal aorta) was compared with the Op/Os ratios determined by the invasive oximetric technique. Oximetry was performed within 24 hours after MR imaging. Results: In the 4 healthy individuals MR flow measurement yielded an Op/Os ratio of 0.96 ± 0.15. In the 11 patient with the various shunt defects, the non-invasive shunt determination by MR gave an Op/OS ratio of 1.99 ± 0.75. The percentage of the calculated shunt sizes was between 43.01 ± 21.99%. In comparison with the results determined by the invasive oximetric technique, the MR-data showed a strong correlation of I' =0.9. Conclusion: Breath-hold velocity-encoded, phase-difference MRtechnique enables a reliable quantification of cardiac shunts within a short acquisition time. Purpose: To assess left ventricular size and function in patients before and after partial left ventriculectomy by electron beam tomography (EBT) and echocardiography. Methods and Materials: 16 patients with dilatative cardiomyopathy (DCMP) were evaluated by EBT before and 4 weeks after partial left ventriculectomy. After intravenous administration of contrast material (90 ml, 3 mlls) 12-level function studies were carried out in the short axis (50 msec exposure time). Endocardial and epicardial borders were traced for volumetric assessment of the left ventricle. Echocardiography was performed after intravenous injection of 10 ml Levovist (300 mg/ml concentration). Leftventricular enddiastolic volume (LVEDV), endsystolic volume (LVESV), stroke volume (SV), ejection fraction (LVEF) and myocardial mass (MM) were measured. Results: Electron beam tomography demonstrated a reduction of LVEDV (315 ± 123 vs 171 ± 92 ml; p< .05), an improvement of LVEF (13 ± 11 vs 39 ± 14%, P < .05) and a reduction of MM (234 ± 53 vs 165 ± 52 g, P < .05). A reduction of LVEDV (183 ± 23 vs 120 ± 29 ml; p < .01) and an improvement of LVEF (20 ± 11 vs 39 ± 12%; p < .05) were found with echocardiography. Correlation between EBT and echocardiography was high regarding LVEF (I' =0.88; P < .001) and moderate concerning LVEDV (I' =0.67; P =0.051). Conclusion: EBT is a reliable noninvasive modality for demonstrating left ventricular size reduction and functional impravement after partial left ventriculectomy. (Submitted by Internet) 115 Aortic compliance and functional determinants of the heart A Ruppert-Kohlmayr, R. Rienmüller, Ch. Baumgartner; GrazlA Purpose: The changes of the transversal area of the ascending aorta over the cardiac cycle reflect the aortic compliance. A hypothesis was postulated that degreasing aortic compliance may negatively influence myocardial perfusion and was by itself dependent on strake volume, caleification score and age. Patients and Methods: 108 patients (mean age 59.8 ± 10.1) with angiographically determined extent of coronary heart disease were studied by Electron Beam Tomography (EBT) to measure myocardial perfusion, stroke volume and coranary calcium score. The relative aortic compliance was determined as percentual changeof the transversal area of the ascending aorta frorn endsystole to enddiastole in %/ms. Results: The quantitative evaluation revealed for relative aortic compliance 7.02 ± 5.1 (%/ms) for stroke volume 69.2 ± 19.5 (mi) for myocardial perfusion 62.2 ± 18.4 (m1/100 g/min) and for coronary calcium score 613.4 ± 1430.98. A significant (p < 0.001) relationship (r = -0.62) was found between increasing age and degreasing aortic compliance. There was no significant correlation between coronary calcium score (as a relative measure of atherosclerosis) the stroke volume (as a relative measure of cardiac work), the relative aorlic compliance and the myocardial perfusion. Conclusion: Using EBT it is possible to measure the relative aortic compliance which significantly correlate with palient's age however in this study does not correlate with myocardial perfusion, stroke volume and coronary calcium score. indicative of malignant transformation: volumetric increase of mass, loss of signal homogeneity, precence of necrolic areas and unhomogeneous contrast enhancement. Four or 3 signs suggested respectively a certain or hardly suspected diagnosis of transformation, while only 2.1 or 0 elements led to a negative verdict. Results: 6 malignant transformations was diagnosed or hardly suspected. In the remaining 3 cases MR showed only 2 or 1 elements, so malignity was only suspected; in no cases no malignant sign was found. Conclusion: Perfect correlation between MR and histopathological findings was only in 6/9 patients (66%). MR is a usefull techique to demonstrate the transformation, in a good percentage of patients, or, at least, to identify the biopsy candidated ones. (Subm itted by Internet) 10:40 [TRlTIITE/excitations] ). Images were scored regarding number, slze and location of lesions, diffuse abnormalities and presence/hindrance of artefacts by 2 experienced radiologists separate and in consensus. Results: Of aillesions 48% were scored at both sequences, 29% were only detected by the fast STIR, 23% only by CSE. In total Fast STIR enabled deteclion of more lesions than the CSE sequence (ns). Fast Stir sequence showed in more patients diffuse abnormalities (p =0.017). Interobserver agreement for diffuse abnormalities was somewhat lower with fast STIR than CSE, although not significant. Conclusion: The fast STIR sequence, though hindered by more artifacts, is a useful adjunct to CSE in detecting both focal, as previously described, and diffuse MS abnormalities in the spinal cord. Purpose: The sophisticated analysis of epi-and subdural fine structures in degenerative and posttraumatic disorders of the spine requires high resolutuion transversal plane MRI. In order to improve fine structure depictability three recently designed T2w sequences were compared in transversal plane MRI of the spine. Methods and Materials: Turbo Spin-Echo (TSE), CISS and MEDIC transversal plane images (Magnetom Vision, 1.5 T) of 20 patients suffering from different spinal disorders were compared independently by two experienced neuroradiologists. Results: While CISS images showed the highest contrast for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) versus spinal cord and nervous roots the image contrast between CSF and bony or disk structures was rather poor. By severe folding artifacts CISS was Iimited to cervical spine imaging. In MEDIC images the contrast between CSF and cord and subdural fine structures was slightly less compared with CISS but the depictability of disk and vertebral disorders was improved. The quality of TSE images was impaired by sensitivity to vascular and other motion artifacts. Conclusion: Because of optimal contrast resolution and the absence of folding artifacts MEDIC was the only sequence suitable for transversal plane imaging of all parts of the spine. Results and Conelusions: Image noise as weil as streaklike artifacts harnper diagnostic quality of CT within the cerebellar region. By VAR image noise as weil as some artifacts can be reduced. An improved diagnost ic evaluation seems possible without an increased radiation exposure. (Submilted by Internet) radiologists will be performing these examinations. They will work with basic scientists to develop antibody containing contrast media attaching themselves to the smallest image detectable lesions. The interventional GI radiologists of the future will administer vascular, biliary, chemo and gene therapy. They will introduce stents , filters and computer chips controlling deficient physiology, e.g., incontinence. The GI diagnostic and interventional radiologists will be essential in delivering modern medicine at an affordable price. The future ls bright. 126 MRI-1971 (2) RoomA In September of 1971 it occurred to me that general methods for making images from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) signals could be devised by applying known magnetic field gradients. The first images were made in 1972 and published in 1973. From the beginning it was evident that all of the powerful and sophisticated methods of NMR spectroscopy could also be used in imaging, and those branches of the field of magnetie resonance have continued to enrich one another. Scaling up magnets to human size took longer, but within a few years our laboratory and others were making images of humans. Radiologists soon became interested , and clinical systems were produced by manufacturers . Versalility, speed and image quality have increased during the past 20 years as applications to research and to diagnostic radiology have multiplied. Will the curve of innovation have f1attened by the beginning of the third millennium? Probably not, because it ls being driven by complementary forces. Widening usage for routine radiology, especially with "open" systems , is maintaining unit sales. Special c1inical applications, including angiography, cardiac diagnos is, and interventional procedures are driving practical innovations. Research areas, such as functional brain imaging and metabolic investigation s by in vive spectroscopy continue to stimulate advanced research and spin off new c1inical applications . 2001 is easy to foresee. 3001, on the other hand, is impossible . In that far future, not only the technology of MR, but the needs for it, are beyond our powers of predietion, as is the social context. One can almost imagine making usefu l predictions for 2101, but the temptation should be resisted. Bronchogenic carcinoma is the most common primary lung neoplasm and displays variable radiologic features that reflect the underlying pathology. Adenocarcinoma manifests as a peripheral nodule or mass of variable border characteristics . Bronehioloalveolar earcinoma , may manifest as consolidation or multifocal disease . Squamous cell cercinoma is typically central and may produce atelectasis or pneumonia . Small cell carcinoma manifests as a central mass with extensive Iymphadenopathy. Additional manifestations of bronchogen ie eareinomas inelude cavitation, Pancoast Syndrome, and superior vena cava syndrome. Carcinoid is an uncommon malignant neoplasm that typically manifests as a well-marginated nodule or mass. Lesions may be completely endobronehial, partially endobronchial, or elosely related to a bronchus. Metastases are the most eommon pulmonary neoplasms and manifest as multifocal masses with well-defined borders and an angiocentrie distribution. They are typically peripherallesions located in the lower lobes. Unusual manifestations include solitary nodules, calcification , cavitation, and Iymphangitie carcinomatosis. Localized fibrous tumor, an uneommon pleural neoplasm , manifests as an enhaneing mass of heterogeneous attenuation. Diffuse malignant mesothelioma, the most eommon primary pleural neoplasm, manifests as pleural effusion , pleural masses, or both. CT shows circumferential nodular pleural thickening. Metastases, the most common pleural neoplasms, manifest as pleural effusions or solid masses. Malignant ehest wall neoplasms include metastases, chondrosarcoma and myeloma . The GI radiologists of the future must first be physicians using all imaging modalities to diagnose or treat disease. They will be members of teams of physicians and surgeons equipped and trained in managing specific diseases. Computer Iiteracy will be essential. Expertise in PACS will be required. Besides understand ing what clinicians expect from them, the GI radiologists of the future will use all imaging modalities, e.g., digital plain films and contrast studies, ultrasound, computed tomography and MR. Their computer expertise will advance the use of artif icial intelligence programs for selecting the optimal modality and protocols for the given data. As virtua l CT or MR endoscopy will be used for screening genetically susceptible individuals, the GI Deteetion of a mediastinal mass essentially remains the role of chest radiography. CT is the next logical step and is often suffieient to suggest a Iimited differential diagnosis adequate for a further invasive proeedure and therapeutie deeisions. MR imaging provide additional information in seleeted cases , This review will emphasized radiologie-pathologie correlations on primary tumors and eysts of lhe mediastinum . Tissue eomponents, as shown by CT or MR seans, together with size, shape and precise location according to the situation within mediastinal cornpartments , are the leading edge of the diagnosis of a mediastinal mass. Attenuation values at CT and signal intensity at MRI give mueh more detailed information than ehest film concerning the tissular compos ition of the mass. The diagnosis ean be at least partly suggested based on lhe major component of a mass: fatty, cystie or solid tissue. Additional information can also be obtained from the degree and type of vaseularity of the lesion thanks to eontrast enhancement after IV injeetion of contrast media. This presentation will demonstrate the pathologie support of these findings in various types of mediastinal masses . Purpose: Clinical studies have correlated progress of cirrhosis with alterations of liver hemodynamic indices. In this study we investigated the influence of cirrhosis on portal vein (PV) hemodynamics in cirrhotic rats. Methods and Materials: The study comprised 40 male Wistar rats assigned in 4 groups: group I (controls) received 0.2 ml intragastric (IG) normal saline, and groups 11, 111, and IV an IG weekly dose of 0.2 ml of CC14, for 1, 3 and 4 weeks respectively. Doppler hemodynamic measurements of PV done in all groups at the above intervals, included: Time Averaged Mean Velocity (TAMV), Flow volume (FV) and Congestive index (CI). Liver pathologie examination was done after the vascular measurements. Results: Control livers showed non-specific changes. Liver sections from group 11 exhibited bridging fibrosis, and focal incomplete cirrhotic nodules; those from groups 111 and IV revealed weil developed cirrhosis. The variance of TAMV and FV values (decreasing from group I to IV) and CI values (increasing from group I to IV) was statistically significant (p = 0.0002 for TAMV and FV, p < 0.0291 for CI). Conclusion: Our results support previous clinical reports, demonstrating that portal vein doppler indices can be used with confidence to evaluate the course of liver cirrhosis. Purpose: To compare the effect of intravenous infusion versus bolus injection of glucagon on the superior mesenteric arterial (SMA) flow using duplex/color Doppler sonography Methods and Materials: Eight healthy volunteers were studied resting and fasted. Each subject had bolus and infusion studies performed on separate days. Baseline measurements of SMA flow were performed. Either 1 mg of glucagon as a bolus or as an infusion of 40 mcg/minute was administered. SMA flow parameters were recorded over 20-30 minutes. Results: The time averaged mean velocity (TAMV) was significantly higher after bolus glucagon injection compared to the infusion technique (median TAMV were 22.6 cm/s {ranges 15.0-49.1} compared to 15.6 cm/s {range 5.1-19.5}; P < 0.005). Median TAMV increment for bolus was 11.5 cm/s (range 3.0 to 23.7) compared to 5.0 cm/s (range -2.6 to 13.0) (P < 0.05). Time taken to reach peak flow was significantly shorter for bolus (P < 0.05). Conclusion: The effect of bolus injection of glucagon on SMA flow is signifcantly greater compared to the infusion technique and would therefore provide a more effective stress stimulus in clinical practice. Purpose: To compare the safety and efficacy of an oral ultrasound contrast agent (SonoRx®), Bracco SPA) with that of water for delineating abdominal anatomy and pathology Methods and Materials: Fifty-three adult patients were enrolled in a single-blind, randomized, multicenter, crossover trial. Patients were given a baseline sonogram, which was repeated following ingestion of 400 mL of either SonoRx® or water. Within 4 days patients were studied using the opposite agent. Investigators and off-site readers were blinded to the agent administered. Results: Both SonoRx and water provided additional information over the baseline ultrasound exam. SonoRx provided additional information over water in 65% of studies evaluated for efficacy and water provided additional information over SonoRx® in 25%. In 8 cases (17%) SonoRx® idenlified a diagnosis not made with water; and in 2 cases (4%) SonoRx helped rule out an incorrect diagnosis made from the water study. A total of 13/51 patients experienced adverse events after SonoRx® administration and 6/53 patients experienced adverse events after water (25% vs.. 11%, P > 0.05). The most frequent complication for both agents was diarrhoea (SonoRx® 12%, water 4%) Conclusion: SonoRx® is safe and efficacious for improving the sonographie visualization of abdominal anatomy and provides significantly more diagnostic information than water. Chairpersons: H. OZER (lzmirITR) P. PIPEROPOULOS (Athens/GR) Purpose: To assess the rote of an echo-enhancing agent (Levovist™) in the assessment of the portal venous (PV) system prior to liver transplantation. Methods and Materials: 33 patients undergoing liver transplant assessment who had incomplete visualisation of the PV system on routine colour Doppler ultrasound (CDUS) examination were selected. A standardised examination was performed before and after injection of t.evovist" and diagnostic confidence (DC) recorded for both examinations using a free analogue score. In a subgroup of patients, the diagnosis was compared with that made following further investigations performed within two weeks of the study examination, including aortoportography, computed tomography and laparotomy findings. . Results: DC was improved in 94% of patients. DC was 90% or more In 58% of patients following enhancement compared with a DC of greater than 60% in only 9% of patients with unenhanced CDUS. The mean DC was 45% (+/-19%) before and 83% (+/-17%) after Levovist (p < 0.001). The echo-enhanced CDUS findings were concordant with other imaging in 80% of patients. Conclusion: Visualisation of the PV system in patients with inadequate CDUS examination due to beam attenuation and poor beam vessel angles is significantly improved by administration of Levovist™. (Submitted by Internet) 14:00-15:30 Methods and Materials: We studied prospeetively 123 patients with persistenlly elevated liver enzymes for at least 6 months and positive hepatitis C serum markers. All patients underwent Iiver biopsy. The following data were eolleeted: age, 17 bioehemieal and 14 ultrasonographie parameters. Results: Multivariate analysis showed signifieanee in the following c1inieal and bioehemieal data: sonograph ie findings were eorrelated with the presenee of esophageal variees seen at endoseopy on the same day. Results: Endoseopy showed esophageal variees in 45/85 patients (52.9%). D-US permilled to visualize LGV in 32/45 (71.1%) and showed hepatofugal flow in 22/32 (68.8%). None of the eontrol subjeets showed hepatofugal flow in the LGV at D-US. Conelusion: hepatofugal blood flow in LGV in Iiver eirrhosis is often assoeiated with the presenee of esophageal variees and is therefore a useful sonographie indieator of portal hypertens ion. With these variables we built a prognost ie index between 0 and 21.5 points. When the score was greater than 6 there was a statistieally signifieant probability (p < 0.001) of having eirrhosis, with sensitivity of 62%, specifieity of 94%, PPV of 68% and NPV of 92%. Conelusion: Our c1inieal and US score is a useful way to rule out eirrhosis in patients with ehronie hepat ie disease eaused by hepatitis C virus. Purpose: To evaluate the sensitivity of eolor-Doppler-US (CD) in malfunetioning TIPS. Methods and Materials: Our study included 53 angiographie TIPS revisions, all preeeeded by CD; 16/53 shunts were oecluded, 37/53 malfunetional. In the first group the sensitiv ity of CD was ealeulated; in the seeond flow volume (FV) and intrahepat ic portal hemodynamics were eompared with preeeeding data from the same TIPS when funetional. Results: The sensitivity of CD in diagnosing oeclusion was 100% (16/16). Regarding the deteetion of malfunetional TIPS, the sensitivity of FV < = 11/min, FV < = 1/2 initial-FV, and FV < =2/3 initial-FV was, respectively, 68% (25/37),43% (16/37) , and 57% (21/37). The sensitivity of re-establishment or hepatopetal flow in intrahepatie portal branehes was 59%. Combining the three parameters (FV < = 1 I/min, redueed by at least 1/3 in comparison to the initial-FV, with hepatopetal flow downstream from the shunt), the sensitivity of CD was 76% (28/37) . Conelusion: CD deteets all occluded shunts. While combined findings reaeh an aeeeptable level of sensitivity, there are still no sufficiently reliable CD parameters whieh ean substitute the angiograph ie evaluation in suspeeted TIPS malfunetion. (Submitted by Internet) Purpose: To evaluate the eontribution of eontrast-enhaneed 3D US in the diagnosis of Iiver lesions by volumetrie analysis of tumor and intratumoral vaseularity. Methods and Materials: Forty patients with elassified liver masses were examined with the US deviee Siemens Sonoline® Elegra (Siemens, Germany). All patients reeeived Levovist® (Schering , Germany) as a continuous infusion (1 ml/min) in a eoneentration of 300 mg/mI. Native and contrast-enhaneed freehand 3D US (Eehoteeh®, Germany) were performed. After the whole volume has been aequired volumetr ie analysis of the tumor and intratumoral vessels were obtained. Results: In all US examinations the intratumoral vessel volume inereased after eontrast agent applieation . The eoefficient vessel volume / tumor volume inereased in foeal nodular hyperplasias (native: 0.059, Levovist: 0.280) and hepatoeellular eareinomas (native: 0.011, Levovist: 0.099) due to their hypervaseularity. Hemangiomas revealed a moderate inerease of the eoeffieient from 0.015 native to 0.086 after Levovist applieation . In metastases the values varied eorresponding to their vaseularity. Conelusion: Freehand 3D US of liver lesions enables real-time volumetrie rendering and improves the aeeuraey of intratumoral vaseularity assessment. However, so far no eharaeteristie volume parameters for all different liver lesions could be determined. Purpose: To investigate the elinical use of the Doppler Perfusion Index (DPI) of the Liver in obesity. Methods and Materials: The study group ineluded fifty-one obese patients [body mass index (BMI) >30 Kg/m2] . The eontrol group eomprised 18 volunteers with normal or slightly inereased weight. Age, BMI, waist to hip ratio (WHR) , DPI, liver funetion tests, serum triglycerides were measured in all individuals. Thirty patients of the study group underwent liver biopsy during bariatrie surgery. Purpose: To determine the optimal CM dosage for best image quality and sensitivity in abdominal spiral C'I. Methods and Materials: The kidneys and pancreas of 225 patients and the Iiver of 223 patients were measured with spiral CT after application of different CM dosages. The patients were prospectively randomized into 4 groups and got 120, 150, 180 or 210 ml lopamidol, respectively. The contrast increase of Iiver, pancreas, and kidneys and of the main abdominal vessels were measured in HU. The measurement was performed every 5 seconds after CM application and image quality was evaluated by two independant radiologists. Interfering factors like patients age, weight, size, diseases or therapy were considered. Results: Although the density rose proportional to the applicated CM dosage, no significant difference in image qualitiy and detectability of lesions between the 4 groups was found. Only tendencies could be shown with preference of 120 ml CM for evaluation of the pancreas and 180 ml over all organs. Nevertheless 120 ml lopamidol are sufficient for a safe diagnosis. Conclusion: The choice of the CM dosage in abdominal spiral CT should be organ-specific. If there is no such detailed inquiry 120 ml are sufficient for the evaluation of the whole abdomen. 14:10 140 Breath-hold MR imaging of liver lesions with MnDPDP: comparison of contrast with biphasic CT P. van Dijk, P.E. Sijens, PA Wielopolski, M. Oudkerk; RotterdamlNL Purpose: The purpose of this study is to compare MRI breathhold sequences with CE-CT in delivering lesion to liver contrast before and after infusion of contrast medium. T1, T2 and a mix of T1 and T2 weighting sequences are considered in Iiver metastases, haemangioma, cysts and focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH). Methods and Materials: From 29 patients 22 presented with metastasis, 6 with a cyst, 4 with haemangioma and 2 with FNH. 35 metastases and the lesions from the other patients were evaluated for contrast by ROl's covering or surrounding the lesion. Imaging was performed om Siemens Magnetom and Somatom scanners. The medium MnDPDP (Teslascan®, Nycomed) was infused intravenously during 20 minutes at a rate of 2.5 ml/min and a dose of 0.005 mmol/kg. Imaging started again 30-60 minutes after the end of infusion. The following breathhold sequences were used. Turbo IR should make use of nulling fat and fat-Iike tissue by proper inversion timing of 140 ms. The liver, when containing Mn, is reduced in T1 and nu/led like 18t. A positive contrast for lesions results. Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of MR-imaging after admini-tration of superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) for patients with liver lesions. Methods and Materials: 30 patients with Iiver lesions and a history of malignant disease were examined after administration of SPIO (Endorem). The investigation was performed at a 1.5 Teslar unit (Philips Gyroscan S 15). We used proton density, T2 and T1 weighted SES before and after administration of contrast material. A total number of 30 patients had after MRI a surgical procedure with an intraoperative ultrasound. Results: The results of SPIO enhanced MRI were identically with the findings of intraoperative ultrasound in 26 patients. False positive results we had in 3 patients (2 scars, 1 hemangioma). In one palientthe liver metastases were misdiagnosed as hemangiomas. Conclusion: SPIO -MRI is a good noninvasive methode with no radiation exposure for the detection and localisation of potentially curable metastatic liver lesions, even if the sensitivity of intraoperative ultrasound is higher. In our study 86% of the Iiver lesions were detected and characterized correctly. SPIO-MRI alone is helpful for planning of additional diagnostic procedures. Purpose: The aim of this study is to show the alterations of Iiver abscesses by computed tomography (CT) and ultrasound (US) during medical treatment. Methods and Materials: Twenty six patients with Iiver abscesses were inciuded in this study. The abscesses were initially detected by US and cr. The final diagnosis was confirmed by percutaneous fine needle aspiration. Bacterial cultures and cytology were obtained. After initial assessment all patients received antibiotic therapy and imaging studies were repeated after 12-14 days. Decrease of the maximum diameter of the lesion about 50% was an evidence for treatment response and its continuity. In failure of antibiotics fine needle therapeutic aspirations were performed. Results: Successful medical treatment had 7 patients. The appearance of liver abscesses depended on the medical treatment response. Beside the size alteration on CT the density was diminished and the fluid nature increased, while on US echogenic lesions became more echolucent. The soft margins of the lesions and their homogeneity were prominent on treatment. Conclusion: Imaging modalities as CT and US are very useful not only to detect liver abscesses but also to follow their response to treatment and facilitate the final decision for intervention. 14:40 143 Doppler perfusion index of benign liver tumors A. Adoniou, K. Kyriakopoulou, E. lIiopoulou, S. Trakadas; AthenslGR Purpose: To evaluate Doppler Perfusion Index in the diagnosis of Benign Liver tumors Methods and Materials: Eleven patients with benign liver tumors (10 hemangioma, 1 multiple adenomas) were stud ied by Spiral CT, MRI and Color Doppler ultrasound . Doppler Perfus ion Index measurments were carried out after 12 hours fasting . Results: C'I, MRI and Real Time findings were diagnostic for Hemangiomas. In the case of multiple liver adenomas the diagnosis was histology proven, DPI measurments range was 0.12--0.18. Conclusion: Doppler Index Perfusion measurments is highly sensit ive in the diagnosis of benign liver tumors . 14:50 144 Malignancy in patients with Iiver transplantation: a role for diagnostic imaging? A. Veltri Conclusion: The incidence of post-Ol,T malignant tumors is relat ively high ; radiolog ie follow-up is sufficiently accurate for early detection but, due to the immunosuppression, it is difficult to improve prognosis. Purpose: To evaluate the change in the square index of liver segment on CT in liver cirrhosis (lC) patlents to determine its value in follow-up. Methods and Materials: Eighteen patients with lC were included in this study. Abdominal CT scans were performed twice in each patient and the mean follow-up period was 17.8 months (5-38 months) . We measured the square index of right lobe and the media l and lateral segment of the longitud inal diameters. Acco rding to Child classification, the palients were c1assified as either progression or non-progress ion group of lC. We correlated the square index wilh the two groups . Results: On the progression group (n = 10), the changes in the mean square index on firsUfollow-up CT were 102.9/83.5 in the right lobe, 21 .6/16.5 in the left lobe medial segment, and 48.2/44.5 in the left lobe lateral segment. On the non-progression group (n =8), the changes in the mean square index were 95.6/96.7 in the right lobe, 32.9/18.9 in the left lobe medial segment, and 54. 1/50.8 in the left lobe lateral segment. The square index of the left lobe medial segment was sign ificantly decreased in not only the progression group but also in the nonprogression group. The square index of the right lobe was significantly decreased only in the progression group . There was no significant change in the square index of the left lobe lateral segment. Conclusion: The square index of the left lobe medial segment is a more sens itive index than Child c1assificalion in predicting the progre ssion of lC. The square index of the right lobe is a valuable in determining the progression of lC. Purpose: To assess the efficacy of MR and Spiral-CT in the evaluation of lesions after radiological treatment. Methods and Materials: 14 liver lesions , treated radiologically with percutaneous Radiofrequency Thermal ablation (RADIONICS, Burlington, MA) and embolization andlor ethanol injection have been studied before and after treatment with MR (Magneton Vision Plus, Siemens, Erlangen-Philips NT, The Neterlands) and Spiral CT (Tomoscan SVA, Philips -The Netherlands). Controls have been performed at 1-3-6 months. At imaging modalities lesion size after Thermal Ablation, regular ity of the periferal rim, signal intens ity on T2w images (TSE and HASTE ) dens ity and signal intensity before and after iv contrast injection were evaluated . Results: Follow-up ranged between 1-7 months, mean 5.3 months: 9 lesions where stable, 2 lesions decrease in size, recurrence occurred in 3 cases , appearing as irregularity of the per iferal rim, and hyper intens ity on T2w images. T1w images suffered of hyper intense signal of the lesions after treatment that often prevent to detect early enhancement areas after contrast. Conclusion: MR and Spiral CT seem to be reliable imaging modalilies in assessing recurrence in radiologically treated lesions; especially with hypervascular lesions we believe that Spiral -CT allows to a a more confident diagnosis. Results: Surgery diagnosed 9 IMH (7 without and 2 with intimal tears): CT abnormality were located on the same aortic wall usually involved by false-Iumen of dissections. Three cases demonstrated stopped aortic ruptures: CT lesions appeared in ascending aorta on the opposite site than usual false-Iumen. In one aortitis the thickening involved 360 0 of the aortic wall and was characterized by a slight contrast enhancement. Other surgical diagnoses were: two false aneurysms, one IMH due to penetrating ulcers. Conclusion: CT evidence of hyperdense thickening of thoracic aortic wall must be related to acute lesions caused by IMH with or without intimal tear, rupture, ulceration or aortitis. Criteria of site, extension and contrast enhancement make easier the differential diagnosis. Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic value of CT-angiography (CTA) in the preoperative study of abdominal aorta (AA) aneurysms. Methods and Materials: 86 patients with clinically/sonographically known or suspected AA aneurysm had undergone spiral CTA of the AA Parameters were: slice thickness 3.2 mm, increment 2 mm, 120 kv, 360 mAS. 120-150 ml of iodinate contrast material were given intravenously via an injector at a rate of 3 ml/sec. Results: 76 aneurysms ofthe AA and 47 ofthe iliac arteries (lA) were depicted. 39 aneurysms of the AA (and the coexisting aneurysms of I.A) were surgically managed. CTA provided accurate depiction of the morphology and dimensions of the aneurysms and clearly showed their anatomic relations with the origin of main arterial trunks, the presence of thrombus and plaques, the perianeurysmal space and, also other unsuspected aneurysms of IA These information permitted accurate surgical planning and were confirmed intraoperatively. Conclusion: CTA is a highly accurate and minimally invasive examination, which in most cases can provide all the necessary information for the surgical tretment planning of AA. and I.A. aneurysms. Results: All follow-up-studies revealed a correct location of the aortic protheses. In 85.1 % of all patients there was detected either no or negligible persisting inflammatory tissue with a diameter less than 2 mm. 10.6% demonstrated reduced inflammatory tissue. In 4.3% the extent of inflammatory tissue had not changed. Pre-and post-contrast CT enables to differentiate between aneurysm-bleeding and persisting inflammatory tissue, which shows strong contrast enhancement. Aneurysms of the anastomoses, morphologic renal changes and aortoenteric fistulas were depicted by CT as postoperative complications. Conclusion: In evaluating recurrence of the aneurysm and possible complications as weil as the development of inflammatory tissue, postoperatively performed CT proved to be a reliable diagnostic method. 85.1 % of IAA's either demonstrate complete remission or considerable regression of the perianeurysmal inflammatory tissue postoperatively. CT is superior in differentiating persisting inflammatory tissue from possible aneurysm-bleeding. Purpose: Different types of aortic coarctation (AC) have been described. Authors analyze the capabilities ofaxial, multiplanar and 3D CT images to obtain a morphological evaluation of AC without invasive studies. Methods and Materials: 8 cases of AC have been diagnosed and evaluated by SpiralCT. Slice 3 mm, pitch 1.6-1.8, time 24s, flow 3-5 ml/s and 80-100 ml of l.v, contrast medium. Results: Transverse images are inadequate for a correct demonstration of stenotic area, of prestenotic aorta and of associated tortuosities. 3D images optimize the representation of the site and of the length of the stenosis, the site and the dilatation of intercostal arteries. Multiplanar images, obtained with the reference of 3D images, prove correct measure of prestenotic, stenotic and poststenotic lumen, of the distance between subclavian artery and stenosis. Evaluation of the size of stenotic lumen is correct in long stenoses, but can be underestimated in cases of thin and narrow stenoses. The association of MPR and 3D images gives a complete morphological demonstration; MIP images are time-expensive and dont add anymore usefull informations. Conclusion: Spiral CT gives appropriate morphological data usefull for the treatment choices of AC, expecially for stenting treatment. (Submitted by Internet) source was the inferior mesenteric artery (type *, n = 2), if dorsolateral (type e , n = 3), it was supplied by either the lumbar arteries or the median sacral artery via the hypogastric artery. One remarkable circumferential endoleak defied adequate evaluation at both CT and angiography. Conventional radiography detected a rupture of the stent mesh in the middle of the prosthesis (type -. n = 1). Aortography visualized an endoleak in only eight of 13 patients (61.5%). Conclusion: Based on its configuration and localization , the cause of an endoleak can be determined by CT in the majority of cases. Ruptures of stent mesh secondary to material fatigue are best detected using convent ional radiographic techniques . HE. Quality evaluat ion for vessel demonstration showed mean values between 1.22 and 1.57 for the abdominal aorta, visceral, renal and iliac arter ies. All accessory renal arte ries (9) and relevant vessel stenoses of aort ic branches were demonstrated with EBT-CTA as compared to MRA and DSA. Conclusion: EBT with 140 slices and slice reconstruction every 2 mm offers a high z-axls-resolution resulting in high-quality CT-angiographies of the whole abdominal aorta and its branches. 14:55 154 SCTA in complex minimally Invasive Imaging of intracranlal AVM AV. Savello, DV Svistov; SI. Petersburg/C/S Purpose: To evaluate the oppo rtunities of SCTA in imaging of intracran ial AVM and SCTA application in complex minimally invasive diagnostics . Methods and Materials: 18 patients with intracranial AVM were studied by means of SCTA, DSA and transcran ial doppler, 5 of them in acute subarachnoid hemorrhage con-dition . The results are confirmed at surgery. Results: SCTA has allowed to detect AVM in all cases. It was possible to detect feeding arteries, draining vlens, AVM nidus. The minimal size of detected AVM was 3 mm. The risk of hyperaemic complications due to normal perfusion pressure breakthrough is one of the main factors of AVM operability. Retrospect ively determined critical values of angiographic and flow parameters were the next (accuracy): AVM volume (cm3) >32.6 (70.8%); diameter of feeding arteries (mm) >3.96 (60.7%); BFV in feeding arteries (cm/sec) >118.8 (71.7%); pulsatility <0.535 (70%); reactivity <18.9 (83.3 %). Thus, application of SCTA allows in most cases to make the decision about further medi-cal tactics according to the risk of perioperative comp lications. Conclusion: SCTA is a valuable method of intracranial AVM imaging . It is reasonably to use SCTA as a first step, especially in urgent patients. Purpose: Ta evaluate the role of contrast mediumapplication techn iques in CT_Angiography (SCTA) of pulmonary arter ies. Methods and Materials: SCTA was performed in 69 Patients without pulmonary hypertension for exclusion of pulmonary embolism. scanprotocolls included collimation , table feed and reconstruct ion increment of 2, 4 and 1 mm, respectively, contrast medium applicat ion (Ultrav ist 300) 150 ml + 40 ml normal saline at 4 ml/s (protocol A, 27 patients) , 5 ml/s (protocol B, 22 patients) or 120 ml + 60 ml at 4 mlls (protocol C, 20 patients). Mean time_density curves and standard deviations were recorded. Siemens_CARE_Bolus _Package allows semiautomatic scantriggering. Accuracy of scantiming was documented for pitfalls. Results: Protocol C has significantly shorter enhancement (20% decrease after maximum enhancement (ME» 37.6 (range 35.6 to 39.6) compared to Band A (42.7 and 45 .5), p < 0.01. Protocol B tends to higher ME (345HU) than A and C (268 and 268 HU, P < 0.09). CARE-Bo lus performs 1-4 additional monitorscans after trigge r leading to delays of 2.1 s in protocol A and 3.1 s in B. Conclusion: 1) Protocols A and B appear advantagous over C for langer scans (>20 s). 2) Small vessels may be easier recognized with 5 ml/s. This may be important for deteclion of subsegmental pathology. 3) Semiautomatic bolustr igger does not exactly trigger the scan . Purpose: To demonstrate the suitability of low concentrated lodinated Contrast Agents (ICA) in thorae ie spiral CT examinations for Pulmonary Embolism (PE). Methods and Materials: 59 patients referred for suspected or proven PE were prospectively evaluated in !wo centers with helical eT using either Xenetix® 200 (n = 30) or lomeron® 200 (n = 29). ICA were randomly allocated while both patient and investigator remained blinded regarding the contrast agent. A single bolus of 120 to 140 ml of ICA was injected after or without a test dose. The recorded parameters were: (a) overall and per site quality of vascular enhancement (b) quantification of artefacts c) diagnostic contribution of enhanced images (d) frequency of adverse reactions over a 2-hour follow-up period. Results: -Global Image Quality was graded as good or excellent in 54/58 evaluated patients (27/29 for both ICA). -Image Quality per slte (aorta, pulmonary arteries and veins, vena cava) was never graded nil or poor. -Significant artefacts were observed at vena cava level in 2 cases (Iomeron). -Enhanced CT scans provided diagnostic informations in every case. Methods and Materials: 27 patients with non-dissecting AAA underwent a spiral CT prior and 2 times post-operatively (1-3 weeks, 6-9 months) after stent placement (Vanguard, Talent) with the following parameters: 3 mm slice thickness, 5 mm table feed, 2 mm reconstruction interval, 150 ml l.v, contrast material, 3.5 ml/s, 25 s scan delay, 250 mAs, 120 kV. 16 virtual views (120) were reconstructed along the path with one branch to each iliac artery (EasyVision, Philips) and compared to MIPs (5 projections) and axial slices. Visualization of the proximal stent end in relation to the renal arteries, the stent position, possible endoleaks, stenoses, thrombi and distal stent connection (scale: --,-, +, ++) were evaluated. Results: Homogeneous aortic opacification was achieved in all patients. In the first postoperative controls, 1 stent was occluded (axials ++, MIP ++, VE ++) and could be reopened through lysis and treated by "stent-in-stent" technique. In the second control, 5 patients showed contrast material outside the stent at the height of the aortic bifurcation, a CM-reflux starting from the distal connection occured in 1 patient (endoleaks: axials ++, MIP +, VE-). In 4 patients, the nitinol stent was placed proximal to a renal artery without consecutive stenosis (axial r, MIP +, VE ++). Conclusion: Axial slices cannot be replaced by MIPs or VE in the detection of endoleaks. The anatomical representation of the entire stent is most successful on MIPs and the relation stentlrenal artery is best visualized on VE. 14: 00-15:30 Room E2 CARDIAC EI 203 Imaging of coronary vessels (1) Chairpersons Methods and Materials: In this prospective study 20 patients with cardiac chest pain were examined with MR coronary angiography and conventional angiography. The MR coronary angiography was performed using a 1.5 T scanner with an ECG-triggered 3d-FLASH-sequence with retrospective respiratory gating in navigator technique. Evaluation of the MR coronary angiography was done by two radiologists blinded to the results of the conventional angiography. Results: 1 patient was excluded from further evaluation due to reduced image quality. Conventional coronary angiography excluded CAD in 8/19 patients, 11/19 patients showed overall 20 hemodynamically significant stenoses (>50%) or occlusions. With MR coronary angiography, CAD was excluded in 7 patients correctly, 1 patient was false positive, 1 patient was false negative. 14/20 stenoses and occlusions were detected, 5 stenoses were diagnosed false positive. Sensitivity and specificity for primary diagnosis of CAD were 91% and 88%, for detection of coronary artery stenoses 70% and 91%, respectively. Conclusion: In 95% of the examined patients MR Coronary Angiography using Navigator technique allows for a diagnosis of hemodynamically significant stenoses or occlusions and, therefore, for primary diagnosis of CAD. 14:10 and a total of 76 distal anastomosis (singular and sequential grafts) were studied at 1.5 Tesla using a phased array body coil. A 2D T2-weighted breath-hold turbospin-echo sequence (HASTE) and a 3D breath-hold contrast enhanced MR-angiography sequence (FISP-3D) were performed. For the MRangiography (MRA) a bolus of 20 ml gadopentetate dimeglumine was used. The time delay for the contrast injection was calculated by a testbolus. All sequences were ECG gated. Reference method was coronary angiography performed within 14 days of MR imaging. The image material was evaluated independently by two radiologists. Results: With the HASTE sequence, 95% of the patent grafts were recognized (42/44), the specificity was 93% (14/15). The MRA showed both a sensitivity (41/44) and specificity (14/15) of 93%. The interobserver agreement for both sequences was good (Cohen's kappa = 87%, McNemar p = 56%). 49 of 59 (83%) of the patent distal graft anastomosis could be assessed with the HASTE sequence, 64% (38/59) were seen in the contrast-enhanced angiography. Only 2 of 8 (HASTE) and 4 of 8 (MRA) hemodynamically significant graft stenoses (>75%) were detected. Conclusion: The HASTE sequence and the 3D MRA are useful MRtechniques to evaluate the patency of CABGs. However, a reliable detection of graft stenoses seems not possible yet. 14:20 161 Navigator-echo-based respiratory gating for 3D-MR coronary angiography: results from healthy volunteers and patients with proximal coronary artery stenoses A. Huber, K. Nikolaou, P. Gonschior, A. Knez, M.F. Reiser; Munich/D The aim of the study was to investigate the value of a respiratorygated MR angiographic technique (MRCA) in identifying coronary arteries and to compare the results of MRCA with conventional coronary angiography. Twenty healthy volunteers and 20 patients with proximal coronary artery stenosis were examined on a 1.5 Tesla scanner with a cardiac and retrospective respiratory gated 3D gradient-echo-sequence. Visualization of coronary arteries was analyzed after curved MPR-Reconstruction in three defined segments. A 6-Point grading system was used to evaluate the image quality of 400 vessel segments. Detection of coronary artery stenosis was compared with conventional coronary angiography by two blinded readers. The proximal, middle and distal segment of the coronariy arteries were completely identified with or without luminal irregularities in 55%, 47% and 20% of the healthy volunteers respectively. For the patients respective data were 69%, 47% and 20%. A sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 50% was found for detection of stenoses by two blinded readers. The used MRCA allows a complete 3D visualization of main coronary arteries in cases with high image quality, but improvement of the navigator-echo-sequence is necessary for reliable assessment of coronary artery stenoses. Purpose: To detect patency-rate and graft-morphology of IMA-conduits early postoperatively and 1 year after myocardial revascularisation at an experienced cardiovascular center. Methods and Materials: From 1990 to 1997, 1023 patients underwent 1080 intraarterial digital subtraction angiographies (La.DSA) of the left IMA (L1MA). A 4-F-catheter-system was introduced into the left brachial artery. The first 80 angiograms were performed non-selectively with position of the catheter-tip in the proximal subclavian artery. In all consecutive angiographies the catheter-tip was positioned selectively into the ostium of the L1MA. Additionally 57 patients were reexamined about 1 year later. The images were mainly evaluated regarding graftpatency and morphology of the arterio-coronary anastomosis as weil as the native coronary system. Results: Patency-rate of the IMA-conduit was 96.2% early postoperatively and 98.2% one year after successful bypass-surgery. In contrast to the non-selective procedure, the selective approach resulted in a good evaluability of the arterio-coronary anastomosis (89.7%), the native coronary arte ries (84.4%), size of the revascularized myocardium as weil as the venous sinuses. Conclusion: At an experienced institution an IMA-patency-rate of 96.2% can be expected early postoperatively. Within the first year the occlusion-rate is 1.8%. l.a.DSA proved to be reliable in evaluating the IMA-bypass and lts function but should not be performed routinely because of its invasiveness. Purpose: The purpose of this study is to show quality diminishing artifacts in non-invasive coronary angiograms, determine their effect on the image quality, their rate of appearance, and their cause. Methods and Materials: The obtained data are transferred to a graphics-workstation and visualized at several angles using volume rendering software. Image processing techniques (e.g. thresholding, segmentation, and c1assification) are used to emphasize the coronary arteries. Two observers scored eight coronary artery segments in 18 MRI (respiratory gated) and 30 EßT studies using five quality levels (1-4 for good to non-diagnostic, 5 for outside field of view). Results: ßad quality (score 4 + 5) in mid to distal RCA (EßT 60-95%; MRI 45-80%), and distal RCX (EßT> 40%; MRI > 60%). Reasons for poor quality are incorrect contrast timing (EßT 3.3%) and incorrect scanstart positlon (EßT 13.3%), motion artifacts (due to inconsistent breathholding, arrhythmia, and patient movement) (EßT-RCA 43.3%; MRI-LAD 33.3%), overlapping veins (EßT-RCX 46.7%; MRI-RCX 50.0%, MRI-LAD 38.9%), and insufficient contrast differences (MRI-LAD + RCX 5.6%). Conclusion: Challenges we are still facing are the reduction of motionand segment specific artifacts, the development of post-processing techniques, and research on contrast-agents in MRI. Despite the pitfalls, MRI and EßT are two potential major break-through techniques for noninvasive coronary imaging. 165 Virtual coronary angioscopy using electron beam computed tomography P.MA van Ooijen, P.J. de Feyter, M. Oudkerk; Rotterdam/NL Purpose: To show the possibility of virtual coronary angioscopy (VCA) using a dataset obtained by non-invasive coronary angiography using contrast enhanced electron beam computed tomography (EßT). Methods and Materials: Five patients were scanned using 40-60 slices (1.5 mm thickness and in-plane pixel dimension approximately 0.5 x 0.5 mm). The datasets were processed on a graphics workstation using volume rendering software. For f1y-throughs, contrast enhanced lumen is made transparent and other tissue opaque. Then key frames are selected in a path through the vessel, with software interpolation of frames between key-frames. A typical movie contains 150-300 frames (10-15 key-frames). Results: High quality data is a main prerequisite for VCA (l.e. no arrhythmias and perfect breath-holding). Fly-throughs were reconstructed through a coronary bypass (1), the LAD (4) and the intermediate branch (1) . Coronary calcifications were seen in three patients (one totally calcified LAD). The f1y-through of the intermediar, the bypass and one of the LAOs did not show any irregularities. In one case a severe stenosis is visible in the LAD. All findings were confirmed by conventional coronary angiography. Conclusion: Recent developments in fast volume rendering using special purpose hardware and non-invasive coronary angiography using EBT Results: The angiographically determined over all patency rate of the CABG was 92.5%. In ECG-gated SCT and with 20 and 3D data interpretation the sensitivity of patent CABG was 92.3% (88.9% (IMA) and 94.1 % (venous grafts). Conclusion: These data suggest that ECG-gated subsecond SCT is a highly accurate approach to assess saphenous vein and IMA graft patency. Purpose: To compare three different table increments in coronary angiography performed by electron beam tomography (EBT). Methods and Materials: 36 patients referred to conventional coronary angiography underwent contrast-enhanced electron beam tomography of the coronary arteries (slice thickness 3 mm, exposure time 100 msec) using a table feed of 1 mm (group A, n = 12), 1.5 mm (group B, n = 12) or 2 mm (group C, n = 12). Patients were randomly assigned to groups A, B or C. Contrast material (Ultravist 370) was administered intravenously at a flow rate of 3.5 ml/sec. Shaded surface display (SSD) reconstructions (threshold 80 HU) were performed in five standard projections. Visualization and continuity of coronary arteries were assessed by three blinded radiologists on the basls of a scoring system in a consensus reading (excellent = 3, good = 2, moderate = 1, poor =0). Results: No significant difference was found between SSD reconstructions of the coronaries performed at table increments of 1, 1.5 or 2 mm (p > .05). Reducing table feed prolongs scanning time, breathhold period and contrast material injection. Conclusion: Decreasing table increment from 2 to 1.5 or 1 mm in coronary angiography performed by electron beam tomography does not improve SSD reconstructions. An increment of 2 mm remains the technique of choice. strength. Signal to noise ratio (SNR) of bone marrow in T12-L3 vertebral bodies and relative contrast (ReCon) between bone marrow and CSF were calculated. were correlated with 10 age and sex-matced controls. QCT was performed using a calibration phantom and separate BMD was measured for trabecular (BMDtr) and cortical (BMDc) bone in T12-L3 vertebral bodies. The findings were correlated with 10 age and sexmatced controls. Results: Significant difference was found between patients and controls concerning SNR and ReCon in both sequences. Statistically significant correlation was found between cancellous BMD and SNR in T1-w SE. BMDtr was found 87% and BMDc was 77% compared to controls. Conclusion: The hemosiderosis with the concominant bone marrow alterations affects in a lesser degree the cancellous compared to cortical bone mineral density in thalassemia major patients. Purpose: Though magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not seem useful in differential diagnosis of myelofibrosis, we aimed to evaluate if it could have value in prognostic staging and follow-up. Methods and Materials: In patients with myelofibrosis, we compared the results of MRI to bone marrow biopsy and laboratory findings. Thirteen patients with myelofibrosis (11 with primary and 2 with secondary myelofibrosis) were evaluated with MRI. The MRI results were compared to the prognostic staging of Visani et al., bone marrow biopsy results and LOH values. Results: MRI sequences were classified in two main groups according to the bone marrow cellularity, resting fatty marrow, and marrow fibrosis. MRI classification were found to have positive correlation with both prognostic staging and LOH level (p =0.026 and p =0.007, respectively), whereas histopathological staging was lacking in correlation with MRI findings and prognostic staging (p > 0.05). Conclusion: MRI is a capable and non-invasive method in classification of myelofibrosis and for detecting prognosis. (Submitted by Internet) 170 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in differential diagnosis of bone marrow sarcomas and some forms of osteomyelitis MA Tch ibissova, V.M. Cheremisin; St. Petersburg/C/S Purpose: early and differential diagnosis of bone marrow sarco mas and some forms of osteomyelitis with the use of MRI and Gadoliniumenhanced MR imaging. Methods and Materials: 76 pat ients with bone marrow tumors (Ewing sarcoma -30, primary lymphoma of bone -30) and 32 patients with osteomyelitis were studied with 0.04 T Magnaview (Instrumentarium) MR equipment. 20 patients with bone marrow sar-cornas and 12 patients w ith osteomyelitis were studied with 1 T Magneton (Siemens) MR equ ipment. The enhancement with Gd-DTPA was used in 55 cases . Results: Results of the complex c1inical and instrumental investigation in 96 patients wlth bone marrow tumors and 44 patients with osteomyelitis showed that MRT permits to differentiate normal and abnormal bone marrow on T1 weighted images. The use of Gd-DTPA in 55 cases of bone marrow tumors enable us to determine the character extent and boundarles of bone marrow lesions, wh Ich was important in prognosis of recurrence and in estimation of treatment efficien'cy. With Gd-DTPAenhancement in case of osteomye-litis edema of soft tlssues usually has low signal intensity. Conclusion: MRI is the most effective techn ique for diagnosis of bone marrow le-sions. MRI permits to differentiate the bone marrow tumors and chron ic act ive osteo-myelit is. To predict malignancy of vertebrallesions using gradient echo (GRE) out of phase sequence. Subjects and Methods: Our study group consisted of 12 patients which had 6 osteoporotic, 4 metastatic vertebral lesions and 2 spondylod iscitis . Examinations were performed with a 0.5 T system using a phased array surface coil. Exam inat ion protocol included a conventional T1 weighted (in phase) and an opposed phase GRE (TE = 7 msec) acquisitions In the sagittal plane . The MR were evaluated by two radiologists in a blinded fashion unaware of c1inical history of patients. Results: Metastatic lesions showed hig h signal intensity on GRE opposed phase images with respect to the low signal intensity of the normal vertebral bone marrow. Osteoporotic fracture had a low signal intensity or a slight hyperintensity, lower than that observed in the tumoral lesions. The spondylodiscitis had a behaviour similar to the ben ign lesions . Conclusion: Our preliminary resul ts suggest possible predictive value of this sequence in distinguishing ben ign trom malignant vertebral lesions . We propose to evaluate a larger number of patients to confirm our data. For final data analysis resected specimens were jointly investigated by a pathologist, orthopedic surgeon and radiologist to correlate MR imaging with macroscopic and histolog ical findings. Results: Concerning the distinctlon between tumor core and tumor edema and the correct assessment of the neurovascular bundle following data were obtained: FLASH200 without off-resonance saturation , FLASH20 0 with off-resonance saturation , T1-w wlth Gd-DTPA, Pd-wIT2-w: 14% , 27% , 6%, 41%, respectively 87%, 89%, 77 %, 79%. The median magnetizat ion transfe r ratios in different tissues showed follow ing values: muscle: 0.65 , blood : 0.17, tumor core : 0.35, tumor edema : 0.36 . Conclusion: In the evaluat ion of the extraosseous extent of musculoskeletal tumors, MTC MRI seem s not to be superior to conventional spin echo technique. 14:30 173 Inversion recovery MR imaging of athletes with shin splint syndrome T. Voivalin, P.T. Karjalainen, V.P. Vuarinen, K. Soila , S. Soimakallio, H.J. Aronen; Kuopio/FIN Purpose: Ta evaluate the location of stress reaction in shin splint syndrome imaged with MRI. Methods and Materials: 16 athletes with 26 symptomatic legs suggesting shin splint syndrome were imaged at 1.5 T. Axial turbo inversion recovery (STIR) Images (TRlTE: 8400 /30 , TI: 160 ms) and T1-weighted spin echo (SE) images (750/20 ms) were obtained. Slice thickness was 5 mm. The bone marrow, cortical bone , perio steal bone and musculotendineous junction were separately evaluated. Results: Overall , 20 of the 26 legs showed increased signal intensity on STIR-images In one or more of the evaluated areas . In 16 legs , periosteal bone had Increased signal intensity on STIR images suggesting periosteal edema. This was most commonly seen in posteromedial surface, anterior and posteromedial margin. In 8 legs , the periosteal changes occured together with cortical bone or musculotendineous changes. In 7 legs , bone marrow showed increased signal intensity on STIR images. In 5 legs, musculotendineous junction showed increased signal intensity on STIR images. On T1-weighted SE images, only 7 legs had cortical or periosteal changes. Six legs had no MRI find ings . Conclusion: In Shin splint syndrome, STIR sequence detected stress reactions in perlosteal bone and nearby tissues. In most cases, STIR images also provided information for management of rehabilitation. 14:40 174 Transient bone marrow edema revisited: how reliable are the MR features to exclude osteonecrosis? G. Reuther, S. Grüner; Vienna/A, Wiesbaden/D Purpose: In order to determine the pos itive predictive value for trans ient bone marrow edema (TBME) and rul ing out osteonecrosis in MRI. Methods and Materials: In a retrospective analysis over 8 years , patients were identified with the diagnosis of TBME according to MRI and c1inical criteria. These persons were reevaluated after 3 to 81 months (mean : 3.3 years) both clinically and by t1-and t2-we ighted MRI. Results: The incidence of TBME of the femoral head (22 patients : 12 male , 10 femare, both femoral heads n = 1) was 2.9 % of MRI hip exams , 0.2% of MRI knee exams (3 pat ients : 1 male , 2 female) and 1.2% of MRI ankle exams (3 patients: 1 male, 2 female). In all pat ients an increased water -bound proton density with dimlnished or lost lipid-bound proton density was present in epi-and/or meta physis of a convex bone without demarcation of subchondral areas. Follow-up examinations showed a normal lipid-bound signal intensity in all bones under concern . Conclusion: When a diffusely increased water-bound proton densily without subchondral demarcations can be identified in MRI in the epi/metaphyseal bone marrow of a convex bone of the lower extremities a reliable diagnosis of TBME can be made when infection, trauma or osteoarthritis are absent. Repeat exams to rule out incipient osteonecrosis are unnecessary. Purpose: "Gaucher-disease" is a lipid storage disorder which can effectively be treated since 1991 by enzyme-replacement therapy (ERT). The purpose of this study was to evaluate bone-marrow changes under ERT using MR imaging. Methods and Materials: In a prospective study, 78 MR examinations of the lower extremities were performed in 32 patients (11 men, 21 women, mean age 49 years) with "Gaucher disease" using a 1.0 T system (Gyroscan T-10NT, Philips). T1-and T2-weigthed SE and TSE sequences were acquired with a standard body-coil in coronal plane. Images obtained before and under enzyme-therapy were analyzed by two radiologists independently. Mean follow-up: 25 months. The MR results were compared with clinical and laboratory findings. Results: MR demonstrated improvement of bone-marrow changes in 13 patients with an increased signal intensity of bone-marrow in T1-1T2images indicating a higher fraction of yellow bone-marrow. 19 Patients showed no changes. All patients showed dramatical improvement of clinical and laboratory courses. Conelusion: Our first long-term MR-results demonstrate an improvement of bone-marrow changes in 41% of patients. The skeletal response to therapy may depend on the degree of bone involvement. Delayed administration of therapy may result in irreversible bone changes. A longer follow-up is necessary to distinguish between reversible und irreversible bone-marrow changes. Purpose: To evaluate bone marrow changes in patients with "Gaucher disease" type I. Methods and Materials: From 1992 to 1998 MR Imagingy was performed in 60 patients (27 male, 33 female, mean age 45 years) with "Gaucher disease". T1 and T2 weighted images of the lower extremities were performed in coronal plane using a standard body-coil at a 1.0 T. magnet (GYROSCAN T10-NT, Philips). Bone marrow changes were analyzed using a MR-Score at 8 anatomical sites. The MR images were read in a blinded-fashion by two experienced radiologists. Results: Altered bone marrow was characterized by decreased signal intensity on T1 and T2 weighted images. The proximal (femoral) areas were more frequently involved than distal (tibial) areas. The epiphyses of the knee were affected in 39%. An increase in signal intensity from T1 to T2 weighted images was seen in 8 patients, complaining of acute bone pain. Involvement of bone marrow was almost symmetrical. The degree of bone marrow involvement was more severe in patients who were splenectomized (30%). Conelusion: Accumulation of Gaucher-Iipids in bone marrow is characterized by low signal intensity on T1 and T2 weighted images, involving femoral more than tibial areas. An increase in signal intensity from T1 to T2 indicates an active bone process. MR imaging is a valuable, non-invasive method in determination of bone marrow involvement in Gaucher's-disease. Purpose: Although in homozygous sickle cell disease (SSD) pain of bone marrow infarction is common, soft tissue pathology may be responsible for atypical symptoms. We assessed the frequency and ultrasound (US) appearances of soft tissue and joint abnormalities in SSD. Methods and Materials: Over a two year period, SS disease patients with atypical musculoskeletal symptoms were examined. Findings were divided into normal, abscess, soft tissue induration (STI), fat necrosis, haematoma, Iymphnode and joint effusion. US findings were correlated with surgery or percutaneous drainage. Results: 31 episodes in 23 patients referred for US, found 36 abnormalities in 18 patients: abscess (n =15), effusions (n =5), soft tissue induration (n =12), fat necrosis (n =2), haematoma (n =1), Iymphnode (n = 1). Abnormalities were associated with intramuscular injection in 10 episodes; fat necrosis (n =1), haematoma (n =1), STI (n =1), abscess (n = 7). Abnormalities with no underlying cause were seen in 7 patients: abscess (n =4), STI (n =2), fat necrosis (n =1). Conelusion: US ls the imaging modality of choice to delineate soft tissue abnormalities. A high proportion of abnorrnallties arose spontaneously and were associated with intramuscular injections. In SSD microvascular occlusion occurs in the soft tissues, mimicking bone infarction. Purpose: To investigate for bone lesions in sport divers with MRI. To compare findings with a control group of non-divers. Methods and Materials: MRI scans of the shoulder, hip and knee joints of 18 amateur divers were compared with a control group of 15 healthy non-divers. Images were obtained with a low-field MR-scanner (Outlook, Picker). Results: A total of 28 lesions were found mostlyon the lateral aspect of the humeral head in 12 of 18 sport divers and in none of the control group (p < 0.001). Size ranged from 0.7 to 3 cm (mean 1.5 cm). Most lesions were hypointense on T1-weighted and hyperintense on T2weighted spin echo sequences, some with a hypointense rim. Only two lesions were accompanied with cutaneous symptoms of decompression sickness. Conelusion: These preliminary results suggest that amateur scuba divers are prone to bone lesions in the humeral head. The nature of the lesions is not clear yet. Further studies are necessary to investigate for risk factors and to find out if the bone lesions are precursors of osteonecrosis.  Purpose: To asses urgent requests to two services of Radiology (SR). To describe the reasons for request. To evaluate type of exploration, justification for urgent and level of agreement between reason for request and the outcome. Methods and Materials: A cross-sectional descriptive study was performed in two SR of primary care that deal to 591.816 inhabitants. A randomised representative sam pie (1.676 requests) from the 109.460 requests received in one year in both SR was selected (726 requests from one SR and 950 requests from the other) and all the urgent requests were studied. Results: In one SR 18.7% of the requests were demanded as urgent (111 requests) but only 28.8% were justified. In the other SR 5.1% of the requests were urgent (59) and 87.1 % were justified. Most frequent reason for emergency was contusion, followed by nephritic colic and pain. The level of agreement between reason request and radiological report was <50%. Conelusion: The urgent requests are justified in one SR > 87%. Differences in the incidence of urgent requests between the two SR can be due: to the introduction of clinical-radiological sessions more late in one centre and to the different number of working hours, formation and way of work of the petitioner physicians. Purpose: to evaluate the need and risks of a second pass in percutaneous ehest semiautomatic trucut core biopsy (STCB) performed without presence of a pathologist. Methods and Materials: 86 consecutive STCB with a minimum of two passes provided 180 biopsy specimen in 85 patients. The specimen were evaluated separately and scored relatively to their macroscopic size and their content. The sensitivity and negative predictive values (NPV) were scored for each pass and correlated with the specimen size. The pneumothorax rate was scored after each pass. Results: The second pass allowed to enhance the sensitivity from 88 to 94% and the NPV from 67 to 81%. There was no correlation between the size of the sampie and its content. The overall rate of pneumothoraces was 10.5%, a chest tube aspiration being needed in 3 cases (3.5%). The second pass did not affect the ehest tube rate. Conclusion: The STCB can be performed without presence of a pathologist. The second pass allows to enhance the sensitivity of the procedure from 88% to 94.2% and the NPV from 67 to 81%. The second pass does not enhance the chest tube rate. Morphologic criteria of the specimen are not usefull. Purpose: To evaluate the clinical utility and the diagnostic efficacy of the CT-guided transthoracic core-biopsy by automated system. Methods and Materials: Since April 1997 to September 1998 we performed 23 CT-guided transthoracic core-biopsies by automated system in 23 patients with single or multiple pulmonary lesions by mean a single sampie. All biopsies were performed by 18 G cutting needle. A standard ehest radiogram was performed 4 h after the procedure in order to evaluate complications. The final diagnosis was determinated by surgery or clinical follow-up. Results: In 23/23 cases, the histologic material was sufficient for a histopathologic diagnosis. Specific histologic diagnosis was possible in all lesions: there were 16 malignant lesions and 7 benign lesions. The diagnoses of malignant lesions included squamous cell carcinoma (n = 4), adenocarcinoma (n = 3), small-cell carcinoma (n = 1), bronchiolalveolar carcinoma (n = 1), non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (n = 1), metastatic disease (n = 6), while the diagnoses of the benign lesions included BOOP (n =1), Iympho-plasmacellular inflammations (n = 1), lymphoid hyperplasia (N = 1), other benign diagnoses (n= 4). Conclusion: 1. Transthoracic core-biopsy by automated system is an extremely accurated method (accuracy 100%) for diagnosis of nodular thoracic lesions, although we performed only a drowing. 2. Particularly useful in the diagnosis of benign lesions. 3. Allows the diagnosis of histotype of the malignant cells. 4. Is not necessary the presence of the pathologist in CT-room. 5. Allows reduction of the costs. 6. The complication rates are similar to thoracic FNAB. 14:00-15:30 14:10 181 CT-guided biopsy of small pulmonary lesions L. Pancione, B. Mecozzi; Tur/n/I Purpose: Assessment was made of the diagnostic sensitivity of CTguided biopsies of small pulmonary lesions. Methods and Materials: Forty-five patients with pulmonary nodules of less than 1.5 cm. in diameter (mean 0.8 cm) underwent CT-guided needie aspiration. The manoeuvre, which was carried out in the presence of a cytopathologist, using a 20-gauge lumbar-puncture needles was completed in the same session with cutting-needle biopsy in the cases of inadequate aspirated tissue sampies. All the patients were checked immediately afterwards with CT and with an x-ray examination after 2 hours. Results: The tissue sampies taken enabled diagnosis of benignant or malignant lesions in 44 cases (97.8%), with 62% of malignant cases. The number of passes with the needle was from 1 to 3 (mean 1.9), and the biopsies carried out using a cutting needle were 4 (8.8o/~). The.major complications were 2 cases of pneumothoraw, treated with drainaqe. The minor complications were 3 cases of pneumothorax and 5 cases of haemoptysis, which did not require any therapeutic intervention. Conclusion: The possibility of cutting-needle biopsy and the presence of a cytopathologist practically reduce the percentage of inadequate tissue sampies to zero. The low incidence of serious complications and the high diagnostic sensitivity demonstrate the~alidity of the ":lano~uvre even in the case of small pulmonary lesions, which are otherwlse difficult to assess purelyon the basis of imaging. Purpose: To determine if a method of concentrated tissue fragment preparation can expedite diagnosis and reduce the number of passes and slides in CT-guided pulmonary aspirates. Methods and Materials: The on-site and final cytologic diagnoses, number of passes and slides were reviewed in 54 consecutive pulmonary aspirates procured by one radiologist and cytologist. Material limited to the hub of the needle was smeared. Bloody specimens aspirated into the syringe were expressed onto a watch glass. Tissue fragments collected on the rim of the watch glass were smeared. A cell block was made from the clot. Results: There were 54 masses, averaging 1.2 cm in slze, One sampling was required to diagnose 23 primary lung carcinomas (19 nons mall cell, 3 small cell, 1 adenoid cystic), 13 metastatic lesions and 11 benign masses (1 hamartoma, 2 Iymph nodes, 4 granulomas, 4 fungal infections). In 5 cases of bronchioloalveolar carcinoma, three paasses were made. The average number of passes required for diagnosis was 1.6. The average number of slides was 7. The on-site and final diagnoses were conclusive and concurrent in 50 cases. The accuracy of the diagnoses was 93%. Conclusion: Accurate on-site diagnoses of pulmonary aspirates can be made when tissue fragments are concentrated and cell blocks are utilized for special studies. Purpose: Precise tumor (T) and nodal (N) staging is imperative in nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) as it determines subsequent treatment, certainly when considering neoadjuvant treatment for stage lilA or IIIB disease. To determine the accuracy of present-day computed tomographie (CT) scanning a prospective study was performed comparing imaging TNM {(i)TNM} and pathological TNM {pTNM}. In 74 patients with NSCLC without distant metastases (i) TNM was determinede on CT findings. The TNM system advocated by the American Joint Committee on Cancer was used. All patients underwent cervical mediastinoscopy. When superior mediastinal nodes were negative this was followed by thoracotomy and pathological examination of the resected specimen and Iymph nodes to determine pTNM. Results: The agreement between (i) TNM and pTNM was only 35.1%. The primary tumor (T) was correctly staged in 54.1%, overstaged in 27.0% and understaged in 18.9% of the patients. Invasion of ehest wall, pericardium and of major mediastinal structures (T3, T4) as not reliably detected by CT scan. Sensitivity and specificity of CT regarding hilar and mediastinallymph node staging were 48.3 and 53.3%, positive and negative predictive value 40 and 61.1% and its overall accuracy 51.4%. The nodal (N) factor was correctly determined by CT scan in 35.1%, overstaged in 44.6% and understaged in 20.3% of the patients. Conclusion: Even with present-day CT scanners (i) TNM provides no accurate staging and routine mediastinoscopy is necessary for precise mediastinal Iymph node staging. Likewise, (i) T3 and (i) T4 determinations are unreliable and should not contraindicate thoracotomy. Methods and Materials: Between April '96 and July '98 we investigated 68 patients with central lung masses to CT (Somatom Plus) angiography. Vascular involvement was revealed in 37 persons whose diagnosis was confirmed histologically after surgical intervention. We acquired CT data (5 mm collimation; 3-5 mm/sec table feet) in monophasic way with administration 100-150 ml of contrast media (delay 8"-20") to evaluate arterial and venous structure of mediastinum simultaneously. Axial, 3D and MIP CTA images were reviewed by two or three radiologists in comparison with conventional CT and X-ray pictures. Results: Among 37 cases, we obtained different patterns of tumor invasion of the pulmonary artery after contrast medium administration. In particular, (20) patients, showed narrowing of the vessel extending more than 15--20 mm. In (10) patients we noticed that lung masses encompassed the pulmonary artery in the form of the "muff'. Two patients demonstrated full obturation of the vessel. Involvement of the pulmonary artery could not be c1early differentiated by CTA in (5) cases. Conclusion: Whereas ehest radiography and conventional CT readily confirmed the presence of lung neoplasms, CTA could play important role in assessing vascular involvement by lung cancer and it could be considered the technique of choice in the preoperative work-up. Purpose: The major goal for surgeons and patients with non-small cell carcinoma of the lung (NSCLC) is to distinguish between operable and inoperable cases. The purpose of the study was to estimatethe value of CT and MR in preoperative staging (TNM) in these patients. Methods and Materials: 67 patients with NSCLC underwent CT (Somatom HiQ scanner-Siemens) MR was performed in 31 patients, including the group of 14 with equivocal T31T4 minimally invasiveIT4 CT results. MR imaging was executed with Magnetom Impact 1.0T -Siemens. Results: 41 patients were judged as operable on a CT base (6 pts. veryfied surgically as unoperable in this group). 12 patients were ctassltlad as T4 stages. MR performed in 14 pts. with equivocal CT results revealed stages: T3 -in 5, minimally invasive T4-in 3 and T4 -in 2 cases. In 4 cases MR did not give the precise staging (thoracotomy performed in 3 patients revealed unresectable mass in 2 cases). Conclusion: CT is a standard imaging method of preoperative staging in patients with NSCLC, however MR should be performed in all patients with equivocal T3/T4 CT results. In our opinion MR with higher accuracy reveals minimally invasive T4 stage, which can be treated surgically with satisfactory prognosis. 14:50 187 Evaluation of parietal pleural invasion of lung cancers with breathhold inspiration and expiration MRI N. Kodalli, C. Erzen, I. Akpinar, M. Yüksel; IstanbullTR Purpose: The aim of this study was to investigate the capability of MRI performed during deep inspiration and expiration to detect the parietal pleural invasion of lung cancer. Methods and Materials: Twenty-six patients with lung cancer located adjacent to the mediastinal or lateral parietal pleura were studied with multisectional breathhold MRI during deep inspiration and expiration on axial and coronal planes. Changes in the location of the tumor relative to the ehest wall marker lines or the vertebrallocation or relevant mediastinal structures were noted. Results: Five of 12 lower segments of lower or middle lobe located tumors showed movement relative to the marker and the vertebral level where the absence of parietal pleural invasion was proven on the operation. The other 7 lesions did not show any movement and parietal pleural invasion was found surgically. For the upper lobe and superior segments of lower lobe located 14 tumors, this method was not sufficient with a sensitivity of 100%, specificity 11%, positive predictive value 53%, negative predictive value 100% and accuracy 57%. Conclusion: MRI performed during deep inspiration and expiration is a supplementary method in detecting parietal pleural invasion for the tumors located in lower and middle lobes.  Contrast-enhanced SCT (collimation 3 mm; pitch 1.7; reconstruction interval 2 mm) from the aortic arch to the inferior pulmonary veins was performed in 18 patients undergoing surgery for CLN. Axial images and MPR were assessed for evidence of tumor involvement of bronchi, pulmonary arteries and veins, and compared to surgery. Results: Eleven patients underwent pneumonectomy because of invasion of proximal bronchi (n =4), main pulmonary arteries (n =4), pulmonary veins (n = 2), both main stem bronchus and pulmonary artery (n = 1). Seven patients underwent lobectomy. SCT correctly predicted the need to perform pneumonectomy in 7 patients and lobectomy in 6. SCT sensivity in evaluating invasion of proximal bronchi, pulmonary arteries and veins were 91%, 50%, and 66.7%. MPRs improved depiction of proximal bronchi and pulmonary arterial invasion in 1 (7.7%) and 2 (15.4%) patients. Conclusion: Spiral CT is accurate in depicting neoplastic invasion of proximal bronchi. However, it is poor sensitive in assessing vascular involvement and this represents a major limitation in predicting the need for pneumonectomy in patients with CLN. Purpose: Prior work has demonstrated the effieacy of MR in renal artery stenosis evaluation. The increasing role of RAS in the differential diagnostic evaluation of hypertension raises the question of whether MRI should be used as a screening modality over scintigraphy. Recent data has suggested close to 10% potential incidental adrenal masses as cause of hypertension in this patient population. This project evaluated the benefits of MRI over scintigraphy by determining extrarenal causes of hypertension. Purpose: To evaluate time/intensity curves of Doppler signals within the kidney after i.v, bolus injection of US contrast medium in an animal model, before and after inducing renal artery stenosis. Methods and Materials: One minute time/intensity curves of Doppler signals after bolus injection of US contrast medium (Levovist®, Schering AG, Berlin, Germany) were obtained within the renal parenchyma in 5 anesthetized rabbits using a built-in prototype software of a US equipment working on raw Doppler data (AU5, Esaote, Genova, Italy). Additional curves were obtained after inducing stenosis (two 50% of the lumen; three 70%) of the renal artery. The k-values indicating the slope of the curves were calculated for both the wash-in and wash-out phases. Results: The procedure has been possible in all cases. Normal curves were characterized by step rise (k-values ranging +0.07 to 0.7) and slow wash-out phase (k-values -0.19 to -0.01). After stenosis, there was slowing of both wash-in (k-values +0.02 to +0.1) and wash-out (k· values -0.001 to -0.07) phases. In one case, the wash-out phase had positive slope at one minute (k-value +0.002). Comparison of curves before and after stenosis in the same rabbit showed three to seven times reductiori of k-value of the ascending phase. Conclusion: Preliminary results show evaluation of time/intensity curves of Doppler signals after i.v injection of US contrast medium as a promising technique for the study of renal hemodynamics in renal artery stenosis. This presentation was supported in part by a grant of Esaote s.p.a. Purpose: To study the interest and the yield of bronchial artery embolisation (BAE) in patients with hemoptysis and a thoracic tumor. Methods and Materials: We retrospectively study 47 patients (male: 36, female: 11, mean age: 56 y) admitted to control hemoptysis by BAE. The underlying disease was a lung carcinoma (n =35), a hypervascular metastasis (n =7) and other diseases (n =5). Hemoptysis was evaluated as small «100 ml, n =1), mild (100 to 400 ml, n =18), massive (>400 ml, n = 17) or recurrent (n = 11 imaging was performed using T2-weighted fast spin-eeho images and unenhanced and gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted spin-echo images. Chemieal-shift imaging was performed in 92 patients, and dynamie gadolinium-enhanced studies in 108 patients. Chemical-shift images were analyzed quantitatively and qualitatively, and dynamic gadoliniumenhanced studies were qualitatively assessed . Results: The sensitivity of MR imaging in differentiating between benign and malignant adrenal masses was 91% , the specificity was 94%, and the aecuracy was 93% . Diagnosis at MR imaging differed with diagnosis at histology in 12 (9%) of 134 eases. Results of quantitative analyses of chem ical-shift imaging techn iques showed significant differences between adenomas and nonadenomas (-36% versus -3.7%, p < .001). Conclusion: Charaeterization of an adrenal mass ean be made with high sensitivity and specificity when using MR imaging. The inereased reliance of MR imaging seems to be mainly based on both chemical shift and dynamic gadolinium-enhaneed studies. The need of histology sampling of incidentally discovered adrenal masses may be reduced to some problematic lesions which will remain in the era of MR imaging . Purpose: To describe the MRI features of the adrenal glands in primary hyperaldosteronism and assess MRI in the deteetion and characterisation of aldosterone producing adenomas (APA Purpose: The purpose of our study was to assess the potential role of different MRI techniques in the differentiation of adrenal masses and to establish the most effective MRI protocol, Methods and Materials: One hund red ten adrenal masses (36 nonhyperfunctioning adenomas, 27 pheochromocytomas, 23 aldosteron secreting adenomas, 20 malignant masses, 2 cortisol seereting adenomas and 2 myelolipomas) in 97 patients were evaluated with SE sequences, chemical shift imaging (CSI) and Gd-DTPA enhanced dynamic studies. Results: Quantitative magnetic resonance evaluation of adrenal masses showed the significant differences (at least a < 0.001) between non-hyperfunctioning adenomas vs. pheochromocytomas or vs. malignant lesions or vs. hyperfunctioning adenomas. The most specific indicators of adrenal mass character proved to be the CSI ratio reflect ing lipid content in the lesion and WO MAXfLAST ratio reflecting contrast agent was haut from the lesion. Excluding myelolipomas, the CSI ratio above threshold value of 15% was 100% specific for adenomas with 70% sens itivity and with 83% sensitivity for non-hyperfunctioning adenomas. The WOMAXILAST ratio above threshold value of 29% was 98% specific for adenomas with 80% sensitivity and with 86% sensitivity for nonhyperfunetioning adenomas. Bifactor ial analysis of adrenal masses with CSI ratio and WO MAX.IlAST ratio was 98% specific for adenomas with 90% sensitivity and even 92% sens itivity for non-hyperfunetioning adenomas. Conclusion: MRI makes possible specific characterisation of adrenal masses . The optimal MRI protocol for adrenal region will be presented. Purpose: Ta assess the potential role of the turbo gradient-echo T1 chem ical shift (opposed phase) imag ing in adrenal masses. Methods and Materials: Thirty-five patients with adrenal masses were subm itted to turbo gradient-echo chem ical-shift imaging in a 1.5T MR. Histology of the lesions were both bening and malignant, from different orig ins. Results: The application of turbo gradient-echo opposed phase imaging shows a good spatial resolution, less chemical-shift artifact, less motion artifact and a considerable save of time in the exploration compared to conventional gradient-echo opposed phase secuences. In our serie this technique shows an accuracy similar to other series in the study of adrenal masses with opposed phase imaging, being useful overall in the distintion between adenomataus and non-adenomatous masses . Ta our knowglodge there is no previous application of this sequence to opposed-phase imaging. Conclusion: Turbo gradient-echo is an easily available sequence perfectly applicable to opposed phase imaging of adrenal masses with inherent adventadges and no lass in accuracy. Each patient was randomly assigned to one of four groups who recieved 100 ml of non-ionic contrast agent (300 mgI/mi) at an injection flow of either 4, 3, 2, or 1.5 ml/s (scan delay: 30 s). The enhancement of the carotid artery, jugular vein and sternocleidomastoid muscie were measured over time and the density of the sumbandibular and thyroid gland were evaluated. Data were compared between patients of different patient groups and between patients weighting more or less than 75 kg. Results: Vascular attenuation of at least 150 Hounsfield Units was defined as sufficient. Upon these criteria, those studies using 1.5 or 2 ml/s injection flow showed good vascular enhancement during the examination time. Injection speed did not significantly influence muscular enhancement. The attenuation of the submandibular and thyroid gland showed only minor differences between the patient groups. In patients over 75 kg the overall enhancement was lower than in patients with less than 75 kg, nevertheless the 1.5 and 2 ml/s flow was regarded as optimal for each subgroup. Conclusion: Using 100 ml of contrast agent for spiral CT studies of the entire neck, the injection flow should not exceed 2 ml/s. In case of persistent or recurrent hyperparathyroidism after ethanol sclerotherapy, the patient was examined also by 99mTc-MIBI scintigraphy, CT scan and/or MRI, Esophageal Echoendscopie Sonography in order to detect possible ectopic glands. After a mean 54 mo. follow up, 26 patients were disease-free, while recurrent or persistent hyperparathyroidism occurred in 10 cases: 7 of them were submitted to surgical exploration and in 3 patients all glands were removed because hyperplastic; in 2 cases multiple parathyroid adenomas were found (2 of them in the mediastinum); in other 2 patients the hyperparathyroidism was related to the reactivation of the parathyroid(s) treated by sclerotherapy. In 3 cases of recurrence the biochemical parameters of hyperparathyroidism were only slightly altered, and thus the patients did not received further therapy. Temporary dysphonia occurred in 5 patients, but only in 2 of them lasted more than 2 weeks; a complete recovery of voice was recorded in all cases within 6 mo. Our data suggest that US-guided sclerotherapy represents a simple, easy, well-accepted and cost-saving method to eure parathyroid tumors; moreover, this kind of treatment does not compromise further traditional surgery. Results: Since 1995 superselective chemoembolisation and/or percutaneous alcoholization was performed in 31 patients with more than one metastatic lesion in the Iiver. In 15 patients only chemoembolization and in 10 patients only alcoholization was performed. In 6 cases we combined both procedures. In 19 cases the procedure was repeated. In 11 cases the procedure was finished with introduction of a port, in 10 cases system chemotherapy followed. Any significant complication did not occur. In 28 cases a statistically significant decrease of markers has taken place. In 27 patients regression or stationary finding on CT was found 9 months after the treatment. Biopsy performed in 11 of those patients were positive in 9 cases. At present time 18 patients are alive (18-61 months after the procedure), 10 died from progression of the primary lesions 3 from another. Conclusion: Superselective chemoembolisation and percutaneous alcoholization in patients with secondary malignant involvement of the liver is a feasible therapeutical method. Though a long-time decrease of markers was shown in 28 patients (90%) but eradication of the metastatic process may be speculated in two patients only (6.1%). duplex-Doppler US provides reliable informations before the next step of chemoembolization. 14:10 214 8uperselective chemoembolisation and percutaneous alcoholization in patients with secondary malignancy of the Iiver V. Valek, J. Boudny, P. Hrobaf; Brno/CZ Purpose: To assess the efficacy of radiofrequency Thermal Ablation in the treatment of Iiver lesions. Methods and Materials: 13 patients with 14 liver lesions, from colorectal cancer (n =7), from breast cancer (n =2) and from primary hepatic tumor (n = 5) were treated with percutaneous radiofrequency Thermal Ablation (RADIONICS, Burlington, MA). Diameter of the lesions ranged between 2 and 4.6 cm, mean 2.8. Treatment has always been performed under US guidance, by using 18-gauge cooled-tip electrodes with 3-4 cm exposure. Every lesion underwent 20 minutes exposion, reaching a final temperature of 60-80°C, mean 71°C. Lesions >3 cm underwent two consecutive treatment at different sites. Lesions were followed-up at 1-3-6 months with MR and Spiral C'T, Percutaneous biopsies have been also performed on areas suspected of recurrence. Results: Tumoral markers decreased in 9 of 13 patients, after the treatment. In 11 lesions a complete and lasting necrosis was obtained. In one 4.6 cm HCC residual tumor was evident soon after the procedure and successfully treated by chemoembolization. During the follow-up recurrences was demonstrated in 3 cases: 2 metastases and one HCC. No complication occurred after treatment. Conclusion: Radiofrequency Thermal Ablation seems to be a safe and effective procedure in the treatment of primary and secondary Iiver lesions. It does not prevent from further local treatment. Lesion >3 cm require multiple exposions to obtain a complete necrosis. Purpose: To test the hypotheses that 1) MR image-guided radiofrequency (RF) thermal ablation in the pancreas is safe and feasible, and that 2) induced thermal lesion size can be predicted using MR monitoring . Methods and Materials: MR-guided RF ablation was performed in the pancreas of six pigs. A 17G-monopolar RF probe was inserted into the pancreas using MR image-guidance, and RF was applied 550 for 10 minutes. After post-procedure imaging (T2-weighted, STIR , T1weighted before and after gadod iamide adm inistrat ion) , the pigs were observed for 7 days and , follow-up MR images were acquired . The pigs were sacrificed, and pathologie exam ination was performed. Results: Successful RF probe placement was accomplished in all cases; the interventional procedure time ranged trom 46-80 min. The thermal lesion size varied from 12-15 mm perpendicular to the probe track and was best seen on STIR and enhanced T1-weighted images with a radio logical/pathological correlation coefficient of 0.81. Diarrhea was the only side effect during the one-week follow-up period , and no clinical signs of pancreatitis occu rred . Conelusion: MR imaging-guided RF thermal ablation in the pancreas is feasible and safe. Induced thermal lesion size can best be mon itored using STIR and enhanced T1-we ighted images. In the future , RF ablation may offer an alternative treatment option for pancreatic cancer. 14:50 219 Optimization of radiofrequency ablation by using a "eooled-wet" eleetrode Y. Miao, Y. Ni, J. Yu, G. Marchal; Leuven/B Purpose: To increase lesion size in radiofrequency (RF) tissue ablation by combining interst itial saline infusion and intra-electrode cool ing perfusion. Methods and Materials: RF tissue ablat ion of 120 sites was performed ex vivo on swine and beef Iivers under power contral mode at 50 watts for 10 min. via a newly developed "cooled-wet" electrode which ls cooled with internal cannula perfus ion at 40 ml/min . and is capab le of hypertonic (5%) saline interstitial infusion at 1 ml/min. The follow ing regimes were tested : Group A: Conventional RF mode (without cooling perfusion and saline infusion) ; Group B: Cooled-only mode (cooling perfusion without saline infusion) ; Group C: Wet only mode (saline infusion without cooling perfus ion); Group D: Continuing cooled-wet mode (cooling perfusion plus saline infusion); Group E: Cooled-wet mode with discontinuation of saline infusion (cool ing perfusion plus first 5 min . saline infusion); Group F: Cooled -wet mode with discontinuation of cooling perfusion (saline infusion plus first 5 min. cooling perfus ion). The ablation effects were compared by measuring the size of lesions. Results: The lesion size (4.90 ± 0.6 cm) in group 0 was signif icantly larger (P < 0.05-0.0001) than that in any other groups. Conelusion: The present des ign of "cooled-wet" electrode for RF tissue ablation may allow to obtain a suffic ient lesion size with a single needle in one session. Purpose: The feasibility of preoperative devascularization of meningiomas depends on the localization of the tumor and on the pattern of vascularization. We evaluated the potential risk that the ophthalmie artery may represent during the embolization procedure. Methods and Materials: From January 1990 until August 1998, 93 patients with CT or MRI diagnosis of meningioma have been investigated angiographically. The average tumor size was 4.5 cm (range 1-12 cm). In all patients we performed a selective catheterization using a Vertebral or Simmons shaped diagnostic catheter and a microcatheter, followed by preoperative embolization with PVA particles in 53 patients. No embolization was attempted in 24 patients because of internal carotid artery vascularization (n = 11), technical failure (n = 7), feeders not cleary identified (n = 5) and allergie reaction prior to embolization (n =1). In 16 patients no preoperative embolization was required by the referring clinicians. Results: Complete tumor devascularization was achieved in 20 patients, subtotal devascularization (50%-99%) in 22 patients, and partial devascularization (Iess than 50%) in 11 patients. Major complications occurred in 3 patients, 2 related to the ophthalmie artery. One patient left the angio suite with a transient hemiplegia as a consequence of reflux of contour particles through the ophthalmie artery in the internal carotid artery. He recovered completely after aperiod of one week. In another patient an accessory ophthalmie branch originated from the feeding middle meningeal artery. Distal catheterization was difficult resulting in an epidural extravasation. Conelusion: Preoperative meningioma embolization is a safe and effective procedure when performed by skilied radiologists. However, anatomical variants and collateral circulation to the ophthalmie artery have to be recognized prior to embolization in order to avoid potential severe complications. Purpose: To study the effects of a new dodecafluoropentane based ultrasound contrast agent, EchoGen® emulsion, on enhancing the visualisation of liver tumour vasculature. Methods and Materials: Thirty patients with Iiver tumours were examined with an ATL HDI-3000 ultrasound system set up for use with contrast agent; low PRF, medium general and colour gain. Patients received a single dose (0.05 mLlkg) of EchoGen. In many of these patients, a second harmonie study was performed, followed by three dimensional reconstruction of the vessels. Results: In the majority of patients, the vascularisation improved significantly after contrast injection. The typical patterns were better defined (compressed normal vessels in benign tumours; vessels irregular in diameter, course and canalisation, presence of A V fistulas or blood pools), thus allowing comparison to angiography. Furthermore, we observed many different types of flow within a given tumour, mainly arterial, which characterised the malignant lesions. In addition, perfusion of the tumour, tumour transit time along with wash in, duration, and wash out curves were studied. Conclusion: Although this was a difficult study to perform, curves were obtained which are similar to those using CT and MR with contrast agents. These preliminary results show that contrast agents improve the conspicuity of liver tumour vascularisation, which creates the potential to further characterise lesions. those from surrounding tissue providing a near-angiographic picture with high vessel to tissue contrast. Image quality was excellent with high spatial and temporal resolution and no obvious artefacts. Arteries showed stronger enhancement than veins. There was also marked Bmode enhancement of Iiver and spleen parenchyma, especially during the late phase (* 2.5 min. Purpose: SHU 563A is a micro-bubble agent with a shell which can be broken by the US beam. This process produces a random pseudo Doppler freqency shift leading to a scintilation colour Doppler signal (stimulated acoustic emission) which is solely dependent on microbubble presence but independent of flow. We used this to image the blood pool phase of SHU 563 in various organs. Methods and Materials: 6 injections (10-20 ml/kg) were given in 2 dogs. The liver, spleen, kidney, testis, stomach wall and large vessels were scanned with a Sequoia 512 (Acuson Corp., USA) in color Doppler mode at maximum transducer output for up to 22 min. Results: Marked stimulated emission was observed in all organs. It was most dramatic in organs with a large blood pool (kidney and large vessels) and organs containing RES cells (liver and spleen). Average duration was 15 min (kidney and large vessels), 12 min (stomach wall) and 6.5 min (testis) respectively. The liver and spleen showed marked stimulated emission until the end of all scans caused by RES up-take. Conelusion: Stimulated acoustic emission colour signals obtained from SHU 563 effectively images the blood pool/perfusion even in organs normally displaying few or no Doppler signals. Purpose: The determination of blood volume flow in extracranialintracranial (EC-IC-) bypasses and original brain supplying arteries before and after EC-IC-bypass surgery. Methods and Materials: In 15 patients selected for EC-IC-bypass surgery because of symptomatic ICA occlusion, blood flow velocity and blood volume flow was measured in both common carotid arteries, both ICAs and in the basilar artery (BA). Blood flow was measured with 20 cine phase-contrast MR imaging. After EC-IC-bypass surgery additionally the blood flow in the EC-IC-bypass itself (arterial anastomosis between the superficial temporal artery and the middle cerebral artery) was determined. Results: Mean blood volume flow in the EC-IC-bypasses was 101.0 ± 29.3 ml/min (68.6-177.6 ml/min). In comparison: blood volume flow of healthy volunteers was found with 256.3 ± 23.5 ml/min in the ICA and 174.4 ± 14.7 ml/min in the BA. Changes in total brain blood supply, calculated from summarized pre-and postoperative brain supplying blood volume f1ow, demonstrated an increase of 64.3 ± 43.7 ml/min (1.8-127.2  Conclusion: Blood flow determination of EC-IC-bypasses allows the quantitative evaluation of bypass sufficiency. The mean increase of total brain blood supply was less than the blood volume flow in the EC-IC-bypass because of a reduction of increased collateral flow in the contralateral ICA and/or the BA. ± 12, C) 59 ± 11, 44 ± 11, 40 ± 9. Blood flow velocities decreased with age in all vessels statistically significant, but more rapid reduction was observed over 40 y. Blood flow velocities were higher in women. There are a small number of conditions that specifically affect the hip in children. Developmental dysplasia of the hip, may be diagnosed by ultrasound but if the initial treatment is unsuccessful, established dislocation or subluxation results in lateralisation of the femoral head and a break in Shenton's line and a shallow acetabular angle on the AP radiographs. Sonography with real time will show the displacement but arthography is required to show the acetabular labrum and the security of reduction. Inversion of the labrum by a capsular constriction, will preclude further conservative therapy and require open reduction. In older children congruity of the femoral head with the acetabulum and the degree of cover of the femoral head are important features. Perthes Disease: Transient synovitis presents clinically as pain and limitation of weight bearing and plain radiographs may demonstrate joint space widening, while sonography demonstrates an effusion in the joint. Some patients may have avascular necrosis of the femoral epiphysis. The radiography may show loss of bone density, subchondral fragmentation, sclerosis and loss of epiphyseal height, depending on the phase of the disease process. The epiphyses may, however, appear normal and TC 99 MDP studies will demonstrate reduced uptake in the femoral head epiphysis. On MR the dead fat cells are replaced y necrotic tissue and oedema, which have a low signal on T1. Some increased signal may be demonstrated on T2 in the later stages particularly at the margin of the necrotic area from granulation tissue as revascularisation occurs. The extent of femoral head involvement is important for prognosis and 'at risk' signs include lateralisation of the head, lateral ossification of the epiphysis, and whole head involvement, while a viable buttress of bone medially and laterallyon Tc 99 studies is a good prognostic sign. Adult hip pathologies are mainly represented by the degenerative disease, so called "osteoarthros is, or more precisely "coxarthrosis. The means of imaging are exposed, according to their specific value: X-rays (measurement of the caracteristic angles of the adult hip), arthrography, arthro-CT scanner, CT scanner. MRI is becoming the major means to study the hip, especially when X-ray films are negative. lt is a very useful tool in the detection of avascular bone necrosis, transcient osteoporosis, stress fractures and arthritis. It used also for bone or articular tumors (using gadolinium intra veinous injection). Bone scintigraphy, using intraveinous injection of technetium 99m, is still known for its lack of specificity. Ultrasounds are more limited, Clinical findings differentiate a mechanical syndrome and an inflammatory syndrome. The coxarthrosis is the most frequent , under two forms: primary (idiopathic) coxarthrosis and secondary coxarthrosis. Localised narrowing of the joint space is the main point, with osteophyte formation, subchondral sclerosis, cyst formation. The destruction progresses slowly, in 10 to 15 years leading to a complete destruction . Bilaterality is frequent. Because very compromised functional activity, the best treatment is total hip prosthesis. There is a rapid form (1 to 2 years) (Posters D). Secondary coxarthrosis occur after architectural vice, chondral diseases, lack of balance between the size of the head and the acetabulum as in the case of previous fracture or dislocation, avascular bone necrosis of the head of the femur, Paget's disease. Avascular bone necrosis of the head of the femur involves young adults. lt has a multi epiphysis location. MRI is the most sensitive and the most specific means of early diagnosis. The area of bone necrosis appears as weil defined modifications of the upper head of the femur, precisely surrounded by a low signal intensity line on both T1 and T2 weighted imaging. MRI shows articular effusion, bone marrow edema. Scintigraphy gives early findings which are a caracteristic, but non specific, hot spot. CT scanner is used for hip destruction evaluation. Calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease (CPPD) involves mostly aged women. Aigodystrophy/transcient osteoporosis of the hip has a cyelic course, lasting 3 to 9 months. MRI shows an inflammatory pattern in the area of the process (dark in T1 and white in T2, with positive gadolinium response). Scintigraphy also is possitive. Staphylococcus location in the hip can be acute or chronic. MRI shows joint effusion, cystic formation and subchondral non specific modifications. Greater trochanteric tuberculous involvement is a non rare finding. In practice CM has achieved limited c1inical acceptability for a variety of reasons. Currently a variety of new designs of DM image acquisition systems are under development that promise to supersede film-based mammography in the new millennium. Typically these devices exploit integrated imaging sensors combining Csl:TI channelled scintillators or X-ray photo-conductive layers for X-ray image detection, with high resolution CCD arrays or a-Si TFT micro-circuitry for image readout. These second-generation DM technologies promise the radiologist superior image quality combined with significant dose savings compared with contemporary imaging systems. In this review we compare the physical and technical characteristics of CM and salient DM image acquisition systems of new design. The clinical results of digital mammography are so far are limited. Various new detector systems are now under development. Digital mammography offer convenient but still too expensive solutions of storing, tracking and retrieving mammograms. The high demand on very fast retrieval and presentation of images may be hard to solve in the near future. There are not yet any dedicated workstations available for soft copy interpretation. The demands from the users will also include integration with dedicated radiology information systems (RIS) and hospital information system (HIS). Image processing may promote detection and diagnosis of microcalcifications and subtle lesions, also in mammographically dense breasts. Together with the use of unsharp-maskings algorithms, adaptive histiogram equalisation and manipulation of the grey scale, the interpreter will be able to visualise clinical details across the full dynamic range of the image. Computer aided detection and diagnosis tools capable of helping the radiologist to identify suspieious areas of the breast are now presented. Various algorithms promise to reduce the level of false negative errors by pointing out areas of concern. Telemammography will be benefieial for women Iiving in rural areas. Normal pericardium is characterized as a peneil-thinline visualized from the diaphragmatical part of the pericardium till the superior junction line and seperated by subepicardial fad from the right ventricular wall. Pericarditis: Any kind of pericardial thickening above this peneil-thinline is suggesting an acute pericarditis, if smooth and chronic, if irregular or calcified. Pericardial Effusion: In case the periepicardial space appears above one centimeter, CT-values or MR signals may be useful to distinguish between solid or effusive hemorrhagic or serous process. In presence of pericardial effusion, the analysis of the state of the peri-and epicardium, of the subepicardial space, of the configuration of both ventricles and of both atria as weil as of the great cardiac vessels and of the pulmonary vessels is helpful in the early recognition of an ongoing pericardial tamponade. Pericardial Constriction: This entity is characterized using CT or MRI, by thickened or calcified pericardium, tube-like configuration of the ventricles, enlargement of the atria, enlargement of the cavaI veins and may thatway be distinguished from restrictive cardiomyopathies, which have normal pericardium. The prognostic validity of CT or MR become evident in patients with pericardial constriction in whom those with myocardial atrophy of fibrosis can be identified preoperatively -an essential prognostic information to prevent acute heart failure, which could follow after pericardiectomy. Echocardiography, espeeially transeophageal echocardiography, is frequently the initial imaging study performed. MRI and fast CT are also used frequently, especially for defining the extent of the mass and for evaluating extracardiac masses invading or compressing the pericardium or cardiac chambers. Secondary cardiac tumors, which are 40 times more frequent than primary ones, are evaluated with CT or MRI. MRI has shown involvement of the heart by direct extension of lung and mediastinal malignancies and by extension through the inferior vena cava by adrenal, renal, and hepatic carcinomas. The most frequent mass involving the heart is thrombus (Iow intensity) which can be differentiated usually from a solid tumor (medium intensity) using eine MRI. Malignant primary cardiac tumors are characterized by a wide point of attachment to the cardiac wall; involvement of more than one cardiac chamber or great vessel; necrosis of the mass; extension beyond the heart and or pulmonary matastasis. MR contrast media are used to delineate intramural masses and to distinguish tumor (enhancement) from cavitary thrombus (no enhancement Mammography is a branch of radiology that could benefit greatly from the assimilation of digital imaging technologies. Computerised enhancement techniques will be used to ensure optimum presentation of images displayed via hardcopy and softcopy. ßeyond this digital imaging will support powerful new facilities such as computer assisted detection, tele-mammography, plus digital image management and archival. An essential precursor to all these developments will be the availability of digital mammography (DM) image acqulsition system(s) to capture high quality breast X-ray image data. Conelusion: An in-depth understanding of the pathophysiology of intracranial hemorrhage is essential to interpret the appearance on imaging studies. The roje of the radiologist is threefold: 1) to recommend the best imaging strategy; 2) to make the correct diagnosis and determ!ne the cause of the hemorrhage; 3) to participate in the treatment planninq of the patient. Normal variants that may simulate disease in the ehest radiographs Gamma camera renography is today the main screening procedure for detection of renovascular hypertension. Older techniques using radiopharmaceuticals with unfavourable biological and physieal prestanda and primitive single-crystal detectors solely yielding curves, have been replaced by modern tracers with high extraction efficieney and elaborate detectors providing supplementary anatomical information of high quality. Advances in computer technology during the last decade have contributed to numerical analysis of the examinations and made it possible to create quantitative indices to help the interpretation. This review will focus on how to perform the examination in the daily routine. Preparation of the patient, different radiopharmaceuticals and data interpretation of will be highlighted. Examination protocols based on e1inical algorithms for handling of the hypertensive patient ineluding provocation with captopril will also be discussed. This presentation deals with some normal variants that may simulate ehest disease in the chest radiograph. We will present different cases with a thorough discussion of the findings, and clues to recognize these entities. The talk will be divided in two categories of findings: 1.-Tubular and linear opacities. 2.-Nodular and extrapulmonary opacities. In the first category we describe different conditions such as intrapulmonary systemic veins, pseudo-intrapulmonary systemic arteries, pulmonary venous anomalies, and lineal images produced by accessory fissures or duplication of the diaphragm. The second group is composed of a variety of conditions that can produce nodular images or opaeitles. Chest wall lesions such as osteophytes and skin lesions are causes of pulmonary pseudonodule. Less known is the pseudonodule due to tortuosity of branches of the aortic arch.. Fat is commonly present in the chest and can also give rise to different images that simulate pulmonary or pleural pathology. An opaque azygos lobe in the frontal chest radiograph can be due to elongation of aortic branches. Other opacities due to chest wall pathology or variants will be discussed. According to the technical evolution of endovascular treatments the management of intracranial haemorrhage is more and more a multidisciplinary approach in which the interventional neuroradiologist has an important place. Facing a patient with intracranial haemorrhage, first we must collect all the informations useful for diagnosis: Circumstances of initial bleeding, evolution, e1inical symptoms. A grading must be established according to the "Glasgow Co~a Scale". The CT scan must be realized in emergency most often without contrast injection, to see a subarachno"idal bleeding•.an intra?ranial hematomã nd/or an intraventricular haemorrhage. It IS very irnportant to esttmate the ventricular dilatation which can require, in emergency, an external shunting. The angiographie study of both internaI carotid artery and both vertebral arteries is realized by transfemoral approach. The e1assic AP., lateral and oblique projections should be replaced by spin angiography able to show the malformation whi~h has bl~ed and to study its angioarchitecture (neck of aneurysm -nidus, feedinq pedicules and draining veins of an AVM...). The angiowaphic study of cerebral circulation must be exhaustive; haernodynarnic parameters are important. We must appreciate the frequent vasospasm and multiple aneurysms are not rare. A transcranial doppler is mandatory to follow-up the cerebraI blood f1ow. lndeed, blood inside subarachno'idal space can induce vasospasm and hydroeephalia. The risk of vasospasm is high: a preventive treatment with calcium channel blockers is immediately started. A precise follow-up with transcranial Doppler allows to detect the vasospasm as soon as possible; if a neurological deficit appears, an hyperselective intracranial angioplasty must be performed in emergency. According to e1inical evolution, CT scan can be repeated to know if brain ischemia, brain oedema or ventricular dilatation is developing. When there is a ventricular dilatation, a ventricular shunt is mandatory. After these initial examinations, we must deeide what is the best treatment and when this treatment must be done; the best is as soon as possible, very often in emergency. When endovascular approach is indicated, the best solution is to do immediately the endosaccular treatment after the end of the angiography during the same procedure. The indications tor endovascular approach are very variable, according to the different teams. Actually, endovascular approach is i~dicated first whenever it is possible: vertebrobasilar aneurysm and anterior communicanting aneurysm are good indications. The aneurysms of the first bifurcation of the middle cerebral artery remain difficult for angioarchitecture understanding; however, in many cases, endosaccular packing is possible and long term follow-up seems good. Indication for treating in emergency a ruptured brain AVM or a dural fistula, are rare. A very close cooperation between neuro-anaesthesiologists, neurosurgeons and interventional neuroradiologists is necessary to choose the best treatment that is to say the less risky, the most comfortable and the less expansive. With the advent of color encoding of the Doppler signal, ultrasonography has gained a major place in the detection of renal artery stenosis (RAS). Our approach is anterolateral on the right side and posterolateral on the left, making it possible to optimize the Doppler angle and to perform longitudinal scans for detection of multiple arteries (codominant and accessory). Complete examination is obtained in 80 to 90% of patients as soon as the sensitivity in depth of the platform used is sufficient. Proximal criteria are the most important with spectral broadening and systolic velocity over 150 cm/s. Distal criteria are accessory because present in severe stenoses only (>75%) and have lower reproducibility. They allow to grade the stenosis when proximal criteria are present and to detect a severe stenosis when proximal criteria cannot be obtained. Among the numerous proposed criteria, the acceleration time is the most convenient, because angle independent, being abnormal when longer than 0.07 s. Performances of Doppler US depends on the criteria used. These results will be presented. The role of captopril sensitization is still unclear to now. Contrast agent injection increases the feasibility but not the sensitivity of the test. spiral CT, virtual endoscopy can visualise the external auditory canal, the ossicular chain, the medial wall of the middle ear, and the osseous labyrinth. The application of virtual endoscopy to high resolution MR data sets allows the visualisation of the membranous labyrinth. This fluid-filled structure presents high signal intensity and provides a virtual cavity for the endoscopic perspective. Virtual endoscopy allows measurements of distance, angle and calibre, and it is useful to detect and quantify the presence of pathologies involving the auditory spaces. Furthermore, virtual endoscopy can be integrated with other bi-dimensional and three-dimensional perspectives, such as multiplanar reconstructions, maximum intensity projections, surface shaded display, volume rendering etc., and therefore represents a multi-imaging tool for the study of the auditory spaces. In the assessment of renovascular disease CT-and MR-Angiography are less invasive, less expensive and easier and quicker to perform than conventional angiography. CTA is based on helical data acquisition with consecutive post-processing and three-dimensional reconstructions. It provides accurate detection of significant renal artery stenoses and additional information on mural calcifications. CTA is limited by a low cranio-caudal coverage, the need for iodinated contrast media, and the lack of ability to quantify blood flow in renal vessels. The phase-contrast (PC) technique is recommended for unenhanced MR angiography of renal arteries. The directional component of the phase images permit easy differentiation of arteries from veins, thus eliminating a potential source of error. Morphologie assessment of the renal arteries with PC-MRA ls, however, still handicapped by the inability to adequately visualize distal renal artery segments and small accessory vessels. While the accepted gold standard, conventional angiography, is highly sensitive in the detection of renovascular disease, it is merely 50-80% specific. CINE-PC based functional blood flow analysis, capable of expressing renal flow, may overcome some of these limitations. A breathheld PC-imaging strategy is essential for accurate blood flow quantification. Contrast-enhanced 3D MR acquisition techniques proved to be highly accurate for visualization of renal vessels. In its initial implementation imaging times ranged from 3 to 5 minutes. The use of fast gradient systems allows to reduce imaging times and to perform breath-hold data acquisition. High resolution images of main and segmental arterial branches can be obtained after injection of higher doses of pararnagnetic contrast media. A virtual angioscopic display of the acquired images provides a new insight into morphologie alterations of renal arteries.  The interest towards the detailed CT study of nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses comes from of functional endoscopic surgery. In 150 patients we used inner surface 3D reconstruction to visualise sinus nasal cavities and to navigate inside them (in the same way as during optic fibrous endoscopy). The main limit is the arbitrary choice of the density threshold value: this implies that discontinuity or continuity of the rebuilt inner surface not always correspond to reality. Furthermore, the overlapping or the closeness of different or same structures (mucosamucopurulent secretions, mucosa-mucosa, etc.) are visualised only as shape modification of the same homogeneous surface if no significant density differences arise or if the chosen threshold corresponds to the lower density value, The correspondence of virtual endoscopic images and the results of endoscopy is largely proved, particularly as regards to lateral nasal wall and to osteo-meatal unit of maxillary sinus. Certainly, it is not, at the moment, an alternative technique to optic fibre fibroscopy but a complementary procedure that may help confirm an analysis or evaluate anatomically difficult or impossible to reach seats (frontal sinus and frontal recessus, maxillary sinus and sinusal ostium, ethmoidal bulla and sphenoidal sinus), also in case of overlapping of pathological processes (such as meatal stenosis), high risk patients or non-passable stenosis. Its teaching potentiality is undoubted. J. Rodenwaldt; GöttingenlD 3D-inner surface models visualize the endoluminal structures in a similar way as an endosopic examination. The quality depends on the scan parameters for high concordance of 3D-virtual endoscopy imaging and the anatomical structures of the upper airway. Practically a collimation of 3 mm and a pitch of 1.5 are optimal parameters for the combined generation of excellent 3D-inner surface models and high quality axial slices with an acceptable longitudinal coverage of the examination. 3D-virtual endoscopy demonstrates space-occupying endoluminal alterations and changes of the tracheal configuration. In comparison with the invasive endoscopic examination the inner surface rendering has several advantages. It is a non-invasive technique and grants the visualization of the entire upper airway especially the inferior part of the vocal cords, which cannot be viewed from below with fiberoptic laryngoscopy. The combined interpretation of 3D-virtual endoscopy and axial slices permits an evaluation of the endo-and extraluminal structures with only one investigation. But 3D virtual endoscopy is not able to visualize the morphology of the mucous membrane. That is one reason why superficially spreading tumors cannot be detected. For that reason virtual endoscopy is especially important for detection, preoperative planning and postoperative follow-up of space-occupying tumors and tracheal stenosis. Virtual endoscopy is a new software development that allows the navigation through the inner or outer spaces of anatomical structures by simulating the fyberoptic endoscopy perspective. This technique has been applied to the exploration of several anatomical regions. The atherosclerotic plaque at the carotid bifurcation is often proliferative, fragile and frequently ulcerated . There is consequently a significant risk of distal intracerebral embolism (5 to 10%) at angioplasty. We developed a technique of "Protected " Angioplasty and later on a tech nique of "Protected" Stenting (Wall Stent) that practically eliminates this risk. Endovascular techniques using a "protection" have presently betler results than endarterectomy. The protect ion consists in a temporary occlusion of the internal carolid distal to the site of the stenting followed by an aspiration and c1ean ing of the working site. Will be showed the technique with two variants 1-"Full protection " at all the steps of the technique (prc-angioplasty, stent placement, post stent placement angioplasty) 2-"Simplified" techn ique where only the post stent placement angioplasty is protected. This last step is for us the most at risk and it should be mandatory perfOrmed with protection. 259 Carotid stents (part 2) B.T. Katzen ; Miami, FUUSA The techn ique of carotid stenting will be presented ulilizing video case reviews. Techniques including placement of carotid artery sheaths and guid ing catheters, use of low-profile balloons and guide wire (0.014-0.018 inch), and deployment of a variety of stents including balloon expandable, and self-expanding stents (Wallstent, Integra, Medicore, and Smart Stent [Cordis]) will be provided. Additionally, specific aspects of patient selection , and technique directed at the prevention of complicalions. Protocols for adjunctive pharma cological therapy will also be reviewed . 260 Carotid stents (part 3) Carotid artery stenting is gaining in popularity as an alternative to carotid endarterectomy for the treatment of symptomatic high-grade stenosis of the internal carotid artery (ICA) . Rationale for this approach includes fess morbidity and shorter recovery. However, the interventions related to the carot id artery pose achallenge to the surgeon for the serious consequences of failure in terms of disability and death. Since there is yet no scient ific evidence demonst raling the safety of carotid stenting , its use should be limited to weil designed random ized prospective trials. For the majority of patients the primary access point is the common femoral artery using large guiding cathet ers. In an altempt to control cerebral emboli during ang ioplasty, marked variability in techniques for treatment of ICA stenosis have evolved. Basically, two groups of techniques are available: with and without cerebral protection. Since the significance of microembolic load to the brain during stenting remains uncerta ln, many investigators use unprote cled carotid angioplasty with primary or secondary stenting. The advantage of primary stenting is the reduc tion of emboli by containing the atherosclerotic debris. In contrast, tight stenoses have to be predilated to allow the stent to cross the lesion . The use of self-expanding stents and adjunctive medical treatment will improve the safety of the procedure. Th. Roeren; Aarau/CH Over the last ten years TIPS has been established as a therapeutic option for failed endoscopic control of variceal bleeding (also in an emergency setling), intractable ascites in liver cirrhosis and as a therapeutic alternative for portocaval shunt surgery. Retrospective and prospective studies from various centers in Europe and the United States yielded techn ical and clinical success rates of more than 90% in patients, who were treated for variceal bleeding. It became apparent, however, that frequent control of shunt patency was necessary to prevent shunt occlusion. Up to 80% of patients develop shunt stenosis , whereo f two thirds are located in hepatic venous outflow. If these stenoses are readily diagnosed , additional stent ing can restore shunt function and prevent shunt occlusion . Various types of anticoagulation do not prevent shunt stenosis and its etiology is still unclear. Another potential hazard of TIPS is the induction of hepatic encephalopathy, which can be expected in a certa in percentage due to portasystemic shunting . redo-surgery. During the workshop, emphasis will be put on procedure planification, main technical problems observed and how to deal with. less common procedures we have peiiormed are art. embolization for steal phenomenon, occlusion of remaining spontaneous shunt, portal v. embolization to treat cholangitis, and stent-grafting as a temporary measure to treat bile duct rupture before surgery. These more advanced techniques will be discussed in details. 72% and 64% of vascular and biliary complications respectively were successfully treated by IRT alone, obviating early surgery. Systematic PTC 3 and 12 months after OlT seems usefull either to detect asymptomatic biliary strictures or to screen the biliary tree in pat.with aspecific clinical symptoms (differential diagnosis with rejections, art. occlusion, viral infection, biliary abnormalities).  Interventional Radiology may be devided into two large categories, vascular and non vascular interventions. a) On one hand vascular interventions deal with revascularisation procedures i.e. aspiration and/or pharmacological lysis for acute and mechanical recanalisation of chronic occlusions, percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) and stenting of stenoses or residual lesions after recanalisation. On the other hand embolisation procedures are performed to occlude abnormal or bleeding vessels such as in trauma, tumor, ulcers, infection or arterio-venous malformation and aneurysms. Various materials such as particulate matter (ivalon, gelfoam), tissue adhesives (bucrylate) or ethanol may be used. b) Non vascular procedures include mainly percutaneous biopsies for diagnostic workup and drainage procedures for abscesses or drainage of obstruction of the biliary and urinary system. lately endoluminal stents have been increasingly used for palliation of strictures of the esophagus, stomach, duodenum and for preoperative or palliative treatment of acute ileus in colorectal malignanies. The radiographer in the interventional room should be familiar not only with the various procedures but also with the instrumentation, patient monitoring and the most frequently used drugs in these procedures. Representative cases discussing the indications for various techniques and devices will be shown. MRI has had an explosive growth since 1982, and during the first decade in diagnostics only. Interventional procedures and minimally invasive procedures are becoming more and more standard solutions. This demands good image guiding. MR imaging during interventional procedures has the latest five years increased considerably. Advantages with MR imaging are the excellent anatomical resolution and no X-ray exposure. You meet problems with MR compatibility when moving procedure into the MR room. Also the working space is limited, and artefacts from different equipment may occur. Established procedures in open MR are image guided biopsy. Precise anaesthetic depositing in neurolytic celiac plexus block. Brain tumour surgery with interactive planning and per operative evaluation, in future also merged with fMRI images to guide the surgeon. Work in progress is MR image guided termo therapy. Cryotherapy is freezing tumours, and laser therapy is "boiling" tumours. MR sequences with temperature sensitive ability present images with temperature gradients, in colour, online. In future there will be more advanced image post processing, and online 3D image guiding. Robots are now entering medicine. Their ability to follow precise orders is one big advantage, and the ability to transfer and downscale movements is another. Ch.L. Zollikofer; Winterthur/CH The idea of computer assistance in radiological diagnosis generally consists in the use of a computer to facilitate diagnosis; not to replace the radiologist by a computer. The computer can improve the diagnostic process at different levels. The use of the computer to reformat information, to extract new information or to develop new patterns in interdisciplinary cooperation will be discussed and illustrated with examples of new software to improve the quality of digital radiography and CT, with techniques of computer assisted image segmentation and image fusion. The use of the computer to extract new information is particularly important in functional imaging. Finally the potential of the computer to offer fundamentally new radiological services and the future role of PACS in this regard will be emphasized. The weakest link in breast cancer diagnosis is still the radiologist, who must find alesion and has to make a diagnosis. In routine practice and in screening, 15-20% of the cancers are overlooked and show up later as interval cancers or late stage cancers in subsequent screening rounds. Another 30% of the cancers is visible on previous mammograms as so-calied minimal signs. The performance of pattern recognition programmes, developed to aid radiologists in detecting breast cancers has now reached a level that renders application in routine practice and in screening. First studies in our department indicate that a higher sensitivity can be achieved without lowering the specificity. In the near future the combination of full size digital mammography with Computer Aided Diagnosis will have a serious impact on the early detection programmes of breast cancer, even in the younger woman. With increasing sophistication of clinical radiological tools it is becoming possible to study the pathogenesis of disease in vivo. In the case of arthritis the addition of MRI in particular has revolutionised understanding of the many processes involved and offers considerable research opportunity. The Refresher Course will focus on the three principle sites of arthritic involvement within any one joint, the synovium, cartilage and underlying bone, and the entheses around the joint. Correlation between the radiological processes that are imaged will be made with the associated pathological changes. The types and heterogeneity of synovial pathology will be emphasised enabling differential diagnosis to be made as weil as disease staging. Hyaline cartilage has become accessible to radiology due mainly to MRI. Attention will be focused on the new knowledge that this has afforded together with some of the pitfalls in imaging. Enthesis disease remains relatively straightforward and a simple system of triage and differential diagnosis will be demonstrated. Many questions remain to be answered. Arthritis assumes increasing importance in our ageing population for whilst rheumatoid disease may be on the wane osteoarthritis is has major significance in health economic terms. Spinal diseases and back pain are one the most common patient problem. In the last ten years the role of imaging has changed dramatically due to the advent of new imaging procedures Iike MRI and spiral (helical) CT. In degeneration conventional radiographs in two planes are still standard procedures. Disk-space narrowing, subchondral sclerosis, osteophytes with foraminal encroaching or spinal stenosis may be outlined. The latter and facet joint abnormalities are best visualized with CT. Disk-califications and "vacuum phenomena" are documented with CT. On the other hand MRI has become the imaging procedure of choice in imaging of disk-problems. It allows direct visualization of the nucleus and anulus fibrosis. Degeneration leads to dimunition of disk-height and hypointensity. Protrusion, prolapse and sequestra are directly seen. The three stages of subchondral bone changes can be easily discerned. Early diagnosis of spondylitis is possible with MRI (bone marrow edema) and (or) 3-phase bone scan (hot spot due to hyperaemia and high bone turn over). Subchondral porosis and sclerosis are best seen with conventional radiographs and (or) spiral CT. First signs of healing are sclerosis. Complications (e.g. abscess-formation) are best documented with CT or MRI. Primary blastoma of the spine are rare. Conventional radiographs combined with CT and (or) MRI allow differential diagnosis and verification of tumor-extension. Secondary blastoma are very common in mamma-, prostate-, bronchus-and thyroid carcinoma in the adult po~ulation. Screening procedure in this question is 3-phase bone scanrunq, but nowadays it is weil known that MRI is much more sensitive than bonescan. Limitation is the relative small field of view, which is improved by phased-array coils. Also in many cases MRI allows a differentiation of compression vertebra due to metastasis from those due to osteoporosis. Methods and Materials: 20 patients with proven focal liver tumours were studied. Using standardised settings, Power Doppler imaging with HDI 3000 was performed before and during iv administration of NC100100 (dose 0.23-10.5 ml). The video-recorded examinations were analysed on PC using commercial software. Standardised regions of interest over the tumour and normalliver at the same depth were selected. Power Doppler signal intensity (PDSI) of the ROls was measured to provide NC1001 00 signal intensity -time curves for the initial 60 sees. Results: Metastases showed a rapid increase in PDSI, reaching peak within 5 seconds whilst the PDSI time eurves for haemangiomas were f1at. Peak signal enhancement in the liver metastases was up to 6 times higher than normal Iiver parenchyma, compared to the inerease in haemangiomas whieh was only 1.3-1.8. 75% of metastases showed a large increase in PDSI whieh was not observed in any of the haemangiomas. There was no clear relationship between the NC100100 dose and signal intensity. Purpose: Several reports dealt with the deteetion of liver metastases using the Doppler perfusion index. To measure the Doppler perfusion index, Iiver arteries must be evaluated. We therefore investigated, how accurate variations of the hepatic artery can be detected using color eoded sonography pre and post levovist injection. : 50 patients were examined using color eoded sonography pre and post levovist injection. After the sonographie examination intraarterial DSA was performed and the results were compared. Results: Using angiography 13 variations of the hepatie artery were detected in 12 patients. The most common variation in 9 patients were hepatic arteries originating from the superior mesenterie artery. This could be deteeted with unenhanced color eoded sonography in 7 and with enhanced sonography in 8 patients. In one patient in addition, a hepatogastrie trunk was noted by angiography, this was not recognized by songraphy. In another patients with a hepatogastric trunk, this variation was sonographieally only seen after levovist injection. One false positive diagnoses of a replaeed right hepatic artery occured by songraphy. The deteetability of arterial hepatie blood supply is better with enhanced than with unenhaneed color eoded sonography; however compared with angiography all variations ean not be detected. -a 3D data set from Spiral CT or MR, with high contrast between the content of the organ to be evaluated and its wall. Tipycally, in spiral CT air is emplyed to fill the colonic lumen, or contrast agent ls injected to opacify the vascula system. In MR positive agent is employed in the colonic lumen as weil. -a computer powerful enough to perform the complex evaluation of the 3D data set, in order to provide images of the different structures from any angulation. With current technology it is possible to obtain all the calculations required in a real time fashion. -a software able to make those calculations and to provide a direct internal view of the organs. Current softwares may use one of two different approach: surface or volume rendering techniques. Surface rendering is somewhat Iimited. With this technique a thresold density value is chosen, and only these densities are dysplayed, providing imaging of the surface of the wall of the organ, when appropriate thresold value is chosen. Artifacts are present with this technique and Volume rendering has been therefore proposed to solve many of the problems. With volume rendering all the data of the 3D data set are kept as informative. The relative transparencies of each voxel can be modified and defrned according to the needs, allowing a real evaluation of the inner part of the organ, but keeping information of the surrounding structures. With current systems real time virtual endoscopy is becoming a reality and the softwares are being implemented in the same operative console of Spiral CT systems, without the need for dedicated workstations. The term virtual endoscopy (VE) encompasses a number of methods reaching from relatively simple helical CT examinations without postprocessing up to virtual excursions through the bowels which require a high computing capacity. In general the method is based on a so-called CT-pneumocolon which involves a helical CT of the entire abdomen and which is performed after insufflation of the large bowel with air and adjuvant administration of spasmolytics. The ultimate purpose is to compress the immense amount of data into a form that can be more easily handled. The bowel can be 2-dimensionally reconstructed or a 3-dimensional volume reconstruction can be generated. Eventually, endoluminal reconstructions can be obtained which simulate endoscopy and, in their technically most sophisticated form, ultimately allow endoscopy to be conducted interactively. The clinical rationale for examining the colon with VE is that this technique might be able to serve as a tool for detection of colonic polyps and masses that are malignant or premalignant. Initial reports of the efficacy of VE are encouraging and suggest that the technique can compete favorably with existing modalities as endoscopy and barium enema. However,radiation exposure marks a disadvantage of CT-based VE, particulcarly when performed as a screening procedure. Further validation will allow VE to become an accurate, minimally invasive, and cost-effective colonimaging method. The results are less satisfying in the evaluation of brain arteriovenous malformations and in the different steps of pre and post therapeutical evaluation. Introduction: Recent improvements in MRI hardware have provided the bases for acquiring 3D data sets within a convenient breathhold. The 3D nature of the data acquisitions permits analysis of tubular structures from a 'virtual' intraluminal endoscopic perspective, thereby providing the basis for virtual MR-colonography. 5ubjects and Methods: With the patient in the prone position, a contrast enema is administered per rectum using a disposable enema kit with an inflatable tip by hydrostatic pressure (1-1.5 m water column). The enema consists of 2000 ml of water spiked with 20 ml of a 0.5 molar Gd-DTPA solution. Rectal filling is monitored with a non-slice select 2D SPGR-acquisition collecting one image every second. To reduce bowel motion, scopolamine (20 mg) is administered. Once contrast reaches the cecum, a 3D-SPGR-(TRITE =4.7/2 ms, 40°flip angle, 32 cm FOV, 256 x 160 matrix, 0.5 NEX), as weil as a SSFSE-sequence is acquired breathheld. To enable differentiation of free floating fecal material and air bubbles from fixed polypoid lesions, the 3D-SPGR-sequence is repeated in the supine position. Image analysis is based on a combination of multiplanar reformated (MPR) and virtual colonoscopy ( The role of CT and MRI to the diagnosis of early acute stroke caused by arterial or venous occlusion is essential. The term "early" used in this context means within 6 hours of the onset of symptoms. Signs of early ischemic edema are sometimes difficult to detect on CT and MRI. The purpose of this presentation is to familiarize the radiologist with the subtle brain parenchymal changes seen within the first 6 hours in order to improve detection and early patient care. In current c1inical practice, CT is still, because of its availability and low cost, the best imaging modality to differentiate between ischemia and hemorrhage. Abnormal CT findings include: 1. hypodensity of the brain parenchyma which corresponds to cytotoxic edema and includes 4 signs: a) obscuration of the lentiform nucleus; b) loss of the insular ribbon; c) effacement of the cortical sulci or gyri; d) loss of differenciation between gray and white matter. 2. hyperdensity of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). MRI is more sensitive than CT in the detection of the acute cerebral ischemia. If conventional T2W spin-echo images are often normal in the first 6 hours after onset, MR angiography (MRA), diffusion and perfusion weighted sequences are emerging techniques of increasing interest. MRA may replace conventional angiography in cerebral venous thrombosis. 283 C. Neck vessels pathology G. Simonetti, A. Bozzao, R. Floris, M. Silvestrini; RomeIl Clinical trial (NASCET, ECTS) have assessed that carotid endoarterectomy Is protective against stroke in patients with symptomatic severe carotid stenosis. To decrease costs and risks, new diagnostic tools have been developed, such as Duplex Ultrasound (US), Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA), and more recently Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA). Digitally subtracted MRA (DSA-MRA) obtained with high speed acquisitions during gadoloinium injection is also newly avaible. These techniques are changing the role of non-invasive assessment of carotid stenosis. Although it is probably too early to assess adefinite diagnostic algorithm, the use of DSA as presurgical tool for defining carotid stenosis is rapidly decreasing. Non invasive methods have the advantage of allowing a rapid and accurate evaluation of extracranial arteries. This is particularly relevant in patients with vascular risks factors or after transient ischemic attacks or ischemic strokes. The lack of invasiveness is important for serial follow-up studies investigating the development of carotid plaques and their natural history. The possibility to operate patients on the strength of ultrasound findings without angiographic confirmation of carotid stenosis is controversial. At present, there is increasing evidence that when the information about large cerebral artery disease supported by color-coded Doppler is in accordance with that of other non-invasive techniques Iike MR and C'T angiography, invasive angiography can be avoided. In the next future the application of different technique and a combined rather than competitive use of non-invasive methods will support the best avaible diagnosis to assess structural phenomena as weil as hemodynamic aspects. Neoplasms of the brain represen!, next to leukemia, the most common form of malignant diseases in the pediatric population. Supratentorial location of brain tumors is most common during the first year of life and after 10 years of age while infratentorial tumors represent more than 60 % of brain tumors between 2 and 5 years of age. The ratio between male and female is about equal except for certain types of neoplasms. Clinical symptoms associated with pediatric intracranial neoplasms are different are related to tumor loeation and the age of the child. Most posterior fossa tumors give symptoms due to obstructive hydrocephalus while brain stern gliomas declare themselves by cranial nerve signs, often misunderstood and thought to be due to gastro-intestinal disease. In the very young child, increasing skull circumference may be the first and only clinical sign of obstructive hydroeephalus. Endocrine symptoms and visual disturbanee may represent subtle clinieal signs of suprasellar location of tumors. Neuroradiological imaging characteristics of brain tumors are nonspecific and the histological diagnosis is often better predieted eonsidering gross location, age and sex. The tendeney of some brain tumors to seed to the subarachnoid space and spinal canal should influence the imaging strategy when the neoplasm is first detected. Neuroradiology is used to monitor the effect of surgery and other therapeutic efforts. These studies should follow predetermined protocols in order to optimize the use of available imaging facilities. There are certain diseases, specific to the pediatrie population, that can mimic intracranial neoplasms. Knowledge of these "Iook-a-likes" is essential to the radiologist in order not to initiate aggressive therapeutic measures in diseases better treated conservatively. 288 Intra-axial brain tumors in adults VV.J. Huk; ErlangenlD diagnostie facilities have induced an abnormal rising of the number of breast examinations and of medical costs, without areal gain in terms of Public Health. The Breast Integrated Diagnosis Units represent a different model compared to the Screening Programs. The centralization inside one structure of the whole diagnostic work up performed by "dedieated" radiologists and radiographers with specific training and consistent experience, the Quality Control of the operative standards, the Medical Audit of the proeedures and the results and, finally, the constant linkage with the General Praetitioner and Therapy Departments are the main features of the B.I.D.U. Consistent number of exams per year, adeguate equipment technology and appropriate methodology are assured moreover. The ereation of a B.I.D.U. network at national level appears nowadays the best choice to assure, at reasonable costs, proper detection and diagnosis to either asymptomatic women or symptomatic ones. Many investigators now believe that from a ciinieal point of view it is useful to divide DCIS into poorly-, intermediately-and well-differentiated (cribriform , miero-papillary, elinging and solid) subtypes. This subclassifieation is based on the observation that the poorly differentiated type has a higher malignancy potential showing a higher proliferative rate as determined by thymidine-Iabelling studies, more frequently expresses the Her 2/ neu oncogene, is more Iikely to be associated with areas of microinvasion and has a higher propensity to reeur within five years after breast-saving therapy than other types. In about 70% of the intraductal cancers, mammographie mierocalcification is the sole evidenee of tumor. The mammographie presentation of these mieroealeifications is in the two main types of intraductal cancers often different. The poorly-differentiated type is associated usually with the so called "casting"lIinear or coarse-granular mierocalcifications which often develop in the necrotic debris of the tumor. In contrast, the well-differentiated type is usually associated with the fine-granular microcalcifications. They develop in the secrete produced by the tumor cells. Based on the present knowledge there are at least three factors influencing the local control after breast-conserving therapy of ductal carcinoma in situ: extent of the disease, adequacy of the exeision, and the histologie subtype of the tumor. Therefore, a elose co-operation between radiologist, pathologist and surgeon is essential for an optimum management of patients with DCIS. 286 C. Early detection and diagnosis: alternative operative models V. Lattanzio, A.M. Guerrieri; Barill Mammography is up to now the most reliable means for early detection of breast cancer and, consequently, for reduction of mortality for the disease. As matter of fact, the demand of prevention by women aged 40-60 has strongly increased during last years. At present, in our country the insufficient number of organized Screening programs and the difformity of guidelines, operative standards and management in The incidence of brain tumors is relatively low. Depending on the site of the lesion ciinical symptoms inciude focal seizures, headache, and various neurological deficits. For the detection and identification of intra-axial lesions, MRI has become superior to CT as the method of first choice. In the early course of intracranial tumor disease, but also later, the lesions often cannot be differentiated from non-neoplastic focal changes of signal intensity. Therefore a thorough evaluation of the clinical history, the neurological findings, and the laboratory examinations is mandatory for the differentiation of these two entities. Besides these clinical informations, a number of morphological parameters will be discussed which are helpful for the differential diagnosis of the large variety of tumors of neuroepithelial, metastatic and nonneoplastic origin. MR-spectroscopy may provide additional information for the identification and grading of tumors. For the same purpose angiography can demonstrate tumor vessels and an early draining vein as sign of a malignant lesion. Nevertheless, in a number of inoperable tumors, stereotactic biopsy will still be necessary for a reliable histological diagnosis, which is essential for the planning of a radiotherapy. 289 Extra-axial brain tumors In adults G. Wilms; LeuvenlB Analyzing the data our results show several interesting findings. PET upstages more than 5% of patients from N2 to N3 compared to conventional staging. Furthermore, it detects a number of unknown distant metastases. As a result, in our series more than 10% of patients are upstaged by PET such that they can no longer be considered to be operable. Using these data in simple cost effectiveness calculations shows, that PET is highly cost effective, as it prevents unnecessary operations in around 10% of patients with bronchial carcinoma. In this workshop the imaging features of the most frequent extra-axial tumors will be discussed. Meningioma, acoustic schwannoma and epidermoid cysts will be discussed. Typical as weil as atypical cases will be demonstrated. Emphasis will be put on the differential diagnostic features with intraaxial and other extra-axial tumors. The term "acute renal infection" encompasses a spectrum of pathologie processes involving the renal parenchyma that vary in severity from acute pyelonephritis to a renal abscess which can progress to the periand pararenal spaces. The clinical pattern of allthe pathological variants is quite similar: therefore if it is easy to diagnose a renal infection, it is impossible to recognize the pathological variant and its extension. The imaging modalities may solve this problem. Most risk factors ot acute renal infection can be elicited by a good clinical history and physical examination. Due to the low sensitivity of IVU, renal scintigraphy ( 99Mtc _labelied DMSA) and US should be the first examinations to be performed. Their !imitations are due to the incomplete evaluation of the process, mainly in cases of extrarenal extension. CT is the study of choice to define the pattern of renal involvement and extrarenal extension, intra-or extrafascial and therefore it has a strong impact on the therapeutic plan. Furthermore it is indicated in monitoring the medical treatment particularly of the abscesses. CT is also useful in understanding the pathophysiology of the infection using precontrast and postcontrast, early and delayed scans. The imaging modalities are indicated: The imaging work-up of inflammatory sinus diseases and complications relies on computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . The simple acute sinusitis is not an indication to imaging studies, whereas chronic, persistent, and recurring sinusitis should urge a CT study. Such an investigation is mandatory to precisely evaluate the extent of inflammatory disease ; furthermore it nicely depicts abnormalities (inflammatory, or anatomie variant s) of the drainage pathways of the sinuses, which are the cause of the sinusitis. Finally CT guides the endoscopic surgeon . In complications of sinusitis (usually acute) , CT and MRI are necessary to evaluate the extent of the inflammatory process to the orbit, or intracranial structures; such events represent radiologie emergencies. Mucoceles, and oste itis of the facial bones are other compl ications of sinusitis , more ehrenie. which are weil demonstrated by CT and/or MRI. Malignant tumors of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are rare (Iess than 1% of all malignanc ies, and about 3% of head and neck tumors) . The prognos is remains poor because of the advanced stage of tumor at the time of diagnosis. Clinical symptoms are nonspecific and these tumors grow insidiously into the orbit, anterior and middle cerebral fossa . Surgical treatment can lead to severe cosmetic deformity and functional impairment. Progress in therapeutic management includes the use of aggressive surgery on the skull base and conformal radioth erapy. Imaging plays an essential role for tumor mapping. MR tends to become the first step imaging modality for initial work-up, since >15 mm in length . In case of an unilateral type D aneurysm the stentgraft is extended to the external iliac artery after embolization of the hypogastric artery. Various devices such as the VANGUARD (Boston Scientific -Meadox) , EXCLUDER (WL Gore) . and TALENT (World Medical Manufacturing) were used and will be presented dur ing the course. A techn ical success was achieved in 99% of cases. However, early leaks were present in 14%. The 30-day mortality rate was 2%, conversion to open surgery was performed in <2%. Due to secondary interventions such as additional stentgraft placeme nt and embolization all primary leaks could be closed within the the first 6 months. However, secondary leaks had to be treated in >10% of cases. During a 4 years follow up stent-grafts prevented rupture of the AAA in all patients. The traditional treatment of thoracic aortic aneurysms is the surgical placement of a graft. Although substantial advances in the operative care of patients with thorae ie aort ic aneurysm have been achieved over the past 30 years, the variety of underly ing diseases , the frequency of coexistent cardiovascular diseases , and the unpredictable need for emergency surgical intervention continue to pose vexing challenges. The difficulty presented by this problem is underscored by studies documenting a mortal ity rate of more then 50 percent in patients requiring emergency operative treatment and in those with particular characteristics or coexisting conditions such as advanced age or the presence of congestive heart failure . The risk associated with elective surgical repair is lower, with a mortality rate of 23 percent reported in one large contemporary series . Transluminally placed endovascular stent-graft prostheses ofter an alternative approach to treatment that is potentially lass invasive and less expens ive, with lower risk than standard operative repair. The clin ical feasibility of transluminal endovascular grafting has been recently described for the treatment of abdom inal aortic aneurysm, subclavianartery aneurysm, arteriovenous fistu la, and femoral occlusive disease . This workshop will review our current experience with translum inally placed endovascular stent-grafts for the repair of descending thoracic aort ic aneurysms. Clinical and radiological aspects of the important and more frequent causes of chronic lung disease in children will be presented. Vascular rings and vascular compression syndromes may cause Iifethreatening airway obstruction. Stridor, apnoe, recurrent pneumonia, chronic atelectasis or overinflation of the lung are the manifestations of airway obstruction. In these cases the diagnostic evaluation has therefore to include also the search for congenital vascular anomalies, in particular the double aortic arch, the right aortic arch with aberrant left subclavian artery and left-sided ductus and the pulmonary artery sling. Another common problem in pediatric radiology is unilateral small or hyperlucent lung. Primary vascular causes of unilateral small lung may be eongenital, such as proximal interruption of pulmonary artery, unilateral pulmonary venous atresia and anomalous pulmonary venous drainage (Scimitar-Syndrom). The goal of this lecture ls to present a systemalic, segmental approach for the evaluation of these congenital aortic arch and pulmonary artery anomalies. All these vascular anomalies may be investigated noninvasively by uhrasound. color doppler and MRI. However ultrasound examination performed in an organized and step-by-step fashion oflen provides a definitive diagnosis. Nevertheless in case of surgical intervention cineangiography may still be neeessary today to provide the precise definition of the vascular anatomy. On the other hand MRimaging is the single most definitive method to delineate both the vascular and tracheobronchial anatomy in children with the sling left pulmonary artery complex. Room K Pulmonary malformations are uncommon but potentially life-threatening fetal anomalies. Their diagnosis relies upon Ultrasound and Doppler analysis. Recent advances in prenatal diagnosis have provided new insights into the pathophysiology and natural history of these anomalies. Purpose: After a brief review of the embryology and normal sonographie appearance of fetal lungs, this course will present pulmonary sequestration, cystic adenomatoid malformation, bronchogenic cyst, bronchial and tracheal atresia, pleural effusion and pulmonary hypoplasia. Sonographie appearance, differential diagnosis, natural history and prognosis will be discussed and iIIustrated. The topic will also include the necessary prenatal and postnatal work-up. The potential role fetal magnetic resonance imaging and the limitations of prenatal diagnosis will be emphasized. With the advent of newer scanners, both CT and MR data sets become so large that printout on film becomes a major cost factor. In addition, the sheer amount of consecutive images requires new display modalities. Dynamic reviewing of souree images (interactive eine display) is an elegant technique to evaluate the continuing spaces and structures of the abdomen and musculoskelatal system. This presentation will interactively demonstrate the practical clinical advantages of this reviewing technique for a variety of diagnostic tasks: detection of focal lesions in the parenchymal organs of the upper abdomen, deseription of the preeise extent and spatial relationship of lesions and surrounding structures, differentiation between Iymph nodes and vessels or bowel loops, evaluation of vascular anatomy and pathology, evaluation of small and large bowel disease, and skeletal pathology. lt has to be noted, however, that dynamic reviewing of images using a monitor display will require a different approach to image analysis. The usual pattern recognition of the eross-sectional images will have to be given up in favor of an organ-oriented approach. There may be the danger that an observer may miss alesion that he is not actively looking for (e.g. adrenal or subcutaneous lesion in rectal cancer screening). Therefore, one has to scrutinize each organ system separately (including subcutaneous fat or skeletal structures). suspected by a variety of clinical symptoms, sometimes only presenting as "funny looking child". Therefore experienced pediatricians, orthopedic surgeons and human genetesists are involved in the diagnostic work-up with the radiologist. Plain films are the basic imaging modality. The radiographer should know when and how to perform the necessary X-ray. Investigation of the unborn and the newborn with suspected severe skeletal dysplasia can have an immediate impact on the child's prognosis and therefore may be highly urgent. On the other hand, many radiologic features of skeletal dysplasias develop within years postnatally. Consequently a correct diagnosis is the basis for the genetic counselling of a family. The diagnosis can have severe consequences for the patient and for his family. lt will be shown, that the extent of the diagnostic procedures will be influenced by the patients' age, by the suspected disease and the expression of its patterns. We will provide guidelines for the general use and the extent of the radiodiagnostic investigations to obtain optimal c1inical information. Special prerequisites for optimized results with interactive reviewing will be discussed, such as simultaneous display for biphasic studies in the abdomen and narrow collimation for CTA, bowel and skeletal studies. 304 B. Circle of WiIIis, skull base, head and neck, chest P.F.G.M. van Waes, BK Velthuis, M.S. van Leeuwen, J. Scheffers; Reviewing in cine view the results of volume scan data is to be preferred over reading a selection of source images, i.e. slices of helical CT or MRI on hard copy prints. Graphic workstations for reviewing have to be an integral part of the imaging chain in c1inical practice. This course will provide live demonstrations of critical analysis by means of a workstation. In case of Subarachnoidal Hemorrhage almost all aneurysmata are detectable in cine view. Aneurysmata located nearby bone, l.e, cavernous sinus or ophtalmic artery, are easily overlooked. Source images are more reliable than Maximum Intensity Projections. Angled slab MIP's are a time saving method to avoid bone superposition. Also understanding tumour spread in compartments of Head and Neck, including destruction of the skull base and splanchnocranium can be enhanced. Assessing extension is essential over showing tumour bulk, while defining patient management. Minimal metastatic spread in lung parenchyma can be defined more accurately as weil as pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection. Multiplanar reformation in three orthogonal and curvilinear planes demonstrates size, orientation, form and volume of tumours. Infiltration of organs or fascial planes can be demonstrated. Major goal of this course is to prove the added value of postprocessing now embedded in our profession. By experience we know that some children are afraid of X-ray examinations. What the children fear we do not know, but they see and think differenliy from adults. The aim of this study was to describe how children percept a CTexamination. The descriptions given by the children of their thoughts and feelings before, during and after the examinations were used. The method was qualitative and data was collected by interviews. The group interviewed consisted of nine children who had been examined by CT at the Department of Pediatric Radiology at Children's Hospital, Gothenburg. The results showed that the way children look at a CT -examinalion is based on any previous experience ofax-ray examination and the information provided by the personell and the parents. Children do not express any fear before the examination. What does induce fear is the child's perception of what will happens when he/she is Iying in the gantry during the examination influenced by his/her own fantasy. It would be desirable to inform the children of the examination early. At that time they should have the opportunity to see pictures of the CTroom and a CT -examination. The use of transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) has developed considerably in the last decade as we have gained a clearer understanding of the ultrasonic features of prostate cancer, the differential diagnosis of hypoechoic areas within the prostate, and the use of serum measurements of prostate specific antige n (PSA) . Prostate cancer is usually hypoecho ic or isoechoic on TRUS imaging; isoechoic cancers are common and are found with increasing frequency when serum PSA is used as the sole indication for prostate biopsy. Transrectal ultrasound is primarily used now to guide precise needle biopsy of the prostate . There is still uncertainty about the optimum biopsy protocol, Systematic quadrant or sextant biopsies are widely used and this approach is usually supplemented by targeted biopsy of hypoechoic areas within the prostate , and areas of altered vascularity on colour and power Doppler. Ultrasound contrast agents are being developed , and are currently being assessed to determine their role in the diagnosis of prostate cancer ; their possible rote, either alone or together with the use of harmon ic imaging in the prostate is currently unclear. PSA is not an ideal serum marker for prostate cancer and various indices -PSA density, PSA velocity -mayaiso be used to increase the specificity of PSA . Newer serum tests -free PSA and freeltotal PSA ratios, and prostate specific membran e antigen (PSMA) -are being considered as potential markers for patients requiring prostate biopsy ; on current evidence , they do not appear to offer a significant advantage over PSA to identify patients with clinically significant prostate cancer. =0.35, P =0.01), FVC (RC =-0.53, P < 0.0005) and DLCO (RC =-0.66, P < 0.0005) were the best predictors of disease extent on CT. The CS correlated more strongly with disease extent (r =0.71, P < 0.0005) than any single index, including DLCa (r =-0.61, P < 0.0005). Conclusion: The CS is a more robust indicator of disease extent than any single functional index. The CS score can be derived fram routinely available pulmonary function data. included rheumatoid arthr itis (n = 9), mixed collagen vascular disorders (n = 3), autoimmune disorder (n = 1), and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (n = 1). All patients had high-resolution CT scans (1-1 .5 mm collimation n = 13, 3 mm n = 1), high spatial-frequency reconst ruction algorithm) performed at 10 mm intervals through the chest. In all patients the diagnos is was proven at open lung biopsy. Results: The main findings at CT included bilateral centrilobular (n = 14) and peribranchial (n = 6) nodules. All 14 patients had nodules measuring less than 3 mm in diameter and 6 patients also had nodules measuring between 3 and 12 mm in diameter. Patchy areas of grau ndglass attenuation were present in nine (64%) patients. Histologically, all patients had lymphoid hyperplasia along the bronchioles and eight of these had peribronchiolar Iymphocytic infiltration. Conclusion: We conclude that the cardinal CT feature of follicular bronchiolitis consists of small centrilobular nodules variably associated with peribronchial nodules and patchy areas of ground-glass attenuat ion. The aim of the study was to evaluate the usefulness of HRCT as a guide method in selection the lung region for bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) in sarcoidosis. The study included 28 patients with recent untreated and pathologically proved sarcoidosis. The HRCT scans were obtained with use 2 mm collimation at 10 mm intervals from the apex to the diaphragm. Each individual HRCT scan was assessed for the segmentar distribution of the abnormalities. In 16 patients (gr 1) irregular, uneven segmental distribution of HRCT changes were seen in lung parenchyma. In these subjects the anterior or the posterior segment of right or left upper lobe were with the most extensive involvement in HRCT (SEG-A). The anterior or posterior segments of lower lobes were the least extensive involvement (SEG-B). In 12 patients (gr 2) regular distribution HRCT changes were observed. Double BAL was performed in SEG-A and in SEG-B in all patients. In alveolar fraction of BAL the total cell yield, BAL cell count and Iymphocytes subsets by means of flow-cytometry using monoclonal antibodies (Becton-Dickinson) were estimated. In gr I in BAL from SEG-A we found the significantly (p < 0.01) mean total cell yield, the significantly higher (p < 0.05) means value of % Iymphocytes and CD4/CD8 ratio then in BAL from SEG-B. In group 11 we observed no statistically significant differences between means walues of estimated BAL parameters from SEG-A and SEG-B. We conclude that HRCT can serve as a useful method for selection the most reliable envolved lung rgion for BAL in patients with sarcoidosis. patienls over a mean follow-up period of 5.2 yr (range: 2-9 yr), leading to investigations of correlations between initial CT findings and evolution of functional impairment. Results: At the time of initial evaluation (TO), CT abnormalities consisted of nodules (n =45; 83%), air-space consolidation (n =16; 30%), lung distorsion (n =24; 44%), nonseptal (n =8; 15%) and septa I (n = 5; 9%) lines, ground-glass attenuation (n = 4; 7%) and honeycombing (n = 2; 4%). The CT score of disease severity at TO was significantly higher in the subgroup of patients in whom CT findings improved (9.8) compared with the subgroups of patients in whom CT findings remained unchanged (5.61; P < 0.05) or increased (5.02; p < 0.01). No correlation was found between : (a) the reversibility of lung changes and either corticosteroid treatment or duration of sarcoidosis; nor (b) between the presence and/or the extent of CT abnormalities at TO and evolution of PFTs. Conclusion: Prognostie criteria cannot be deducted from the appearance or the extent of disease on the initial CT examination in sareoidosls . Purpose: In difficult diagnostic cases of partial small bowel obstruction radiopaque markers should simulate food particles localizing the region of obstruction. Methods and Materials: 20 4-mm radiopaque markers were administered orally and plain radiographs of the abdomen were obtained at 2 -hours intervals in terms of quadrant localisation and transit time. This investigation was compared with other diagnostic methods. The findings at laparotomy were the criterion. So far 20 patients were investigated. Results: Confirmation of the c1inical suspicion of partial small bowel obstruction was possible with radiopaque markers. The obstruction was localized by long term focal c1ustering of markers and dilatation of this small bowel segment and corresponded to the findings at laparotomy. Conelusion: Radiopaque non -resorbable markers can imitate solid foods and non-digestible particles and may obstruct a mild but potentially critical narrowing when results of other imaging studies are normal. 325 Adult eeliae disease: sonographie signs T. Rettenbacher, A. Hollerweger, P. Macheiner, S. Huber, N. Gritzmann; Purpose: To examine if there exist distinct sonographie signs in patients with adult celiac disease. Methods and Materials: Sonograms of the abdomen were performed on 12 patients with adult celiac disease (aged 28-70) before and after treatment with a gluten-free die!. Also investigated were 50 matched control individuals. Patients were examined after an overnight period of fasting with abdominal transducers (2-4 MHz) and high-frequency linear transducers (5-10 MHz). Results: We· found several pathological signs in our patients with untreated disease including abnormal fluid-filled small intestine (100%), flaccid and moderately dilated small-bowel loops (2.5-3.5 cm) (75%), slight diffuse thickening of small-bowel wall (3-5 mm) (67%), increased peristaisis of small intestine (75%), enlarged mesenteric Iymph nodes (anteroposterior diameter 5-10 mm) (83%), enlarged calibre of superior mesenteric artery or portal vein (67%), free fluid in the abdomen cavity (50%), increased echogenicity of the Iiver (50%), enteroenteric intussusception (9%), sludge in the gallbladder (9%). None of these signs were present in the control group. We documented disappearance or improvement of sonographie findings after die!. Conelusion: There are several sonographie signs associated with adult celiac disease. Each sign is unspecific but the combination is characteristic and allows the suspicion in a high percentage of cases. Especially in patients with atypical c1inical presentation, ultrasound could help to avoid diagnostic delay. Patient groups with Crohn's disease (n =20) and with normal findings (n =20) served as controls. Radiographie studies were evaluated by two blinded readers in consensus, who were unaware of the exact proportion of celiac cases in the study population. Findings assessed were fold thickness, number of foldslinch, presence of jejunoileal fold pattern reversal, flocculation, dilatation or masses. Results: In patients with celiac disease, increased fold thickness was found in 45% (n = 9), decreased number of jejunal folds (n ::; 3) in 40% (n = 8), with reversal of jejunoilieal fold pattern in 65% (n = 13) and dilatation in 55% (n = 11). Flocculation was present in only 20% (n = 4). No mass was found in our study population. Sensitivity for detection of celiac disease was 80%. Accuracy for differentiation between celiac disease vs. non-celiac cases was 90%. Purpose: In spite of the improved MR-diagnosis of the abdomen , MRI is not used as a rout ine method for the diagnosis of inflam matory small bowel disease. The aim of this study was -after optimazation of the bowe l opacificalion -the cor relation of the findings obtained with enteroclysis and MRI in patients with known Crohns ' disease. Methods and Materials: 60 pat ients beween 17 and 72 years of age were invesligated. First , an enteroclysis was performed in typ ical manner. The applicated methylcellulosis was blended with positive oral MR contrast media (Magnevist oral, Schering). After enteroclysis, MRI of the abdomen was performed using T1-and T2 weighted breathhold sequences (Flash 20 pre-and postcontrast and TSE) in axial and coronal planes. Results: The length of the affected bowel and the stenosis seen with enteroclysis correlated weil with the visible thickening of the small bowel wall and the stenosis seen in MRI. Using MRI, additional find ings could be obtained in 28 patients , such as fistulas, abscesses or a hydronephrosis, or a better assessment of the stenosis was poss ible with MRI , because of the avoidance of overshadowing of the affected bowel loop with MRI. Conclusion: A brilliant MR-tomographic imaging of the small bowe l is poss ible under the cond ition, that the small bowel contrast is opt imal. The main prerequisite is a large fill ing volume of the small bowel to reach a homogeneous contrast and a good distension of the sma ll bowel lumen. Methods and Materials: GrUS was performed in 250 patients with suspected Crohn 's disease of the small intestine. Doppler flow measurements were performed in 127 patients. The results were compared to enteroclysis, small bowel CT and 99mTc AgAb immunoscintigraphy. Results: 184 patients proved to have SICD with enteroclysis and c1in ical tests. The sensitivity, specificity and accuracy of GrUS were 87%, 92% and 89% respectively. Enteroclysis was more accurate, CT was more sens itive, but less specific, immunoscintigraphy had less sensitivity. In advanced and active disease abscesses were detected by CT and GrUS more frequently than with enteroclysis. GrUS detected all significant luminal str ictures, compared to enteroclysis. Active and inactive fistulas were bolh reliably demonslrated by GruS . High Doppler flow measured in the SMA correlated with sc intigraphic activity in 82%. Conclusion: The diagnostic results of GrUS are similar to those obtained by CT and immunoscintigraphy, however, in early stages, enteroclysis and immunoscintigraphy are more sensitive. Sonography detects surgical indications and may indicate activity, thus the decision of surgical intervention can be made and the effect of the therapy could be followed without endoscopy or ente roclysis. Purpose: Estimating new preparation for its ability to characterize small intestine in health and pathology. Methods and Materials: A total 980 x-ray films of small intestine of 156 patients were studied. 32 patients did 'n have any clinical symptoms. Of 124 patients with gas troen terolog ie symptoms, 6 had Croh n's disease , 2 -tuberculosis, 1 -Iymphosarcoma, 2 -cancer of i1eocaecal angle. In other palients changes in small intest ine were funclional and associated witg organic pathology of abdominal organs or organs of retroperitoneal space. Results: ENTERO VU gives complete and objective anatomical picture of normal ileum and c1early demonstrates functional changes. Enterography fails to characterize the cond ition of ileum co comprehensevely. In Crohn 's disease it revealed portions of effected small intestine and helped to estimate depth of the invasion . In tuberculosis of terminal portion of ileum it revealed narrowing of affected portions with involvement of caecum. Conclusion: Special benefit of ENTERO VU is possibility to get detailed characteristics of ileum ( part of intestine most difficult to estimate). Noninvasive character, easy use , detailed information and comprehensive anatomical picture of ileum suggest ENTEROVU to have indisuptable advantages over enlerography. Purpose: To evaluate the usefulness of contrast enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (ceMRA) in combination with phase contrast flow quantification in the assessment of stenotic iliac arteries pre and after percutaneous angioplasty. Methods and Materials: 12 patients were examinated. 14 vessels were treated with stent placement (3 occluded and 11 stenotic iliac arteries). Contrast enhanced angiography was performed with a fisp 3D ultrafast gradient echo sequence on a Magnetom Symphony (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). Flow quantification with ECG-gated phase-contrast MR measurement was obtained distal to the stenosis. The results were compared with intraarterial digital subtraction angiography. Results: ceMRA was comparable to intraarterial angiography in the preinterventional analysis. Phase contrast flow measurement showed poststenotic flow profile changes with a decrease in the systolic peak but no reduction in mean f1ow. After stent placement there was a normalization in flow profile. Within the wallstent there was a total signal void whereas within Strecker-and Memothermstents the patent lumen of the vessel could be identified. Conclusion: ceMRA in combination with blood flow quantification appears to be promising in the pre-and postinterventional evaluation of stenotic iliac artery disease. Purpose: The purpose of this work was to assess the overall reliability of MR fluoroscopie triggering for contrast-enhanced MRA. Methods and Materials: The f1uoroscopy sequence uses gradient echo acquisition with TRITE of 6.5/2.4 msec. Real-time reconstruction gives rates of 1.6 and 3.5 img/sec for single and multi-coil, respectively. Interactive imaging permits fast selection of a monitoring plane on a patient-specific basis. The latency from trigger to start of the 3D sequence is 20 msec. From September 1997 through August 1998 the technique was applied to 338 patient studies: renal (47%), carotid (21%), abdominal aorta and iliac (17%), thoraeie aorta (8.5%), and other (5.6%). The technique was assessed on the basis of reliability of bolus detection. Results: MR fluoroscopy detected the contrast bolus in 335 of the 338 studies (99.1 %). In all but three of these the 3D sequence was properly triggered. In virtually all of these successfully triggered cases a venoussuppressed MRA result was obtained which readily permitted diagnosis. Conclusion: To maximize spatial resolution, maximize contrast, and minimize venous signal a triggered or timed 3D MRA sequence with a centric view order is known to be optimum in principle. This work shows that fluoroscopie triggering can reliably (332 of 338 cases, or 98.2%) provide this in practice. Purpose: Numerous investigations have shown the kinetics of rather large volumes (>100 cc) of iodinated contrast media for computed tomography. We sought to determine the kinetics of small volumes «20 ce) of MRI contrast agents. Methods and Materials: Thirty patients (16 male, 14 female; mean age 52 ± 22 years) assigned for an MRI examination received contrast media with apower injector in a standardized fashion. In three subgroups the contrast agent was administered with velocities of 2 cc/s, 3 cc/s and 4 cc/s. During application we monitored the heart rate. Simultaneously we acquired single transverse slabs of the abdomen every 1.25 sees for a total of 2.5 minutes. A ROI was positioned in the aortic lumen for signal measurement. Hemodynamic parameters were measured by echo doppler using Levovistt". Results: An intial increase of signal occured after a mean time of 20 ± 13 sees. We could not detect any signal decrease, but found a plateau phase for the entire period. The three different injection velocities did not lead to any significant difference in the resulting curves. Conclusion: A correct timing of the bolus arrival in the examined vessel for contrast enhanced MR angiograms is more important than the injection rate. For dynamic studies lt can be concluded that the contrast media concentration in the vessel will be on a high level of steady state for several minutes. Results: The new turbo-MRA-software reduces the overestimation of stenotic degree (in only 3 cases versus 13 cases in conventional MRAreadings) and increases the visualized length of intracranial arteries up to 17% in comparison with conventional TOF-MTCITONE-techniques. The CNR and SNR did not differ significantly between both methods. Turbo MRA shows better image quality (mean = 2.1) than MRA (m = 2.8) and improves significantly the interobserver reliability (r =0.9 versus 0.82), but is still inferior to DSA (m =1.5; r =0.98). All 5 aneurysm, 1 AVM and all anatomical variations were correctly detected by both MRA-techniques in comparison with DSA-readings. Conclusion: Turbo-MRA only takes 55% of the acquisition time and increases the diagnostic efficiacy compared to conventional TOFtechniques. The method represents an improved alternative to DSA. Purpose: To evaluate the ability of high resolution intravascular MR imaging using a 5F catheter coil to study the development of atherosclerotic lesions in heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits. Methods and Materials: 16 hyperlipidemic rabbits were investigated at different ages of 6, 12, 24 and 36 months. The aorta was studied with DSA and high resolution MR using a surface as weil as an intravascular coil which consisted of a single loop copper wire, integrated in a 5F balloon catheter. Images were correlated with histologie sections regarding wall thickness, plaque area and plaque components. Results: DSA revealed no abnormalities in the 6 and 12 months old rabbits and only mild stenoses in the 24 and 36 months ones. High resolution imaging with surface coils resulted in an in-plane resolution of 234 x 468 um, Delineation of the vessel wall was not possible in younger rabbits and correlated only poorly with microscopic measurements in the 36 month old rabbits. Intravascular images achieved an in-plane resolut ion of 117 x 156 um, Increasing thickness of the aortic wall and plaque area was observed with increasing age. In the 24 and 36 months animals calcificat ion could be differentiated from fibrous and fally tissue based on the T2-FSE images, as confirmed by histologic correlation. Conclusion: Atherosclerotic evolution of hyperlipidemic rabbits can be mon itored with high resolution lntravascular MRI. In vive image quality is sufficienl 10 determine wall Ihickness, plaque area and differentiale plaque components. Purpose: To evaluate the aceuracy of MR PC velocimetry with regard to hemodynamic changes caused by atherosclerotic stenoses. Methods and Materials: Flow velocity measurements were obtained using a validated Doppler guidewire and a 1.0T MRI system in 31 consec utive patlents with atherosclerotic obstructions of the lower limb (mean age 72.5 years) . The intravascular measurements with the Doppler guide wire were undertaken dur ing balloon-PTA (pre and post dilatation). The MR PC measurements were obtained before angiegraphy and 24 h post PTA. Results: Generally, MRI obtained flow velocities are lower compared to the Doppler based data. The ratio proximal/intrastenotic velocities and calculated cross sectional area stenoses showed a low correlation for concentric stenoses (max .r = 0.33 post PTA). But both methods showed a decrease of crosssectional area stenoses (pre PTA Flowire 66%, post PTA 21% ; MR: 40%, 20%) . For phase contrast velocily measuremenls the exact definit ion of the luminal area , especially in excent ric stenoses, is problematic . An automated software may be helpful to obtain reliable data . Conclusion: The assessment of hemodynamic changes caused by atherosclerotic stenoses using MR phase contrast flow measurements is promising inspite the bad correlat ion with Doppler measurements. Purpose: To optimize multiple field-of-view (total: 1200 mm) movingbed infusion tracking (MoBI-track) MR angiography using a phasedarray dedicated lower extremity coil with integrated footboard versus Ihe standard quadrature body coil. Methods and Materials: Cf 40 patients with intermittent c1audication 20 each underwent MoBI-track MR angiography with the standard bodycoil and the dedicated lower exlremity coil, respectively. MoBI-track MR sequence parameters were : TRfTE 10/4.6, matrix 512 x 164, voxel6.7 mm3. Patients were matched for severity of proximal vascular occlusive disease . Images obtained with both coils were evaluated for SNR, CNR , visibility and subjective image quality of arteries in the lower legs. The latter two were scored on a 3-point scale . Results: SNR and CNR were significantly higher (P < 0.005) using the dedicated lower leg extremity coil. Even more so subjective image quality was good in 39/40 lower legs. 4 of the 80 lower legs had subopt imal subtraction due to patient movement. Conclusion: The use of a dedicated lower extremity coil with integrated footboard reduces motion artifacts in MoBI-track MR angiography and improves objective and subjective image quality. Purpose: To assess the reliability of contrast enhanced MR study of the venous system . Methods and Materials: 8 pts suspected of peripheral venous thrombosis and 3 patients with inferior vena cava thrombosis underwent MR examination (Magnetom Vision Plus, Siemens , Erlangen). MR Phlebography was performed by acqu iring a 3D FISP sequence (TRfTE/matrixlacq.t. : 4.612.4/195 x 512/23) during dynamic injection of 30 ml of gadolinium at 3 mI/sec, using apower injection. When injection was performed from a foot vein a compression was applied on the ankle in order to exclude the superficial venous system. MRA images were reconstructed using MIP algorithm. Findings have been confirmed with conventional flebography. Results: Visualization of the venous system was obtained in 6 patients with patent venous system . In two patients with thrombosis of the deep system of the leg no venous visualization occurred at the first acquisition, but only at delayed images . Inferior vena cava was always weil opacified , and thrombos is was easily detected within the vessel. Conelusion: MR Phlebography seems to be a reliable technique to evaluate the venous system . Low spat ial resolution prevents in some cases to correctly evaluate the morphology of the thrombus in the peripheral deep venous system . Purpose: Determination of optimal scantiming to depict the arterial, portal and venous system with maximum contrasl resolution in cirrhot ic palients and healthy volunteers . Methods and Materials: Scans with optimized timing for each pal ient were performed in 20 cirrhotic OLT candidates and 8 healthy potential renal donors who underwent CE-MRA of the abdominal vessels. Gadolinium enhanced MRA was performed on a 1.5T scanner with a phased array bodycoil. After circulat ion time calculation a 17 sec. 3D Flash fatsuppressing pulse sequence (TRfTE 3.8/1.3, 30°) with a slice interpolation technique was repeated 4 times with a breathing interval of 12 sec. between the first four and 40 sec. between the last scans . Signal intensity in a selection of arteries and veins were measured to determine the optimal scantiming for each individual vessel. Results: Arteries showed maximum contrast on scan 1, the portal vein , renal vein and supra renal ICV on scan 2 or 3, whereas the infrarenal ICV showed maximum intensity on scan 3, 4 or 5 with equal distribut ion. No statistically significant difference was observed between the cirrhotic and healthy group. Conclusion: Both cirrhotic and non-c irrhotic patients can be evaluated by the same MRA scan sequence for optimal visualization of all abdominal vessels . The arterial and venous system can be visualized selectively by careful timing of the scans , hereby reduc ing redundant scans . Purpose: Power-Doppler sonography improves the detection of slow and low volume blood f1ow. In breast carcinoma the vascularity is often increased compared to normal breast parenchyma. Therefor the purpose of our study was to determine, whether blood flow imaging with Power-Doppler offers new diagnostic capabilities to differentiate benign and malign breast diseases. Methods and Materials: 400 patients were prospectively investigated by 13-MHz high-frequency-ultrasound combined with Power-Doppler sonography. In 118 cases sonographie findings were correlated with histology. The increase in f1ow-signal density compared to normal breast parenchyma, scored semiquantitatively with ascale of 0 to +++, was registered. The sonographie diagnosis was based upon the ultrasonic appearance of alesion and the f1ow-characteristics in Power-Doppler. Results: 74.6% of benign breast lesions were score 0 or +, while the majority of invasive breast cancer (80%) showed a flow increase scored as ++ or +++. The degree of flow increase was related to the tumor size. By combining high-frequency ultrasound with Power-Doppler sonography we achieved a sensitivity of 87.5%, a specificity of 82.3% and an accuracy of 84.8% for the diagnosis of in situ and invasiv breast cancer. Conclusion: High-frequency-ultrasound combined with Power-Doppler proved to be a new, promising method in the diagnosis of breast diseases. Purpose: The trend towards conservative breast surgery has increased the importance of differentiating recurrent cancer from scar. Our inability to do so increases the number of benign biopsies performed. Dynamic enhanced MR is the current gold standard but is expensive and not widely available. A prospective, multi-centre, trial was performed comparing un-enhanced and enhanced colour Doppler ultrasound with histopathology. Methods and Materials: 57 women, age 57 y (29-79) with radiological/clinical suspicion of local recurrence, scheduled for biopsy were recruited. Grey scale, baseline Doppler and contrast-enhanced colour Doppler (8 m1, 400 mg/ml Levovist (Schering, Berlinj) were perforrned. Lesion vascularity was graded 0--4, vascular morphology categorised as regularIirregular and shunts noted. All lesions were biopsied and histopathology compared with ultrasound. Results: 16 patients had recurrent cancer. Mean lesion size was 14 mm. 39/41 benign lesions were hypovascular pre-contrast and 36/39 post. 5116 recurrences were hypervascular pre and 12/16 post. Precontrast sensitivity was 31%, specificity 95% and accuracy 76%. Postcontrast sensitivity was 75%, accuracy 87% and specificity 92%. 7/11 recurrences had irregular vessels pre and 12/14 post. Shunts were only seen post-contrast: 4 malignant, 1 benign. Conclusion: Contrast enhancement improved the sensitivity and accuracy for recurrence. Irregular vessels and shunts were more indicative of malignancy and best appreciated post-contrast. Purpose: To evaluate the overall quality of 3D ultrasound images achieved by a commercial equipment, comparing them to the conventional ultrasound imaging. Methods and Materials: A dedicated and certified phantom was employed for the evaluation of ultrasound imaging. The examination under compression has been performed laying the phantom on the standard compressor plate of a conventional mammograph. A linear ultrasound probe (10 MHz) was utilized whit beam focalization at 3 cm of depth. 3D reconstruction are bared on a spatial recognition and on a workstation. able to digitalize and elaborate ultrasound images. Imaging evaluation was performed by a 3D and 20 technique in the three spatial planes. The conventional ultrasound examination was obtained manually in a free scan by the same probe employed during the examination under compression and subsequently by a last generation equiment, supplied with a 7-13 MHz probe. Subsequent sessions of examination performed by different operators in different periods were effected. Results: The capabilities of the three different systems to visualize the focal zone inside the phantom, to gain linear and volumetrie measurements and to identify the exact location of the lesions were considered. The three systems result to be equivalent in focal regions recognition while 3~rec?nstruction system appears more accurate in topographie evaluation, Linear and volumetrie meaurements are reproducible whit higher precision in the system whit breast compressicn than in the cne with free and normal scanning. Conclusion: 3D recostruction system of ultrasound imaging in breast phantom is accurate in results reproducibility. Purpose: To investigate the depiction of mammography findings on the projection images obtained by automated ultrasound. Methods and Materials: A prototype imaging system yields x-raymammograms and mammography-like ultrasound survey images generated from an automatically acquired 3 0 data set of B-mode scans. Three physicians experienced in mammography and one physicists evaluated lesion conspicuity on the mammograms and ultrasound projections of 58 histologically proven lesions on ascale of 1 (not detectable) to 10 (clearly detectable). From these results, mean values were calculated for 26 benign and 32 malignant lesions. Results: The physicist and one experienced reader achieved identical mean values for the detectability of cancers on the mammograms (7.95) and the ultrasound projections (7.9), while the other two experienced readers had lower means on the ultrasound projections compared to the mammograms (5.3 versus 7.75). Regarding benign lesions, all four readers rated lesion visualization on the sonograms lower than on the mammographies (3.4 versus 5.95). Conclusion: The fact that the physicist, who was unexperienced in both methods,~n? even one of the experienced readers rated conspicuity of cancers sirnilarly on both mammographies and ultrasound projections rniqht sug~est that there is no difference between the two imaging procedures with respect to malignancies, whereas benign lesions actually appear to be less clearly depicted on ultrasound projections. Purpose: The possibility of differential diagnosis of breast tumours using voeal fremitus in sonography, deseribed by Sohn and eoworkers is eheeked under standardized eonditions. Methods and Materials: 41 patients with 8 malignant and 33 benign histologieally proven sonographie visible lesions were investigated using a Sonoline Elegra (Siemens) or a HDI 500 (ATL) ultrasound maehine (7.5 or 5-12 MHz linear array, eolor-and power-mode). Vibration artifacts indueed by the voeal fremitus and by asound generator-supplied smaliloudspeaker applied to the breast near to the array were observed. In addition, a "motion artifaet", appearing while the array is shaked, was analyzed. Results: A eorreet differentiation into a benign or malignant lesion was possible by means of vibration or motion artifact analysis in 21/41 cases (16 benign and 5 malignant, including 10 eystic lesions). 16/41 (13 benign and 3 malignant) lesions could not be differentiated, in 4 cases a benign lesion was shown to be malignant. The results aehieved by Sohn and eoworkers were not reprodueible under on hand eonditions. A differential diagnosis by means of fremitus or vibration effeets doesn't seem promising. (Submitted by Internet) To determine the relevanee of ultrasound and partieular sonographie eriteria for the differentiation of breast tumors Methods and Materials: 77 patients with a eireumseribed breast lesion were referred for elinieal, mammography and high-resolution sonography in a two-center study. Partieular sonographie parameters were evaluated with respeet to their value for differentialdiagnosis by using a standardized evaluation scheme. Diagnostie relevanee of all methods and eaeh ultrasonographie parameter was evaluated by ealeulating sensitivity, specifieity and odds ratios. The degree of interdependenee between an examiner's decision and diagnostie eriteria used was assessed using the kappa statisties. Results: Sensitivity of elinieal examination was 65%, the speeificity 87% (p < 0.001). For mammography, sensitivity was 71%, the specificity 83% (p < 0.001). Sonography showed a sensitivity of 96%, a specifieity of 94% (p < 0.001). The odds ratio was 4.4 for malignaney suspeeted at mammography and 44 for sonography. Among sonographie eriteria the highest contribution to the diagnosis was found for an unsharp border (OR, 12.2), arehiteetural distortion (OR, 8.6), relation to skin or ehest wall (OR, 9.0), and relation to adjaeent breast parenehyma (OR, 8.8). Ultrasound is an exeellent diagnostie tool in the evaluation of solid breast lesions when performed by an experieneed examiner in eombination with mammography. Despite standardized assessment, the eriteria used for differentialdiagnosis were at least partially different. The overall judgement of an experieneed examiner is superior to partieular sonographie parameters in eontribution to differential diagnosis.  Purpose: To find a correlation between a new radiographic incidence, ealled "Puddu incidence", and lateral stress radiographies in diagnosis of Posterior Crueiate Ligament (PCL) ruptures.) Methods and Materials: From January 1996 to July 1998" two radiographie tests were performed in 67 patients with suspicion of a PCL rupture: 1) Usual lateral stress views (90 0 flexion); we defined a PCL rupture as a gap between the two posterior tibial translation larger than 5 mm; 2) "Puddu ineidence": femoro-patella axial view (90 0 flexion), with visualization of the anterior tibial plateaus. The distanee-PC (Plateaus -Condyles) between those and the anterior femoral Condyle line, was measured. A PCL rupture was defined as a differenee between the two PC greater than 5 mm. A Spearman test was used (statistieal eorrelation when C > 0.6). Results: Diagnosis, based on c1inical and stress view findings, were: PCL isolated rupture (n =45-67%); pentade (n =12-18%); triad (n = 7-10.5%); dislocation (n = 3-4.5%). Stress radiographs revealed a mean posterior translation at 12.3 mm on pathologie knee versus 2.9 mm on contralateral. Puddu ineidences revealed a mean PC at 19.6 mm on pathologie site versus 9.9 mm. The two tests were eorrelated (C = 0.64; P < 0.0005). 355 First experience about a new radiographie incidence in the diagnosis of posterior cruciate ligament rupture B. Marchand, N. Blineau, D. Casalonga, P. Chambat, P. Neyret, Ph.Ch. Douek; LyonlF Results: The following frequencies were observed: 42 medial gastrocnemic bursae, 20 gastrocnemic-semimembranosus bursae, 17 profound infrapatellar bursae, 3 anserine bursae, 3 tibial-semimembranosus bursae, 2 lateral gastrocnemic bursae, 1 iliotibialis bursa. The occurrence of an effusion did not deteriorate the delineation of the bursae. The frequency of the visualization of the medial gastrocnemic bursa showed a positive correlation to the occurrence of an effusion (chi 2 = 9.916, P = 0.0016). No correlation was found to the clinical history. Conclusion: The knowledge of the anatomical position of an individual bursa facilitates its recognition and delineation against joint effusion. The medial gastrocnemic, gastrocnemic-semimembranosus und profound infrapatellar bursae are frequently observed on MRI without pathological relevance in our study. Observation of the remaining bursae seems to be more likely due to inflammation or degeneration. Chairpersons Purpose: To calculate the incidence and study the morphology of a recess of the knee joint capsule within the inferior aspect of the infrapatellar (Hoffa's) fat pad. Methods and Materials: 130 routinely generated knee MRI were retrospectively analyzed for the frequency, size and shape of fluid filled spaces within the dorsal aspect of the infrapatellar (Hoffa's) fat pad. Additionally anatomical dissections were performed in 20 cadaveric knees. Results: In 12 cases (9.2%) we found an ovoid shaped f1uid-equivalent recess within the dorsal, inferior aspect of Hoffa's fat pad, best visualized on mid-sagittal T2-weighted MR images. Its size ranged from 8 to 15 mm (11 ± 3, mean ± standard deviation). In 3 cadaveric knees such recesses could be demonstrated just below the insertion of the ligamentum mucosum. Conclusion: Hoffa's recess can mimic an intraarticular ganglion on MRI. However, its ovoid shape, a diameter under 1.5 cm, and the location below the insertion of the infrapatellar plica (Le., ligamentum mucosum) may serve as differential diagnostic criteria to separate this rare anatomical variant from pathologic conditions. 10:30-12:00 Purpose: Axillary Iymph node status is crucial in evaluation of prognosis and in treatment planning of breast cancer. Methods and Materials: The investigation of the mammary gland and axillary Iymph nodes including colored Doppler ultrasonography, routine ultrasonography, mammography, c1inical and morphological methods was accomplished in 125 female patients age 30-70 years old. Results: Criteria of changes in Iymph nodes for differential diagnosis in benignant and malignant mammary disease were elaborated. As for malignant processes the pathognomostic are Iymph nodes exceeding 1.5 sm in dimensions, rounded, hypoechogenic, with no differentiation structure, of chaotic hypervascularisation. Conclusion: Ultrasound method has great potentials in detecting metastases to axillary Iymph nodes -accuracy -95%, sensitivity -93%, specificity -97%. Purpose: This study was undertaken to compare conventional T1weighted spin echo and T1-weighted hybrid rapid acquisition with relaxation (RARE) (turbo spin echo) MR imaging of the knee. Methods and Materials: 30 consecutive patients referred following acute knee trauma underwent both conventional and turbo spin echo imaging in either the coronal or sagittal plane. The same contrast parameters were used in both sequences (TE -20 msecs, TR -500 ms). Turbo imaging was performed with an echo train of 4 and an echo to view mapping seheme termed low-high profile order. Evaluation was made of meniscii, articular cartilage, and bone marrow by two reviewers in each case with work station calculations of both image signal to noise, contrast to noise and edge enhancement (bone marrow, fat and museie). Results: Turbo spin echo T1-weighted images were acquired in 1 minute and 20 seconds relative to 4 minutes and 10 seconds using conventional apin echo T1-weighted images. Short echo train combined with low-high echo to view mapping allowed Turbo T1-weighting without loss of edge enhancement relative to conventional spin echo images. Diagnostic discrepancy was observed in one patient in whom motion on a prolonged conventional sequence simulated a meniscal tear. The study protocol included a proton-density weighted SE-sequence in the sagittal, a T2*-weighted Flash-2D-Sequence in the coronal, a STIR-sequence in the axial, a T2-weighted TSE-sequence in the oblique coronal and a 3D-acquisition (DESS) in the axial plane. 75 patients were treated either conservatively or operatively. Results: Based on arthroscopy as the gold standard, the sensitivities, specificities and diagnostic accuracies for lesions of the medial and lateral meniscus, the anterior cruciate ligament (ACl), the hyaline cartilage and the posterior cruciate ligament (PCl) were 92%, 92% and 92%, 83%, 93% and 92%, 95%, 96% and 96%, 74%, 93% and 85%, and 100% each, respectively, for reader 1. The values for reader 2 were 81%, 74% and 77% (medial meniscus), 61%, 86% and 80% (lateral meniscus), 79%, 95% and 91% (ACl), 48%, 91% and 73% (hyaline cartilage), and 100% each (PCl), respectively. The were no statistical differences between both readers (Fisher's Exact Test, 95%-confidence interval). Conclusion: Using a time consuming examination protocol, the diagnostic accuracies of the open low-field MR unit are weil comparable to those obtained with mid-or high-field units. Though not statistically significant in this study, the experience level of the examiner seems to be of considerable clinical relevance. Purpose: to categorize discrepant findings of the menisci and anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) between arthroscopy and MRI. Methods and Materials: The MRls of 236 patients were retrospectively analyzed by an experienced radiologist without knowledge of clinical and/or operative findings. Discrepant findings to arthroscopy were reevaluated together with the arthroscopist to determine their cause of error. The diagnostie aeeuraeies for injuries of the medial and lateral meniseus and the ACL were 92.4%, 92.4% and 94.1% respeetively. For the menisei, eauses for diserepant findings (n =31) were: overinterpretation of eentral signal intensities with eontaet to the meniseal surfaee but without disturbanee of the meniseal eontour as a tear (n = 12), insufficient arthroseopie evaluation of the knee joint (n = 11), overlooked tears on MR imaging (n =6), misinterpretation of normal anatomie struetures (n = 1), "magie angle" phenomenon (n = 1), and missed tears at MRI (n =1). Causes for diserepancies for the ACL (n = 18) were: nearly eomplete versus eomplete rupture either at MRI or arthroseopy and viee versa (n = 9), insufficient arthroseopie evaluation (n =6), insufficient MRI teehnique (n =2), and overlooked tear on MR imaging (n = 1). Conelusion: Diserepant findings beween MRI and arthroseopy may be also due to an insuffieient arthroseopie evaluation in elinieal routine. The close eooperation between surgeons and radiologists improves the understanding of the methods of eaeh other. that of PCL did not change. We found a differenee between PTA-ACL and PCL at 1-3 months at both l' and 8' (p = .0015), while at 18-24 months we did not. At both examinations, PTA-ACL and NPT were different (p < .0017). Conelusion: Early after surgery, PTA-ACL and NPT showed a strong enhaneement. Later, PTA-ACL enhaneement was redueed beeoming similar to PCL, but higher than NPT, suggesting a neovaseularization supporting the "ligamentization" of PTA-ACL. Methods and Materials: Between 8/96 and 7/97 a prospeetive study registred 100 multiple trauma patients in the emergeney room with ehest x-ray and following ehest CT. The therapeutie proeedures depending on eaeh examination were reeorded. In total 41% (41/100) an immediate therapeutie eonsequenee resulted from the ehest x-ray and ehest CT in the ER. In 20% (20/100) it depended only on the ehest x-ray, in 15% (3/20) of them an additional therapeutie change was the result of the ehest CT. Based only on the results of the ehest CT a therapeutie change was neeessary in 21% (21/100). 78% (78/100) were primarily intubated multiple trauma patients. No ease of therapeutie change was seen in the non-intubated patients. We have seen a relevant underestimation of ehest injuries in multiple trauma patients based only on interpretation of the ehest xray. A relevant change of therapeutie proeedures followed by ehest CT was seen in 24%, that is nearly every third of the intubated patients. Therefore it seems to be neeessary to do a ehest CT in every ease of intubated multiple trauma patient, despite the ehest x-ray. (women: 7.1 mm vs 9.8 mm; p < 0.001; men: 8.5 mm vs 10.9 mm; p < 0.05) and eostoelavieular (women: 9.5 mm vs 14.4 mm; p < 0.001; men: 2.8 mm vs 16.9 mm; p < 0.005) distanees. Compared with the referenee population, a statistieally signifieant differenee was found in the median values of the eostoelavieular distanee in the neutral position (13.8 mm vs 16.9 mm; p < 0.05) and after postural maneuver (7.7 mm vs 12.6 mm; p < 0.005) in symptomatie women. Conelusion: Spiral CT demonstrates signifieant narrowing of the costo-c1avieular spaee after postural maneuver in patients with thoraeie outlet arterial eompression. Purpose: Fact is that more details are visible in ehest CT eompared to ehest x-ray in multiple trauma patients. The question is how often additional therapeutie eonsequenees result after a ehest-CT in this eases. Purpose: To assess the complex pathophysiology of pulmonary function abnormalities related to ehest wall deformities by means of an integrated imaging approach (HRCT-rad ionuclide seanning) Methods and Materials: 38 patients (mean age 58.2 ± 11.3) with thoraeie deformities were selected and graded on the basis of routine ehest X-ray exam ination and pulmonary function tests (PFT). Those with significantly altered PFT (5 chyphoscoliosis, 3 scoliosis, 2 ankylopoietic spond ilitis) underwent standard ehest HRCT and lung perfusion scanning (99Tc-MAA) with axial SPECT evaluation; blood gases and echoderived pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) were available in all of these ten patients. Results: In all cases HRCT allowed optimal morphologie assessment of thorae ie deformity complexity. High degree of correlation (topography and severity) was obtained between HRCT findings and scintigraphic tracer distribution (r =0.91) as weil as between these imaging results and PAP measurements (respectively r =0.88 and r =0.83), whereas low correlation was found betwee n blood gases analysis and both imaging find ings (overall r < 0.7) and PAP extimation (r < 0.6). Conelusion: The restrictive pattern commonly observed in patients with ehest wall deformities is usually accompanied by alveolar hypoventilation with reflex vasoconstriction and flow redistribution, causing progress ive raise of PAp, whose progno stic relevance is undoubtful. Grad ing these patients and monitoring them by means of PFT and blood gases analysis, as routinely done , may not be indicated , since these parameters are poorly related to PAp, whereas significantly better results can be obtained using HRCT, which may be applied as a "one- The purpose was to present the radiologieal characteristics as potential aids in the differential diagnos is of benign and malignant thymus neoplasms by correlating them with histopathologie findings . The characteristics assessed radiolog ically were : loeation and slze: its nature (solid or cyst ie); presence of calcification ; absence of the fat plane; presence of capsule and its enhancement of it after the administration of contrast; invasion of adjaeent structures; and distant metastasis. Histologically were: 10 maligna nt tymomas, 12 bening, 3 thymic carcl- (17), suspicion of renal artery stenosis (13), renal vein thrombosis (5), hypoperfusion in native kidneys or renal transplants (10), arteriovenous malformations (AVM 3) and false aneurysms (FA 2). All cases were correlated to gold standard imaging. Results: USCA improved the detection of intratumoral vessels and helped in delineating the lesions and evaluating the venous extension of carcinomas. They improved the detection and visualization of main Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostie value of "wide band harmonie mode" (wbh) on the diagnosis of altered perfusion after blunt renal trauma in an experimental group of 10 rabbits in eomparison with colordoppler, scintigraphical and post-mortem findings. Methods and Materials: After anaesthesia of rabbits and surgical rnobilization of the left kidney a contusion aeeording to published standards was caused, and the kidney was reposed. Pre and post contusionem wbh, color-doppler, and power-mode-doppler were performed under i.v.applieation of levovist (400 mg/mi). 7/10 rabbits were killed after 24 hcontrol, 2/10 after 72 h-control, 1/10 after 122 h-control, 2/10 rabbits got scintigraphy. Kidneys were histologically examined. Results: In 2/10 rabbits place and extend of 3 parenchymallesions (diameter 2 resp. 1.5 mm) could be shown using only wbh. in 4/10 rabbits subcapsular hematoma as thick as 1 mm could be clearly shown in b.mode as weil as in wbh. In contrast to color-doppler and powermode the parenchymal perfusion eould be visualized without blushing or incertain margins of vessels using wbh. scintigraphy showed an alteration of perfusion after 72 h post contusionem. Conclusion: "wide band harmonic" exactly visualizes perfusion of vessels near capillar size. 2/10 kidneys with supposed minimal parenchymallesions could be identified only by wbh. These results suggest a possible potential in using this method in humans. Cr. Methods and Materials: 35 patients (10 without pelvocaliceal disease, 5 calyceal diverticulum , 12 excretourinary tumours and 8 chronic pyelonephritis) underwent helical acquisition with abdominal compression in excretory phase at the end of their CT renal protocol . 70 kidneys 3D reconstructions were performed and correlated with IVU and axial CT slices. The following parameters were evaluated : number and appearance of minor and major calyces , orientat ion, localization and size of abnormalities. Results: Excellent 3D images were obtained for all patients. In normal cases , the 3D were slightly better to IVU for the number and morphology of calyces because of multiple rotating views and contrast quality. In cases of tumoral processes no additional information was noted . In cases of divert iculum and chron ic pyelonephritis additional informations concerning localization and relat ionship to the normal collecting system were provided by 3D. They were very helpful in planning partial renal surgery. Conelusion: 3D helical CT provides additional morphologic information for evaluation of collecting system especially in cases of pathologic contrast-filled cavities. It can be recommended as a routine preoperative study. Methods and Materials: In 8 healthy pigs, a percutaneous nephrostomy tube was placed into the nondilated pelvicaliceal system using exclusively MR-guidance at 1.5 T. Enhancement of the collecting system was achieved by intravenous injection of gadolinium-OTPA and lowdose furosemide. The entire interventional procedure was controlled using a T1-weighted dual stack 20-TFE sequence in two orthogonal planes . Results: In all 8 pigs, the MR compatible puncture needle was safely directed into the target calix. Even minimal deviations of the needle from its optimal path were readily detected on MR images allowing direct correct ion to achieve a first attempt access to the targeted calix in each anima!. Over a nitinol guidewire, different dysprosium-marked catheters were successfully placed and tested inside the renal pelvis or the ureter. The endoluminal position of the dysprosium-Iabelled tip of each catheter was accurately visualized under MR control , Via the inserted catheter, a gado linium-in-saline solution was injected which enab led a permanent high contrast-enhancement for a continuous catheter localisation inside the urinary tract. Conclusion: MRPCN offers , even at this early exper imental stage, a promising technique for puncturing the nondilated pelvicaliceal system. Purpose: To determine normative data for renal parenchymal thickness (RPT) measurements on ultrasonograms (US) and examine the relationsh ip of these measurements with the predicted clearance of creat inine (P-CCr) . Methods and Materials: The study comprised 300 consecutive patients -147 men and 153 women, 18-83 years of age -who underwent abdom inal US with various indications unrelated to kidneys' disease. Patients with history of renal disease, increased blood pressure, or abnormal blood glucose, urea or creatinine were not included in the study. Measurements of the RPT at the upper and lower kidney pole and mid-Ievel of the kidney were obtained by two exam iners in each patient and the mean value was used for further analysis. Body mass index (BMI) and P-CCr were recorded in all patients. Results: RPT measurements exhibited significant positive correlation with BMI (+0.36 < r < +0.45, P < 0.0001) and P-CCr (+0.47< r < +0.60, P < 0.0001) and negative correlation with age (-0.51 < r < -0.45, p< 0.0001). No differences in RPT existed between men and women if the BMI is taken under account. Conclusion: Normal range for RPT measurements in relation to age and BMI may be of value when assessing kidney morphology on USo RPT decreases with age and correlates with RPT. Four patients presented a transfacial fracture. There was one case of inferior museie herniation and one case of globe rupture. Orbital fracture is the third type of maxilofacial fracture in frequency (after nasal and mandibular fractures). Nevertheless it is the first one in needing the application of CT for its correct diagnosis. The orbital trauma statistics presented in this work can be used as a complementary tool for an adequate evaluation of this pathology. Purpose: Ta determine whether orbital volume assessment by CT following blow-out fracture could predict the degree of enophthalmos. Methods and Materials: Twenty-six patients with unilateral blow-out fracture were studied. The volumes of both orbits were measured thraugh contiguous axial sections employing cursor tracing of bony orbit and pratruding orbital fat fram digitalized CT scans. The volume expansion percentage of fractured orbit to the unaffected orbit was obtained. Enophthalmos was measured by Hertel's exophthalmometry after the develpment of blow-out fracture. We correlated the expansion percentage of orbital volume by CT with the degree of enophthalmos as determined by the Hertel's measurement and the presence of significant enophthalmos (>2 mm) which is indication for surgical correction. Results: There was a positive linear correlation between the expansion percentage of orbit volume and the degree of enophthalmos. Four of five patients who showed over than 12% orbital volume expansion manifested significant enophthalmos. Only one of 21 patients who showed <12% orbital volume expansion manifested significant enophthalmos. Conclusion: CT measurement of orbital volume in blow-out fracture can reliably predict the degree of enophthalmos. Orbital volume expansion over 12% is a possible indication for surgical correction. (Submitted by Internet) Purpose: Ta prave the visualization of orbital foreign bodies (FB) by CT. Methods and Materials: In vitra we examined defined small objects of various materials (metal, wood, glass, stone), wich are common as orbital FB. Density and minimum detectable size were studied. The findings of 33 patients with suspected orbital FB were compared with results of plain radiographs, comberg radiographs, sonography, surgery, or follow up. Furthermore, exposure to radiation was calculated for CT. Results: For iran, the minimum detectable size was 0.02 mm3. A differentiation of various materials by CT was not always possible, especially in small objects. There were wide differences in density of wood (-600 HU to +130 HU) according to hardness and water content, CT scans correctly showed number and location of orbital FB in 27 cases. In 6 cases, an orbital FB could be excluded correctly. other methods were c1early inferior: sonography had 5 false findings, plain radiographs could not show wood and could not localize FB exactly, and the comberg radiographs had 1 false extraocular finding. Depending on CT parameters, the effective and lenticular dose can range between 0.50 and 1.31 mSv, or 26 and 70 mSv respectivly. Conclusion: In presumed orbital FB, C'T should be done. In this work we present a descriptive study of orbital trauma: types, frequency, complications and association with other maxilofacial fractures. Over aperiod of one and half years we have gathered all the cases of orbital trauma at our centre. A total of 25 patients with orbital trauma (34 orbital fractures) have been studied with an helical CT. This helical CT unit is connected to a work station where three dimensional and multiplanar algorithms are used. The majority of patients were males (84%). The most frequent type of fracture was the orbital floor, the second being the medial wall fracture. Purpose: Ta evaluate the radiation dose to the lens of the eye which is the critical organ Iying in the primary beam during fluoroscopically guided transluminal balloon dilatation of the lacrimal drainage system (balloon dacryocystoplasty) in obstructive epiphora as it is believed to be the only drawback of the pracedure against standard surgical treatment. Methods and Materials: Radiation dose to the lens of the eye during balloon daeryoeystoplasty (ineluding pre-post intervention daeryoeystographies) was measured in 10 patients with use ofthermolumineseent dosimeters plaeed in both orbitae as elose as possible to the lenses. AC-arm angiography unit was used for the proeedure with similar exposure and geometrie parameters in all eases. For lateral projeetion the treated side was elose to the image intensifier. Results: The mean radiation dose to the lens of the treated side was 5.84 +/-2.3 mGy with a range of 1.9-9 mGy and 37.8 +/-17.2 mGy with a range of 20.1-66.5 mGy for the lens of the other eye. Conclusion: Lens of the other eye reeeives higher dose than the lens of the treated side due to its eloser position to the x-ray tube in lateral projeetion. For the lens even the highest radiation dose (66.5 mGy) is still weil below the deterministie threshold level (2 Gy) for lens opasities and eataraet formation. (Submitted by Internet) We have eonsidered the ealiber of the vessel, the direetion of blood flow and the following flow parameters: maximum and minimum flow veloeities for veins; peak systolie, end diastolie and resistive index for arteries. Results: CDI demonstrated a SOV dilatated, with low resistenee arterialized and reversal blood flow in 7 high blood flow CCSF; no flow ehanges were found in the other orbital vessels. In 5 low blood flow CCSF no flow alterations resulted in any vessel. Conclusion: CDI is not diagnostie in low blood flow CCSF, while it ean give a sure diagnosis in high blood flow CCSF (superior ophthalmie vein dilatated, with arterialized and reversal blood flow). This teehnique offers a non invasive means to confirm the elinieal diagnosis and to monitor a possible angiographie embolization. Axial and eoronal seans were aequired using 2 mm eollimation at a piteh of 1.5. Coronal reeonstruetions were performed in all eases. Results: All images using settings as low as 50 mAs were of good quality and allowed good to exeellent assessment of all anatomie struetures in patients with severe dental amalgam artifaets, the quality of seeondary eoronal reeonstruetions was superior to the primary eoronal images in all eases. Primary images at 25 mAs were graded as fair only when severe mueosal thiekening was present. Here, seeondary eoronal reeonstruetions eould not always provide suffleient quality for elear identifieation of ostiomeatal eomplex pathology in partieular. Conclusion: Helieal CT of the paranasal sinuses using 25 mAs will usually allow good to exeellent image quality of both primary data and secondary reeonstruetions. Seeondary eoronal reeonstruetions ofaxial images aequired at 25 mAs are insufficient only in eases of marked mueosal pathology. Here, additional primary eoronal images using the low-dose teehnique are neeessary. The orbital radiation dose was measured using a thermolumineseent dosimeter. Seans were reviewed by 2 observers independently, who were unaware of the mAs used. The ostio-meatal eomplex, uneinate proeess, infundibulum, frontal reeess, middle turbinate and optie nerve were assessed as elearly demonstrated (2 points), demonstrated, but not elearly (1 point) and not seen (0 points). Results: Using ANOVA no statistieally signifieant differenee was shown between the 4 groups in the demonstration of any of the features evaluated. The mean radiation dose to the orbit was redueed by 77% from 13.5 mGy at 200 mAs, to 3.1 mGy at 50 mAs. Conclusion: Our study shows C'T seans of the sinuses ean be performed at a greatly redueed mAs without loss of elinieally important information or image quality. This is important in redueing the radiation dose to the lens. (1) Room I Criteria). The cause of occlusion was a thrombosis in 79 cases and an embolus in 36 cases. Adjunctive procedures to restore patency were PTA (61%), suction thrombectomy (10%), stent implantation (9%) and local fibrinolysis (18%). Primary patency rates, mortality rates, limb salvage rates and amputation free survival rates were calculated according to SVS Criteria. Patients were followed-up with clinical examination, ankle-brachial index, treadmill test and color coded duplex sonography and angiography in case of reobstruction. balloon angioplasty alone (n = 77) or balloon angioplasty followed by implantation of Palmaz stents (n = 77). Inclusion criteria were not more than three obstructed segments up to 5 cm in length in the superficial femoral or proximal popliteal artery with at least one patent run-off vessel. Follow-up included clinical assesment, ankle-brachial index (= ABI), color duplex ultrasound at 1, 3, 6, 12 months and intravenous angiography at 6 or 12 months after intervention. Purpose: To determine long-term results, and risk factors for early and late stent failure. Methods and Materials: Since 1988, 128 patients were included in a prospective, single-center study on flexible tantalum stents for the treatment of residual stenosis after balloon angioplasty of femoropopliteal stenosis (N = 54) or occlusion (N = 73). Post-procedural medication included 3 days standard heparin (N = 54) or 21 days lowmolecular weight heparin (LMWH) reviparin® (N = 74). Patients were followed clinically (N = 128) and angiographically or with color doppler sonography (105/128) for 1 to 117 months (mean 18 months). Results: The overall incidence of early stent thrombosis within ten days after stenting was 5%, the risk being higher in stents >4 cm than in short stents (p < 0.01). 1-,2-, and 3-years primary patency rate (PPR) was 77%, 54%, and 51% (femoral: 76%, 51%, and 49%, popliteal: 77%, 69%, and 68%), being higher in stents~4 cm versus Ionger stents, and for stented stenoses versus stented occlusions (p < 0.05). At multivariate analysis, stent length, lesion type, and secondary lesion were the most predictive factors. With reviparin treatment, the incidence of early and late stent failure could be diminished significantly (p < 0.05). Concluslon: Femoro-popliteal sten ting comb ined with post-procedural high-dose long-term reviparin is a valuable treatment modality. 393 Subclavian steal syndrome: treatment with stenting and mld-terrn follow-up E. Laiolo , R. Cion i, C. Vignali, P. Petruzzi, C. Bisogn i, V. Napoli , Purpose: to evaluate the short and mid-term results of subclavian artery stenling in patients with stea l syndrome. 5ubjects and Methods: 19 patients presenting steal syndrome, ang iograph ically proved 10 have steno-obstructions (n = 14) of the left subclavian aretry (n = 5), were treated with the placement of 6 Palmaz. 11 Wallstents and 2 Strecker stents. Primary stenling was needed in 8 cases, while the stents were placed after angioplasty in 11. Ang iography, CT angiography and ECD were performed bedore the procedure. Follow-up intravenous angiography, ECD and CTA were done 1 and 6 months after treatment. Immediate results were evaluated wiht angiography and ECD. Results: all patients were cured of symptoms after stenting, and the immediaate follow -up with ang iography and ECD showed a succesfull dilation of the stenoses and obstru ctions . One month follow -up demonstrated the absence of reslenosis in all patients, while the 6 months follow-up detected arestenosis (40%) in a case with absence of clinical symptoms. CTA succesfully demonstrated the patency and the correct pos ition of stents and agreement with angiography was ranked as 100%. Conclusion: our study support the trea tment of subclavian artery steal syndrome with stenting , but also the usefulness of the combined followup with less invasive modalities, as ECD and CTA. Methods and Materials: We implanted Hemobahn (n = 8), Passager (n =8) and Corvita (n =8) stentgrafts in the iliac arteries in eight female sheep, with Wallstent as internal control. We implanted one type per anima l, two implants at each side , the implantation sites for each type were permutated from animal to anima!. Angiographic control and intravaseular ultrasound imaging (before and after implantation, after 2 months and before explantation) were used to characterize paten cy and to assess intimal hyperplasia. Afte r 3 months implants were retr ieved and subjected to histological evaluation (after melhacrylal embedding , cutt ing and histological staining) to chara cterize the biological response.  Methods and Materials: We treated 20 consecutive pat ients with iliac thrombosis: 10 stent related and 10 native vessels. Age of the thrombosis: between 1 hour and <3 months. The protection dev ice, the Balloon Protection Sheath (BPS) , is a 7 Fr sheath with a removable valve and a soft occlusion balloon at the tip. This device not only temporarily occludes, but can also be used to aspirate or to flush embolic material in the hypogastric arte ry. Results: loeal thrombectomy resul t: 100% . Local embolization 6/10 in the stent group and 2/10 in the native group . There was, however, 0% peripheral embolization because all embolic material could be managed with the BPS : a comb ina tion of flush into the hypogastric artery and/or aspiration was used . There were no clin ical sequela from the hypogastric flush. Intussusception in more than one members in the same family is rare. Our purpose is to report intussusception in three members of a family (mother and the two sons) and probably in the matemal grandfather. Intussusception was verified by surgery in the mother by the age of 7 months and by sonography and subsequent sonographie reduclion of intussusception in both children by the age of 3.5 and 5 months respectively. There was no recurrence of intussusception in any case and both chi/dren are in good health. Intussusception was not verified in the case of the grandfather however there is a clinical history of abdominal surgery by the age of 13 months for intestinal obstruction. In conclusion our cases suggest that there may be apredisposition for idiopathic intussusception in some families. Trauma aceounts for about 10% of all childhood death and is the leading cause of death among ehildren ages 1 to 14 years. Abdominal injuries occur in approximately 12% of children with major trauma. The majority of such injuries are hepatic, splenie or renal. Pancreatic, intestinal and mesenteric injuries oceur far less commonly. Signs and symptoms of abdominal trauma in our serious are: abdominal tenderness, ecchymosis, abrasion and distension. Laboratory results suggesting intra-abdominal trauma are: elevation of Iiver enzym levels, hematuria and low hematocrit levels. Diagnostic algorithm include: US, CT and DPL (diagnostic peritoneal lavage). We present experience of our own in diagnosing of blunt abdominal trauma in ehildren during the period of 3 years (1996) (1997) (1998) We examined 12 patients. Six of them were with spleen, 2 with pancreatie, and 3 with renal injuries. One of them was with hepatic injurie. In all of them we performed US and CT with application of intravenous contrast medium in rapid bolus. DPL was done in 5 cases. Purpose: In pediatric liver transplantation, long-term survival depends on the adaptation of the vascular supply to increasing organ demands of the growing child. We describe the hepatic artery flow to the transplant over a long period of follow-up. Patients and Methods: 21 Iiver transplant recipients less than 12 years of age at the time of transplantation (mean age: 4.6 years; range: 10 months to 11 years) were followed by duplex sonography. Mean time after transplantation was 9.6 years with a mean interval between initial and most recent examination of 7.4 years. The initial sonogram was performed at least 3 months postoperatively to exclude the effects of edema at the anastomosis. Results: Peak systolic velocity in the post-anastomotic (transplanted) hepatic artery was 45 cm/s at the initial examination and 42 crn/s at long-term follow-up with normal waveforms. Resistive indices inereased by 9.7% over time to a mean of 0.68. Conclusion: Arterial supply in the growing child with a liver transplant adapts without a significant change in hemodynamic variables. The peak systolic velocity and the resistive index remain stable and within normal ranges. Purpose: Plain film radiography often underestimates the extent of injury in children with epiphyseal fracture. Especially Salter-Harris Vfractures (crush fraclure of the epiphyseal plate) are often primarily not detected. Epiphyseal injuries can be aecurately analyzed with computed tomography, but CT-examination goes along with a high dose of radiation, which is a severe problem in children. T. The study protocol included a STIR-sequence, two T2-weighted sequences in the oblique axial planes , and a T1-weighted sequence in the sagittal plane. If cons idered necessary, either a 3D-acquisition (DESS-sequence) or the T1-we ighted SE~sequence after admin istration of Gd-DTPA were performed. Two readers blinded to the patients' clin ical history, outcome, and roentgenologic studies, evaluated the images in conference. All patients were treated either operatively or have been followed up clinically and radiographically with or without repeated MR examinations. Results: All examinations were considered as diagnostic suff icient. No sedation was necessary, even for the youngest patient (2 years, 9 months). Tears of the lateral collateral ligaments were present in 14/31 patients. In five patients, these tears were associated with oecult bone brulses, in one patient with an osteoehondral fraeture of the medial talar dome . In five patients with unclear clinieal findings and negative roentgenologie studies, MRI deteeted four occult fraetures (distal fibu/ar epiphyseolyses and med ial malleolus fractures) and one bone bruise. Two patients demonstrated tendin itis of the posterior tibial tendon ; a Brodie 's a bsces s, an arthritis of the ankre jo int, an osteochondritis dissecans and a necrosis of the talus were found in one patient each. Conclusion: Low-field MRI of the ankle is weil suitable in the pediatric age group . It reveals a wide range especially of traumatic disorders and may be used on a large scale in unclear clinical and roentgenographic situations. 405 Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) H. Schulman, V. Tsodikov, L. Laufer, M. Einhorn , Y. Hertzanu; Purpose: Congenital insensitivity to pain with anhidrosis (CIPA) ls one of the rare hereditary sensory autonomie neuropathies (HSAN) . We evaluated the various radiological features, including brain CT of CIPA. Methods and Materials: The radiological findings of 16 children, 8 females and 8 males , rang ing in age from 1 month to 8 years, with elinically proven CIPA, were retrospectively analysed . We evaluated chest X-rays , skeletal X-rays and CT scans and cranial CT scans . The skeletal findings were classified as fractures, osteomyelitis, avascular neerosis, joint deformities and acroosteolysis. Results: The ehest X-rays were normal in all ehildren. Of the 16 patients, all of them had fractures of the extremities and 8 had joint deformities. Eight of them had osteomyelitis, 6 of the lower limbs, 2 of the upper and 1 of the seapuJa. Acroosteolysis, with amputation of fingers , was present in all 16 patients. Avascular necrosis was evident S92 in 3 patients. The eranial CT scans performed in 5 ehildren beeause of hypotonia and psyehomotor retardation , showed mild generalized atrophy. Concluslon: CIPA ls a rare and severe autosomal reeessive eondition whieh leads to self-mut ilation in the first months of Iife. Fraetures, osteomyelitis and joint deformities are evident in older ehildren . Mental retardation ls eommon. Death from hyperpyrexia occurs in almost 20% of the patients within the first 3 years of life. In our southern area the eustomary consanguineous marriages of the Beduin tribes , had led to a group of 16 children belonging 10 8 kindreds affected by CIPA. We emphasize the various radiolog ieal find ings at different ages and the characteristie brain CT scans . Purpose: Medical imaging progress continuously improves quality of image capture, but an antique technology is still being used in the most crucial step -film reading and interpretation. Five root causes degrade film readers' performance: • Insufficient illumination intensity degrades contrast and spatial resolution. • Extraneous light from non-covered light box areas scatters within readers eye causing glare which decreases contrast discrimination. • Non-controlled pupil dilation. • Light-box diffused incident light scatters within the film and reduces contrast by up to 40%. • Improper ambient light level reduces visual acuity. A conventional light box enables the reader to perceive only a fraction of the data contained in the X-ray film. Regulatory authorities have also paid attention to the potential clinical consequences of light box limitation and issued the European Guidelines on Ouality Criteria for Diagnostic Radiographie Images (EUR 16260 and 16261). Methods and Materials: A Digital Film Viewer system (DFV) was developed to replace the traditional light box. Results: Clinical evaluations demonstrate that the DFV capabilities improve reading quality and increase diagnostic confidence in interpretation of radiographie films. The device meets EC guidelines fully and automatically. Conclusion: The DFV overcomes traditional light box Iimitations and sets new benchmarks for quality film reading. doses, the use ofax-ray scatter reduetion grid does not have as mueh advantage as expected. Adetector material with higher quantum efficieney would solve this problem. Purpose: To assess the imaging performance of a digital radiographie system whieh incorporates a large area f1at panel amorphous silicon deteetor Methods and Materials: The x-ray deteetor is based on an active matrix of amorphous silicon photodiodes, eovered with a Cesium Iodide (Csl) scintillator. The aetive image field covers an area of about 43 by 43 crrr', required to satisfy the needs for all radiographie applieations. The detector was integrated into a bueky and a wall stand radiographie system and used routinely in a clinical environment. The achieved image quality is described in terms of physical parameters such as the detective quantum efficiency (DQE), and the modulation transfer function (MTF). Also, contrast detail phantoms were evaluated and their results eompared to the conventional systems. Results: DOE and MTF were found to be superior to conventional sereen-film systems. In the c1in ical environment the digital radiographie system provided fast aecess to the radiographie data and faeilitated the proeedures when eompared to conventional screen-film systems. Conclusion: The novel large size x-ray detector based on amorphous silicon technology provides excellent image quality, quantitatively deseibed by DOE and MTF. The high DOE is the key to strive for dose reduetions. Furthermore, the detector provides the missing link to render the radiological department fully digital. This work was partly supported by the Euopean community funds. Purpose: To eompare the overall image quality for a selenium digital Xray detector panel (Direct-Rayl'", Sterling) and conventional sereen-film systems using a threshold-contrast detail-detection (TCDD) test object. Methods and Materials: The digital system is a multilayer detector panel eonsisting of a thin-film transistor pixel array, se/enium X-ray photoconductor, dielectric layer and top electrode. Latitude and speed conventional X-ray film-screen couples were used for comparison. Both the digital and the eonventional systems were exposed and developed using the same equipment. We performed 23 exposures of the Leeds Test Object 10 (T010) TCDD phantom in several filtration, voltage, current and time conditions with both digital and conventional systems (10 exposures for regular; 13 for speed sereen-film eouple). Five radiologists reviewed the films under the same viewing conditions to determine detectability contrast threshold Cr(A). The Threshold Detection Index Hr(A) =(Cr(A) .°Ar 1 was calculated; the mean value over the range of T010 detail contrasts was taken as overall image quality index. Image sharpness was also evaluated ranking 1 -i-4 the films. Results: The mean (SD) HT(A) for the 5 observers were: Differenees were significant (p < 0.05) for 4/5 observers. Image sharpness was always beUer for the digital system. Conclusion: The Leeds TCDD phantom provides a simple way to assess overall image quality of radiological images, which is determined by a eomplex interaction of several physical factors. Our study showed the digital system was always superior to conventional ones in this respeet. 414 Physical image quality evaluation of a selenium based digital X-ray Imaging system under the influence of a scatter reduction grld H. Schmidl, G. Reichei, W. Döhring; Magdeburg/D Purpose: To assess the technical and clinical performance of an experimental solid-state universal digital X-ray image receptor. Methods and Materials: A f1at-panel dynamic digital X-ray detector (FDXD, Philips Medical Systems), capable offunctioning in radiographic and f1uoroscopic (25 frames/sec) modes, was subjected to a rigorous technical assessment in a medical physics imaging laboratory (FAXiL, University of Leeds). A test rig incorporating the plate was installed in the research room of the Clinical Radiology Department, Leeds General Infirmary, and a range of patient examinations performed. Results: Technical assessment of objective image quality and dose efficiency confirms that FDXD is superior to currently available digital image capture systems, with a DOE(O) value approaching 70% in the c1 inical exposure range. The value of this parameter for computed radiography systems is approximately 20% under the same conditions. Initial c1inical experience has included musculoskeletal radiography, intravenous urography, arthrography and upper and lower GI barium studies. Results have again been very encouraging, despite the limitations of the test eonfiguration. Technical data and images will be presented. Conclusion: FDXD technology can provide direet digital radiography and f1uoroseopy in a single piece of equipment -a truly universal X-ray detector. Purpose: To evaluate the influence of a scatter reduction grid on the physieal image quality parameters of a digital selenium detector for different exposure conditions. Methods and Materials: We measured the MTF of a Thoravision system (Philips) using an angulated narrow tantalum slit (42.5 um), The data for noise analysis were obtained by uniform exposures. The tube voltage was varied over a range from 70 to 150 kVp. The speetral eomposition of the x-rays was investigated using a Ge-compton spectrometer (Canberra). The exposures were made with and without a seatter reduetion grid (GRIDGIL-AI N60 r12). Results: A scatter reduction grid nearly eliminates the scattered part of the x-ray spectrum. Higher x-ray energy results in a better resolution without using a grid. The signal-to-noise ratio decreases when lowering tne quantum energy. There is only a small influenee of the grid on the image-noise properties at a higher spatial resolution. The Iinearity of the imaging proeess in noncentral image areas deereases due to grid scatter reduction. Conclusion: The x-ray scatter reduction grid inereases the detail detectability in absorption image areas. However,without greater exposure 11:20 to image, define a straight line known as a transfer characteristic, the gradient of which determines image contrast. This study was impiemented to find a reproducible method of displaying digital images from adult and paediatric bone scans and pinhole hip views. Methods and Materials: The mean and maximum counts/pixel in the lumbar spine and femoral head were recorded for 30 paediatric and adult bone scans. The average values of these parameters were then assigned optical densities of 1.1 and 2.2 respectively to define three linear standardised transfer characteristics, one for each type of image. Results: Using a standardised transfer characteristic the displayed optical density of each pixel is governed only by the number of counts it contains and is completely insensitive to counts in other areas. This facilitates inter-and intra-study comparison of image data and eliminates the influence of hot spots on image quality. Conclusion: This is a reproducible method of displaying digital images. It is simple to implement and is based on data from sites of c1inical significance. Purpose: How much can the radiation dose for skull radiography be decreased by using digital luminescence radiography (DLR) c0f!1pared to conventional screen film system with grid cassette concernmg the clinical question? Methods and Materials: A skull phantom (3M) was x-rayed a.p. by conventional screen film system with grid cassette and DLR (ADC-70, AGFA). Voltage (kV) and tube current time product (mAs) were varyied and diminished gradually. The surface entrance dose was measured by a measuring feeler of Dosimax (Wellhöfer). Five investigators evaluated the images by characteristic and critical features, visual resolution and contrast. Results: The surface entrance dose at 73 kV/22 mAs was 0.432 mGy in conventional screen film system and 0.435 mGy in DLR Assessment of the digital images was very good with an average dose of 71% (0.308 mGy; SO 0.050) and sufficient evaluable down to an average dose of 31% (0.136 mGy; SO 0.065) by using a constant voltage (73 kV) and diminishing tube current time product. The line pairs were reduced by 1 or 2 steps depending on the investigator. The contrast was very good to sufficient. For the sufficient assessment of a fraclure I of paranasal sinuses I of measurement the skull the dose can be reduced to at least 56% (average 31%; SO 14.9%) 140% (average 27%; SO 9.3%) 118% (average 14%; SO 4.4%). Conclusion: The DLR allows the reduction of the surface entrance dose at the a.p. radiography of the skull to at least 56% (average 31%) -concerning the clinical question to at least 18%. Purpose: The aim of this examination was to analyse t~e appllcation of digital radiography in RSA reducing radiation dose and improvmq Image quality. . . Methods and Materials: A Miller Galante 11 prosthesls was Implanted in a cadaver knee. Conventional images were taken with a screen-film combination (Gadolinium Oxisulfid). Digital images were obtained with a storage phosphor screen. The spatial resolution achievable~a~2.7 line pairs per mm using a cassette size of 24 x 30 cm (sensitivity of 100). The calculation of the dose area product was pe~ormed~ith an ionisation chamber. The image quality was ranked with a subjective five-point scale. Results: Using the conventional PSA-technique (109 kVp, 3.2 mAs) the dose area product was 15.7 cGy/cm2. A dose reduction was only achievable by using digital images. The images had a g?od to satisfactory quality and the visualisation criteria for RSA were still met. Conclusion: Using digital radiography in RSA-examinations the dose area product can be reduced for approximately 8~% witho.ut loslnq image quality. We recommend to replace the conventional radioqraphic method by the digital technique in RSA. . . . Results: Two young patients (aged 32 and 34 years) wlth farrnly history and headache had normal MR images. Fourty of the fourtytwo patients had lesions, as multiple small deep infarcts scattered in subcortical parietal (85%), frontal, occipital and temporal white matter and basal ganglia (25%), external capsule (55%), internal capsule, thalam~s, brainstem, and cerebellum (15%). More or less extensive and relative symmetric leucodystrophy was observed in 34 patients: Leucodystrop~y of external capsule was idenlified in 16 patients. All lesions were readily identificable by diffusion weighted MRI, whereas T2-weighted imaging was less sensitive in especially characterisation of lesion size (68%) and number (93%). Atrophy was only found in !wo older patients (aged 64 and 60 years). None of lesions was enhanced on enhanced T1weighted images. Conclusion: The MR features of CADASIL are characteristic, and weil observed with diffusion weighted imaging. There are multiple lacunar infarcts and leucodystrophie without contrast enhancement. Purpose: We used diffusion-weighted MR imaging (DWI) in addition to routine MR imaging in order to provide a more rapid non invasive way to make this sometimes confusing diagnosis. Methods and Materials: We obtained 5 MR examinations in three patients with autopsy proven Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). A multislice, single-shot echo planar imaging sequence was used in addition to the routine proton-density and T2-weighted MR images. The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) was calculated. Results: While cortical abnormalities were present in only 1/3 patients on T2-weighted images, lesions were seen in all three patients in DWI. A significant progression of the lesions was seen on the follow-up scans. In all patients the lesions appeared in one hemisphere and extended to the contralateral hemisphere on the follow-up scan. In one patient, abnormalities were seen on DWI only. ADC values were normal or slightly elevated. Conclusion: DWI appears to improve the in vivo diagnosis of CJD and may thus decrease the number of false negative MR examinations when relying on proton-density and T2-weighted images only. The DWI changes probably reflect the spongiform degeneration, astrocytosis and neuronal 1055 on pathology. We recommend DWI whenever there 15 a elinical suspicion of CJD. The MRI examinations on a 1.5 T. unit were performed during a recent relapse, prior to therapy. Flair-sequences, DWI-sequences with sensitizing gradient in 1 to 3 directions, T1-weighted sequences with MTC before and after double dose Gd-DTPA with delay of 10 min were obtained. The sequence parameters for DWI-EPI were (TRITE 6000/20 m sec, b-value -300 sec/mm2), for Flair-sequence (TRITEITI 6850/150/200 m sec), for T1 + MTC + CM (TRITE 600115). Results: T1 + MTC + CM revealed enhancement in 24 lesions with max. 1.5 cm in diameter. On Flair sequence 11 lesions presented ring shaped with edema. All lesions, whieh had been already deteeted by T1 + MTC + CM, could be seen by DWI as weil. Two lesions (Iocated elose to the skull base) that were elearly identified by Flair-sequence, could not be seen on DWI. Conclusion: Our results suggest that DWI imaging may be more sensitive in the detection of MS-Iesion activity than T1-MTC + DD CM + delay which is presently regarded as the gold standard in this question. b2 =300 s/mm 2 ; b3 =1100 s/mrrr") were applied in slice direction for three orthogonal axis. In each patient 16 ROI in different anatomic regions were calculated. In subcortical white matter (mean ADC: 524.10-8 cm 2/s), in grey matter (mean ADC: 1441.10-8 cm 2/s) and in CSF (mean ADC: 3209.10-8 cm 2/s) diffusion is isotropic, i. e. independent of direction. In contrast diffusion in periventricular white matter and in the corpus 596 callosum is anisotropic, l.e, diffusion in one direction is less restricted than in the other directions (p < 0.05). Conclusion: ADC values of human brain are highly dependent on the localization; even in white matter there are regions with isotropic as weil as those with anisotropic diffusion. Knowledge of the physiologic ADC values and their distribution in human brain is essential for the investigation of pathology. Results: Localization of high signal intensity in DWI was compatible with symptoms of cerebral ischemia in all patients. ADC values outside the infarction and on the contralateral hemisphere were significantly higher than in the corresponding area of the control group without cerebral lesion. After onset of symptoms the ADC is declining for about 24 to 32 hours to a minimum ot 150.10-8 cm 2/s. Then the ADC reaches a "pseudonormalization" after 5 days. Independent of the anatomical localization, the diffusion in the infarcted area is isotropic. Chronic infarcts showed much higher ADC values than unaffected areas. Conclusion: DWI enables early detection of cerebral stroke. Furthermore, ADC calculation allows to quantify diffusion conditions and to determine the onset of infarction. and spin-echo (SE) MR-imaging (PDW, T2W, T1W before and following injection of 0.1 mmol/kg bw Gd-DTPA). All images were assessed by two experienced radiologists. Results: A total of 25 ischemic lesions was found. 38% of these lesions were only shown by DWI, 14% only by SE, 38% by both methods, 10% were false negative. DWI results in a 70% increase in lesion detection. DWI failed to show cerebra I ischemic lesions in patients who were examined on day 12 and 13. On a 5-point scale artifacts (5 =none, 1 = considerable) and image quality (5 =very good, 1 =insufficient) of DWI revealed scores of 3.6 ± 0.6 and 4.1 ± 0.8 (mean ± sd), respectively. The detection of cerebral ischemic lesions in subacute stages of ischemia is considerably improved by adding DWI 10 SE. Artifacts are often present in DWI, however, they do not disturb the diagnostic quality. Purpose: To demonstrate the technical feasibility and precision of a novel high-resolution dual-echo sequence with either isotropic or anisotropic diffusion weighting gradients using interleaved EPI and phase navigation, and to test its diagnostic sensitivity for acute ischemic stroke. Methods and Materials: Measurements on phantoms (water and acetone) were performed and six volunteers served to determine intrasubject (precision) and intersubject (reference range) variations in both absolute and relative ADC measurements. DWI maps and lesion relative ADC values were obtained in 34 consecutive stroke patients to evaluate the sensitivity and reliability of the proposed DWI-IEPI technique for ischemic brain damage. Moreover, 3D-rendering and maximum intensity projection of the hyperintense lesions was used for assessment of lesions spatial extend. Results: Phantom and volunteer study yielded excellent agreement with published data. The intrasubject variation of relative ADC was 6.2%. The precision of ADC ranged from 6.5% to 12.9% depending on anatomie region. IEPI allowed the rapid acquisition (-4-5 min) of high quality images without any significant artifacts. All patient studies were of diagnostic quality. Within the first week, the sensitivity of DWI-IEPI for acute infarction was 90% of first examinations, independent of lesion location. A short period of reduced sensitivity in ADC maps was found -200 hours after ictus due to pseudonormalization of ADC. Conclusion: DWI-IEPI in conjunction with phase navigation and cardiac triggering is a robust, reliable and fast technique for DWI. Anisotropie DWI-IEPI provides reasonable image quality also on conventional gradient hardware (10 mT/m) and warrants further study of the sensitivity and specificity with a large patient series in general clinical use. In comparison to trace-maps, isotropie DWI is three to six times faster and provides images free from fiber anisotropy, but requires high performance gradients (20 mT/m) due to the otherwise inappropriately prolonged diffusion time. Methods and Materials: We examined 26 patients with angiographically proven stenoses (60-99%) of the internal carotid artery (ICA) preoperatively. Perfusion imaging studies using a bolus tracking method was done on a 1.5 T clinical scanner. Bolus tracking of a dosage of 0.2 mmollkg bw IV injection of Gd-DTPA (0.5 M) was performed using a T2*weighted FLASH-sequence. In 17 patients a transcranial doppler (TCD) was performed to assess cerebral hemodynamics preoperatively. Three months postoperatively perfusion MRI was performed in 13 patients. Results: 1. In patients with <80% stenosis there was no alteration of mean transit time (MTT) and regional cerebral blood volume (rCBV) compared to the contralateral normal hemisphere (-0.16 sec, +5.9%). In patients with hemodynamically relevant stenoses (>80%) we found a delay in MTT ipsilateral to the obstruction of the ICA of 1.2 sec (p < 0.001, Wilcoxon) and increase of rCBV of 16.8% (p < 0.005). 2. In patients with normal perfusion characteristics in TCD there was no significant delay of MTT and no sigificant increase of rCBV, whereas in patients with abnormal perfusion characteristics in TCD there was a delay in MTT of +1.9 sec (p < 0.05) and rCBV was increased to 23% (p < 0.05). 3. Three months postoperatively perfusion parameters were normal in all 13 patients. Conclusion: Perfusion-weighted MRI is weil suited to pre-and postoperatively evaluate the hemodynamic changes of cerebral blood flow in patients with carotid artery disease.  Purpose: To show the contribution of background noise in the calculation of ADC and to suggest alternative, noise-robust techniques for parameter estimation especially important in sequences with inherently prolonged diffusion times (isotropie DWI). Methods and Materials: Monte Carlo simulations were performed to compare conventional parameter estimation techniques (linear regression, non-linear least square fits) with two novel approaches considering the Rician (Rayleigh) distribution of the background noise on MR magnitude images. A maximum likelihood estimator approach and a model which automatically corrects for the amount of noise contribution were used. Simulations were carried out using representative ADCs of typical tissues (CSF, WM, GM, acute stroke) with a variable number and magnitude of b-values and with reasonable SNRs. Results and Conclusion: Normal or poisson distribution of noise is aprerequisite for standard fitting techniques. For higher diffusion weighted signal sampies this may be no longer true and sampies with different DW show different noise distributions. Hence, a (non)linear fit based on a monoexponential decaying model is inappropriate. The model has to be extended by a term representing the contribution of the noise distribution or might be replaced by a certain maximum likelihood estimator approach. Both new methods are superior to standard techniques in terms of accuracy in ADC calculation for low SNR. Using conventional fitting diffusion weighted sampies below a certain signal threshold biases the ADC to lower values. This may lead to a reduced lesion contrast and diagnostic sensitivity. Although, acute stroke lesions contrast best with bD = 1.11 (2 point method), the introduced bias in ADC of normal parenchyma (-17%) due to this heavy DW should be kept in mind especially when ratios between both compartments are calculated (rADC). Virtual endoscopy allows for moving the observer into a 3D data set and providing images from 'inside' a structure of interest. This is only possible by using perspective rendering instead of parallel projections sueh as in standard 3D rendering techniques. Navigation techniques are employed to virtually move through the structures of interest. This baslc review discusses the prerequisites for aequiring a data volume suitable for performing virtual endoscopy (voxel size, overlapping the number of diagnostic investigations requ ired for preoperative workup and , by consequence, the length of hospitalisation. At the same time , a number of more invasive and potentially harmful techniques as ERCp, catheter angiography, endoscopic sonography, or even laparoscopy, can be avoided in a number of patients. Other important areas of technical progress are the development of new organ specific contrast media, and blood pool agents. Weil known examples of the first class are iron oxide particles that -depending on their size -can be used as hepatospecific agents or as markers of normal (non-neoplastic) Iymph nodes . Unfortunatly, the diagnostic performance of abdominal MRI largely depends on the type of equipment used . The current tendency to use cheap , low-field MR equ ipment may be a major obstacle to a further break-through of MRI as a primary diagnostic modality in the investigation of abdominal diseases. However, the unique intrinsic diagnostic capabilities of MRI, together with its totally noninvasive nature , will ultimately make it the 'one-stop shopping' modality of choice in a large number of patients. Modern imaging and computer graph ics gather the components for realism in virtual realily: high resolution of the graph ics -organ properties and reaction -interactivity between organs and objects and, in some clinical applications, sensory feedbacks. Spira l CT acquisition of the human body allows a volumetrie analysis of the volumetrie data. Three main three-dimensional rendering techniques can be applied to the data set: shaded surface display (SSO), maximum or minimum intensity projection (MIP) and volume rendering (VR) . SSO and VR are the two ones with wh ich we can perform an analysis from within the data set , also called internal rendering or immersive visualization. When assessing the pretherapeutic evaluation of a disease the radiologist is not always aware of the precise results of a previous actual endoscopy. Nevertheless he is compelled to take into aceount the endoscopic findings before performing the CT acqu isition . Virtual endoscopy can be envisaged whenever an actual endoscopy in indicated. It can help the interpretation of complex anatomy. It can abbr eviate, direct, avoid , influence the need for or replace an actual endoscopy and can solve some discordances between actual endoseopy and cross-sectional images. Most of the radiologists are able to perform their own mental immersion into an hollow viscus but are very often unable to eommunicate it to their clinieian colleagues. Until now incipient works have been done on analysis of angioscopy, bronchoscopy, cystoscopy, upper urinary tract , co fonoscopy, orthopedics, anatomie instruetion. Some other areas are still unexplored: retroperitoneoscopy, mediastinoscopy, pleuroseopy... etc. Virtual endoscopy needs interactivity and sufficient resolution so that struc!ures of interest can be visua lized with an entire eonfidenee. Its final position in the diagnostie and therapeutic strategies has to be fully evaluated. Oespite colon carcinoma is characterized by a slow development with in 97% a benign polyp as precursor it is most often diagnosed in symptomatic patients. At that stage many patients already developed extensive local extension or metastases. The 5 year survival is therefore in the range of 50% . The only available and effective method to prevent this evolution is the detect ion of adenomas by eolonoscopy. Unfortunately endoscopy is rather invasive and most patients are therefore not very enthousiastic about it use as a screening modality. On the other hand , virtual endoscopy, has the potential to be developed into a minimally invasive screening mOOality at least if sufficient sensitivity and specificity can be ach ieved. In this presentation the technique of virtual endoseopy for the screen ing of colorectal cancer will be described and the cost efficiency of virtual endoscopy screening programs will be discussed. Virtual endoscopy provides endoluminal views of vessels by simulating fyberoptic endoscopy perspective. The simulation is obtained with 3D surface or volume rendering of CT-angiography and MR-angiography data sets. It requires appropriate software and hardware eapabilities, it is influenced by the quality of image acquisition, and is strongly dependent on the exper ience of the speeialist using this kind of technology. Volumetrie acquisition , precise images segmentation and correct interpretation of anatomical and pathological find ings are the requirements of a goOO angioscopic study. If these parameters are respected virtual ang ioscopy can be applied effic iently to the study of many diseases of the aorta, pulmonary artery and peripheral vessels. The main potentialities can be foreseen in the detection and evaluation of aortic dissections and aneurysms, arterial stenoses, pulmonary embolism , neoplastic infiltration; a fur ther role could be played in the planning and assessment of interventional procedures such as the placement of stent or aortic graft. Dur three year experienee with virtual endoseopy suggests that this technique is an useful tool if used as an integrative and not a sub stitutive tool of eross-sectional imaging. Probably virtual endoscopy will be used routinarily in the future as part of a multi-imaging system in wh ich cross -sections, 3D surface and volume rendered images, and virtual endoscopy are interactive and represent simultaneously the same anatomical structure. 433 Gastrointestinal tract G. Marchal; LeuvenlB sampling , role of data interpolation). The differences between standard rendering and perspective render ing , and between shaded surface displays and volume render ing techniques will be explained . Navigat ion through the data volume is an integral part of virtual endoscopy. The relative advantages of interactive navigation and off-line rendering of movies along a pre-defined f1ight path will be discussed. Special emphasis will be put on pract lcal aspects such as ehoos ing suitable thresholds or opacity curves, using color and Iighting , and setting the view ing angle that determines the visualized field of view. Accuracy of measurements in virtual endoscopy depends both on the scan parameters as weil as on the rendering parameters used . Some specific problems of virtual bronchoscopy and virtual eolonascopy using CT or MR data will be expla ined . Virtual endoscopy is a type of three-dimensional reconstruction in wh ich the observation point is placed within a given anatomical space to produce an endoscopic-like display. Within the past three years, this concept has emerged as a potential solution to overcome difficul ties Purpose: Interstitial laser therapy is an effective treatment for patients with inoperable Iiver metastases. Dur aim was to assess the feasibility of liver tumour ablation at 0.2 T and to identify specific advantageous features . Methods and Materials: 72 metastases were treated in 37 patients at 68 sessions. Laser thermal ablation was performed in 59 and radiofrequency in 9. 25/37 had colorectal metastases, the remainder miscellaneous primary lesions . Needles were positioned using both ultrasound and MR guidance. Breath-hold , multiplanar oblique , 2D grad ient echo sequences (TR 152 rnsec, TE 9 msec, flip angle 700) were used to visualise needle position . Thermal effects were monitored using a fast inversion recovery sequence (TR 1068 msec , TE 48 msec , TI 80 msec , NSA I in 59s , collima tion 10 mm. Results: Thermal effects were appreciated as a reduction in signal intensity over time . Reduction in signal intensity on MR was helpful but consistently underestimated the area of devascularisation shown on CT. Concluslon: MR guided tumou r ablation is feasible and safe with good patient access , patient comfort and acceptable monitoring. Tumour visualisation was adequate and accurate, multiplanar needle positioning is facilitated by MR. Thermally induced signal intensity was visual ised but did not predict final necrosis volume . Purpose: Two methods of percutaneous, image guided, thermal ablation , Laser Tumour Ablation (LTA) and Radiofrequency Ablation (RF) were compared in patients receiving treatment for colorectalliver metastases . for PEI (p < 0.01). After a mean follow-up period of 10.9 ± 4.9 months (range 3-18 months), local recurrence (i.e., recurrence within or around a successfully treated lesion) was seen in 1 (2%) of 49 cases after RF ablation and in 7 (13%) of 52 cases after PEI (p < 0.05). Conclusion: Percutaneous ablation of small HCC can be safely achieved with either RF treatment or PEI. RF ablation, however, requires a lower number of treatment sessions and is associated with a lower local recurrence rate. To determine the value of magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in follow-up of small «3 cm) hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) treated with percutaneous US-guided radiofrequency ablation (RFA). Methods and Materials: RFA was performed in 23 patients with single HCC lesion by using 18-gauge cooled-tip electrodes with 2-3 cm tip exposure. All patients underwent MR imaging at 0.5 T before and after RFA. Sequences included unenhanced SE T1, T2-weighted, GRE and dynamic gadolinium-enhanced SE T1-weighted. At follow-up every six months, unenhanced and dynamic MR images were correlated with findings at contrast-enhanced spiral CT. Therapeutic assessment was established with pathologie evaluation of resected specimens in 9 cases; in the remaining cases, results of US-guided fine needle biopsy were used. Results: In 16 patients followed up for 18 months, complete tumor necrosis was obtained with RF. In these cases, the treated lesions showed hypointensity on unenhanced T2-weighted images and loss of enhancement on dynamic MR images. These features corresponded to S100 a nonenhanced, low-attenuation area on follow-up contrast-enhanced spiral CT scans. In the other 7 patients, viable residual tumor remained after RFA At six-month follow-up in these patients, the lesions showed areas of hyperintensity on unenhanced T2-weighted images and enhancement on dynamic MR images that corresponded to regions of high attenuation on spiral CT scans. Purpose: Heat sump effect in hyper or normally perfused tissue effectively limits the volume of necrosis achieved with thermal ablation. Blood f10w manipulation in conjunction with thermal ablation is currently under investigation. Not only do liver metastases alter regional blood flow but thermal injury has a dramatic effect on regional perfusion. We used dynamic CT to measure tissue perfusion changes induced by thermal ablation therapy. Methods and Materials: Rapid sequential single slice CT acquisition following bolus injection of 50 ml of IV contrast at 7-10 mlfs was used to measure the kinetics of hepatic arterial and portal venous flow and derive quantitative measurements. 26 patients with liver metastases were studied both before and after treatment and in 11 patients, again at 3 months. Results: Mean tumour perfusion was 0.2 ml/min/ml. Thermal ablation (laser or radiofrequency) induced an immediate, marked increase in arterial perfusion in the surrounding normal liver within minutes of the start of treatment. Arterial perfusion increased from mean of 0.22 to 0.9 ml/ml/min. This was usually but not always concurrent with reduced portal perfusion. Conclusion: There is a rapid and dramatic change in hepatic arterial flow in response to thermal injury. This will have implications for planning thermal ablation therapy. Purpose: Photodynamic therapy (PDT) offers the potential to destroy significant volumes of malignant tissue within the pancreas using fine needles to deliver laser fibres. Methods and Materials: 12 patients were treated over an 18 month period using 4-6, 19G needles positioned at 15-18 mm intervals within the tumour, 5 days after administration of the photosensitiser, mTHPC. 20J of red light from a diode laser was delivered at each treatment station. All patients had endobiliary stents in situ. Treatment efficacy was assessed at 5 days with contrast enhanced CT and clinical followup. Results: All 12 patients tolerated the procedure weil. Around each treatment station the de-vascularised area measured 14-19 mm in diameter. Confluent necrosis was achieved where there was overlap of treatment stations. The total volume of necrosis was 12-36 ml. In 4 cases there was ulceration of the duodenal wall on endoscopy. This was c1inically insignificant and healed in 3 months. One patient developed transient gastric outflow obstruction. 9/12 patients remain alive at 13 months median follow-up (range 1-21) Conclusion: PDT appears safe and weil tolerated and can debulk small pancreatic tumours by over 90%. The impact of this novel therapy on survival will rapidly emerge from extension of this series. Purpose: Evaluation of percutaneous interventional embolization in gastrointestinal bleeding over a long term observation from 1989 to 1997. Methods and Materials: 35 patients with gastrointestinal hemorrhage have been presented for interventional therapy primarily or secondary after unsuccessful endoscopy or surgery. Patients age ranges from 18 to 89 years. Bleeding causes were upper GI-ulcerations (n =7), diverticula (n =3), tumour (n =6), vascular malformations (n =4), hemorrhoids (n =2) or unknown (n = 1). They appeared postoperatively (n = 6), posttraumatic (n =2) or postinflammatory (n =4). As embolization agent ethibloc (12 x) and coils (14 x) were preferred. In some cases (6 x) combinations of therapeutics such as gelfoam particles and tissue glue or coils and ethibloc were used. Only once a patient was treated by PVA-particles, a covered stent and a wire manouver for dissection. Results: In 29 of 35 patients (83%) the hemorrhage could be stopped completely. In one case the bleeding source was detected, but the depending vessel was not to cannulate, so that no treatment could be performed (3%). In 5 cases the was only a reduction in bleeding intensity or a recurrent hemorrhage after treatment (14%). The overall complication rate was 14%. While we observed 4 cases of lethai bowel ischemias during the first four years, there was only one case of spleenie infarction since 1993 without any further treatment nessiccity. Conclusion: Gastrointestinal bleedings can be controlled in high number by minimal invasive intervantional treatment. Even so in primarily operated or high risk patients. The progressive use of modern ernbolization agents such as minicoils may be reduce the number of severe complications. Conclusion: FNH lesions enhance with MnDPDP becoming isointense or hyperintense on early phase imaging and hyperintense to normal liver on delayed imaging. Central scars or septations do not enhance, resulting in heterogenous contrast uptake. MnDPDP enhanced MRI appears more sensitive than other imaging modalities for diagnosing FNH with maximum conspicuity on delayed imaging. 14:10 446 Perfusion characteristics of focal nodular hyperplasia and its scar by dynamic magnetic resonance imaging L. Marti-Bonmati, C. Casillas, R. Dosda: Valenc/alE Purpose: To determine the relationship between the tumor and sear enhancement characteristic with dynamic MR and time-enhancement curves. Methods and Materials: Ten patients with FNH Iiver lesions were studied with plain MR. The slice showing the tumor scar was selected for the dynamic single slice T1W GRE. Quantitative image analysis was performed with time-enhancement curves from the lesion and the scar. Results: On the 9 cases with ascar, dynamic images showed homogeneous early vigorous enhancement of the lesion with delayed enhancement of the scar. However, visual comparison of the curves idenlified two slightly different patterns. In the parallel pattern, both curves started early after the contrast administration and, after a rapid inerease in enhancement, reached a plateau maintained over time (77.8%). In the divergent pattern, again both curves started very early after the contrast administration but, after the maximum slope was passes, a plateau was reached in which the curve of the scar was situated above the curve of the FNH (22.2%). Conclusion: Time-enhancement curves demonstrate a c1ear relationship between the lesion and scar enhancement of FNH. 2. Lesions ::; 3 cm: n =7. All were identified on EPI in homogeneous hypersignal without eentral sear. -All the lesions shown on T1 with gadolinium were perfectly identified on EPI (24/24). Regarding deteetability, EPI is better than T2TSE (3 lesions were not visible on T2). -The central scar was seen in 70% of lesions larger than 3 cm, and never in smalller lesions regardless of the sequence. Conclusion: EPI can be useful in FNH because of its rapidity (40 contiguous slices in 5 seconds), and its diagnostic capacity is better than T2TSE, espeeially in small lesions. EPI is complementary to the T1 Gadolinium study and facililates the multifocal lesions diagnosis. It may be useful for FNH characterization. Purpose: To improve the contrast performance and spatial resolution in T2w turbo spin-echo imaging. Methods and Materials: A turbo spin-echo based sequence was implemented, in which the excitation pulse and one refocussing pulse are followed bya delayed echo train (7 echoes, echo spacing: 8.5 msec, effective echo time: variable). Thirty-eight patients with various focal Iiver lesions were examined at 1.5 Tesla using a phased-array body coil with following sequences: T1-weighted gradient-echo, conventional T2-weighted turbo SE with fatsat (CTSE, 11 echos, TEeff: 99 msec); T2weighted single breath-hold turbo SE (HASTE), and DELET-TSE with fatsat (TEeff = 109 msec). Results: For solid malignant liver lesions (n = 39) absolute livertumor contrasts were as folIows: .184 ± .053 (T1w GRE), .212 ± .105 (HASTE), .328 ± .106 (C-TSE), .392 ± .099 (DELET-TSE). For hemangiomas (n = 7): .121 ± .13, .297 ± .128, .403 ± .174, .436 ± .076, respectively. For solid lesions the DELET-TSE achieved a significantly higher contrast compared to the other sequences (p < .01). For hemangiomas no difference was found between the T2-weighted sequences. Small lesions and structures were significantly better visualized with the DELET-TSE compared to the CTSE sequence Conclusion: The DELET-TSE sequence is superior to conventional TSE imaging in terms of liver-tumor contrast and depiciton of small lesions and structures.  Methods and Materials: A placebo-controlled double-blinded study with five doses was performed in two centers: 1. placebo, 2. 3 urnol, 3. 6 urnol, 4. 12.5 urnol, and 5. 25.0 urnol Gd-EOB-DTPNkg). Fifty patients with previously diagnosed focal liver lesions (25 with primary and 25 with secondary liver lesions) were enrolled into the study. MRI was performed before, 20 min, and 45 min following contrast injection with axial breathheld in-phase T1-w FLASH (1.0T). Visible focal liver lesions were counted separatelyon pre and postcontrast images. Liver enhancement and lesion-Iiver contrast was calculated for quantitative analysis. Results: Liver enhancement significantly increased with increasing doses (14.4 ± 9.2 at 3 urnol, 13.7 ± 7.3 at 6 urnol, 46.1 ± 17. Purpose: To differentiate focal liver lesion by their dynamic patterns (wash-in and wash-out) after the injection of the ecocontrast agent LevovisFM (ehering AG, Berlin, Germany). We examined 14 patients with focal liver lesions after injecting them with t.evovlst" (i.v, bolus injction, 300 mg/mi). The lesion werw 1 adenoma, 2 focal nodulae hyperplasias, 7 HCCs and 4 metastases. The wash in wash-out curves werw recorded at the lesion with an ATL 3000 unit with 3.5 MHz convex transducer. The signal was analyzed for evaluating the light intensity of the pixels in the region of interest. Results: We found major differences in the wash-in and wash-out curves of the different lesion. The adenoma had quick wash-in and quick was-out with a very steep curve. The FNHs had similar was-in with a rather long plateau and longer wash-out. The HCCs had short wash-in and a wash-out in between those of adenoma and FNH. Finally, the metastases had minimal and short contrst uptake. The evaluation of wash-in and wash-out curves appears to be usefull tool in the differential diagnosis of focal liver lesion. Only histopatholgically proven malignant lesions or benign lesions with a follow-up of at least 2 years were considered for ROC analysis. Image analysis was performed by 5 readers only from outside institutions; 35 sections with lesions and 32 sections without lesions were presented in random order. All readers reviewed 5 subsets of images:  Purpose: To determine the optimal dose of SonoVue™ (Bracco) to best display of anatomy and flow in extracranial carotid and peripheral arteries and increase accuracy of Doppler sonography. Methods and Materials: Multicentre, randomised, dose-ranging, crossover study of four intravenous SonoVue ™ doses (0.3, 0.6, 1.2, 2.4 mL) in 39 patients with suspected carotid or peripheral artery disease. Color or power Doppler imaging and spectral analyses were performed at baseline and after each SonoVue ™ dose. All images were assessed independently by two off-site assessors who were blinded to the dose used and to any information upon the patients. Primary endpoints were: change from baseline in the diagnostic quality of Doppler examination (7-point scale), duration of c1inically useful signal enhacement (min), accuracy of the ultrasound examination (on the basis of X-ray angiography findings). Results: Statistically significant change from baseline in the quality of the Doppler examination was observed at all doses (p < 0.05). A significant (p < 0.001) dose response was observed in the duration of clinically useful enhancement (mean: 4-6 min). Agreement with X-ray angiography was: pre-dose, 30-56%; 0.3 mL, 59%; 0.6 mL, 70-74%; Aim: It was to determine the relationship between ultrasound-evaluated carotid plaque homogeneity and contrast, stenosis on duplex with the prevalence of ipsilateral cerebrovascular symptoms (ICS). Methods and Materials: 150 patients referred for carotid scan, with 192 plaques, 81 symptomatic and 111 asymptomatic, having 50-99% stenosis, were studied. All ultrasound images of plaques were standardised so that the grey scale median (GSM) of blood was 0-5 and the GSM of the adventitia was 180-200. Homogeneity (HOM) and contrast (CON) were evaluated on a computer with the Spatial Grey Level Dependence Matrix Method. Results: For the purposes of the analysis, HOM of 0.3, CON of 100 and stenosis of 70% were considered as arbitrary cut-off levels and the prevalence of ICS was noted: Raynaud's phenomenon). In a standardized way a dorsovolar sagital and axial scans of the distal phalanx were achieved. Depending on the clinical symptoms and the perfusion the examination was repeated either after a warm or cold water bath of the hand. Semiquantitatively the vessel density, the vessel diameters and the Doppler spectrum were measured. For all these examinations a Multi-D-Array, VFX 13-5 (12 MHz) in combination with a Sonoline Elegra® (Siemens) was used. Results: In arteries down to 0.1 mm Doppler flow signals were measured. In healthy volunteers a relevant variability of the vessel density after warm/cold water bath was noticed. A significant difference to that variability was measured in patients with Raynaud's phenomenon and sclerodermia. Patients with advanced diabetes yielded alterations of the Doppler spectrum. Conclusion: With a Multi-D-Array an extremely low blood-flow in vessel-diameters down to 0.1 mm is measurable. The evaluation of distal finger arteries in patients with Raynaud's phenomenon, advanced diabetes mellitus and sclerodermia allows reproducible and noninvasive follow-ups. 14:45 Methods and Materials: A Dunning prostate carcinoma R3327/AT1 implanted subcutaneously in Copenhagen rats was examined post l.v. injection of 1.5 ml Levovist. A calibrated histomorphometry system was used to measure the diameters of vessels inside and directly adjacent to the tumour (300 to 360 measurements per region). Results: For histology, two tumours were selected which upon injection of contrast medium showed Doppler signals directly adjacent to the tumour (in the subcutaneous tissue and in the underlying muscle) but not inside the tumour itself. The median vessel diameter was 11 um inside the tumour, 19 um in the underlying museie, and 27 um in the adjacent subcutaneous tissue. the 95% quantile was 21 um inside the tumour, 37 um in the museie, and 73 um subcuataneously. Conclusion: It can be assumed that among the vessels found in the adjacent tissue, the larger ones were detectable with Doppler sonography. Using the 95% quantile as an estimate, vessels with a diameter of 40 to 70 um were detectable under the given conditions. Vessels smaller than 20 um in diameter were undetectable. Purpose: to evaluate and to compare quantitatively morphologie changes after PTA and stent implantation for femoropopliteal artery occlusive disease using IVUS and DSA. Patients and Methods: in 27 consecutive patients 29 PTAs were performed for femoropopliteal obstruction, followed by DSA and IVUS. In 12 patients, the morphologie results were not satisfying and stents were implanted, followed again by DSA and IVUS. Results: After PTA, IVUS demonstrated sufficient luminal gain in 17/29 patients. In 12/29 patients, long intimal dissection as weil as residual stenoses >80% were detected and stents implanted. After stent implantation, IVUS and DSA revealed wall wrapping of the intimal flap with a patent lumen in 8/12 patients. In 4 patients small uncovered dissections were noted, which were only seen with IVUS in 2 patients. Asymmetrie stent deployment was seen with DSA in 3, with IVUS in 5 patients. There was a good correlation between angiographic determined luminal diameter and those determined by IVUS (4.1 +/-1.17 mm versus 4.0 +/-1.02 mm). Conclusion: Assessment of morphologie changes after intervention in femoropopliteal arteries is easier and more accurate with IVUS than with DSA; this however is only advantage in a few individual patients. Purpose: To determine the potential of using a 3-dimensional ultrasound imaging system in the investigation of the arterial vessels in the hand, finger and fingertips. Methods and Materials: Ten volunteers with no known pathology of the hand or finger vasculature have been be investigated, both at room temperature and with the hand immersed in a hot water bath, using the Acuson Sequoia 15L8 transducer. B-mode, colour and Doppler energy imaging modes were used and aseries of images were obtained using a linear translation system or the Polhemus "Fastrak" position sensing unit. Complete volume data sets have been produced using a purpose designed interpolation algorithm, and these were further processed, using the PC based VoxBlast 3D measurement and visualization software package, to obtain three-dimensional visualisation of the greyscale, haemodynamic and combined greyscale/colour views. Results: The resulting rendered images, using the dual volume rendering facility, show the spatial relationships between the palmar arches and the common digital arteries, the bifurcation of the common digital arteries and the fingertip anastomoses. Conclusion: These preliminary results show that the three-dimensional ultrasound angiographic techniques described have the potential both to improve vessel tracking in the hand and fingers and to reduce the investigation time. 15:10 464 Quantification of the reflectivity of the intimal medial layer as the earliest indicator of atherosclerotic risk: a new computer based analysis program S. Ellis, P.S. Sidhu; London/UK Purpose: B-mode ultrasound of the carotid artery identifies the intimal medial layer (IML), hypoechoic compared to the proximal intimal medial interface (IMI). Increase granularity of the IML is associated with early atherosclerosis. This reproducibility study assesses a method of assessing IML reflectivity. Methods and Materials: 10 volunteers (18-34 yrs), no risk factors of atherosclerosis. Two observers examined each subject twice for 2 weeks apart. Both common carotid arteries were imaged using a 7-10 MHz transducer, settings standardised. Images incorporating the IML were digitised and analysed by a custom computer program. Ratio calculated, averaging over a length of arterial wall, lowest pixel brightness in IML over the maximum pixel brightness in IMI. Results: Coefficient of variation (CV) for the intra-observer measurements were 6% and 5% and for inter-observer variation at each session 7% and 10%. Pooled results gave an inter-session CV of 9%. 92.5% of all measurements were within two standard deviations of the mean measurement of combined initial and repeat results. Conclusion: We have derived a new reproducible method of quantifying the IML reflectivity. This may prove to be the earliest method of imaging atherosclerotic change, preceding IML thickening. Methods and Materials: 32 patients with suspected carotid artery stenosis or peripheral vascular disease received 4 intravenous BR1 doses, 0.3, 0.6, 1.2 and 2.4 mL, in random order. CDS examinations were performed pre-dose and following each dose. The resulting 5 (baseline and 4 post-dose) videoclips were assessed separately and in random order by 2 off-site, blinded readers, who made an ultrasound diagnosis (total vessel patency, occlusion, stenosis and degree of stenosis, presence of collaterals, aneurysm). The accuracy of offsite ultrasound diagnoses was evaluated by an independent panel of c1inicians on the basis of X-ray angiography and/or contrast-enhanced MR angiography findings. Results: All BR1 doses significantly (p < 0.01) increased the accuracy of CDS studies, in terms of both detection/exclusion of vessel abnormality and assessment of disease severity. Purpose: Minimally invasive coronary arteriography with electron beam tomography (EBT) has been reported to have promising results. We sought to determine the diagnostic accuracy of EBT angiography using conventional coronary angiography (CCA) as reference test. Methods and Materials: 24 patients were included. During iv injection of contrast agent, 40 consecutive transaxial tomograms were obtained, with 1.5 mm collimation covering 6 cm of the coronary trajectory in one breathhold with ECG triggering at 80% RR interval. 3D reconstructions were obtained using Voxelview software. CCA was performed on each patient before or after the EBT study within two weeks. Results: Of 168 coronary segments, 76% were analyzable. 19 stenoses were present. Overall sensitivity and specificity were 68% and 94%. All left main segments were evaluable (accuracy 100%). In 88% the left descending artery was evaluable (sensitivity 70%, specificity 97%). The circumflex artery was evaluable in 77% (sensitivity 77%, specificity 75%). The (proximal) right coronary artery was evaluable in 54% (sensitivity 25%, specificity 88%). Conclusion: The position of 3D EBT of the coronary arteries remains to be defined. To exclude disease a high sensitivity is required; however, in a relatively healthy population the relative high specificity of EBT might be useful. 14:10 467 Helical CT-angiography of internat mammary artery bypass grafts WA Wohlgemuth, C. Vicol, K. Bohndorf; AugsburglD Purpose: To evaluate the ability of CT-angiography (CTA) to correctly measure the patency of internal mammary artery (IMA) to left anterior descendent artery (LAD) coronary artery bypass grafts. Patients and Methods: 65 patients (59 male, 6 female; mean age 55, 2a, range 32-65a) which had cardiac bypass surgery with a Goretex sleeved IMA to LAD bypass graft (67 grafts) 3 month before, were prospectively investigated with helical CTA (collirnation 2 mm, pitch 1.5, reconstruction increment 1 mm; 120 ml CM with 4 ml/s flow). The Gold Standard for patency was a c1inical asymptomatic patient with no new changes in the exercise ECG. Symptomatic patients with ECG changes received a coronary angiography (n = 3). Results: After administration of 20 ml test-bolus, the mean scanning delay was 21, 2s (range 15-31s). One paravenous CM-injection occured as complication. There were no false negative cases, the negative predictive value was 100% (62/62). 2 out of 5 patients with suspicious CTA had a angiographic proven occlusion (positive predictive value 40%). The false negative ratio was 0% (0/2), the false positive ratio was 4.6% (3/65). In 4 patients additional clinically relevant information was achieved (2 pseudarthrosis of the sternum, 2 Iymphatic node enlargement). Conclusion: CTA seems to be a valuable tool to exclude occlusion when CM is seen in the lumen of the bypass. However, the method is hampered by false positive "pseudoocclusions". Conclusions: The nonionic contrast medium was not associated with a higher rate of abrupt vessel closure requiring repeat-angioplasty, or major ischemic events. Severe allergic reactions requiring therapy occurred only after the ionic compound. These data suggest that nonionic contrast media do not increase the risk of thrombotic complications but minimize the risk of allergic reactions in patients undergoing coronary interventions. 14:30 Nevertheless, subsecond spiral CT possibly allows imaging of the heart within one breathhold. Aim was to evaluate spiral CT with retrospective ECG gating of the heart and adjacent lung. Methods and Materials: We imaged 20 patients on a Siemens SOMATOM Plus 4 CT scanner. An ECG was stored in a PC together with the x-ray trigger pulse. Standard reconstructions were compared to ECG-retrogated reconstructions under limited angles (240°) and timeoptimized reconstructions. 'Partial scan' reconstructions of images with short time intervals in-between (10-50 ms) were additionally performed. Results: Retrospective ECG-gating leads to areduction of motion artifacts of the heart and the adjacent lung in spiral CT in patients with a moderate heart rate. Thus an improved depiction of coronary calcium as weil as cardiac pathology seems possible. Calculating images with short time intervals in-between offers dynamic image series of cardiac motion from a continuous data set, thus allowing to visualize cardiac wall movement. Conclusion: Retrospectively ECG gated spiral CT of the heart and the adjacent lung leads to an improved image quality in patients with a moderate heart rate between 60 and 80 bpm. The procedure is easily performed. Further reduction of image acquisition time is necessary. Purpose: Conventional spiral CT may be a non-invasive and inexpensive screening tool for coronary artery disease (CAD), but is limited by its lower temporal resolution. ECG-gated spiral image reconstruction may improve coronary artery visualization. Methods and Materials: Nine patients were scanned using protocols based on heart rate, coverage required and duration of breath-hold, guaranteeing contiguity of CT slices on a 60 rpm scanner. Four image sets were reconstructed: D1 -mid-diastole (center of T-to-R waves), D2 -mid-diastole (275 msec from T wave), SS -systole (SS), and STDstandard (1 image/revolution) images. Two radiologists, a technologist and a cardiologist performed blinded evaluation of the studies. Each of D1, D2 and SS images were compared to STD images, and graded as better, equal or worse for visualization of at least 1 cm of left main, left anterior descending, circumflex and right coronary arteries, and any coronary calcification. Results: Images gated for mid-diastole were evaluated bettet than systole and STD. Results: 73 of 88 main coronary arteries could be visualized (83%). 12 of 23 significantly stenotic (>I =50%) and 48 of 50 non-stenotic coronary vessels could be exactly c1assified. Overall sensitivity and specifity for stenosis detection resulted in 52% and 96%. Conclusion: Using ultrafast Gadolinium-enhanced 3D breath-hold imaging oblique projection MR coronary angiograms can be successfully performed. Sensitivity for detecting coronary stenoses is considerably low and further techniqual improvements are mandatory to introduce this technique as a reliable diagnostic tool in clinical practice. Purpose: The purpose of this study is to show the value of evaluation of respiratory gated magnetic resonance imaging of the coronary arteries (MRCA) with a volume rendering technique. Methods and Materials: 26 patient were studied from those referred for conventional coronary angiography (CAG). MRCA was performed with a retrospective respiratory gated gradient echo sequence with a resolution of 1.9 x 1.2 x 2.0 mm. Three partly overlapping slabs were acquired in 30-40 minutes. Evaluation of the data was performed after segmentation of the desired volume with a volume rendering technique (VoxeIView, Vital Images). CAG was performed within 2 weeks. Blinded evaluation of the MR images were performed by a radiologist and a cardiologist unaware of the CAG results. Results: The left main coronary artery was visualized in 96% of the patients with diagnostic image quality, The LAD, RCA and CX were visualized in 50% to 96% respectively. Sensitivity and specificity for the detection of significant lesions were 52% (25% to 75%) and 93% (89%-97%) respectively. Conclusion: In patients with a regular breathing pattern the proximal and mid coronary arteries can be visualized in an anatomical view with a volume rendering technique. Stenoses can be detected with a reasonable sensitivity and specificity for the detection of coronary artery disease. 472 Oblique projection magnetic resonance coronary angiography using gadolinium-enhanced 3D breath-hold imaging M. Regenfus, D. Ropers, W Kessler, D. Zink, S. Achenbach, W Moshage, G. Laub, WG. Daniel; ErlangenlD Purpose: To evaluate a new, ultrafast contrast-enhanced 3D breathhold magnetic resonance (MR) technique for detection of coronary artery stenoses in oblique projection angiograms. Methods and Materials: MR coronary angiography was performed in 22 patients on a 1.5 T scanner (VISION, Siemens) within one breathhold using an contrast-enhanced 3D gradient-echo sequence (TRITE 4.2/1.6, spatial resolution 1.25 x 1.25 x 1.5 mrn"). The imaging volume (32 contiguous parallel sections) was positioned along right and left main, circumflex and anterior descending coronary arteries. During each measurement 20 ml Gadolinium-DPTA (0.5 mol/I, MAGNEVIST, Schering) were applied intravenously. Image data were rendered in maximal intensity projections, evaluated by two independent observers and compared with conventional contrast angiography in a blinded manner. Purpose: To establish the efficacy of a purpose designed mechanical device which produces a controlled vibration in a coronary angioplasty guidewire in the treatment of chronic coronary artery occlusions. Methods and Materials: A hand held motorised device which can produce a reciprocation of 1-5 mm and a frequency of up to 100 Hz was used in conjunction with standard over the wire coronary angioplasty equipment in 78 patients (66 male aged 40-77 years with angiographically proven chronic coronary artery occlusions (Iesion present >3 months). In all patients at least one atternpt to cross the lesion with an unaided wire had been carried out. Results: The angioplasty success rate was 59% (46/78) this compared to 38.6% in a group where conventional guidewire techniques alone were used. Major complications occured in 2 patients neither were fatal. Regression analysis idenlified duration of occlusion «6 months) and length of lesion «15 mm) as predictors of success. Vessel calcification and other angiographic findings did not influence the end result. Conclusion: Activated guidewire angioplasty is an effective adjunct to treatment in chronic coronary oclusions. Purpose: Ta compare the accuracy of diameter and area measurements and radial geometry accuracy of two mechanical (CVIS, DUMED) and one phased array (Endosonics) intravascular ultrasound sytems. Methods and Materials: Lumen quantification was carried out by using a phantom of known dimensions. 9 catheters were used in the study. The influence of ultrasound frequency and catheter size and type were studied. Results: The mean deviations of measured frorn true diameters of the phantom veried between different catheters of the same specification as wel as different types of catheter. Mean deviations for a 30 Mhz mechanical catheter (CVIS) were 0.03-0.05 +/-0.03 mm. for 20 Mhz. phased array catheters (Endosonics) 0.30-0.45 +/-0.09-13 mm and for the mechanical 32.5 Mhz (DU-MED) were 0.54 +/-0.13 mm. The percent luminal area measurement deviations frorn true area were underestimated with all small french sized catheters (average 14% for phased array and 24% for mechanical) and were overestimated by large sized mechanical catheters (5%) Conclusion: Large deviations frorn true measurements were observed with certain types of IVUS catheters, caution should be observed when these cathers are used for making measurements of lumen diameter prior to intervention. signal-to-noise ratio are poorer than in high field units. Suspicion of myelopathy should additionly be referred to high-field MRI. Methods and Materials: Fat-suppressed axial T1 weighted SE images were obtained in 12 patients without evidence of inflammatory arthritis before and immediately after intravenous administration of a gadoliniumcontaining contrast agent (0.2 mol Dimegluminegadopentetate [Gd-DTPA)). Patterns of enhancement of signal intensity in and about the atlantoaxial joints were evaluated qualitatively. Results: Four different MR imaging patterns were observed: no enhancement of signal intensity, enhancement in the form of a single punctate region, enhancement in a confluent pattern, and a bandlike enhancement. Conclusion: Enhancement of varying extent can be observed in and about the atlantoaxial joints following intravenous gadolinium administration in normal subjects. Our observations may allow the establishment of criteria for the differentiation of low grade synovitis (i.e., in rheumatoid arthritis) frorn normal changes at the atlantoaxial joints. 14:20 Purpose: To work out CT and MRI imaging techniques and to detect the prevalence of osseous and soft tissue lesions in acute whiplash syndrome in adults. Methods and Materials: 1. In vitro MRI of blood of different ages was performed and the best examination sequence (SE, TSE, STIR, FLAIR and fat saturated techniques) for detection of blood with the highest contrast to water and fat on different field strenghts was determined. 2. In vivo MRI of provoked hematomas (animal studies) was carried out at different times and the optimal time for detection of hematoma was determined. 3. Phantom studies were performed to define the best Cl scann ing techn ique (optimal slice thickness, pitch and reconstruction interval) to detect small in plane fractures. 4. Radiation dose was measured in 10 patients undergoing routine Cl scan and ten patients having extend ed spiral Cl scan of the eervical spine . 5. Radiography, spiral Cl scan and MRI were performed in 25 patients with wh iplash injury in aperiod between 2 and 10 days after trauma. Results: 1. No fractures were seen on radiograph ie exam ination. 2. Cl scan was able to detect oecult end plate and spinous process fractures in the resorption phase . Results: 67 fractures were posltraumatic, 20 osteoporotic, and 9 tumorrelated . 85 fractures (88.5 %) exhibited no vacuum phenomenon, 11 fractu res (11.5%) showed gas inclusions. Most frequenlly IWP were found at Th12 (4 of 20 fractures , 20%) and L1 (4 of 23 fractures, 17.4%). No vacuum phenomena were detected above Th12 level. 6 of 20 osteoporotic fraclures (30%), 5 of 67traumatic fractures (7.5%) and none of 9 tumor-related fractures (0%) exhibited a vacuum phenomenon. The difference of osteoporotic fractures and traumatic or tumor-related fractures was significant (p < 0.001 , chi2-test ). Conclusion: Intraosseous vertebral vacuum phenomena after fractures are far more frequent than expected and related to osteoporosis. Vacuum phenomenon nearly excludes tumor-related fraclure. As intraosseous gas inclusions are so frequent, they most Iikely do not represent vertebral osteonecrosis. Purpose: To evaluate sensitivity and specificity of MRI in diagnosing spondyl itis. Although it is a rare disease due to tuberculosis, AIDS and organ -transplantations the incidence is increasing. The erarly diagnosis is achallenge for all imaging moda lilies because unspec ified clin ical symptoms and laboratory data result in prolonged latency in diagnosing leading to invalidily and immense health care costs . Methods and Materials: Between 1988 and 98 we performed more than 4000 MR spine examinations. An operatively proven spondylitis was diagnosed in 95 cases (cerv ical = 7, thoraeie = 19, lumbar = 69). All patients received sagittal T2w and T1w scans without and with Gadolinium. X-ray was available in all pat ., CT in 41 and scintigraphy in 26 . Results: The signal alteration is mostly T1w hypo-and T2w hyper intense and is localized almost symmetrically on both sides of a disk with a broader extens ion to the ventral part of the vertebral body. The diagnostic sensitivity of MRI is 89 .5%. CT is preoperatively less accurate but is essential for patients beeing stabiJized with bone grafts in postoperative follow-up. Since Gd-enhancement will be seen all over in MRI postoperatively, CT demonstrates accurate cortical and spong iosa structure of the graft. Callus formation and fusion of the adapted graft in CT represent incorporation and stability, whereas inflammatory processes lead to Iytic and destructive changes. Conclusion: X-ray remains the basic documentation. In 95 cases of proven spondylitis MRlturns out to be the diagnostic modality of choice with a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 71%. Gd-enhancement and typical signal intensities enable a semiquantitative grading in acute , moderate and chronic spondylitis. Following surgery CT offers most accurate facts about healing of implemented bone grafts and callus formation. Purpose: Computed tomography (CT) reveals a comb ination of dense dependent opacification and widespread ground glass opacification in ARDS patients. Refraetory hypoxaemia is a defining feature of ARDS , and manipulation of the pulmonary circulation is of great interest in this cond ition . Methods and Materials: Regional pulmonary perf usion was studied in 12 subjects with ARDS using EBCT, wh ich allows the evaluat ion of perfusion within specified regions of interest (ROI). At a sing le level, repeated sections were obtained during the injection of non-ionic contrast. Perfusion was calculated in five ROI along the dorsal-ventral lung ax is. Results: In 5 subjects with no dependent opacification, there was a marked gravitational gradient in perfusion (p < 0.001) , whereas in 7 subjects with dependent opaci ficat ion , the gradient was more uniform (p 0.003) , due to a relalive deerease in perfus ion in dependent reg ions. Conelusion: EBCT, has the potential to define regional pulmonary perfusion in ARDS, and may allow th erapeutic interventions aimed at manipulat ing the pulmonary circulation to be assessed. Imaging pulmonary function and morphology Chairpersons: Ph. GRENIER (Paris/F) P. SCHNYDER (Lausanne/CH) 14:00-15:30 14:00 Purpose: The EBCrs superior temporal resolution allows subsecond scans of the lung parenchyma. The purpose was 1.) to develope the interface between respirator and EBCT and 2.) to evaluate image processing routines to quantify lung aeration behaviour in mechanical ventilated patients. Methods and Materials: An electronic trigger was developed, that utilized the respirator's synch ronizing signal to start the scan at the beginn ing of mechanical expiration . In the 50 ms scan mode with Bmm eollimation, 40 slices could be acquired during the expiratory phase of 2 seconds . The scanner was positioned 1 cm above the diaphragm in order to determine the changes in lung density, time-dependent, dur ing mechanical expiration . During controlled mechan ical expiration at vary ing levels of PEEP (0, 5, 10, 15 cm H20), time-density curves from defined (spatially and grey-value related) regions of interest were used to compute the changes in pulmonary aeration. The dynamic greyvalue changes were color-coded. Results: Significant changes of expiration dynamics caused by different PEEP settings could be measured. Conelusion: Respirator triggered EBCT ofters the possibility of visualizing and quantifying the dynam ic changes in the lungs during expirat ion in mechanieal ventilated patients . Purpose: Scoliosis radiography is difficult in a digital environment because of the need to cover the whole spine. We have made a dose assessment of a new method whieh overcomes this problem. Methods and Materials: The patient is examined standing with an image intensifier system. Aseries of 30 to 40 collimated images are exposed . The images are combined in a computer into an image of the whole sp ine where measurements can be made. An alternative method is to save pulsed f1uoroscopy to memory. The dose measurements were made with an Alderson phantom packed with thermoluminescent dosimeters. Furthermore, a Monte Carlo simulation has been made. Results: For the exposure method , the measured efteclive dose is 0.25 mSv, three times higher than our old film-sereen method (0.08 mSv). For the f1uoroscopy variant, the dose is only 0.03 mSv. All Monte Cario simulations showed good correlation with measured values. Conelusion: The exposure method is useful but has a rather high dose . Purpose: To evaluate the dynamic effect of varying levels of positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) in ventilated patients with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Methods and Materials: After modification of the EBCT machine to perform arespirator triggered scanning, we used the 50 msec scan mode and accquired 40 slices in 2 seconds of expiration. The slice positlon was at level of 1 cm above the diaphragm. Time density curves from calculated regions of interest (ROI) in defined regions of both left and right lungs were used to compute the changes in pulmonary aeration. This protocol was repeated for 0, 5, 10, 15 cm H20 of positive endexpiratory pressure (PEEP) ventilation. Results: The total of well-aerated pixels per region, at the higher PEEP setting (15 cm), showed a significantly slower decrease during expiration and higher end-expiratory lung volume, than the same region at a lower PEEP setting. The dynamics of the non-aerated lung regions remained almost unchanged, independent of the chosen PEEP setting. Conclusion: Respirator-triggered EBCT can demonstrate the influence of varying PEEP settings on the expiratory biomechanics of the lung. In restrictive impairment (n =18) MLDs were significantly higher (p < 0.05), and the difference was normal (111 HU). In mixed respiratory impairment (n =16) data were similar to normals. In normals, correlations between MLD and PFT were moderate (r < jO.51), in obstruction, they were good for static and dynamic parameters (r =10.41 -10.661). In restriction, correlations were good with static volumes (r = 10.721), and poor with dynamic parameters (r < 10.11). In general, expiratory MLD showed better correlations as compared with inspiratory MLD. The difference between inspiratory MLD and expiratory MLD did not yield any improvement. Conclusion: Expiratory HRCT and MLD facilitate the differentiation of patients with and without lung function impairment and show better correlations with PFTs as compared with inspiration. 14:40 490 Evaluation of lung parenchymal hemodynamics with dynamic pulmonary perfusion MRI -compared with Tc-99m MAA perfusion spect K. Suga, N. Ogasawara, N. Kume, K. Honjo, K. Takano, N. Matsunaga; Purpose: Dynamic perfusion MRI (P-MRI) was applied to assess lung parenchymal hemod-ynamics in various lung diseases, compared with Tc-99m-MAA SPECT. Methods and Materials: The subjects were 12 patients with lung cancer, 9 with interstitial pneumonia (7 radiation pneumonitis, 2 usual interstitial pneumonia), 8 with obstructive lung disease (7 pulmonary emphysema, 1 diffuse panbronchiolitis) and 3 with pulmonary thromboembolism (PE). Three sec after a 2-sec rate bolus injection of Gd-DTPA, dynamic P-MRI was acquired utilizing a 3D turbo MR angiographie technique with zero-filling interpolation (TRITE/FA =3 ms/0.9 ms/30 D , acqulsltion time =3 sec/scan, partition = 16-20 sections, slab thickness =6ü-80 mm). With total acquisition time of 30-40 sec, 10-13 sequential transaxial images were produced at each lung level (FOV =320 x 380 mm, matrix =176 x 176), yielding time-intensity curves (TlCs). Pulmonary arterial (PA) P-MR image was created by subtracting a pre-contrast image from a post-contrast one at the first PA passage peak, which was compared with Tc-99m-MAA SPECT. Results: Dynamic P-MRI and TICs weil showed abnormal hemodynamics in the diseased lung with or without abnormal opacities on CT scan; for instance, bronchial arterial (BA) supply to lung tumors, delayed and progressive fill-in of contrast material to the lesions of interstitial pneumonia, markedly heterogeneous PA perfusion in the obstructive lung diseases, and the presence of BA perfusion in the peripheral lung tissue distal to PE or bronchial obstruction by tumors were identified. The findings on PA P-MR images were weil consisted with those on Tc-99m MAA SPECT in 26/32 patients. However, PA perfusion was observed even at the photopenic areas of Tc-99m-MAA in 6 patients with radiation pneumonitis or interstitial pneumonia, which may reflect the differences in partieIe sizes between these two materials. Conclusion: This modality is useful for the evaluation of lung parenchymal hemodynamics by differentiating PA perfusion from BA perfusion in various lung diseases. The PA P-MR image can be an excellent PA perfusion image with better spatial resolution compared to Tc-99m-MAA SPECT. 14:50 Purpose: To measure the impact of RF voltages and paramagnetic oxygen upon the loss of signal intensity of hyperpolarized He-3 gas in vivo. Methods and Materials: Eight anesthetized pigs underwent He-3 MRI (1.5 T scanner) with different RF voltages, different inspiratory oxygen concentrations, and bolus administration of He-3 gas (35-45% hyperpolarized) using a dedicated application device. During subsequent inspiratory breath-hold, dynamic FLASH 20 (TR 11 ms, TE 4.2 ms, duration 1 s) images were acquired The decay of signal intensity (T1) was analyzed as a function of RF amplitude and measured endexpiratory oxygen concentration (Fee02). Results: Bolus administration of He-3 was sufficiently accurate and reproducible. The signal-to-noise ratio of He-3 within the lungs was sufficient for analysis of the decay function (>3). In vivo, the theoretically predicted relationship of T1 to ambient oxygen and RF voltage was confirmed. From two consecutive images -acquired at a known Fee02 -the effective flip angle was determined: 2.74 ± 0.29 (RF = 10 V). Subsequently, regional oxygen concentration were calculated from independently acquired image series yielding a elose correlation with Fee02 (r = 0.93). Conclusion: Oxygen-induced T1-shortening of hyperpolarized He-3 can be utilized to measure regional alveolar oxygen concentration in vivo provided the flip angle is known. Purpose: To study the influence of radiotherapy (RT) on lung tissue five rnonths after completion of adjuvant radiotherapy in breast cancer patients. Methods and Materials: 160 patients were examined by ehest X-ray 5 months after RT. Previous examinations and the contralateral lung were used as controls. The observed radiological abnormalities were scored according to Arriagada with respect to grade of density (1-3) and affected pulmonary region (apical-Iateral, central-parahilar, basallateral). The highest density grade within each region were added together. Patients scoring 0-3 were c1assified as having slight radiological reactions and scores ranging from 4-9 represented moderate to severe reactions. The scores were compared to pulmonary complications and target volumes. Results: Increasing scores were correlated with pulmonary complications (P < 0.001) and increasing target volumes (P < 0.001). Conclusion: This c1assification system of pulmonary side-effects following adjuvant radiotherapy for breast cancer showed a statistically significant correlation with pneumonitis. The same system might be useful also for evaluating side-effects following radiotherapy for lung cancer. Purpose: To describe first experiences with a new generation CT. Methods and Materials: We examined 50 patients suffering from different pathologies: Brain, petrous bone, sella, thorax, and abdomen. All examinations were performed on a multi-slice scanner (multirow detector system) prototype ("Somatom Plus 4 VZ". Siemens). The images were compared with prior examinations. obtained at a conventional 4 th generation CT scanner. The images were read by three observers in consensus. Results: Generally, a better resolution is possible with this scanner. When compared to conventional 4 th generation scanners, doubling the resolution is possible within the identical measurement time. This allows artifact reduction in the posterior fossa, due to thin slice acquisition (1 mm) adding the slices to 4 mm thickness in a postprocessing procedure. Furthermore, the higher resolution provides benefits for diagnosis of the petrous bone, as weil as the sella region. Oue to short rotation time (0.5 s) lung artifacts in the niveau of the heart are reduced significantly. The multirow-detector technique allows acquisition of high-resolution (1 mm) and "conventional" (4 mm) lung images. The value for abdominal CTA has to be elaborated in future studies. Conclusion: The new CT technique, introduced here, allows improved resolution respectively shortened measurement times. Purpose: 30-visualizations of intrahepatic vessels and their relationship to lesions, improves the planning of complex resections and vessel reconstructions. In this context it is important that radiologists have access to fast and robust computer assistance to provide the surgeon with optimal quantitative and visual information. Methods and Materials: CTAP or biphasic spiral CT data are filtered (noise reduction and adaptive background compensation) and the intrahepatic vessels are segmented by threshold based region growing. A newly developed skeletonization algorithm, that combines thinning and suppression of boundary noise, enables a precise computation of the medial axis as weil as local vessel radii. This information allows an automatic identification of the portal and hepatic vein and their branching structure. Results: Segmentation and 30-visualization of the hepatic vesselsystems requires little interaction and takes only a few minutes. The main branches of the portal vein are identified automatically, allowing the determination and visualization of individual liversegments. Selecting and coloring of branches/subtrees or measuring length, volume and diameter are supported. Conclusion: The proposed method provides a robust analysis of the morphology and structure of the intrahepatic vessels. This method applies to all imaging techniques involving contrasted vesselsystems and therefore has great potential for other c1inical applications. Purpose: To test the feasibility of assessing volumetrie indices from routine CT investigations of the abdomen. Methods and Materials: 30 patients with solitary neoplastic liver lesions underwent contrast enhanced CT using routine protocols. Additionally, phantoms with known volumes were scanned. Data were transferred to a dedicated image evaluation system (Virtuoso, Siemens). A specially designed computer program capable of semi-automated segmentation based on b-spline technique was used to determine the voxel-volume of phantoms and lesions in vivo. Voxel volumes were converted to actual volume indices using different algorithms and results were compared with phantom volumes and surgical findings. Results: An accurate prediction of the actual volume was feasible with an error <5%. Depending on the size and shape of the target, adapted algorithms of volume calculation yielded more accurate results. Conelusion: Semi-automated segmentation is a valuable tool for the assessment of volume indices from CT data. This technique may be applicable in a variety of clinical settings i.e, abdominal and thoracic surgery or oncology. 14:25 A.J. Lacey, A. Golash, NA Thacker, A. Jackson; ManchesterJUK Manual segmentation of spinal CSF spaces from phase contrast quantitative flow studies is problematic. We describe a semi-automatie process is used to compare the temporal variation of regions from CSF flow images with a previously defined waveform. A feedback process enables the waveformo to be refined as more CSF examples are found until an accurate segmentation is identified. Three statistical similarity metries, typically used in fMRI analysis, are employed and have been compared. The experiments were performed on 9 patients with cervical spondylosis to acquire 15 phase quantitative flow images. The performance of segmentation was compared to a 'gold standard' manual segmentation. The reproducibility of the techniques was evaluated by splitting each sequence to provide two sampie vectors of the same data. The technique is shown to give good levels of reproducibility in a quick and virtually automatie algorithm. The results compare weil with the 'gold standard', with !wo of the metries having very good overall performance. In this work we make use of a technique usually reserved for fMRI analysis to identify the temporal 'signature' of CSF in flow images. This also results in a profile of the temporal CSF behavior, which could be of use in c1assifying abnormalities of CSF flow in a variety of diseases. These algorithms are available within T1NA via the WWW at www.niac.man.ac.uklTina 14:35 499 5tereotaetie approach to regional volume measurements using segmented brain images Purpose: To measure cerebral lobe volumes by applying the Talairach 3-D proportional grid to segmented brain MR images, and to compare the results with manual definition of lobar boundaries. Methods and Materials: MR brain studies from 5 subjects (T1w and DPIT2w SE images, 30 contiguous axial slices, 4 mm-thick) were used. Corresponding segmented images were obtained using a recentlypublished multispectral segmentation method (MRM, 1997: 37; 84-93) . The 1056 boxes of the Talairach atlas, plus 2 additional boxes for cerebellum, were assigned to 5 couples of substructures (frontal, parietal, occipital and temporal lobes, cerebellar hemispheres). On each study, 2 neuroradiologists manually outlined the 10 substructures and the cerebral commissures (AC/PC) for Talairach grid application. An automated software applied the Talairach grid to each segmented image set, thus providing regional volumes, which were compared to manually obtained lobar volumes using linear regression. Results: Manual assessment required 37 minutes/study (range 30-48), definition of AC/PC required less then 1 minute. The volumes obtained using the Talairach approach correlated with those obtained by manual definition (r = 0.94), with a mean difference of 4.7 ml (range 0. 1-19.4 ). Conelusion: 3D proportional approach provides a measure of brain substructures comparable to manual definition. Due to the limited operator intervention required it appears suitable for c1inical trials with large data sets. 14:45 500 3D visualization of registered MR and 5PECT images of the brain with volume rendering Th. Pfluger; MunichlD Purpose: To evaluate the efficacy of detecting areas of hypo-/hyperperfusion in registered 3D volume rendered brain images (MRISPECT). Methods and Materials: Image fusion of MRI and ECD-SPECT was performed in 24 patients using Woods algorithm. 52 areas of hypo/hyperperfusion were found in 2D-SPECT. Identification in 3Dreconstruction was assessed without and with knowledge of 2Danalysis. 3D-visualization of segmented and registered data was done using volume rendering. Variable transparency settings were used to visualize areas near the brain surface or in the depth. Results: 19/52 areas of interest were localized in deeper brain structures. Size of lesions ranged from 5-30 mm. Using one setting of transparency levels, 11/19 deeply located and 6/32 superficially located lesions could not be distinguished in 3D-view. Only when using 4 settings of transparency levels, all 52 areas were seen. However, 24 additionallesions were suspected without knowledge of the 2D data analysis. Conelusion: 3D volume rendering of registered MR and SPECT images is effective for anatomical localization of hypo-/hyperperfusion areas in the brain. For determination of lesions semi-quantitative analysis of 2D SPECT data is indispensable. Purpose: FSE sequence introduces exponential weighting of the Kspace. 1I may lead 10 blurred image due 10 an effeclive PSF (PS-Feff) wider than in SE. We propose a FSE modification consisting of segmented Half Fourier (sHF) K-space filling that improves spatial resolution within the same scan time. Methods and Materials: PSF was measured by using ::: :;:;~:::;~:; simulator. Phantom and patient images were obtained in a 1.5 T scanner to study the improvement in spatial resolution without and with biological artefacts. ETL ranged 9-21 echoes. Results: Comparison between sHF and conventional FSE: • Software simulation: for T2 = 30 ms the PSFeff narrows up to 45% (2 pixels) for HF = 60%. For T2 = 126 ms narrowing is <1 pixel. • Phantoms: low HF figures enhance short T2 structures, but ringing is very conspicuous for HF < 80%. • Patient images: at HF =60%, short T2 structures invisible in FSE can be distinguished. Ringing artefacts are imperceptible even for HF = 60%. Breath artefacts are more evident for lower HF factors. Conelusion: sHF enhances details for short T2 structures and increases the multislice capability while keeping an acceptable SNR in the same scan time as FSE. Simulation facilitates the analysis of PSFeff changes with HF, ETL and echo spacing for different T2s. Brain and corpus callosum atrophy, gender and age of patient, were also included. Data were either numericalornominal and were processed by inductive machine learning algorithms using entropy information theory, producing adecision tree automatically translated to handy decision rules. Results: 148 diagnostic attributes were properly inputed in the C4.5 algorithm. Primary results, discovered criteria for discrimination between MS and CVD. Specific attribute value combinations observed in the produced decision tree, should guide to a further statistical analysis, in order to obtain remarkable relations among diagnostic characteristics. Conclusion: Information entropy theory contributes in discriminating MRimages for MS and CVD when no c1inical or laboratory results are helpful. The described matrix, consists a form easy to be filled by radiologists while studying MRimages and thus, on-line decision support can be achieved in order to differentiate between MS and CVD in new cases. 502 Improving accuracy of timing parameter estimations in dynamic susceptibility contrast enhanced MR perfusion imaging X.P. Zhu, K.L. Li, A. Jackson; ManchesterlUK Purpose: To examine methods for minimization of errors in the estimation of time of arrival (Ta) on dynamic susceptibility contrast enhanced MR perfusion imaging. Methods and Materials: TO values were measured directly from the gray and white matter in normal volunteers. The data was analyzed using conventional gamma variant fitting methods and a modified analysis technique which combines 1) single pixel estimation of TO values prior to fitting, 2) flexible model based principle component noise reduction 3) modified gamma variant curve fitting to include TOas a fitting parameter. The quality of parametric images of TO and TTP was assessed by two experienced neuroradiologists in normal volunteers and in 40 patients with vascular or neoplastic brain disease. Results: TO measurements demonstrated differences between gray and white matter (2.5-5.4 5). Parametric images using modified analysis techniques demonstrated these differences which were not seen following conventional analysis. Parametric image quality was significantly improved on both TO and TTP in normal volunteers and patients (p < 0.01). Conclusion: Measurements of TO and TTP have been shown to be unique indicators of brain at risk in ischaemic disease. The technique we describe is robust and less sensitive to image noise allowing accurate parametric representation of TO.  Purpose: To identify areas of abnormal perfusion characteristics in enhancing cerebral tumors. Methods and Materials: Perfusion imaging was performed in 14 patients with enhancing cerebral tumors. Relaxivity effects were removed by prior administration of Gd DTPA (0.1 mmoI/L). The relative contrast concentration during the re-circulation phase (rR) was estimated as the area between the observed data and the idealized gamma variant model. Estimates of correlation between rCBV and rR were conducted in normal and tumor tissues. Parametric maps of normalised rR (rRlrCBV) were examined. Results: Normal values for rR showed strong correlation with rCBV values in brain and normal vascular structures. Correlation between rCBV and rR was poor in 4/14 tumors. Parametric maps of rR normalised to rCBV confirmed the presence of abnormal areas within these tumors characterized by an inappropriately high values for rR. These areas of abnormality were seen in 1 high grade glioma, 1 meningioma and 1 rapidly progressive acoustic neuroma. Conclusion: Abnormalities of perfusion images are seen in 50me tumors. We believe that the map of normalised rR may indicate areas of deranged blood flow due to abnormal micro-vascular structure. The algorithm is available in the TINA image analysis software package (http://www.niac.man.ac.uk)  Purpose: To identify decision rules for discrimination between multiple sclerosis (MS) and cerebrovascular disease (CVD) in MRimages. We reviewed 95 brain MR-studies (74-MS. 21lacunes-CVD) attempting to achieve discrimination signs by studying solely MRI. MRimages were recorded in a two-dimensional matrix containing brain mapping information in the horizontal axis, number, shape and location of increased signaliesions, in the vertical axis.  In 72 patients (26 sensorineural or conduvtive hearing 1055, 9 malformations of the middle or inner ear, 4 glomus tumors, 13 cholesteatomas, 15 trauma, 5 otosclerosis) thin-slice spiral CT (Somatom Plus 4 Siemens. axial and coronal, 1 mm slices, pitch 1:1, high resolution) was performed. Coronal reformations were obtained and compared by 2 readers in a blinded fashion. The established diagnoses were correlated to the c1inical/surgical final diagnoses (Wilcoxon test). Results: There was no significant difference between the reformated and primarily coronal aquired slices in lesion detection and conspicuity. Sensitivity for primary coronal scans was 87.5 versus 85 for the reformations. Specificity was 92.3 for both. PPV was rspectively 94.6 and 94.4 and NPV was 85.7 versus 80. Conclusion: Based on a high resolution data set coronal reformations are of sufficient diagnostic quality compared to original source images with no need for additional coronal scanning resulting in dose and examination time saving. Purpose: To evaluate the influence of chronic inflammation to tegmen anatomy. We retrospectively analyze 151 temporal bone CT (302 ears). Eighteen ears were excluded due to trauma or previous operation. Chronic inflammation or cholesteatoma were 115 cases. Normal ears were 169 cases. On coronal scan at the level of external aud itory canal morphology of tegmen was c1assified to three types depending on the angle between tegmen and squamous port ion of temporal bone ; type A: over 90 degree , type B: about 90 degree , type C: under 90degree. We evaluated the influence of chronic inflammation to the type of tegmen with statistical method. Results: Type A tegmen were 40 cases (14%). Of them 8 cases (20%) were chronic inflammation and 32 cases (80%) were normal ears . Type B were 178 cases (62.8%) ; inflammation : 68 (38.2 %), normal:110 (61.8%). Type C were 66 cases (23.2%); inflammation: 39 (59 %), normal:27 (41 %). In chronic inflammation incidence of type C tegmen was significantly increased (p =0.001). Conelusion: The anatomy of tegmen is significanatly influenced by chron ic inflammation of ear. Purpose: The prevalence of ehronic middle-ear diseases with adult cleft-palate patients approximates 50%. The aim of this study was to analyse the pathomorphological background of the disturbed museulary complianee of the auditory tube by MRI. Methods and Materials: 20 pat. with cleft palate were examined using otoscopy, audiometry, EMG of the tensor veli palatini museie and MRI of the aud itory tube, 9 of the pat. were suffer ing from ehrenie middle-ear disease; 11 pat. had normal middle -ear function . All pat. but one of the otitis group underwent c1eft palate surgery in ehildhood . Results: The MRI revealed severe morphologieal differences betwee n healthy and diseased patients. With all healthy patients continuity of the TVP was intaet. With the otitis patients numerous morphological part icularities could be shown , e.g. disruption of muscular continuity, scar ing with medial pterygoid or levator muscle. Mutilation of the medial pterygoid proeess was seen in 5 of the 9 otit is patients. Conclusion : Chronie middle-ear diseases wit h c1eft-palate patients are caused by a disturbed morphology of the tensor veli palatini muscle . MRI can depict the funetional compartments of the auditory tube . Therefore, MRI is a valuable tool with the evaluation of c1eft-palate patients with ear-problems. Furthermore, our results underlines the importanee of the protection of the tensor veli palatini museie funetion in cleft-palate surgery. 14:25 508 Petrous bone chemodectomas B. Kreuzberg, P. Mukensnab', K. Jedllekova ; PilsenlCZ Chemodectomas (glomus tumours) are neoplasms originating from aehromafinne parasympathetie paraganglias. Only chemodectomas 10calised in petrous bone (glomus jugulare tumou r and glomus tympanieum tumour) are mentioned . The purpose of the leeture is to show the radiolog ie -pathologie eorrelation of ehemodectomas in petrous bone and to rnention their differential diagnos is. The group of 14 patients is presented with eight confirmed ehemodectomas the rest of cases being especially chron ie otitis findings (glue ear) . The findings were confirmed by biopsy, in one case by seetion. Radiolog ieal examinations have been performed with CT (super high resolut ion) and in some eases with OSA. Histopatologie specimens were sta ined mainly with hematoxylin -eosin . Radiolog ical examinations showed the exact anatomie location and progression of ehemodectomas in correlation with histopathologic examinations . The detailed analysis of 8 cases of chemodeetomas is the result of our proceedings. Chemodectomas with ear location are semimalignant lesions (one case with lung and liver dissemination described). Two basie forms of loeal progress ion are introduced (glomus tympanicum and jugulare tumours) . In several cases chronic otitis (glue ear) has been misdiagnosed as chemodectoma (radiologically). 14:30 509 Inner ear visualization by 3D high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging C. Pirolli, M.F. Osti , V. lacari, F. Maeori, G. Anaveri ; RomeIl The introduetion of Magnetie resonanee imaging, especially of the three-d imensional Fourier transformation eonstructive interferenee in steady-state (30FT-CISS), has proven to be belter in deteetion of softtissue lesions in the inner ear. Purpose of this study was to assess the feaseability of 30FT-CISS to delineate the membranous labyrinth and the VII and VIII eranial nerves. Four healthy volunteers and 15 patients with hear ing loss, tinn itus and vertigo were examined with a standard head eoil on a 1.5-T MR unit, with T1-weighted before and post contrast medium to determine wich provided the most informat ion. The three-dimensional allowed detailed visualization of all inner ear structures in healty volunteers, and lack of a visible endolymphatie duet and sae in patients with vertigo was helpful to prove a possible inflammatory envolvement of these struetures. Unenhanced T1-weighted images were neeessary to exclude spontaneous hyperintensity in the membranous labyrinth. Post contrast medium images were needed to deteet enhancing pathology such as labyrinthitis and tumor inside the labyr inth. Our results indieate that 30FT-CISS is a valuable diagnostie tool in the evaluation of inner ear anatomy and pathology, and the use of both unenhaneed and enhaneed T1-weighted sequenee formed the best seauenee eombination for diagnosis of membranous labyrinth lesions. Purpose: To test the feasibility of volume rendering (VoIRen) of highresolution magnetie resonanee (HR-MR) data sets of the membranous labyr inth and evaluate the quality of 3D visualisation . Methods and Materials: We retrospeet ively reviewed the HR-MR (Signa 1.5 T; GEMS) data sets of 16 eonsecutive patients with no evidence of labyrinthine pathology. HR-MR data sets were obtained by means of a 30 T2-weighted FSE sequenee with the use of a 3-inch circular surface coil for signal reeeption , and proeessed with the software Advantage Windows 3.1 (GEMS) running on UltraSpare 1 workstation. Two reviewers performed separately VolRen of the labyr inth, then they ranked the quality ofaxial images and 30 views. Results: The interobserver agreement for quality ranks was good in ease ofaxial images (k = 0.57) and excellent in case of VolRen (k = 0.78). The quality ranks agreement was excellent between axial images and VolRen (k =0.86). The interobservers correlation eoeffieient (Spearman rank) for transparency and opaeity values of VolRen was good and statistically significant (Rs > 0.765 ; P < 0.001). Conclusion: VolRen of the labyrinth ls a feasible and reproducible teehnique; it provides reliable 30 visions of the labyrinthine anatomy arid opens potential applications to the study of its pathological ehanges. 14:45 511 Virtual endoscopic labyrinthoscopy with direct volume renderlng: a new technique for the 3D reconstruction of the inner ear B.F. Tomandl , K.E.W. Eberhardt, P. Hastreiter, U. Nissen , w.J. Huk ; Purpose: A new method for the 3-dimens ional visualization of the struetures of the inner ear using direet volume rendering is presented . Methods and Materials: The petro us bones of 10 specimens and of 5 patients were examined with spiral CT (Siemens Somatom Plus 4) . The data were transfered to a graph ies workstation (Silicon Graphies Onyx 2) and the 30-reconstruction was performed . The software allows real time viewing of objects from all directions as weil as virtual endoseopic views . Measurements of the labyr inth and the semilunar eanals were eompared with the anatomie preparat ions . Symptoms in Meniere 's disease are charactherized by hydrops of the endolimphatic system with recurrent rupture of the membranous labyrinth. Primary cause of the increased endolymphatic volume appears to be an unbalanced resorption of endolymph. The aim of this study was to compare the visibility of the endolymphatic duct and sac on high-resolution MR images with the symptoms and clinical course in patients with meniere 's disease . Twenty patients with unilateral Meniere disease were sorted into two groups on the basis of the c1inical stag e of their disease at the time of imaging. Group I included palients in acute phase, who presented vert igo. Group 2 comprised patients in the nonacute phase of the disease, studied 10 days or more after an episode of vertigo. During acute attacks the endolimphatyc duct and sac were not visible in the affected ears, but were visible in the unaffected ear. During remission these structures were not observed in clinically advanced patients, but they were seen in patients in the early and intermediate stages. High-resolution MR imaging can be used to evaluate endolimphatyc duct and sac : visible abnormalities and lack of visible endolimphatyc duct and sac correlate with the c1inical course of the disease. Methods and Materials: MRI (1.5 T) was performed in 30 patients (2 to 19 years) . By functional tests sensorineural hearing loss was diagnosed in 52 temporal bones (tb) . In suspected inner ear malformations, the CISS sequence (0.7 mm slice thickness) was used. Additionally, MIPs and reformatted images were obtained. MRI results were compared with HRCT findings . Results: Normal morphology was seen in all tb with normal hearing (8 tb) and in 25 tb with sensorineural hearing loss by CT and MRI. By MRI following inner ear malformations were found: isolated cochlear dysplasia (4 tb), cochlear dysplasia with sem icircular canal dysplasia, enlarged vestibule and enlarg ed endolymphatic duct and sac (4 tb), cochlear dysplasia with semicircular canal dysplasia and enlarged vest ibule (5 tb), cochlear dysplas ia with and enlarged endolymphatic duct and sac (4 tb), isolated semicircular canal dysplasia (7 tb) , isolated enlarged endolymphatic duct and sac (3 tb). No neural abnormalities were found. The diagnosis of an inner ear malformation could be made by CT in all cases, too. Only by MRI loops of the AICA within the inner ear canal were seen (13 tb). Conclusion: MRI will develop to the imaging method of choice in patients with suspected inner ear malformation. Results: The CIEM were class ified equally weil with both modalities, however HR-MRI depicts the malformations more accurate. Especially the abil ity to acquire multi planar reconstructions and 3D images in MIPtechnique was appreciated. MRI detected in 40%(n =6) anomalies of the IAC. In 2 patients one or more nerves failed unilaterally. In 4 patients the extend of the IAC anomalies was more severe on one side. Conclusion: HR-MRI seems to be superior to HR-CT in depicting CIEM. In this population a considerable number of malformations of the IAC was detected by HR-MRI. MRI in children with CIEM might be of importance for surgical management, because it gives addit ional information which can be used to select the side with the best prognos is for cochlear implant. Purpose: Evaluation of efficacy and safety of mechanical fragmentation of acute massive pulmonary embol i with a rotatable pigtail catheter. Methods and Materials: Sixteen patients with acute massive pulmonary embolism and hemodynamic impairment were treated. Pulmonary emboli were fragmented by mechanical action of the rotating pigtail, while the guide wire was exiting an oval side hole proximal to the pigtail tip. In 13 cases an additional thrombolysis with reduced dose was performed. Results: Fragmentation was successful in 12 of 16 patients with an average recanalization rate of 36.0%. Average shock index decreased significantly pre-to postfragmentation and 48 hours later. Decrease of average mean arterial pulmonary pressure pre-to postfragmentation was insignificant, further decrease within the 48 hour follow-up highly significant. There were no procedure-related complications. Overall mortality rate was 19%. Conclusion: Fragmentation of massive pulmonary emboli with the pigtail rotation catheter achieved rapid partial recanalization, with ease of instrumentation, and without complications. Purpose: To evaluate the sensitivity and specifity of percutaneous corecut biopsy of enlarged Iymph nodes for the diagnosis and subclassification of malignant lymphomas. Methods and Materials: In 1995 158 percutaneous core-cut biopsies of enlarged lymph nodes using Tru-Cut-needles and a biopsy gun were performed consecutively in patients aged 17 to 86 years. 128 biopsies were ultrasound guided and the remainder controlled by CT scanning. The major biopsy locations were cervical (n = 77) and axillary nodes (n = 20). In 135 cases the diagnosis could be confirmed by histology from other specimens (n = 8), correlation with the c1inical and radiological course of the disease (n = 75) or combination of both (n = 52). The final diagnoses were malignant lymphoma in 65 cases (Non-Hodgkin's-Lymphoma n =48, Hodgkin's disease n = 17), lymph node infiltration by acute leukemia in 2, lymph node metastases of solid tumors in 37 and benign changes/no malignancy in 31 cases. Results: 58 of 65 malignant lymphomas were correctly diagnosed by core-cut biopsies (sensitivity: 89%). For diagnosing malignant lymphoma with this procedure the specifity was 97%, the accuracy 93%, the positive and negative predictive value were 97% and 91%, respectively. In 55 of 58 (95%) of the truely proven malignant lymphomas a subclassification was possible on the basis of the core-cut biopsy. Conclusion: Image-guided core-cut biopsy of enlarged lymph nodes is an excellent method allowing diagnosis and subclassification of malignant lymphomas. Surgical Iymph node dissection for diagnostic reasons should be reserved for cases still indetermined after core-cut biopsy or for locations not accessible for percutaneous biopsy. Results: All procedures were successfull without any immediate or delayed complication. The pathological diagnosis was made in 33 patients (94.3%); in the case of Castelman disease the pathological diagnosis was suspected but needed to be confirmed by a surgical biopsy. Conclusion: Fluoro-CT guidance make abdominal nodes biopsy faster, easier and more confident than conventional CT biopsy, and allowed to puncture smaller targets. 14:30 519 CT-guided intervention using a patient laser marker system R. Klöppel, Th. Weiße, W. Wilke, S. Pecher; LeipziglD Purpose: It was tested to which extent laser marker system are useful for CT-guided intervention. Methods and Materials: 130 cases of diagnostical biopsies (ehest, abdomen, and spine) and lumbal sympathectomies, 80 cases with laser marker system and 50 without were compared. Results: Using laser marker system target region and parameters of intervention (cutan location, length, and angle) can be planned, exactly demonstrated, and the needle position can be checked during procedure. Therefore the intervention become less dependent of the radiologist's individual experience. Using laser marker system the number of control scans decreased to 30 to 50%, and necessary corrections of needle location were reduced to maximal 30%. The average target deviation of the needle decreased under 5 mm in 50% of cases. The duration of interventional procedure was reduced. Conclusion: Laser marker system are strongly recommended in CTguided interventions for quality assurance and dose reduction. Laser markings facilitate the introduction for the newcomer and the experienced radiologist: The advantage will be especially effective in case of small target volume and oblique needle path and tilted gantry. Purpose: To introduce a new device for accurate needle puncture, avoiding direct X-ray irradiation to the operator during CT f1uoroscopic procedure, named "CT guide needle compressor". Methods and Materials: Main part of a new device was made by acrylic resin with square pillar for holding a puncture needle. A single loop of wire is connected between the needle pusher at square pillar and the handle. A puncture needle was inserted to the target tissue in 1 to 5 mm pitch by taking hold of the handle. Four PLDD (Percutaneous Laser Disc Decompression) of lumbar disc hernia and 1 lung biopsy were performed using this new device. Results: Puncture of needle for 4 PLDD and 1 lung biopsy were safely done without any complication. Needle and its tip was weil monitored on CRT in real time during puncture. Tip of needle could be inserted accurately at the center of the disc for PLDD and at the margin of tumor far lung biopsy. Conclusion: Needle puncture under CT f1uoroscopy were safely performed, using a new device of "CT guide needle compressor". This device can minutely insert the needle into the target tissue. 14:50 521 Navigation support for CT-guided interventional radiology R. Proksa, J. Wilting; HamburglD, Best/NL A navigation support system for CT-guided interventions in radiology is presented which increases the accuracy and efficiency of minimally invasive interventions such as biopsies. The system uses an optical localizer that measures the position of infra-red light sources (LEDs). The CT-scanner, the patient and the interventional tools (e.g. biopsy needles) are equipped with LEDs. During pre-operative imaging the system measures the position of the CT imaging plane and the patient for each scanned slice and registers them in the patient reference coordinate system. In a planing phase the user determines the target and entry point of the intervention in the stack of images. These locations are transformed into the patient reference system and used to guide the radiologist. During the actual intervention the system tracks the position of patient and tool and provides the user with real-time navigation feedback. A graphical tool guides the user towards the planned trajectory. Interactive slice positioning is required for interventional MRI. A navigation system has been developed for the 0.2T Open Viva MRI scanner (Siemens). A stereoscopie infra-red camera monitors the positions of reflective balls on a passive pointing device and on a static reference plate. Complete control of slice positioning is achieved via the pointer and system software to an accurate of within +/-1 mm. Image plane selection can follow orthogonal, single oblique, or double oblique Iines. Images are aligned parallel or perpendicular to the axis of the pointer. Scans are acquired in single or multi-slice modes. Image plane selection is set to monitor the trajectory of a needle as it advances to a target. With fast MRI, the targeting and introduction of devices into lesions is simple and rapid. It is possible to incorporate any pointer shape the pointer into MR-compatible interventional devices (needle guides, biopsy guns), provided that the line of sight is maintained. Interactive slice positioning reduces the time required for interventional MRI procedures as preparatory scans become redundant. We will present data on the utility of the device compared to iterative conventional scanning. Purpose: Previous Keyhole imaging simulations suggested that improved definition of an interventional device could be achieved by rotating a Keyhole pattern in k-space such that the Keyhole's long axis lies perpendicular to the device arientation. This study sought to validate these predictions with in-vltro and ln-vive trials. Methods and Materials: A True-FISP keyhole sequence was modified to rotate k-space from a conventional k-space orientation. An initial 256x256 data set was acquired, but all subsequent keyhole scans were limited to the center 64 rows. Four sets of images were acquired with this sequence during in-vitro or in-vivo procedures involving insertion of an interventional device into a phantom or pereine Iiver. Device insertion was parallel to the rotated readout axis and then parallel to the rotated phase encode axis for each subject. The images were acquired and reconstructed on-line at about 3 images/second. They were evaluated for spatial resolution and utility in c1inical applications. Results: The image studies with the device oriented perpendicularly to the Keyhole stripes led to more accurate reconstructions «2 mm spatial error), and mare highly rated image quality by I-MRI clinicians. Conelusion: Rotation of a Keyhole pattern to match the device gives improved image quality over conventional Keyhole acquisitions while maintaining the improvement in acquisition speed. is a considerable problem, especially in patients with vessel elonga-tion. Currently a diagnostic angiography using a graduated 5-F pigtail catheter is performed to determine stent dimensions. In arder to determine size of endovascular protheses for treatment of abdominal aortic aneurysms mare precisely and non-invasively a computer simulation was developed. Methods and Materials: Using helical CT aquisition, two-dimensional coordinates of vascular luminal planes and carresponding mid-points were obtained. After a first rough estimation of graft length by simple addition of the distances between rnid-points, a multi-step refinement coordinating the paramters 1.) stent diameter, 2.) relative position to mid-point, and 3.) relative position within vascular lumen is performed. Three-dimensional visualization of the vessel and a proposed graf! is possible. Results: The algorithm was tested on a vascular dummy in various positions. All measurements were within a 1% range of the true prothesis length. Additionally, CT scans of 20 patients were evaluated confirming the characteristic parameters of the implanted stents. Conelusion: Elongation and irregular geometry of the aorta can cause problems in measurements of graft length for abdominal aneurysms. We demonstrated an automated non-invasive procedure of high accuracy to determine correct stent dimensions easily. Purpose: In a busy Oncolog y centre CT scanning forms an important component of not only the initial diagnosis but in the subsequent monitoring of disease . Clinical experience with CT imaging has indicated that the procedure may produce anxieties specific to Oncology patients to the extent that it becomes an unpleasant experience for them. Methods and Materials: This study attempts to identify, understand and suggest solutions which may improve the whole experience of CT for these patients. A study of patient's subjective experiences of CT was therefore conducted. Initial interviews with twenty-five patients led to the development of questionnaire that was administered to a further one hundred patients. Results: Principle components analysis of the concerns expressed suggested five factors; to do with the machine itself, the environment , the physical discomfort, the results and the social interactions involved. Conclusion: Our study provides a basic structure to help us understand many of the anxieties found in oncology patients. Optimal care for these patients goes beyond the techn ical to emotional support. Methods and Materials: In a samplte (n =566) we measured WT spent in the waiting room from moment of arrival until beginning of the examination (Time 1) and from end of examination until leaving the department (Time 2). The patient was also asked to complete a questionnaire regarding satisfaction with the services. Times were measured by using an individual chart and a time clock, Results: The median (Time 1) was 14 minutes; for 20% of the patients Time 1 exceeded 30 minutes. The median Time 2 was 19 minutes. Patients state they expect a Time 1 of maximum 16 minutes. More than 75% of the patients expressed a feeling of short waiting times in our department. We found a linear relationship between objectively measured waiting times and subjective waiting times as perceived by the patient. Conclusion: The method has proven to be reliable and useful for future monitoring of WT. Objective measured waiting times correlate closely with patients' perception of WT. WT monitoring is necessary in order to increase service levels of the radiology department. Purpose: Analysis of rejected films in a large, central radiological department under the following aspects: What is the reject-film -rate before and after intensive lecturing ? Where are the sources of error? Methods and Materials: Over 9 months, separated in 3 quarters, 7238 mistaken films were analysed and sorted to regions of the body, subdivided in columns "Positioning", "Exposure" und "due to the patient". Based on these results all radiographers and radiologists of the department took part in lectures on "Anatomy", "Positioning" and "What are the clinical questions" for one week (= 5 hours), about regions with the highest reject-fiIm-rate ("hips", "shoulder"). Results: In the regions "Hips" (20.6% mistaken films) and "Shoulder" (13.0% mistaken films) the rejected films increased after lecturing up to 23.9 respectively 17.5%. After one year the reject-film-rate decreased to the original level. Conclusion: Traditional training , in form of lectures, does not reduce the number of mistaken films; on the contrary the rate is increasing. One reason is probably the more critically attitude towards the taken pictures. More practical teaching in small groups on "Anatomy" and "Posilioning" is presumed to show better results. Purpose: Rejected films are analysed monthly to determine the true reject rate and reduce patient radiation dose by means of identifying and eliminating avoidable problems. Methods and Materials: A routine monthly film reject analysis is performed as part of an extensive quality assurance programme in a busy paediatric hospital. Rejected films are analysed and categorised according to film size, anatomical area and reason for rejection. The true reject rate does not include films discarded which did not contr ibute to an increase in the patient's radiation dose, i.e. copied and manipulated films, or technical rejects, i.e. fogged, test and blank films. The anatomical area with the highest rejection rate is analysed in depth to identify problems that could be eliminated. Results: The true reject rate is routinely between 2.5% to 2.75% of total film usage. The number of technical rejects reduced as equipment faults were readily identified and rectified. The anatomical area analysis identified areas for re-education and/or revision of techniques. Conclusion: Rejected films, although costly, are unavoidable. In a paediatric population, efficient reject analysis, coupled with an effective qualily assurance programme, is an important tool for monitoring and reducing the patient radiation dose. 14:20 528 Waiting times (WT) in the radiology department I. Van Hee, P. Van Bogaert, P. Van Aken, A.M .A. De Schepper; Purpose: Time spent in the waiting room is an important issue in the patients' perception of service quality. In order to increase our service quality we developed a method to monitor WT. 14:40 530 Computed radiology and radiation dose P. Van Bogaert , P. Van Aken, J.w. Van Goethem , A.M.A. De Schepper; Purpose: To obtain good quality films in conventional radiology the radiation dose should be in a specific narrow range. In computed radiology, using a storage phosphor system (SPS), this range is much wider and the image quality increases using higher radiation doses. This is important in the train ing of radiographers and the organization of the department when introducing this system. Methods and Materials: When the new SPS was introduced in our hospital, radiographers were instructed to use the same settings as with the old conventional radiology system. This ensured good quality computed radiology, with a comparable patient dose. Results: After a while radiographers tend to pay less attent ion to radiation dose since there is no immediate unsatisfactory effecl on the produced images. Therefore continuing training of radiographers is necessary to keep the doses used within the planned range, and to raise their awareness of the problem. A build-in dose monitoring system in the SPS is also indispensable . Conclusion: The introduction of the SPS in our service was very weil received with all radiographers , radiologists and referring physicians. The awareness of radiation dose with the radiographers tends to diminish after time. Therefore continuing education and a build-in control system is imperative. 14:50 531 Reducing the radiation dose from conventional X-ray film radiography: the MicroRad system AB. Dobrzeniecki, S.J. Nielsen, L. Lading; Skodsborg /DK Purpose: There is a clear, growing trend toward introducing digital radiography systems into radiology departments. However, emerging direct-digital methods are expensive, have a small installed base, and are not likely to replace the many film-screen systems for which the advantages of going digital are not perceived to be cost-effective nor necessary. Thus, there remains a need to reduce radiation doses resulting from the use of conventional radiographic systems ; the benefits can be both general (to a patients and staft) and specific (for example, involving pediatric imaging). Methods and Materials: We are developing a dose-reduction system, MicroRad, that integrates with existing workflows and significantly reduces radiation exposure to both patients and staff. The system introduce s only minor changes in the use of current film-based systems. A novel noise phantom is used to acquire the noise characteristics of reduced-exposure images, and adaptive , information-preserving , protocol-specific filters are then applied to restore the digital image data. Results: 25 radiographie films have been under-exposed to less than 50% of regular dose and then restored by the MicroRad system with no quantitative or subjective difference observed as compared to correcll y exposed films. Two trained radiologists performed the evaluations. Conclusion: Radiation dose to patients from conventional radiography procedures can be substant ially reduced via film digitization and subsequent image processing . Done in a manner that integrates with existing radiological workflows , such a system can effectively reduce overall exposure levels in the clinical setting. 14:55 532 A simple model for the description of solid state matrix X-ray detectors R.F. Schulz ; Forchheim/D Purpose: New types of solid state matrix x-ray detectors are being developed . In the "electro-direct" approach a direclly converting serniconductor is used, while the "opto-direct" approach uses a scintillator/photodiode combination. A very simple model is proposed, which gives a belter understanding, and allows to derive the basic characteristics of both types of detection principles. Methods and Materials: The complex detection process is described by a set of simple main processes: I.absor ption of the x-ray quantum , 11. • creation of excitations , 111 . • transport of excitations to the surface, IV. -storage and readout of the charge carriers. Step IV can be considered equivalent for both approaches . Results: The image quality (quantum noise) depends on the efficiency of the absorption process I, which depends on the attenuation properties of the absorbing layer. The lowest applicable dose in the quantum limited range depends on processes 11 to IV. Conclusion: At a first glance, the electro-direct approach might appear advantageous because of the inherent simplicity. But looking at the currentiy available absorber materials and typical applications, it becomes understandable , why the photo-direct approch is the mainstream solution. Purpose: To assess the process and outcome of hospital inpatients for whom body computed tomography (CT) was requested but not performed . Methods and Materials: For six months, reasons why CT was not performed were recorded , together with relevant discuss ions with clinicians. Subsequent referrals for alternative investigations were noted. The eventual outcome was monitored via the patients' records. Results: 75 patients (7.5% of 1001 inpatient requests) were identified where body CT was not performed after an electronically generated request. In 52/75 patients the CT request was not accepted during the vetting process by the Radiology Department. Criteria for rejection included referrals outside national guidelines (n =16), better alternative investigations (8), time constraints (15), over-zealous requests (4) and c1inician's erroneous interpretat ion of preceding imaging investigations (9). 14 CTs were cancelled bya clinician; a further 9 were not performed for miscellaneous non-medical reasons . In no case could the death of a patient be ascribed to CT not being performed . Conclusion: Most (98.5%) CT requests comply with guidelines, dlsproving a perception that many radiological referrals are inappropriate . Radiologists have to turn down some appropriate CT referrals due to lack of CT capacity. Although no patient died as a result of not having CT, lack of CT contributed to delay in diagnosis. CT was performed both in supine and in prone position, but also scans in oblique position were useful as required by neoplasm location. Contiguous 5 mm slices from public synphysis to iliae crestae are performed (with multiplanar reconstruetion) , before and after nonionic iodate contrast agent (ca) i.v, injection (80 ce). After ca inject ion it was useful to start CT from bladder f100r to dome in order to avoid artifacts due to concent rated ca into the bladder. Results: DCBCT was well-tolerated and allowed an accurate study of the implant base of sessile and pedunculate neoplasms , as dernonstrated by comparison to endoscopy and surgery. A good evaluation of perivescical fat tissue infiltration was also possible, with diagnost ie accuracy values in accordance to literature. Conclusion: In the study of bladder neoplasms, DCBCT is a valuable diagnostic method because of aceurate spatial balance, both in endoluminal and in perivisceral evaluation and seems to be advisable also as the first step for its less invasivity in comparison to cystoscopy. Purpose: To evaluate the implementation of a radiographer based reporting service for trauma examinations of the musculo-skeletal system at five sites within four UK hospitals. Methods and Materials: A longitudinal study design was adopted to measure the produetivity and effectiveness of radiograph ie reporting. Accuraey of radiographers ' reports ; volume of reporting activity; the speed with which the report became available, and the satisfaction of users of the radiograph ie reporting serv ice were measured before and after implementation of a radiographic reporting service. Results: Accuraey of radiographers reports was found to be high (early results suggest as high as 99% aecuracy). Volume of reporting activity increased substantially where this had been low (early results show >20% improvement). Reports became available more quickly (early results show mean improvement >30% for reports becoming available in fewer than 5 days; percentage of reports available on the same day of examination improved from 1%-2% pre-implementation to 10-35% post-implementation). Satisfaetion of users data is awaiting analysis . Purpose: To estimate the role of scanner-dependent effects on MR relaxation rate measurements and to evaluate their influence on the MR-signal intensity of normal brain. Methods and Materials: A phantom composed of 2 tubes of 2.5 cm of diameter filled with a manganese sulphate solution were placed inside the brain coil and was scanned 62 times over 10 months. Twentytwo normal subjects were studied over the same period. Two spinecho sequences (1.5 T, 2300/15/90 and 600/15 TRITE) were used to calculate relaxation rates of both phantom compartments and normal brain tissues (JMRI 1995: 5; 217-225) . Coefficient of variation (CV) and standard deviation (SO) were used for data comparison. Results: Phantom mean R1 and R2 values were in the range measured in normal brain (R1 =1.326 sec"; R2 =12.40 sec:"). R1 SO and CV (0.157sec-1 and 11.9%) were significantly higher than those found for R2 (0.39 sec" and 3.2%). Comparative analysis of phantom and normal brain relaxation times showed concomitant changes occurring in simultaneous acquisitions of phantom and human brain. Conclusion: Our data support the routine use of a phantom to correct relaxation rate estimates in MR studies. 14:10 537 5tochastic resonance in human visual system: fMRI investigation F. Levrero contusion of the upper (n = 17) or lower (n = 3~extremities were imaged on a 0.2 T dedicated MRI system (Artoscan , ESAOTE, Genua) with STIR-and GEFS-sequences. Acquisition times were 6 min. 18 sec. for STIR and 3 min. 49 sec. for GEFS. Signal difference between bone marrow edema, normal bone marrow and fatty soft tissue in the same image and contrast to noise ratio (CNR) were calculated. All sequences were observed by 2 MRI-experienced radiologists and ranged by a score from 1 to 5. Mean values were calculated. Results: Both the signal difference (bone edema versus nomal bone marrow of the affected bone) and the CNR in STIR (1327 ± 317; 7.6 ± 1.9) and GEFS (1360 ± 269; 7.5 ± 2.6) were nearly identical. Similar results were obtained by correlating signal alterations and CNRchanges of bone edema with fatty soft tissue. Subjective findings of the radiologists resulted in a slightly better score for STIR (1.5) than GEFS (1.7 The fast transit of contrast agent in dynamic perfusion MRI studies requires special acquisition-reconstruction techniques such as the keyhole method. With this method a reduced number of phase-encoded sampies are acquired so that reconstruction artifacts and 1055 of resolution may hamper the diagnostic potential of dynamic images. Since any attempt of quantitative derivation relies on the accuracy of the reconstructed images, several advanced reconstruction techniques were investigated and applied both on simulated and experimental data. The conventional keyhole (KH) method available in commercial systems was compared with the constrained reconstruction by the Tikhonov (T), truncated singular value decomposition (TSVD) and conjugate gradient (CG) methods. All the new methods gave slightly improved image quality with respect to KH. The regularization capabilities of the new methods were equivalent but CG was faster of a factor 20 and 100 than T and TSVD respectively. The results of this work showed that, in front of the inherent difficulty to extract reliable information from dynamic MRI for quantitative pourposes, it is important to investigate reconstruction methods which make better use of the information available in the experimental data. 14:50 Purpose: Testing texture dependence on depth and angle, using the 2nd order statistical parameter obtained from a cooccurrence matrix of US SIW images. Methods and Materials: Images of a tissue-mimicking material phantom, in both 1st and 2nd harmonie modality were used. Placing a ROI at different depths and angles, 4 matrix for each ROI were calculated using pairs of adiacent pixels and orizontal, vertical, and oblique displacements. Using this matrix, Homogeneity (H = Sum(p(i,j)/(1 + (i-j)2)), and Entropy (E =Sum(-p(i,j)log(p(i,j))) were computed. Results: Two-way analysis of variance with repeated measures was performed. Parameter's variation resulted higly significant; at a oneway analysis, differences among angles were higly significant. Entropy variations with depth were no significant in 2nd harmonie image. Conelusion: The dependence of texture descriptors on both depth and angle seems to be a strong limit in order to classify different tissues. Corrections based on depth and angles must be taken in account. Second harmonie imaging is less sensitive to these variations and it seems a promising framework for texture analysis of ultrasound images.  Methods and Materials: 200 consecutive investigations on 200 patients were analysed with a highend sonographie unit. THI is performed using broadband scan heads and a special preprocessing software. A standardised examination technique was applied to make comparison possible. System settings were adjusted to the different methods (standard ultrasound examination and THI). Images were reviewed independently by four readers, experienced in ultrasound, with regard to image artifacts, haze and image contrast and graded according to an individual score. Results: a. Image artifacts were partially reduced b. Image contrast was increased due to improved signal-to-noise-ratio. c. The depth of penetration was reduced. Conelusion: Tissue Harmonie Imaging is a new way of ultrasound image processing that adresses especially the difficult to image patient. The improved image quality leads to higher diagnostic confidence and may help to make the use of further imaging modalities partially unnecessary. 544 New development of eomputed seetional virtual endoseopy N. Sato; Tokyo/J Purpose: Recently, virtual endoscopy has been developed to depict luminal appearance of the alimentary tract or blood vessels without invasiveness to patients. However, this application only uses the data around a threshold at the sacrifice of the other three dimensional data. We've developed a new endoscopic software application, called "Computed Sectional Probe" (CSP), to show the information from inside, and around the lumen simultaneously. Methods and Materials: A virtual probe with variable diameter and depth is prepared in the virtual endoscopic navigator application. It is laid on the surface of the lumen and makes a column. The column is transparent so that the bottom plane can be seen. Therefore, the image is a combination of a 2D multiplaner reconstruction image on bottom plane and 3D endoscopic image. The border line can be moved by shifting the threshold. Additionally, three reference planes orthogonal to the direction of "f1ight" are displayed and are updated synchronously. Results: In application to gastric, colon, and bronchogenic carcinoma, this method provided visualization of abnormalities outside the lumen as weil as the surface appearance without increasing computing time. This information was very useful in evaluating the extent and staging of cancer. Conelusion: Newly developed CSP was effective and robust enough to provide more clinical benefit than the previous navigator system. Purpose: The aim of this study was to analyze the connectivity of DICOM device in an overall system and to design the quality assurance procedures to validate the system before c1inical use (diagnosis). Methods and Materials: We tested a DICOM 3.0-based network including multi-vendor equipment. The system included TC scanner, MR scanner, film devices, processing and visualization stations (PCs, UNIX workstations and X-terminals) and DICOM servers (PCs, UNIX workstations) of the departments of Radiology, Radiotherapy and Medical Physics of the Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, Italy. Results and Conelusion: We designed a procedure to validate all levels of the DICOM network before the connection is declared operational for clinical use. For this purpose we tested the complete range of possible interactions between the devices and belween the application using DICOM data. The acceptance procedures revealed a number of problems that were not noticed at casual inspection. There were problems both in the hardware and in the software configuration due to improper initial settings which were fixed. Purpose: To investigate the potential of high-resolution MR imaging for the delineation and assessment of different brain lesions. Methods and Materials: High-resolution T2*-weighted, low-bandwidth, single-echo brain images were acquired with a 3D, rf-spoiled, gradientecho sequence (TRlTE/aITH =58/40125/2, FOV =240-256,320 x 512 matrix, 32 partitions) in a 1.5 T scanner. CerebraI venograms were created from the magnitude and phase data by performing a minimum intensity projection over targeted volumes. Pre-and post-contrast 3D T1-weighted images were additionally acquired with the same in-plane resolution and orientation (TRITE/alTH =20/4.76125/2, FOV = 240-256, 320 x 512 matrix, 36 partitions). In an ongoing study the sequences were applied in 10 patients with different intracranial lesions, such as tumors, metastases, and AVMs. Results: Additional diagnostic information was obtained from the 3D T1-weighted data sets without altering the c1inical protocol. Subtraction of the pre-and post-contrast partitions and performing a MIP yielded highly detailed images of the cerebral vascular system around the lesions. In combination with the MR venography it is possible to obtain information about arterial and venous vessels and to differentiate between feeding and draining vessels of brain lesions. Conclusion: High-resolution imaging appears very promising for an improved delineation of cerebral brain lesions. Purpose: To evaluate imaging characteristics of a new T2-weighted turbo spin echo (TSE) sequence with inherent sensitivity to susceptibiliy artifacts. Methods and Materials: In order to improve the detection of hemosiderine in T2-TSE-imaging, sensitivity to susceptibility artifacts of a standard T2-TSE sequence was improved by increasing selectively the first (contrast-determining) TE. For 10 patients with multiple intracranial deposits of hemosiderine, this sequece was compared to the standard T2-TSE-and T2*-sequences, especially the number of hemosiderine-deposits was counted. Results: The new sequence detected markedly more deposits of hemosiderine than standard T2-TSE-imaging, but significantly less than T2*-imaging with the only exception of the skull base (proximity to the paranasal sinuses). Fat signal was lower than in T2-TSE, the number and of flow artifacts increased. Contrast-resolution did not differ much from standard T2-TSE. Conclusion: As the new sequence detects c1early more hemosiderinedeposits than standard T2-TSE-imaging and shows a more T2-SE contrast charcteristic and a sirnilar spatial resolution, it can be used instead of a standard T2-TSE sequence. However, it can not can not replace T2*-imaging except for the skull base. Purpose: Evaluation of the changes of the retrobulbic fat body, the extraoccular muscles of the eye and the optic nerve before and after radiation therapy of endocrine orbitopathy using high resolution MRI. Methods and Materials: 10 patients with c1inical and c1inical chemistry tested endocrine orbitopathy (age range 35-76 years) were investigated with high resolution MRI (Magnetom Vision, Siemens, Germany) before and after retro-orbital radiation therapy (6 MeV linear accelerator, 16 Gy, 2 Gy/d). The MRI protocol included T2-, proton-density and T1weighted high resolution (matrix 512) turbo spin-echo imaging in axial and coronal orientation and 3D MPRAGE imaging. Follow-up MRI was performed 1 month and 12 rnonths ± 2 months after radiation therapy. Brain MRI (1) 14:00 Purpose: To prove that the half-dose enhanced MR imaging with magnetisation transfer (MT) saturation can replace standard dose T1-Weighted spin-echo (SE) without MT saturation in brain tumors. Methods and Materials: We studied prospectively 2 sets of T1weighted SE: half-dose Gd with MT in the first one, and for the second standard Ti SE with Gd, in 30 patients presenting 33 brain tumors. We compared the contrast-to-noise ratio (C/Ns) of the different sequences and we analysed qualitative images of the 2 sequences by 4 radiologist. Results: The quantitative analysis using the Wilcoxon test show the absence of a significant difference between both techniques. However, the comparison of the correlation coefficient intraclass (r = 0.70), of the total of the lesion, shows a relative similarity between the 2 techniques. In the case of meningiomas that coefficient is higher (r = 0.84). The qualitative data shows a difference between the 2 sequences, favorising the use of the T1-weighted MR images with MT and half-dose Gadolinium in the whole of the tested parameters except the lesional oedema and the presence of artefacts. Conclusion: Our study suggests that the half-dose T1-weighted SE with MT can replace the conventional techniques in the investigation of meningiomas. 546 Use of the half-dose gadolinium-enhanced and magnetisation transfer saturation in brain tumors D. Haba, C. Aube, P. Burtin, A Pasco-Papon, J.Y. Tanguy, Purpose: To evaluate the sensitivity of fast FLAIR versus FSE T2, PD and High-resolution T2 sequences in different brain pathologies. Methods and Materials: 156 patients with multiple sclerosis (n =45); trauma (n =23); herpes encephalitis (n =9); atrophy (n =11); epilepsy (n =8); intracerebral neoplasms (n =18); subarachnoid hemorrhage (n =9); ischemia, AVMs (n =33) were primary investigated and followedup on the 1,0 T magnet HORIZON LX GE. We used our modifications of fast FLAIR; coronal, axial; sagittal planes. Comparative studies with FSE T2, PD, High-resolution T2 were done. Scans were assessed for lesions detection, delineation; c1inical and morphological correlation were done. Results: FLAIR was superior in diagnostic of subtle acute subarachnoid hemorrhage; cortical ischemia; vascular steal phenomena in parenchymal AVMs; medial axonal injuries; glial scars; cortical, basal, periventricular MS plaques; herpes encephalitis. In intraaxial tumours FLAIR improved differentiation between cystic, degenerative, solid tumour parts; visualisation of the tumorous-oedematous spread along white matter tracts. Conclusion: Fast FLAIR is recommended for primary MRI investigation and follow-up in solving forms of vascular, traumatic, inflammatory, demyelinating and tumorous brain pathology. Special modifications of FLAIR for investigations of posterior fossa are essential. Results: 4 of 10 palients showed significant decrease of the eye muscle thickness , in part icular of the medial rectus muscle . Enlargement of the CSF spaces around the optlc nerve was seen in 4/10 palients without significant reduction after radiation therapy. 3/10 patients demonstrated significant improvement of c1inical symptoms and blood chemical analysis after retro-orb ital radiation therapy without any other medical treatment. Conclusion: High resolution MRI visualises the changes of retroorb ital structures in endocrine orbitopathy with excellent quality before and after radiation therapy. Purpose: To determine the c1inical dose of ProHance® used for the assessment of blood-brain-barrier disrupt ion on low-field MR scanners that corresponds to standard-dose ProHance® on high-field MR scanners. Methods and Materials: The study was carried out at 4 centers . 138 patients with suspected or known brain disease underwent a routinehead-scan comprising T2-TSE and T1-SE-sequences on a 1.5 T MR scanner. After administration of 0.1 mmollkg ProHanc e® (Bracco-Byk, Gulden) a T1-weighted standard-dose-scan was performed with a delay of 15-20 min. Continuing the examination on a 0.2 T Magnetom OPEN (Siemens, Erlangen) a single-dose T1-SE-Sequence was started within 30-50 min. of the first injection. Two further T1low-field sequences were then each started 5 min. after two additional doses of 0.1 mmollkg ProHance® . 80 patients with enhancing lesions underwent an intraindividual compa rision. Assessment, performed OFFsite by two independent readers , included numbers of lesions detected, ranking according to the diagnostic information. contrast -to-no ise ratio (CNR ) and a matched pair assessment of CNS-to-Iesion contrast, lesion del ineation , information on internaI morphology and diagnostic confidence in defining or excluding lesions . Results: The single-dose low-field sequence detected significantly fewer lesions (80/95 lesions; p < 0.05), particularly metastases and infarctions, than the single-dose high-field sequence. No statistically relevant differences (reader 1: p = 1, reader 2: p =0.8) were found between the double-and tripie-dose low-field sequences and the singledose high-field sequence. Primary brain tumors were detected by all post-co ntrast sequences irrespective of the dose . By all criter ia of the matched pair assessment the higher doses were determined to be significantly (both readers p < 0.001) better than the lower doses wh en used in conjunction with low-field . Conclusion: The clinically equivalent dose in low-field to the 0.1 mmollkg Prohan ce® in high-field is 0.2 mmollkg. Single -dose Pro-Hanc e® is less effective and cannot be recommended at low-field . Purpose: To reliably identify, using the three-dimensional Fourier transformation constructive interference in steady-state (30FT-CISS) magnetlc resonance imaging (MRI) sequence, the cisternal segment of the A.M. Davies; BirminghamlUK be discussed. MRI also accurately reflects histology of post surgical masses, and can thus be used to identify and characterize recurrence. Oynamic Gd-enhanced MRI with a temporal resolution of 3 sec. is able to identify viable tumor residue following chemotherapy, or local TNF perfusion, as small as 3 mm2. This is, however, only possible after two cycles of chemotherapy. In infectious disease (Gd-enhanced) MRI displays granulation tissue, sinus tracts, active osteomyelitis, abscesses, necrosing fasciitis, cellulitis, etc. MRI is mainly used in chronic infection, spondylitis, and in complicated cases such as in diabetes mellitus. There are a large variety of tumours and tumour-like lesions arising in bone. To the unwary observer they present a bewildering spectrum of radiographie appearances that can lead to misinterpretation and suboptimal management. Although primary malignancies of bone are relatively rare they frequently pose an intriguing problem for the radiologist as the pathology is often equally challenging. Oespite recent major advances in musculoskeletal imaging the corner-stone of the radiological diagnosis remains the humble radiograph. This presentation will revisit the fundamentals of radiographie interpretation of bone lesions. Likening the search for the diagnosis to a detective story, an ordered approach to radiographie interpretation (pattern analysis) will be stressed rather than the frequently employed pattern recognition ("Aunt Minnie" approach). The salient features of bone destruction, periosteal new bone formation and matrix mineralization will be reviewed. Purpose: The insula is a distinct lobe, first described by Reil in 1809. Glassically, the insula is divided by the central sulcus of the insula (GSI) in an anterior precentral (three short gyri) and a posterior postcentral (two long gyri) part. The purpose of our study was to describe the anatomie characterstics of the insula using MRI. Methods and Materials: Using MPRAGE sequences, we examined 20 hemispheres of 10 volunteers. The number of identified gyri related to the insula were determined in the sagittal and transverse plane. Furthermore, the direction of the GSI with respect to the central sulcus was evaluated. Results: We always identified two postcentral gyri. Precentrally, we found three gyri in 50%, two in 25% and four in 25%. In the transverse plane, we counted 4 gyri in 65%, 5 gyri in 25% and 6 gyri in 10% of the examined hemispheres. The fifth gyrus was usually only identified on the inferior slices. The GSI was always identified in the sagittal plane by its depth and its oblique course. It was directed towards the central sulcus in 20%. Conelusion: The detailed description of the insula allows accurate identification of tumor extension and is aprerequisite for precise localization of function when using fMRI. 556 The insula: anatomie deseription and methods of identifieation in MRI TA Yousry, G. Fesl, A. Büttner, A. Mueller, S. Hartz, P. Winkler; Munich/D abducens nerve (N VI), to define landmarks that assist in identification of the nerve, and to describe the nerve's relationship to the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AIGA). Methods and Materials: A total of 26 volunteers underwent 30FT-GISS sequence MRI and 10 also underwent MR angiography to identify the facial colliculus, N VI and its apparent origin, Oorello's canal, and the AIGA. Results: We identified N VI with certainty in 96% of 30FT-GISS sequences obtained in the axial and sagittal planes and in 94% obtained in the coronal plane. The nerve emerged from the pontomedullary sulcus in 94% of cases. The facial colliculus could always be identified and Oorello's canal was identified in 94% of cases. In 76.6% of cases the abducens nerve was seen to contact the AIGA, which passed anterior to the nerve in 63.8% of cases and posterior in 29.8%. Conclusion: The abducens nerve and its relationship to the AIGA and other blood vessels can be reliably identified using a 30FT-GISS sequence and the facial colliculus and Oorello's canal as landmarks. 16:00-17:30 In this series of lectures, the various three-dimensional (3-D) ultrasonic imaging techniques are presented. These include the latest real-time aequisition methods to image moving organs sueh as the heart. Furthermore ultrasound techniques are presented to visualise 3-D colour blood flow and to obtain intravascular results. Since 3-D ultrasound is particularly used in echography of heart and vessels, clinical examples of cardiac 3-D imaging will be given. II will be explained that 3-D echoeardiography provides the c1inician with more confidence for the diagnosis of cardiac diseases and adds insights to the understanding of eomplex pathology. The availability of a 3-D data set allows the cardiologist to retrieve an infinite number of different views after the examination procedure. Unique cross-sections, difficult or impossible to obtain from standard acoustie windows, can be viewed. This increases the diagnostic power of the echo study. To reeonstruet an organ in its true anatomie dimensions, sequential acquisition of all eross-seetional planes encompassing te entire organ is necessary. Scanning methods include parallel slicing; pivoting orfan-Iike seanning or the stepwise rotational image aequisition every few degrees as ean be performed with multiplane probes. For moving organs such as the heart, triggering is required. New developments inelude fast volumetrie seanning by eleetronie as weil as by mechanical means. The electronic method is based on the mosaie transdueer principle combined with parallel processing of sound In this early era of virtual imaging we are beginning to see interactive 3D imaging also applied within the gastrointestinal tract. Although this technique already seems to be applicable to hollow organs like the colon and stomach we would like to point out a few caveats for its use; it is not Iikely to replace barium radiology for the radiologieal work-up of several groups of palients such as those with symptoms that may indicate abnormal function of the swallowing apparatus and/or colon and rectum. The diagnostic work up of patients with dysphagia or an anoreetaJ problem will rely on properly performed barium studies if neeessarily combined with simultaneous manometry. On the other hand, dedicated barium studies will still have an edge over more static virtual imaging techniques for the demonstration of structural anomalies or lesions smalI, complexe or specific Iike diverticles, hiatus hernia, stenosis and rings..., for lesions unsufficiently or not demonstrated by endoscopic studies, and for post-operative studies. However virtual imaging will take over some of the today indications of barium studies, the laller being practised more and more by subspecialised. Room C 16:00-17:30 the understanding of complex pathology. The availability of a threedimensional data-set allows the cardiologist to retrieve an infinite number of different views after the examination procedure. Unique cardiac cross-sections, difficult or impossible to obtain from standard acoustic windows, can be computed from the data set in any desired plane (anyplane echocardiography) and displayed in cine-Ioop format. Regions of interest can be extracted from the data set and structures of interest removed from their surroundings for detailed analysis. Surgeons will have greater insight into what will be found during operational procedures combined with additional functional details. This information is already of particular help in mitral valve and congenital defect repair. Accurate quantitative data together with new parameters will provide additional information and allow to address new c1in ical questions. For these reasons, three-dimensional echocardiography will be an essential part of the future of the clinical practice of cardiology and examinations will be performed with computer controlled transducer systems and standardized for specific cardiac conditions. As a consequence, the examination procedure will be less dependent on the ski11 and experience of the sonographer. Research must be directed towards identifying those cardiac conditions in which the diagnostie potential of three-dimenslonal echocardiography is superior or more cost-effective than other imaging methods. 562 Application in cardiology J.R.T.C. Roelandt; Rotterdam/NL beam information. The mechanical equivalent is based on fast-rotating phased array probe technique. These methods minimise the motion artifacts. Also intravascular echo data are being presented in 3D. Here again a series of echo slices, this time obtained by catheter pullback, serves to reconstruct the 3D image. From this volumetrie information a plaque size may be documented. Repeated measurements in a single plane may even yield volumetrie flow information. With simple pullback, the artery can only be reconstructed as "a straight tube". Geometrically correct 3D reconstruction of vascular geometry requires additional X-ray data. The combination of both techniques allows ealculation of parameters such as wall shear stress. 3D not only offers the possibility to view the organ in better perspective, it also beeomes possible to derive new parameters and, in future, to combine information by image fusion. In the last two years important technical improvement in 3D ultrasound color flow imaging occurred. In particular, new acquisition modalities, faster reconstruction algorithms and better display techniques are now available. The number of scanners commercially available on the market with the possibility of 3D flow imaging (3DFI) is constanlly increasing. This trend shows that 3DFI is not only a useful tool of the ultrasound scanner but it is beeoming areal new methodology and imaging technique. 3DFI improves the possibility of understanding the geometry and the emodynamics of blood flow. From a physical point of view, it gives us the possibility of a multi planar reconstruction, higher sensitivity, higher color spatial resolution, a redueed operator dependence. From a c1inical point of view it is possible to study and monitor the 3D local blood flow and velocity over the whole vessel; it is now possible to displaya coronal plane, there is an improved detectability of small vessel structure, there is an improved accuracy in velocity distribution measurement; 3DFI adds spatial information in complex geometry, improves reproducibility in sequential exams, gives an easier understanding of complex patient anatomy for primary care physicians, gives addition of information not previously available such as changes in velocity near the vessel wall and shear stress and improves accuracy in volume measurements. Some interesting technical innovations are pointed out: contrast harmonie imaging, tissue or native harmonie imaging, Doppler 3D tissue imaging, 1.5D and 2D array technology. The possibility of acquiring a volume allows the "fusion" with images coming fram other modalities. In order to do that it is necessary to export basic data from the US scanner in standard format (DICOM 3.0). Problems of connectivity deriving from this application will be discussed. Results obtained with a particular phantom using 3DFI and a CT scanner and some personal experience with 3DFI will be presented. 561 Technical possibilities of color flow imaging R. Novario; Varese/I Three-dimensional imaging constitutes a major research goal, since correct spatial structure information would help one to overcome the difficult process of mental conceptualization of cardiac structures, pathology of unknown morphology and complex geometry from crosssectional images. Several directions have been followed in threedimensional echocardiography. Undoubtedly, the most challenging direction is real-time threedimensional echocardiography. At present, however, most clinical experienee is with software controlled meehanical acquisition of a consecutive series of cardiac crosssectional images using currently available standard transducers and retrospeetive computer assisted "off-line" three-dimensional reconstruction. Recenlly, an ultrafast continuously rotating phased-array transdueer which allows the acquisition of 16 volumetrie data sets per seeond has been developed. Standard imaging processing equipment is used for reconstruction. This near real-time approach may become an alternative to real-time volumetrie imaging systems in specific clinieal conditions. Three-dimensional echocardiography provides the c1inician with more confidenee for the diagnosis of cardiac disease and adds insights to 16:00-17:30 Secondly the currently available techniques for coronary interventions will be summarised. The advantages and limitations of the different approaches to treat coronary stenoses and occlusions will be discussed. Selective coronary arteriography has been introduced in clinical practice since 1957 and regarded as the standard of reference for coronary anatomy and pathology. Substantial technical refinements have been achieved in the following two decades to improve resolution, x-ray views (double obliquity projections) and to develop computerized measurements techniques (quantitative coronary angiography). . .. In the same period of time, however, accuracy and reproduclbility of coronary angiography began to be questioned; intraobserver and interobserver variability of angiographic evaluations, major discrepaneies between angiographic and post-mortem findings and discordance between angiographic lesion severity and its physiological effects could be weil documented. It must now be accepted that coronary angiograms can only provide bidimensional images of vessel lumina, which are often poor indicators of underlying pathology and have limited c1inical impact and prognostic value. At present, therefore, coronary arteriography can't any longer be considered the "gold standard" for coronary anatomy and pathology. Its value as a guide in making the choice between surgical o~interventi~nal revascularization procedures in ischemic patients rernais unquestionable. Reliable non-invasive imaging of the coronary arteries would have a considerable impact on patient management in cardiology. Freezing of motion is the key issue in any cardiac imaging modality, even more so for non-invasive techniques. EßT and high-power gradient MR imaging provide extremely short acquisition times «100 msec) which enables non-invasive coronary visualization during breathholding. State of the art overview of results will be presented of EßT and MR non-invasive coronary imaging. Results of the first 60 patients with direct comparison between MRI, EßT and coronary angiography will be presented, with the outcomes of MRI navigator, VCATS techniq~es with and without contrast-enhancement and different reconstruction algorithms for evaluation of EßT data. Preliminary outcomes f~r the detection of 50% stenoses in the coronary arteries over the first 8 cm indicate overall sensitivity values of 63% and 68% and specificity values of 98% and 94% for MR and EßT, respectively in different patient cohorts. Also results of direct comparison of MR and EßT will be presented. ßoth techniques perform differently for each coronary segment. . . Pitfalls artifacts and diagnostic performance for each modallty will be evaluated, Also the different image processing techniques (e.g. thresholding, segmentation, rendering, etc.) and their effect on diagnostic outcome will be shown. In parts of Scandinavia the interventions in the coronary~rteries still is an area dominated by thoracic radiologists. A brief descnptlo~of t~e organisation of coronary interventional work at~he Uppsala University Hospital will be given together with a personal vlew~f why we feel It IS important for the rest of radiology that radioloqists still do PTCA. Early detection of breast cancer with high quality mammography is thm ost effective means of reducing death from this disease. A cornbination of superb image quality and undertsanding the heterogeneous and progressive nature of breast cancer is essential to optimize the potential of modern mammography. To be effective, the mammogrpaher will have to find the potentially fatal cancers in their preclinical detectable phase. Included in this category are the grade 3/poorly differentiated, rapidly growing tumors, as weil as those that have the potential to dedifferentiate. The heterogeneity can cause considerable difficulty for the radiologist. To add to this difficulty, the earlier the cancer is detected, the more nonspecific the mammographic appearance may be. The outcome of 2,500 women with breast cancer diagnosed in a randomized controlled screening trial and followed for an average of 18 years serves the basis for this presentation. An understanding of the underlying histopathology, its reflection on the mammogram and the capabilities and limitations of modern mammography combined with the knowledge about outcome differences by subtypes will provide the radiologist with the tools for effective disease control. 568 B. What is the real benefit? P.ß. Dean; TurkulF/N There are important confounding effects which will decrease the measured effect of mammography screening without decreasing its true impact. The measured effect of a 30% reduction in mortality teils us only part of the effect of mammography screening, as the true effect has been watered down by non-participation of the invited women and mammography of the non-invited wamen, termed "contamination". The mortality reduction in the "ever-screened" versus the "neverscreened" women in a screening trial. This will give a mortality reduction of more than 40%, although there is a self-selection bias in these numbers. The message is still c1ear: those women who attend mammography screening have nearly half the mortality from breast cancer than do those women who do not attend. These concepts will be iIIustrated with data from the Swedish Two-County screening program. Those cancers which have already grown to palpable size when the screening program begins will no longer be detected at an early stage by mammography; indeed many of the deaths in women invited to screening come from large cancers detected at screening. It is a common observation that women with a breast tumor will often delay seeking medical advice, but will respond to a screening invitation. Additionally, the absolute benefit of a screening program in the number of lives saved will continue to grow for many years after the trial has ended. Difficult as it is to demonstrate the true benefits of screening, it should be no surprise that a poorly conducted trial will have difficulty in demonstrating any benefit at all. Mortality reduction means reducing the actual number of deaths from breast cancer in a population, so that more women with breast cancer may survive it, and live longer until they eventually die from .anoth~r disease. Measuring survival of women who already have the diaqnosis of breast cancer does not tell us whether any deaths have been prevented; only mortality measurements can accomplish that. Since surgical, radio-and chemotherapy of breast cancer are given only to women with breast cancer and not to any population of normal women, these methods cannot be proven to have affected mortality from breast cancer. The real benefit from mammography screening is that it is the only method which has been proved to prevent death from breast cancer. Modern noninvasive imaging techniques show intracranial aneurysms large enough to compromise the visual pathways; intra-arte rial studies are indicated only for therapy. This may not apply to some low-flow arteriovenous malformations or fistulae interfering with vision, for which detailed superselective diagnostic studies may be required. MRI is the first-choice technique for lesions of the intracranial optic pathways. Functional MRI studies mayaiso be employed in certain circumstances; they may conceivably indicate the potential for visual recovery. 569 C. Controversies in mammographie screening I.M. Ramos; Parta/P Screening with mammography in order to detect early curable breast cancer has been widely used during the last 2-3 decades. There is a rather general consensus about the value of screening in women above 50 years of age, whice screening in the age group 40-49 is still controversial due to the low rate of mammographically demonstrable cancers and the high rate of recalls for supplementary mammography, c1inical examinations and biopsies in relation to cancers found. Although many programs recommend annual mamograms in elegible women the good screening interval for breast cancers also needs to be defined. Understanding these screening controversies requires an understanding of the principle of screening for disease, the epidemiology of breast cancer and the results of the many randomized clinical trials. A prime indication for imaging in neuro-ophthalmology is visual loss. Effective imaging must be tailored to the clinical pattern of visual loss. For presumed ocular causes, sonography is the investigation of choice, followed in some cases by MRI. Optic nerve lesions can sometimes be localised c1inically to the intraocular, intraorbital, intracanalicular or intracranial portions of the nerve. C'T and/or MRI may be combined to clarify the nature and extent of involvement. When optic neuropathy is part of a more generalised disorder, such as multiple sclerosis, wider imaging of the CNS may be necessary. Vascular accidents involving the eye and optic nerve require reliable noninvasive imaging of the extracranial cervical arteries. Opportunistic ehest infections are an important cause of morbidity and mortality in the immuno-compromised population. In order to make a meaningful contribution to the management of these patients background information such as the cause of immuno-deficiency, current immuno-suppressive therapy, white blood cell count (particularly the CD4 + count in AIDS patients), and overall medical status should be gathered, since these will provide important diagnostic guides. When this information is available it is possible to extend the traditionaJ role of a radiologist from one Iimited to detection and monitoring of pulmonary abnormalities. The application of CT and high resolution CT provides more specific diagnostic information, and allows accurate prediction of the relative chances of obtaining a positive diagnosis from transbronchial or percutaneous biopsy. The spectrum of pathology encountered in the AIDS and non AIDS populations will be reviewed separately, concentrating on the most common conditions in each group. Particular emphasis will be given to the role of the radiologist in advancing the process of diagnosis. The place of ehest radiography and high resolution CT scanning will be discussed in the context of alternative non radiological diagnostic tests. Pulmonary infections are among the most frequent causes of morbidity and mortality throughout the world. In the non-immunocompromizedpopulation, pneumonia is one of the top two infectious diseases and reprents the most prevelant community-acquired infection (CAP). Nosocomial pneumonia (NP) is the leading cause of death from acquired infection originating or taking place in the hospital. In CAP, most individuals are infected through person-to-person transmission of microorganisms bound to or suspended in water-mucus droplets. In contrast, NP is more frequently the result of an intraindividual process, triggered by aspiraton of gastric contents or contaminated oropharyngeal secretions. Infections in CAP are commonly caused by gram-positive and atypical bacteria as weil as viruses. The pathogens causing NP include aerobic gram-negative organisms and Staphy/ocaccus aureus. Viruses, protozoa and funghi play an increasing role in patients with impaired defense mechanisms. In CAP and NP, the typical radiologie findings include lobar pneumonia, bronchopneumonia (Iobular pneumonia) and diffuse bilateral interstitial disease. Nodules may be seen in fungal pneumonia. Complications such as necrosis, cavitation, bronchopleural fistula and pleural effusions are more frequently seen in NP. In both entities, the roje of radiology includes detection and exclusion of pulmonary infiltrates (which may be difficult in NP), narrowing of the differential diagnosis, guidance of additional (invasive) procedures and patient follow-up. This presentation will concentrate on the roje of various neurointerventional procedures for the management of vascular skull base lesions including preoperative embolization of extensive vascular skull base neoplasms, vascular malformations involving the skull base and traumatic vascular lesions of the skull base. A comprehensive imaging approach including correct selection of the appropriate imaging and interventional techniques is one of the key factors contributing to the final outcome of patients with skull base tumors. Particular emphasis will be given to the key roje of the internal carotid artery in the diagnosis and management of vascular extensive skull base tumors. Imaging criteria for detecting involvement of the internal carotid artery as weil as the endovascular techniques used pre-or intraoperatively to enhance radicality and safety of tumor removaJ will be discussed. RoomG any cerebra I structure for a closer look, or manipulate the stereotactic probe. References [1] CT is very useful for the demonstration of temporal bone fractures. The main plane is transverse or horizontal showing in 90% of the cases a longitudinal extralabyrinthine fracture with an entrance in the pars squamosa or mastoid. The labyrinthine lesions are transverse originating in the occipital bone. The incus is usually damaged in the long process with or without dislocations. The stapes may be involved with vestibular luxation, fracture of the footplate and/or lesions of the annular ligament. CT mayaiso be performed in the detection of traumatic labyrinthine fistula particularly through the oval and round windows. In case of post-traumatic nerve paralysis, a hematoma in the course of the nerve can be detected on MR and the damaged nerve segment is sometimes seen as a thickened enhancing region. More over only MR can show the proximal and/or distal extend of the nerve oedema, showing the surgeon that the decompression should be wider. MR can also help in the differentiation between an encephalocele and other tissue or fluid when a tegmen fracture occurs. MR is also the only technique able to demonstrate intralabyrinthine hemorrhage (on unenhanced T1weighted images) or fibrosis (on gradient-echo images) in case of labyrinthine concussion. The inflammatory changes developing during the days following the occurrence of a perilymph fistula can sometimes be recognized as an intralabyrinthine enhancement on MR. Finally MR is the method of choice to look for contusions or hemorrhages in the brain tissue surrounding the temporal bone and in the important structures of the auditory and vestibular pathways. With the availability of 3D data sets in CT, MRI, and PET methods of perspective 3D visualization have become possible.. The most informative visualization is achieved by volume visualisation for which the authors group has done pioneering work. These techniques are explained and examples of applications in diagnostic radiology, surgical plannung and education in radiological anatomy are shown. For the latter 3D interactive atlases like the VOXEL-MAN system have been created. 3D models of different parts of the body may be explored by rotation, dissection, lookthrough. As a specialty cross-sectional and radiographie imaging may be simulated in the context of 3D anatomy. Information about the visible objects may be called from a knowledge base. However, even on a high end workstation, high quality visualisation is still too time consuming and interaction too complicated when sophisticated tools like dissection are used. We hence developed a new feature allowing to create simpler derivatives of the model, called "intelligent movies". Thus, an expert (radiologist, anatomist) can emphasize certain aspects by creating corresponding scenes as intelligent movies, which a user (referring physician, student) can explore interactively on a PC. 575 B. Atlas-based stereotactic neurosurgery: from the clinical CD-ROM to virtual reality BrainBench w.L. Nowinski; SingaporelSGP Deformable brain atlases along with fast warping are powerful tools for quantitative analysis of brain images, particularly for segmentation, labeling, targeting, and multi-modal registration. We have constructed the brain atlas database [1] with c1assic Thieme atlases: Schaltenbrand-Wahren, Talairach-Tournoux, Referentially Oriented Talairach-Tournoux, and Ono-Kubik-Abernathey. These atlases are fully segmented and labeled, mutually coregistered, and their 3D extensions are built. The anatomical index has about 1000 structures and 400 sulcal patterns. NeuroFamily is a suite of atlas-based applications for neurosurgery, neuroradiology, neuroeducation and neurosciences. The Electronic Clinical Brain Atlas CD-ROM [2] "is a truly unique accomplishment that marks a new stage in clinical neuroanatomy" [see Surgical Neurology, 1998; 49; 114-5] . It integrates severallandmark atlases and MR scans into a multi-purpose, multi-dimensional, multi-platform interactive clinical tool with 17,000 structures labeled on 1,500 atlas images. With its unique real-time scaling of images, it greatly facilitates the correlation of specific anatomical structures from the atlas to actual patient's scans. NeuroPlanner, a system for functional neurosurgery [3], supports preoperative planning, intraoperative procedures, and postoperative analysis of data. Preoperative planning includes registration, target definition and trajectory planning. A 3D display of cerebral structures along with stereotactic trajectories and simulated therapeutic lesions allows for a better understanding of spatial relationships and facilitates surgery planning. The Brain Bench is virtual reality stereotaxis for fast neurosurgery planning and training [4] . It integrates 3D brain atlas, geometrie models of stereotactic frames, neurosurgical tools, and 3D reach-in, two-hand manipulation. The user's left hand controls the entire displayed complex containing the patient's data, individualized 3D atlas, and stereotactic frame fixed to the patient's head. This complex can be turned and placed as one does an object held in the hand. The right hand performs detailed manipulation using 3D widgets to interact with the surgical planning tools and patient's data.  In this workshop the treatment of benign biliary lesions will be shown. We will show one case of contacllaser-lithotripsy under cholangioscopic control. Furthermore we will show how oceluded endoscopically placed plaslic stents are removed, and the dilation of benign biliary strictures. In the summary the results of the treatment of benign biliary disease will be discussed. Self-expandable metallic biliary stents combine the advantage of a small track through the liver and a large lumen which is less Iikely to become occluded by encrusted bile. Occlusion by bile encrustation is unusual but approximately 10% of stents become oceluded by tumour overgrowth or ingrowth. In most cases it is possible to recanalise the stent by inserting a second endoprosthesis coaxially within the first. In patients with low or mid-common bile duct obstruction a single metallic stent is used. In hilar lesions involving the left and right hepatic ducts bilateral parallel stents are inserted, extending into the duodenum, in order to provide optimum palliation and minimise the risk of cholangitis Studies comparing plastic endoprostheses with metallic stents have shown that the lalter are associated with a lower incidence of cornplications such as infection and haemorrhage and with a significantly lower rate of reintervention. In benign biliary strictures balloon dilatation has a success rate of approximately 70%. This is usually done transhepatically but access via a Roux loop fixed to the parietal peritoneum can be useful. In selected patients with frequent recurrent stenoses metallic endoprostheses may maintain patency. Close communication and mutual learning between different medical professionals is essential in pediatric CNS diseases to accommodate increasing knowledge, integrate specialization and best use rapidly expanding imaging potential. We will supply so me material and answers to central questions in 3 selected fields of pediatric spinal diseases: trauma, tumor and tethered cord. Selected questions are: (1) which embryologie and biomechanical knowledge is necessary for performing an adequate study? (2) what does the surgeon want to know from imaging modalities? (3) What does the radiologist need to understand from principles of surgical treatment? (4) Which of the neurosurgeon's questions can or cannot be answered by the radiologist? (5) Which MR-techniques are most helpful? Representative pediatric spinal MRstudies will be presented in their elinical context using basic principles and interactive neurosurgical -neuroradiological discussion. Embryologie, anatomie and biomechanical principles are the basis on which to build an useful imaging study. In the newborn, infant and young child the spinal column is -for instance -much more flexible (compliant) when "stretched" than the spinal cord as compared to the spine of an adult. This leads to traumatic (birth-related or accidental) spinal cord injuries without detectable radiographie abnormalities (SCIWORA). Adequate elasticity response to physiological strain (Le. bending) is the hallmark of the normal filum terminale. Failure of this simple mechanism due to abnormal structure, lipoma, tumor, scar, adhesion or split cord of fast MRI techniques for a refined examination of the brain and their profound contribution to basic neuroimaging reseach will be covered. Special attention will be given to the advantages, draw backs and limitations of the different fast MRI techniques in comparison to the normal spin echo performance. The course will start with the use of GE, TSE, and EPI sequences for the diagnosis of brain maturation, stroke, and brain and spinal cord lesions, will than proceed to diffusion and perfusion imaging, and discuss different aspects of functional imaging during different activation tasks in normal and diseased brain. Room N/O 16:00-17:30 is likely to eventually damage the lower spinal cord due to tractionrelated ischemia. This in turn gives rise to symptoms and signs of lower leg weakness and decreasing sensibility, bladder dysfunction and incontinence. Closure of neural plate is proceeding from "head to tail" but has also a segmental component. A myelomenigocele might therefore coexist with a split cord malformation which is not uncommonly overlooked. What does the pediatric neurosurgeon want to know from MRI? Examples for questions are: Where is the lesion in precise relationship to numbered vertebral bodies, pedicles and arches? Is the lesion epidural, subdural extramedullary or intramedullary? Is there a perilesional reaction/ edema/ gliosis? Is lt possible to distinguish between the lesion and the perilesional changes? Is there more than one lesion? Is there hydrosyringomyelia? Where is the position of the conus medullaris? How wide is the spinal canal? What is the precise relationship between alesion and the spinal nerve roots/nerves? Does a space-occupying lesion arise from defined structures (bone?). MRI of the spinal canal should primarily rely on the little artifact -much resolution and contrast principle. The single most helpful standard technique for MRI of the spinal canal in infants and children are in our experience 2 mm Turbo-Spin-Echo-sequences in sagittal (T1 + T2-weighted) and transverse (T2-weighted) planes. We use a 512 Matrix in the frequency direction and no interslice gap. Transverse images are 5 mm for "survey" and 2 mm in regions of interest. Other techniques such as T1SE-fat saturation, STIR, FLAIR, gradient-echo-volume aquisition/CISS, MRA and the application of contrast are based on individual decisions. Standard MRI measurement sequences for clinical examinations are spin echo sequences, which needs several minutes for the data acquisition. For faster data acquisition, a variety of fast imaging techniques are available, which include gradient echo sequences, turbo spin echo sequences, echo planar sequences and a lot of combinations of these techniques. Different magnetization preparation techniques can be used prior to the imaging sequences in order to modify the image contrast. All fast imaging techniques can be described by the obtainable spatial resolution, the image contrast for selected tissues and the sensitivity to additional parameters like f1ow, chemical shift and field inhomogeneities. The lecture will give an overview of the imaging techniques, their physical principles and their features and constraints. Helpful tools for the characterization of sequences are the k-space description of data acquisition and the course of longitudinal and transversal magnetization during the measurement. These tools will be described and applied to the different imaging techniques. This session will discuss the impact that CT and MR scanning has had on established radiographie techniques, the mainstay of neuroradiographie practice for over a quarter of a century.. CT and MR examinations of the central nervous system have replaced established contrast radiographie examinations such as myelography, encephalography and most of the noncontrast radiography. Currently cerebral angiography is under threat from CT and MR angiography which is either noninvasive or minimally so. In this session we will discuss issues with particular reference to radiographers working where access to CT/MR scanners is not the norm and what, if any value there is in using other techniques. Medico-Iegal issues such as the radiation dose that the patient may receive during an Xray examination and that of performing an invasive examination when an alternative one could be available will be discussed. We need to discuss the impact that scanning has on the patient, on the ultimate diagnosis, on the radiographers and of equal importance on our teaching .. The impact of Interventional procedures will be discussed as part of the change in the work of the diagnostic department of Neuroradiography.  Purpose: The term "stromal tumours" defines a new histopathologieal eoneept eomprising a group of poorly diferentiated tumours of the gastrointestinal traet. Previously these tumours were thought to originate from smooth muscle eells. Ultrastruetural and inmunohistoehemieal studies suggest that some of these tumours may arise from nerve eells or vaseular endothelial eells. Our aim is to review the radiologieal appearanees of these tumours. Retrospeetive study of 25 patients (10 females, 15 males) with a mean age of 29 years. In 3 eases the tumour was found ineidentally. Radiologieal examinations include: CT (16 patients), CT portography (2 patients), MRI (3 patients), ultrasound (2 patients) and barium studies (2 patients). The eommonest presenting symptom was abdominal pain (8). The tumours were loealised in: stomaeh (10), jejunum (7), ileum (4), reetum (2) and duodenum (1). The mean size of the benign tumours (36%) was 5.5 em, and of the malignant (64%) 9.6 em. Some of the radiologieal appearanees ineluded: weil defined margins (80%), neerosis (68%), ealcifieations (7%), haemorrhage (64%), liver metastases (32%) and omental spread (16%). Conelusion: Radiology has an important role to play in the deteetion and staging of the stromal tumours. as eost-effeetiveness aspeets will be diseussed. Reports in radiologieal literature and own experienees will be presented. Plain film radiography is the basic teehnique for imaging of spinal and pelvie trauma. Digital radiography teehniques are espeeially useful in traumatized patients rendering diagnostie image quality in almost all eases. CT is extremely useful for the preeise c1assifieation of spinal and pelvie trauma, when plain film radiography is ambiguous. Stability of aeetabular and vertebral fraclures as weil as SI-joint lesions ean be preeisely evaluated. MRI gives valuable information in patients with neurologie deficits following spinal trauma, deterioration of neurologieal funetion in the early and late posttraumatie phase and for the deteetion of oeeult soft-tissue and bony injury of the pelvis and proximal femur. Conelusion: For radiologieal diagnosis of spinal and pelvie trauma, a tailored approach is reeommended, whieh has to take into eonsideration the elinieal status of the patient, the trauma meehanism and the availability of imaging teehniques. Reeenlly, MRI proved useful for the deteetion of oeeult fraetures and eontusions of the bone marrow. Purpose: To assess the value of 'pouehography' and CT sean in the postsurgieal evaluation following total proctoeoleetomy with i1eoanal pouch . To assess the value of transana l drainage by lamel to prevent leakage of sutures and subsequent abscess formation . Methods and Materials: Between 1985 and 199830 patients underwent total proctocolectomy, endorectal pull-through of an ileal pouch , and temporary diverling loop ileostomy for ulcerative colitis or familial polyposis coli, At surgery, a transabdominal drainage was performed in all patients. The last 5 patients underwent additional transanal drainage to protect sutures . CT scan was performed when pelvic abscess was suspected. 'Pouchography' was performed three monts after surgery and/or before closure of the diverting i1eostomy to assess continence, integrity of the i1eoanal anastomosis and ileal pouch anatomy. 'Pouchography' was done by injection of water soluble contrast agent into the efferent ileal loop. Results: In six patients surgery was complicated by abscess formation . In four of them a persisting fistula was seen on antegrade pouchography performed several months later. In total eight fistulae were diagnosed , seven on antegrade pouchography, one on fistulography. In one patient massive pulmonary embol ism and shock resulted in severe bowel ischemia. Two patients developed small-bowel obstruction as a consequence of intraperitoneal adhesions. Two patients developed a reservoir outlet obstruction due to anal stenosis. One of them had an associated persisting large perianal fistula. One patient developed fecal ineontinence, requiring a permanent i1eostomy. In the patients with transanal drainage , no abseess format ion was seen . In one patient CT scan was performed beeause of loss of purulent material via transanal lame l. CT scan showed only mild inflammation adjacenl to the poueh wilhout abscess formation. Conclusion: CT scan is the exam ination of choice for detect ion of abscesses. Antegrade 'pouchography' is a safe and reliable examination to evaluate contincenee of the anastomosis and to detect postoperative fistulae . Transanal drainage improves results of surgical therapy by preventing leakage of sutures and subsequent abscess formation. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to define the role of focused computed tomography (CT) in adult patients with suspected acute appendicitis and to determine the effect of CT on the treatment of such patients. Methods and Materials: Appendiceal CT was performed in 120 consecutive patients with acute appendicitis in the differential diagnosis, whose clinical findings were insufficient to perform surgery or to discharge from the hospital. Each scan was obtained in a single breath-hold from the lower abdomen to the upper pelvis using a 5-mm collimation and a pitch of 1.6. No patients were given oral or intravenous contrast media. CT results were correlated with surgical and pathologie findings at appendectomy or clinical follow-up. Results: 88 of the 93 patients with acute appendicitis were correctly diagnosed by CT, 24 of the 27 patients without acute appendicitis were correctly diagnosed by CT (95% sensitivity, 89% specificity). CT signs of acute appendicitis included fat stranding (100%), enlarged appendix (>6 mm) (97%), adenopathy (63%), appendicoliths (43%), abscess (10%), and phlegmon (5%). Conclusion: An enlarged appendix with periappendiceal fat stranding is by far the most common CT finding in acute appendicitis. The use of spiral CT in patients with equivocal c1inical presentation suspected of having acute appendicitis led to a significant improvement in the preoperative diagnosis and a lower negative appendectomy rate. Routine use of focused appendiceal CT may lower the costs of caring for patients with c1inically suspected appendicitis. (239) and of patients with right lower quadrant pain without acute appendicitis (138) and acute inflamed appendices (80) were prospectively evaluated with ultrasound for intraluminal gas. Results: Appendices of asymptomatic patients showed gas in 86% (206) and 14% (33) did not. Appendices of symptomatic patients without acute appendicitis presented with gas in 79% (109) and without in 21% (29). Acute inflamed appendices showed gas in 15% (12) and 85% (68) did not. The absence of gas as a criterion for acute appendicitis has a sensitivity of 85%, a specificity of 79%, a positive and negative predictive value of 57% and 94% and an accuracy of 81%. Gas was useful to rule out acute appendicitis in 46% (64) of our symptomatic patients because established criteria were misleading. In 24% (19 patients) the absence of gas was useful to diagnose acute appendicitis because other criteria were not present in a convincing manner. Conclusion: The presence or absence of gas in the appendix are useful additional sonographie signs especially in cases where established criteria for acute appendicitis are not sufficiently present or misleading. Purpose: To improve the accuracy of c1inical diagnosis in patients with suspected appendicitis, a sonographie attempt was made with high resolution broad band with (5-10 MHz) transducers to visualise both the normal and abnormal appendix. Methods and Materials: In 100 patients the visibility ofthe appendix, its AP outer diameter during compression (00), the maximal wall thickness (MWT) and the presence of colour Doppler (CD) signs were recorded. The findings were compared to histology in all operated cases (38) otherwise a 2 weeks c1inical follow up was made. Results: The appendix was visualised in all pathologically positive cases and in 82.5% of the normal appendices (18.7% partly, 63.8% in whole length). Using 00 >6 mm as the sonographie criteria of appendicitis resulted in unnecessarily operated false positive cases (100% sensitivity, 91.3% specificity). The false positive rate decreased, but the sensitivity also, if using MWT >3 mm as the diagnostic criteria (90% sensitivity, 97.5% specificity). Adding CD improved specificity, but decreased sensitivity in both methods. Conclusion: The normal appendix can be detected more frequently by sonography than reported previously. Whole length demonstration of an appendix, smaller than 6 mm in 00 is 100% specific for anormal appendix. This sign might prevent from unnecessary laparotomies in c1inically doubtful cases. real-time two-dimensional imaging and blood flow studies provide complementary information. Intravascular scanning allows high frequency ultrasound to be used, with correspondingly good spatial resolution. Contrast resolution is degraded by beam side lobes and the limited dynamic range of the ultrasonic pulse. The physics of ultrasonic scattering by blood, pulsed Doppler and duplex scanning and colour flow imaging performances determine the limits of clinical applications. Contrast agents enhance the echogenicity of blood, improving sensitivity and, through second harmonic detection, suppress solid tissue echoes. Three-dimensional display, with segmentation by the presence of the flow signal, facilitates spatial perception. Clinical applications in vascular pathologies are summarised. Since the introduction of helical scanners, CT angiography (CTA) achieved an essential role in many vascular applications that were previously managed with conventional angiography. CTA performance is based on the accurate selection of collimation width, pitch, reconstruction spacing and scan delay, that must be modulated on the basis of the c1inical issue. However, the major improvement of CT has been provided by the recent implementation of many post-processing techniques, as multiplanar reformatting, shaded surface display, maximum intensity projections, 3D perspectives of surface and volume rendering that simulate endoscopic view. The integration of the potentialities of the scanner and of the image processing techniques permitted to improve the evaluation of aneurysms, dissection and vascular anomalies involving the thoracic aorta; carotid artery stenosis; aneurysms of abdominal aorta; renal artery stenosis; , follow-up of arterial stents and grafts; acute or chronic pulmonary embolism. Our experience showed that the assessment of arterial pathologies with CTA requires the integration of 3D post-processing techniques in most applications. 600 C. MR-based assessment of vascular pathologies J.F. Debatin; Zurich/CH Initially, lime-of-f1ight angiography has found its way into c1inical routine for imaging vascular morphology. In conjunction with phase contrast imaging, functional and morphological assessment of vascular pathology became possible. The f1ow-dependence and associated artifacts inherent to these techniques have restricted the c1inical use of these MRA techniques to the extra-and intracranial arterial-as weil as the systemic and portal venous systems. With the advent of high performance gradient systems a new promising MRA strategy has been developed: contrast-enhanced 3D MR-angiography. It is based on the combination of rapid 3D imaging and the T1-shortening effect of intravenously infused paramagnetic contrast. This review provides a technical overview and critically discusses the c1inical application for the different MRA techniques regarding morphological as weil as functional assessment of the vascular system. The presentation will focus upon the ehest and abdomen. purposes. The high sensitivity, excellent technique provided, is lowered only by a few circumstances: Patient age, radiodense breast lissue and the specific histopathologie growth pattern of some malignancies. The specificity is limited by lesion size and morphology as weil as by the threshold for mammographie cancer detection. These limitations should always be considered when additional imaging modalities are selected for work-up. Interpretative criteria apply to the breast tissue structure, weil circumscribed and ill-defined masses, spiculated masses and stellate lesions, microcalcifications and asymmetries. Breast parenchymal pattern can be categorised from 1 to 4 in order to describe the accuracy and reliability of the lesion detection. Weil circumscribed masses, except those containing fat or typical calcifications, need correct management to be categorised: Spot compression magnification views to better visualise the contour and ultrasound to establish or exclude a simple cyst. Generally a conservative approach is recommended because of the very low ppv of these lesions. III-defined masses can correspond to malignant disease but the differential diagnosis encompasses cyst, fibroadenomas, papillomas and posttraumatic/posttherapeutic changes. Therefore the mammography yields an equivocal result. In contrast stellate lesions and spiculated masses reach a ppv of up to 94%. Without a posttraumalic/posttherapeutic history open surgical biopsy is mandatory. Microcalcifications with today's equipment and the broad use of magnification spot compression views can be determined as definitely benign, indeterminate or suspicious. The stereotactically guided vacuum-assisted core biopsy offers an invaluable diagnostic tool for the work-up of indeterminate microcalcifications and can substitute diagnostic surgical biopsy. y. Grumbach; Amiens/F Technological progress over these last ten years, has made of this investigation in B mode, the more often indispensable complementary exploration to mammography. However sonography can in certain particular circumstances be used alone, in first intention. It is fundamental to possess a good knowledge of mammary echoanatomy, its physiological variants and that of pitfalls and artefacts. Thanks to the use of higher frequencies (pass bands from 6 to 13 Mhz), the sonographic semiology has become finer, both for malignant and benign findings. The new semiological criteria described by Stavros, following a multicentric sonographic study in the USA, will be discussed. However, not only fine needle aspiration cytology, but also, and more frequently, core biopsy proves to be indispensable if any doubt. Echoguided-puncture, with a weil trained operator, always keeps its prominent place, exept in presence of microcalcifications compared to stereotactic biopsy, which is becoming more performant with the progress of digitalization. The only limits of ultrasound concerning masses are very small opacities in fatty breasts, because of insufficient sonographie contrast compared to the neighbouring tissues. For us Color Doppler remains still under evaluation, as weil as the use of microbubble contrast media, the future of which appears promissing. Infectious and inflammatory pathology of the spinal cord may be due to enterococcal or syphilitic infection, coccidiomycosis, sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, tropical spastic paraparesis, herpes zoster or myelitis of uncertain origin. In many cases arespiratory tract infection or vaccination precedes idiopathic acute transverse myelitis which its considered to follow an autoimmune response or small vessel vasculopathy. Pathologically demyelination and necrosis as weil as edema can be found. Neuroradiologically, magnetic resonance imaging criteria can help differenliating IATM from MS, infarction or spinal cord tumor. Subacute necrotizing myelopathy, AIDS related myelitis and polyradiculomyelitis as weil as the findings in Guillain-Barre syndrome are being discussed. Guillain-Barre syndrome is a progressive ascending motor weakness that involves more than one limb with areflexia and evolves over a maximum of four weeks. Although Guillain-Barre syndrome affects the peripheral nerves and IATM affects the spinal cord crossover cases have been reported. Recent studies of acute transverse myelopathy show that differentiation of MS from IATM may be possible with use of magnetic resonance imaging criteria, including lesion length and cranial findings. Identification of IATM and differentiation from other causes of transverse myelopathy are important since treatment and prognosis vary considerably. In the chest, spiral CT angiography (CTA) is a powerful imaging tool with a well-proven value for the diagnostic work-up of the aorta and the pulmonary vasculature. This course will discuss the most important factors that influence image quality and will give suggestions for examination techniques with various scanner types inciuding multirow detector systems. It will be demonstrated how problems such as streak artifacts in the brachiocephalic veins or pulsation effects in the ascending aorta can be reduced, and how subsecond tube rotation or multirow detector systems can be used to improve spatial resolution, shorten the overall examination time, improve vascular contrast or reduce the total amount of contrast agent. CT angiography is the 'workhorse' for the evaluation of aortic disease. It has a high diagnostic yield for the work-up of thoracic aneurysms and dissections, and allows for a precise characterization of the location of disease relative to the supraaortic branches. CTA is the technique of choice in acutely ill patients such as in suspected aortic rupture, aortic injury, or acute dissection. In acute and chronic pulmonary embolism. CTA has become an established standard technique that allows for direct visualization of the thrombembolic material. CTA, however, is limited to more central pulmonary arteries. Accurate evaluation of subsegmental arteries is limited with standard scanners but may be improved with newer scanners and optimum examination techniques. Typical pitfalls and diagnostic limitations of CTA will be discussed for various applications. Given the recent technologic advances, CT angiography remains a potent competitor to MRA for non-invasive imaging of the chest. Rapid progress in imaging techniques and advances in computer technology during the past decade has had an unquestionably profound effect on radiology, as weil as a strong influence on related clinical fields. Recently image-guided therapy has been boosted by the improved quality, content of digital data and by the ease with which computers can manipulate images. Based on experiences made in the Surgical Planning Laboratory (SPL), Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston we will discuss the implementation of planning and simulation of surgical procedures, intraoperative navigation, interactive image-guidance, thermal monitoring, virtual endoscopy, automated patient-to-model registration methods and morphometric analysis into radiology. The great challenge for radiologists however will be to provide leadership in the evolution of image-guided therapy. Radiology is particularly weil suited and positioned to take this leadership role, since it has a strong commitment to advancement of technology as weil as clinical care. Our success will depend on the competence of radiologists in advancing technology and to participate in patient care beyond the initial stage of diagnosis. By doing so we should find asecure place in the process and as a result we will continue to expand the prevailing frontiers of our specialty. We present with a live surgical procedure at the University of Vienna a technology for remote augmented reality visualization via telecommunication. We transfer and visualize medical knowledge via the Internet, for interactive consultation and for continuous medical education. All surgery is image-guided since surgeons operate guided by images of the surgical field formed on their retinas. Any surgical procedure can be executed more safely by extending the vision of surgeons beyond the surface of the surgical field. Our vision is to give the surgeon "Xray vision", diagnostic and therapeutic information from different sources is visualized directly at the patient, augmenting the reality. Video from endoscope or microscope is fused with medical imaging data in real time, augmenting the reality. The surgeon sees beyond the surface the position of surgical instruments relative to the patient's anatomy. Although image guided surgery assists the surgeon to locate critical anatomical structures, one decisive factor for success is the experience and knowledge of the surgeon. We use the Internet and industry standard telecommunication protocols to distribute in real time medical content. The surgical procedure can be visualized at any remote computer, an expert can be consulted for a second opinion. We will demonstrate at the tutorial an expert consultation during a live teleassisted image guided stereotatic procedure, connecting to the University Hospital of Vienna. Rescue of failed Doppler studies has been the main theme in the investigation of the role of microbubble agents for radiological ultrasound with some useful gains in diagnostic accuracy. Recently a number of non-linear modes of microbubble behaviour have been studied. These exploit the fact that the compressibility of gas confers unique modes of behaviour upon microbubble agents, including the harmonie mode, stimulated acoustic emission and inverse pulse imaging, which depend on the non-linear properties of bubbles. They detect both moving and stationary bubbles and can be used to assess the microcirculation but have proved particularly promising in the Iiverspecific late phase shown by Levovist and some newer agents. Another main trend has been the quantification of microbubbles as they transit a tissue of interest. Tumours are an important example but demonstrating shunts, e.g. between the portal and systemic circulations in cirrhosis and liver tumours, between twins in the twin-twin-transfusion syndrome and across the lung in hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia are important examples. From this data true tissue perfusion and functional images that depict the spatial variation of these haemodynamic features can be derived. The recent introduction of efficient and safe ultrasound contrast agents (USCAs) is participating to the development of color Doppler ultrasonography of renal diseases. The diagnosis of renal vascular diseases is facing many technical and anatomieallimitations. USCAs increase the Doppler signal intensity and the renal echogenicity in some cases. They improve the detection and the recording of main and supernumerary renal arteries and reduce the frequency of technical tailures. USCAs increase the role of color Doppler sonography as the primary modality in the screening of renovascular hypertension. USCAs improve the detection of renal vein blood flow for the diagnosis of patency and thrombosis in case of technical failure. They also improve the analysis of the cortical microvasculature and facilitate the diagnosis of perfusion defects. The diagnosis of renal infarct is tacilitated when the baseline Doppler signal is insufficient, as it is the case in the ischemic renal transplant. USCAs seem also capable of increasing the color Doppler sensitivity in the diagnosis of low flow arteriovenous fistulas and malformations. USCAs improve detection of intratumoral blood flow and may be useful for characterization and detection of small lesions. Next generation of USCAs will achieve reproducible B-mode enhancement and allow targeted drug delivery. USCAs are weil tolerated and do not have any renal toxicity. US contrast agents allow a better evaluation of focal liver lesions and of the portal system, as they enhance Doppler signals in both large and small vessels. The use of contrast agents in focal liver lesions has been studied by several investigators. The data in the literature are sometimes contradictory, but typical features of some pathologies are emerging and can be applied in the clinical practice. The most promising area for contrast-enhanced Doppler US lies in the follow up of percutaneous ablation procedures, including ethanol injection, thermal ablation and chemoembolization. US contrast media in the evaluation of the portal system are mainly applied in the visualization of the portal vein and collaterals in difficult patients and in the assessment of TIPS. US contrast media can be used as intravascular tracers to dynamically the study blood flow in organs or tumors. This functional imaging should be used to obtain typical time-intensity curves in tumors, since flow in malignant tumor vasculature is known to have considerable spatial and temporal variations. Encouraging results are coming from the assessment of liver blood flow changes in cirrhotic patients, indicating that contrast-enhanced Doppler US can differentiate cirrhotic and non-cirrhotic diffuse liver disease. Finally, non-linear techniques, including harmonic resonance, microbubble disruption and stimulated acoustic emission, will represent an exciting technical development for imaging Iiver vasculature and tumor vascularization. 8:30-10:00 Room I -brain AVMs treated by glue injection -dural arterio-venous fistulas treated by venous approach Indications and technique will be discussed with the audience. This Video-Workshop will concentrate on the demonstration of endovascular procedures for the complete oblitteration of arterio-venous malformations of the brain and GDC obliteration of intracranial saccular aneurysms. Concerning brain AVM embolizations video-demonstrations on multicatheter superselective nidus catheterization and intranidal glue embolization will be shown. The role of superselective evaluation of AVM angioarchitecture in achieving complete obliteration will be included in these video-demonstrations. Concerning aneurysm obliteration emphasis will be given to the GDC obliteration of complex ruptured and incidental saccular aneurysms as weil as on the demonstration of the balloon assisted GDC obliteration of broad based aneurysms.  Im 809 Percutaneous drainage procedures Drainage of fluid collection is a weil established interventional procedure, and every radiologist should be familiar with the basic interventional skills necessary to drain a simple abscess. In this workshop the indications and contra-indications of catheter drainage are listed. Imaging guidance, and drainage strategies will be discussed in detail. The presentation will have the format of a "Case presentation" and will consist of several cases that can be encountered in common c1inical practice. Emphasis is put on selection and use of different interventional materials, and management of technical issues encountered during the various procedures. Results and complications of catheter drainage will be critically analyzed and compared with surgical treatment. Biliary drainage is performed in a first intent by the endoscopic approach, allowing for sphincterotomy, biopsy, endoscopy and access to the pancreatic and cystic ducts. In routine use, the percutaneous transhepatic approach is reserved for endoscopical failures, or other particular circumstances. Main indications of the percutaneous antegrade approach to the bile ducts include previous gastric surgery or hepatico-jejunostomy, failed catheterization of the papilla, Bismuth type 11 or 111 obstruction at the Iiver hilum, liver transplant, and others. Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography gives precise information on location, length, extent and cause of biliary obstruction. lodinated contrast material or C0 2 can be used for opacification of the intrahepatic bile ducts. Complete demonstration of the biliary tree is mandatory prior to any therapeutic procedure. Relative contra-indications are ascites, intractable coagulopathy, portal hypertension and Iimited life expectancy. Placement of metal stents for relief of malignant obstruction ensures a higher benefit/cost ratio than plastic stents. Covered stents and stent placement in benign biliary obstruction are not advisible as routine procedures. Other percutaneous transhepatic procedures derived from insertion of a drainage catheter inciude balloon dilatation, stone extraction or disintegration, atypical drainage routes such as biliary-gastric or biliary-neojejunostomy, antegrade endoscopy, intraluminal ultrasound, The purpose of this video session is to present different cases of vascular brain diseases treated by embolization. We will comment successively endovascular treatment of: -intracranial aneurysms treated selectively and by occlusion of parent vessel During the last ten years endovascular treatment has been accepted as a therapeutic alternative in the management of intracranial aneurysms, which are considered inoperable or pose a high surgical risk. Detachable balloons and non detachable microcoils have been used in the past, aneurysm rupture and coil migration have been observed as complications. With the advent of Guglielmi detachable coils (GDC) the indication for treatment of intracranial aneurysms night have been changed. The use of GDC allows a more controlled and precise placement of these very soft platinum microcoils, enabling selective occlusion of saccular aneurysms. Depending on the clinical presentation, the therapeutic protocol is different: The c1inical diagnosis of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is confirmed on computed tomography (CT) and the diagnosis of an aneurysm is verified by four vessels angiography, using intraarterial digital subtraction angiography (DSA) technique. If an aneurysm is detected, endovascular embolization is performed in the same session with the angiography. All non-ruptured aneurysms are examined by CTangiography and/or by MR-angiography with three-dimensional reconstructions. These examinations do not only detect aneurysms but play an important role in planning the endovascular therapy. Our technique of endovascular therapy with GDC is demonstrated using abiplane DSA. In our series of 256 embolized aneurysms, the clinical presentation was SAH in 127,44 aneurysms were symptomatic and 58 aneurysms were found incidentally. The major complications were due to thromboembolic events, aneurysm rupture and rehemorrhage. The rate of recurrence as a disadvantage is 12 %. An advantage of the method includes the minimal invasive procedure and the possibility to treat patients in poor medical conditions as weil as patients with high risk aneurysms. Major Iimitations that will be presented are a broad neck of the aneurysm and a difficult vascular anatomy of the relevant arteries. Room UM patient comes to x-ray examinations she usually expects to get the best quality of imaging and examination done by a professional radiographer with the best possible equipment. We have recommendations for quality assurance concerning equipment and dose. Is that enough? What is the high level quality that the patients want? There have been several enquiries about the services made by radiological unit staff. Both the patients and the ward staff are not satisfied with the waiting time (it takes too long time to get in to examination or get the answers). Sometimes they also complain about too small or uncomfortable waiting rooms. Every patient has a right to know about the examinations weil beforehand. Patients hope especially that they get the information from the radiographer because she can answer the questions. It is also a good situation for the radiographer to talk to the patient and observe if the patient is afraid of examination, has pain, needs special help or equipment etc. Maybe that's the area we can improve and develop in the future. Teleradiologyand telemedicine are developing very quickly in Finland. In health care centers there are no radiologists. Because of long distances it's difficult to get an opinion of an expert during the visit of the patient. Nowadays we can send the x-ray images in digital form to university hospitals. The experts give their opinions quickly and send it back to health care centers. That's why the patient and society save time and money. There have been 5 broad areas of development in ultrasound; the probe, hardware design, signal processing, measurement techniques and c1inical applications. The use of composite PZT transducers has resulted in improvements in RF bandwidth. This has enabled the development of harmonie imaging in which the system receives ultrasound at twice the transmit frequency. In 1.5 D arrays a single row of elements is replaced by 3-7 shorter rows enabling focusing in the elevation plane. Intravascular ultrasound transducers have special problems associated with miniaturisation, multi-element devices have recently become available. Many machines now digitise the signal in RF, enabling the application of advanced signal processing techniques resulting in low image noise and improved spatial resolution. This has only been possible because of continuous improvement in hardware processing speed and digital storage size. Colour images may be obtained both of frequency shift or power, applied to blood or tissue. The use of harmonie imaging and contrast agents has led to improved sensitivity. Enormous research resources are being directed at contrast agents, however their c1inical potential is still being explored. The acquisition of 3D ultrasound datasets presents problems of automated collection and data registration. Conventional Doppler only acquires information along the ultrasound beam. Vector Doppler systems acquire Doppler data from 2 or 3 beam directions, with consequent reduction in angle dependence. Measurement of most physical quantities remains difficult. The mostly widely used are simple dimensions and blood velocity. Automated measurement of physical dimensions is being introduced, for example fetal BPD, left ventricular boundaries and LV volume. These technical developments have further expanded the clinical applications of ultrasound in many areas, in addition new applications such as intravascular ultrasound are being developed. 620 B. Patient as a customer -how do we meet his/her needs? The aim of the functioning in radiological units is to deliver radiological services that help the patient to recover from his/her illness either by finding the reason of the illness by examinations or curing it by radiological interventions. In order to reach this goal -the patient recovery -we need to perceive the radiological unit as a customeroriented service-delivering unit. The functioning of this unit should be based on our customers' needs. A radiological unit always has two kinds of customers: those internal to the organisation (the wards that are sending patients to us) and customers external to the organisation (the patients who are the ultimate consumers of our services). The external and internal customers emphasize different aspects in and state different requirements for the quality of our services. If we are going to satisfy all our customers we need the quality management in our function. To implement quality management it is necessary that the radiological unit has a quality system. The quality system that describes the structure, procedures, processes and resources of the unit makes it possible to systematically identify the needs of the customers, to plan the services, to negotiate the services with the purchasers and to evaluate the services. The radiological unit should use the possibilities a quality system offers when planning its functions. By doing so it also gives its customers' a real chance to state their needs and requirements for the quality of the radiological services. The purpose of this State of the Art Symposium is to provide to the radiologist an overview of the present state and the future of MR Contrast-enhanced MRA generates images with high signal-to-noise and high resolution without saturation-effects and can be acquired in the coronal plane. Fat can be eliminated by digital subtraclion of a precontrast image set. By combining this technique with either a movingtable approach or repeated imaging at multiple locations, comprehensive evaluation of the vasculature from above the level of the renal arteries to the level of the ankle vessels can be performed in less than 15 minutes. The purpose of this presentation is to describe the technique, application and relative merits of the different MRA approaches, and to present an algorithm to enable accurate and cost-effective evaluation of patients with arterio-occlusive disease. angiography. The work up of patients with vascular disease includes both invasive and non invasive imaging. Beside catheter contrast angiography and doppler ultrasound, MR angiography will playa increasing role and one can expect that this imaging modality will dominate the field as primary vascular imaging modality in the future. Atherotic occlusive disease is the cause of 85% of strokes and the secondary events of ischemia and infarction. The carotid artery, and specially the carotid bifurcation, remains a principal focus for detection and characterisalion. Among the non invasive imaging modalities, MR angiography shows promises for high sensitivity and less variability from operator dependency. MR angiography of the aorta and branches is already today playing a role in dissection and aneurysm. Further application includes investigation of the renal arteries, hepatic artery and portal vein. MR angiography was only recently applied to the peripheral vascular system. Gadolinium-enhanced MR angiography and moving For arterial dissection, native techniques are still considered the investigation of choice due to the direct demonstration of both, the patent lumen and the thrombosed part. Ph.Ch. Douek; LyonlF 3D contrast MRA is a fast reliable technique and overcomes the limitations of time-of-f1ight and phase contrast sequence. This course is intented for radiologists with a background in MRA who wish to learn to perform abdominal MRA. The course will provide a knowledge of the principles and techniques that can be applied to produce optimal images of the abdominal aorta and branches. MR angiography is widely accepted as the most flexible and accurate method for imaging aortic disease. The accuracy of MR angiography will be compared with C'T, and contrast angiography. MR angiography of aortic dissection, abdominal aneurysm and stenosis of branch vessels will be illustrated, along with the use of 3D reconstruction (MIP, MPVR) for demonstrating complex anatomy and improved accuracy in assessing stenoses. The course will also address the potential limitations of MR angiography for imaging the renal arteries i.e, a still limited spatial and temporal resolution in order to analyze accurately the second order branches. 624 Aorta and lower extremities J.F.M. Meaney; LeedslUK "Time-of-fIight" MRA is weil established for assessing the arterial tree in patients with lower extremity claudication. Because of reliance on "inflow" effects images must be acquired in the axial plane, which results in long examination times for comprehensive evaluation from above the aortic bifurcation to the ankle vessels. There is a tendency to overestimate stenoses and produce false positive stenoses and occlusions where vessels run a horizontal course -this can be minimised by image acquisition during systole only, although this further increases examination time and therefore cost. Purpose: assessment of the pancreato-biliary system according to anatomy and clinical correlation. Methods and Materials: HASTE and RARE sequences were acquired (1.5 T). In 171 examinations the duct system was splitted into anatomic region. The assessability was rated as completely, partially or not assessable. Results: Common bile duct was completely assessable in 86.5%, partially in 12.9% ampullary region in 62%, partially in 44%; the common hepatic bile duct in 88.3% and partially in 6.4%; intrahepatic ducts 1°o f the left (right) lobe in 83.6% (77.2%) and partially in 13.5% (18.7%); ducts 11°16.9% (18.7%), in 70.8% (66.1%) partially. The pancreatic duct was completely assessable in 86.5%in the caput, 82.5% in the corpus and in 73.1% in the cauda. Reduced assessability was found in 19 patients due to ascites or fluid-filled bowel. Conclusion: The MRCP is a valuable method to examine the pancreato-biliary tract. Narrow ducts cannot be sufficienty investigated due to the lesser resolution in the MRCP compared to the ERCP Fluid filled bowel and ascites diminuish the quality of MRCP. Breathholds performed at end-expiration. Volume rendering and multiplanar reformation were used for image display and analysis. Results: On patients with pathology, !wo volumes covered the region of interest. Good image quality was obtained on all healthy subjects and on 13 patients with biliary ducts e1early depicted down to 2 mm diameters. Signal-to-noise ratios were 9.9 ± 3.9 and 6.8 ± 3.5 for fluids close to and far from the receiver coil, respectively. Liver signal was comparable to background noise. Conclusion: Breathhold 3D MRCP is fast, robust, operator independent and provides adequate diagnostic quality revealing ductal anatomy with 3D visualization. 100-5000/1100-1100/3-15 sec). Image quality was graded using a score scale in terms of presence of artifacts and depiction of intrahepatic ducts, common bile duct and pancreatic duct; S/N and C/N ratios were calculated for all the sequences. Results: Images of diagnostic quality were obtained in all the cases. Better image quality, in terms of image sharpness, was obtained with 15 sec. RARE sequence. S/N rand C/N ratios were higher on 15 sec. RARE sequence. Conclusion: Thick slab, single-shot breath-hold MR cholangiography is an useful method for imaging bile ducts. Further reduction of the acqulsltion time down to 1-3 sec. is important especially in the evaluation of uncooperative patients. 628 Functional evaluation of the pancreatic duct using MR pancreatography (MRP) after iv injection of secretin H. Helmberger, Th. Rüll, A. Nolting, C. Ganter, Th. Rösch, P. Gerhardt; Purpose: This clinical study was performed to assess the diagnostic value of pharmacologically supported MR pancreatography (MRP) after iv injection of secretin for delineation of the pancreatic duct. Methods and Materials: 52 patients with potential disorders of the pancreatic duct were studied on a 1.0 T magnet using a modified RARE sequence (TR =2800; TE = 1100; slice: 70 mm; TA =7.14 s). After exclusion of contradictions to the pharmacon, 1.0 IU secretin/kg bodyweight (Sekretolin, Hoechst AG, Germany) were injected. 20 images were obtained every 30 s for 10 minutes, starting with the injection start. All the images were assessed by !wo experienced, blinded radiologists independently, in relation to depiction of the pancreatic duct (1) and optimal time-delay (injection-examination) (2) using a 5-point-score. Results: After iv injection of secretin delineation of the pancreatic duct was improved significantly (p < 0.05) or was even made possible by the injection (p < 0.05). There were no side effects of the pharmacon. Correlation coefficient of the !wo radiologists was 0.95. The optimal time window for scanning was defined with 2-5 minutes p.i. (mean: 3.25 minutes). Conclusion: Pharmacologically supported MRP is a suitable and safe technique for evaluation of the pancreatic duct. The depiction of the ductal structures is improved significantly after iv injection of secretin. 3/3 communicating cysts were detected at MRPC; 1 non-communicating cyst was detected only at MRCP. 2/4 pancreas divisum were correctly interpreted and 2 cases were missed. Conclusion: MRCP is particularly accurate in detecting ductal anornalies due to chronic pancreatitis in a non-invasive manner. MRCP is therefore helpful in therapy planning in patients with chronic pancreatitis, reducing in this manner the number of diagnostic ERCPs. Purpose: We oberved that the acute pancreatitis (AP) can involve the subphrenic fat in some cases. We tried to find out how often the subphrenic fat infiltration (SFI) can be found and the correlation between SFI and Balthazar's grading criteria. Methods and Materials: We retrospectively studied the CT images of 182 consecutive AP cases idenlified by surgery er laboratory and clinical findings. We also observed the subphrenic region in 50 normal individuals. 30 cases with pleural effusions and 30 with ascites for comparison. Results: The SFI occurred in 73 of 182 cases (40.11%) superior to the left adrenal gland. It appeared as a band of soft tissue density (thickness >3 mm) with (35/73, 47.95%) or without (38/73, 52.05%) anormal fat layer anteriorly. Of the 182 cases, by balthazar's grading system, 9, 24, 42, 59 and 48 cases are grade A to E respectively, and the occurrence of SFI in grade A to E is 0, 0, 9 (21.43%),30 (50.85%),34 (70.83%) respectively. We never saw SFI in the control group, except one of the 30 cases with ascites which looked like SFI. Conclusion: We believe that the SFI is a significant sign of CT images in acute pancreatitis (positive rate is about 40.11 %). It mostly occurs in the cases of Balthazar's grade C to E, and hardly occurs in grade A and B. Purpose: Determination of value of selective angiography and arterial stimulated venous sampling (ASVS) with calcium in localization of hyperinsulinism. Methods and Materials: 33 patients (age -43.5 ± 4.8) with organic hyperinsulinism were studied (19-w, 14-m). All patients underwent coeliacography, superior mesenteric arteriography and selective arteriography of celiac branches and US of abdomen. CT of pancreatic region made in 32 cases. ASVS from right hepatic vein prior and at 1, 2, 3 min after the intraarterial stimulation of different parts of pancreas by 2.0-4.0 mg of calcium gluconate in 5.0 saline, which was injected in each catheterized artery. Contrast accumulation on angiogram was scored with 3 grade scale from + (weak) to +++ (strong). Results: 28 patients had 34 insulinomas (4 -two tumors, 1-three tumors), 4 -ß-cell nodular hyperplasia and one -microadenomatosis. Mean size of tumor -1.8 ± 0.7 cm with localization in head (14), body (11) and tail (9) of pancreas. Precise localization of hyperinsulinism by US was in 35.9%, false-positive -10.3% and false-negative -53.8%. CT Purpose: The aim of the study was to generate endoscopic views of the colon from data obtained with T1w 3D spoiled gradient echo sequence after administration of gadolinium through the rectum using volumerendering as reconstruction technique. Methods and Materials: Five patients with known colon cancers and 3 patients with polyps were submitted to MR examination using a 1.5 T magnet (Magnetom Vision Plus, Siemens, Erlangen). Imaging protocol included breath-hold FLASH T1w sequences acquired on axial and coronal planes and T2w HASTE sequences. Following colon preparation, patients were submitted to diluted gadolinium enema (1:1000) and scanned using a T1w 3D FISP sequence on supine position. When necessary additional prone scans were acquired. Images were reconstructed using volume-rendering technique (Vitrea 1.0, Vital Images, Fairfield, lowa). Both 20 axial MR images and volume-rendered 3D reconstructions were evaluated. Results: Images of diagnostic quality were obtained in all the cases. All the tumors were correctly evaluated. One polyps smaller than 5 mm was missed whereas two polyps larger than 10 mm were correctly evaluated. Conclusion: MR virtual colonoscopy is a reliable imaging modality for the evaluation of colon cancers. In particular the additional use of volume-rendering technique for 3D reconstructions allows for a better image quality compared with conventional surface rendering techniques, offering more realistic views. Purpose: To compare CT virtual colonoscopy (VC) with tissue transition projection in the detection of clinically suspected colorectal cancer. Methods and Materials: 34 patients who were c1inically suspected of having colorectal cancer were referred to CT. After bowel c1eansing and rectal air insufflation, spiral CT was performed with 3 mm slice thickness, 5 mm table feed and 2 mm reconstruction interval. Virtual colonoscopy and tissue transition projection (TTP images resemble conventional fluoroscopie double contrast studies with a translucent bowel wall) were generated on an EasyVision workstation (Philips Medical Systems) using volume rendering technique. A 120 0 viewing angle, 2% depth encoding and 2 cm image distance (fly-through mode) was used for VC. The air classification was set to -650 HU for both reconstruction techniques. TTP images were reconstructed in 15°-steps revolving around the patient's longitudinal axis. All patients underwent subsequent fibre-optic endoscopy and surgical bowel resection. Results: On both VC and TTP, a total of 28 cancers (stage pT1: 3, pT2: 14, pT3: 9, pT4: 2) were detected. TTP, virtual and fibre-optic endoscopy (including biopsy) diagnosed malignant tumor in one patient, however, surgical resection revealed a massive chronic diverticulitis. In five patients with diverticulitis, VC revealed 17% more diverticula than TTP. A synchronous colorectal tumor was found in 2 patients, equally shown on both techniques. Conclusion: CT virtual colonoscopy and TTP have reached a high diagnostic value in the assessment of symptomatic patients. Both VC and TTP are equally effected by rendering artifacts. Tf'P bares the advantage of presenting the entire bowel, hence supporting the anatomical orientation that can be difficult in VC alone. However, the sensitivity of TTP for polyp detection remains to be determined. 10:45 637 5piral-CT colography and volume-rendered virtual colonoscopy in colo-rectal disorders: initial clinical experience A. Laghi, P. Pavone, C. Catalano, V. Panebianco, R. Giura, Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of spiral CT colography and volume-rendered virtual colonoscopy in colo-rectal disorders, performing a blinded, perspective study, using conventional colonoscopy as gold standard. Methods and Materials: Twenty-four patients affected by colo-rectal disorders were selected excluding those with known or high suspicion for inflammatory bowel disease. Non-contrast spiral CT (Somatom Plus 4, Siemens, G) examination of the abdomen and pelvis after regular colonoscopy bowel preparation was performed. The colon was distended with air and antiperistaltic drug was administered in order to reduce bowel motion. Images were obtained with 5 mm collimation, pitch 1-1.6, 3 mm reconstructions; when necessary prone acquisitions were additionally obtained. Reconstructions were performed on a 02 workstation (Silicon Graphichs, Mountain View, CA, USA) using Vitrea 1.0 software (Vital Images, Fairfield, lowa). Images were blindly reviewed by two expert GI radiologists and were correlated with conventional colonoscopy in all the patients. Results: Image quality was graded as optimal in all the cases. Preliminary results showed very high values of interobserver agreement (k value > .8). Colonic diverticula were correctly diagnosed in all the cases on 20 images, but very difficult evaluation was obtained on endoscopic views. Polypoid lesions and tumors larger than 1 cm were correctly identified in all the cases. Conclusion: Spiral CT colography is a reliable technique in the evaluation of colo-rectal disorders. The combination of 20 and 3D endoscopic views allows for a better diagnostic performance. Purpose: to compare the results of CT colonography with barium enema, fiberoptic endoscopy. Methods and Materials: Thirty-six patients (47-78 years, 16 female, 20 male) with suspected colorectal tumours underwent 3D CT colonography, fiberoptic endoscopy (total) or endoscopy (partial) plus double contrast barium enema within a 3 days period. For 3D CT colonography, the colon after cleaning was retrogradely insufflated with air and Iv. peristalticolyticum was given. A 45 second 5/7.5/3 mm spiral scanning was performed during breathhold. A second spiral scan was added at the region of interest in doubtful cases with Iv. contrast material. The results were compared with those of fiberoptic colonoscopy and barium enema. Results: CT colonography detected all 17 malignancies diagnosed by colonoscopy. Two additional higher tumours were diagnosed by CT colonography (and barium enema) not reached by partial colonoscopy. In detecting polyps, CT colonography was 100% sensitive for polyps >20 mm, but only 60% sensitive for polyps <20 mm. Conclusion: CT colonography has good patient compliance and seems to be a useful diagnostic modality in detecting colorectal neoplasms. The right side of the colon can always be reached. For screening purposes technical refinements are needed to increase sensitivity for small polyps. Purpose: To prospectively compare the accuracy of conventional and virtual colonoscopy for colorectal polyp detection. Methods and Materials: 73 patients (39 men and 34 women; mean age, 59 years) at moderate risk for colorectal cancer underwent virtual colonoscopy immediately prior to conventional colonoscopy. Supine and prone CT acquisitions of the air-distended clean colon were obtained using 5 mm collimation, 2 mm index, 110 mA, and 110 kVp. Perspective volume rendered images were interpreted in combination with axial CT images . Results of virtual colonoscopy were compared with the findings of same-day conventional colonoscopy, wh ich was regarded as the goldstandard . Results: 79 polyps and 2 cancers were ident ified on conventional colonoscopy. Virtual colonoscopy demonstrated all 15 polyps (100 %) measuring 10 mm or greater, 23 of 24 polyps (96%) 6-9 mm in size , 22 of 40 polyps (55%) 1-5 mm in size, and both cancers. 42 polyps were adenomas, 39 (92.8%) of which were correctly identified on virtual colonoscopy. Virtual colonoscopy resulted in 7 false positive findings. The sens itivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values of virtual colonoscopy for patients with polyps were 94 .3%, 92.1%, 91 .7%, 94.6% respectively. Conelusion : Preliminary results of virtual colonoscopy for polyp detection exceed those of barium enema and are competitive with conventional colonoscopy. Purpose: To optim ize the enema in MRC with regard to cost and viscosity. Methods and Materials: Gd-DTPA-, manganesechloride-, ironglycerophosphate-and manganesechloride-ironglycerophosphate dilution series were imaged with the 3D SPGR-sequence used for MRC . SIconcentration curves were obta ined for each contrast media. The concentration of ironglycerophosphate providing max imal SI was used to fill the colon of 5 fully anesthesized pig. The existence of ironuptake was histologically determined by Prussian blue staining . Finally, in 6 patients undergoing MRC a Gd-DTPA-water cellulose mixture was diluted with water until its viscosity allowed a hydrostatically based rectal filling. Results: All contrast media resulted in an initial SI increase, followed by an eventual SI decrease as concentrations wer e increased. The highest SI was ach ieved with a 45 mmolar (28 gll) ironglycerophosphate-water solution. In vivo, this contrast media provided excellent depiction of the colon without artifacts and ironuptake. The opt imal amount of cellulose additive , wh ich permitted infusion of the enema in all six patients amounted to 0.8%. Conelusion: The expensive Gd compound can be replaced by the cheaper ironglycerophosphate. A cellulose additive of 0.8% (w/w) is practicable for increasing the viscosity of the enema .  Purpose: To opt imize the acqu isition parameters and Gd-concentration with in the enema for combined T1-and T2-weighted analysis of the colon . Methods and Materials: The optimal TE was determined by CNR analysis assuring maximal signal difference between the colonic wall and adjacent tissues in six volunteers undergoing MRC . Using Gd-waterdilut ion series the optimal flip-angle and Gd-concentration providing a signal void on SSFSE-and maximum signal on 3D-SPGR-images was determined . Finally, a 10 mmolar Gd-enema was applied to 15 patients with known inflammatory or neoplastic disease undergoing MRC and colonoscopy. The visualization of the different diseases on both SSFSE and 3D-SPGR was assessed. Results: A Gd-concentration of 10mmolar results in optimal contrast on both , 3D-SPGR-collected with a flip of 45°and SSFSE-images acquired with a TE time of 65 ms. All colonic segments affected by inflammation as weil as 8/11 poly ps larger than 10 mm in size were identified by a bright signal on the SSFSE images. Conclusion: An optimized contrast strategy in MRC based on both T1and T2-weighted imaging enables identification of pathologies in and beyond the colonic wall. Purpose: To evaluate feasibility of MR-Colonoscopy with a 1.0 Tesla system . Methods and Materials: A first feasibility study was done in an animal model with simulated polyps (diameter 0.4-1.5 cm) . Thereafter seven patients (age 39-81 years; 6 f, 1 m) were examined by MR-colonoscopy and endoscopic coloscopy. After preparation for coloscopy the colon was filled under MR-guidance with a Gadol inium/water solution (1:100) . A breathhold 3D-gradient-echo-sequence was acquired in prone/supine position and after intravenous Gadolinium administration . Images were analyzed interactively using mult iplanar projection (MPR), maximum intensity projection (MIP) and surface projection . The virtual endoscopy was performed on a GE-workstation furnished with "Advantage windows". The MRI-results were correlated with the endoscopic finding s. Results: All seven solitary polyps (diameter> 0.5 cm) detected at endoscop ic coloscopy were visualized by virtua l colonoscopy. Furthermore, two neoplasms of the colon were identified correctly. Supine/prone pos ition and CM-enhancement facilitated to distinguish polyps from fecal mater ial. Conclusion: The virtual MR-colonoscopy is feasible with a 1.0 Tesla system . This method provides suffi cient image quality combined wilh short acquisition times and minimal patient discomfort. Purpose: To compare MRC with colonoscopy in the detection of colorectal mass lesions . Methods and Materials: 132 patients underwent MRC prior to colonoscopy. Following MR-monitored rectal filling of a 10mmolar gadoliniumwater enema, 3D data sets were collected breathheld in the patienl's prone and supine positions. The exam was complemented by the breathheld acquisition of a T2w image set. All image data including endoscopic reconstructions were assessed for the presence of colorectal mass lesions by two radiologists in a blinded fashion in a consensus reading . Results: MR-image quality was sufficient for diagnosis in 96% of patients . Most mass lesions smaller or equal to 5 mm in size were miss ed with MRC. MRC did correclly identify 19/31 (61%) lesions ranging in size between 6 and 10 mm, and 26/27 (96 %) lesions exceeding 10 mm in size . Using a 10 mm cut off size, MRC revealed a sens itivity of 93%, a specificity of 99%, a positive pred ictive value of 92% and a negat ive predictive value of 98% in the detection of mass positive patients. Conclusion: MRC holds promise as a screening modality for colorectal mass lesions . Purpose: To determine the usefulness of RTVR in comparison to spiral-CT imaging in detection of comp licat ions in patients with Crohn 's disease. Methods and Materials: After application of a duodenal tube and infus ion of 2000 ml of water soluble contrast media (2%), 50 patients suffering from proven Crohn's disease underwent spiral-CT on a Somatom Plus 40 scanner (slice 8 rnrn, feed 14 mm, increment 5 mm) before and after the i.v, administration of 150 ml of non ionic contrast. Beside conventional filming the data sets were transferred to an Onyx-I-station (Silicon Graphics), where RTVR enables to view CT-data sets from any orientation. Three different observers blinded to the patient's data investigated the filmed CT ser ies and data sets on the RTVR comparing the number of complications found . Results: Complications were detected in 18 (36%) in RTVR and in 16 (32%) patients in conventional film reading . 15 (30 %) fistulas were found in RTVR, 13 (26 %) in conventional film reading . 4 ((%) abscesses, 1 (2%) phlegmona and 1 (2%) mild obstruction were found in both methods. Interobserver agreement was excellent (kappa =0.83) Conclusion: The number of complications found in spiral CT was not sign ificantly different when using the RTVR, Fistulas could be better detected using the RTVR-technique. The size of aortic root , descending aorta, prothesis and per iprosthetic effus ion, proximal and distal anastomosis were measured . Occurring residual the false lumen and the aortic thoraco-abdominal branches involvement were also analyzed . Results: The analysis of variance between TEE , conventional MRI and MRA showed an agreement in the evaluation of aortic root size. Slight difference was observed between TEE and MRI in the evaluation of prothesis and descending aortic size with agreement between conventional MRI and MRA . MRA was inadequate in the evaluation of the periprosthetic effusion and differences were observed between conventional MRI and TEE . Qualitative data were also compared: pers istent flap , patency of the false lumen, abdominal aorta , sovra-aortic and abdominal branches involvement. Conclusion: MRA is a fast and accurate technique in the evaluat ion of the endoluminal alterations and the involvement of the aortic branches . Conventional MRI allows a direct evaluation of the aortic wall and periaortic tissue: TEE is less accurate in the evaluation of aortic branches and abdominal aorta. EIl 915 MR angiography: aorta and branches (1) Purpose: Feasibility study of virtual endo scopy of the small intestines. Methods and Materials: After an overnight fasting 300 ml of air was inflated to the intestines through an enteroclysis tube placed in the first loops of the jejunum. I.m. 25 mg Glucagon was given and spiral CT scanning using 5 mm collima tion and 1.5 pitch was applied during one breath-hold covering the intestines. Binary segmen tation and connectivity algorithms were applied comb ined with manua l navigation . In uncertain cases for proper segmentation an algorithm was utilized, wh ich searches for the midline of the intestines starting from a seeding point and uses binary tresholding comb ined with connectivity. Results: Binary tresholding and connectivity based segmentation resulted in uncertain margins in slim patients. The semiautomatic midline searching combined with segmentation yielded a feasible tool for determining complex geometry and eliminates difficulties with manual navigation. The semiautomatic method also allows the wall thickness to be measured and color coded . The axial images with air filling can be used for conventional CT diagnos is as weil , and allow i.v, contrast material to be applied. Conclusion: Virtual CT enteroscopy is technically feasible. The method has to be technically refined, but it allows a non invasive imaging of intestinal tumors and strictures. Results: CE MRA correctly diagnosed the presence of aortic (n =8), iliac (n = 2) or combined aorto-iliac occlusions (n = 6) in all patients when compared to conventional angiography. It also correctly determined the level and extent of occlusion in all patients although the degree of stenosis was overestimated in 2 patients with iliac disease. The distal vessels were visualized down to the common femoral arteries in all patients and to the level of the proximal superficial femoral arteries in 7 patients. Thirteen patients underwent axillo-bifemoral bypass surgery, 2 patients had percutaneous iliac stent placement and one patient had aortic embolectomy based on these findings. Conclusion: CE MRA gave anatomical detail of the occlusion, proximal aorta and distal run-off sufficient to plan surgery and should therefore be considered as the first line of investigation in such patients. Results: In all patients the real and false lumina of the thoracic and/or abdominal aortaI dissection could be visualized together with the origin of branching arte ries as weil as the dynamic of perfusion of the true and false lumen. Conclusion: 3D reconstructions give a more detailed impression of the anatomical relations than CT and conventional angiography providing the surgeon with important anatomical and morphological information such as involvement of other arteries, position of real and false lumina and three-dimensional configuration of the dissection. MR angiography is less invasive than conventional angiography and especially in patients with known hypersensitivity to iodinated contrast media or impaired renal function MR angiography is able to replace contrast enhanced CT and conventional angiography in patients with aorta I dissection. Purpose: The aim of this study is to determine the diagnostic accuracy of Gadolinium-enhanced 3D MR Angiography in the assesment of thoracic aortic disease. Methods and Materials: In 25 patients with suspected thoracic aorta pathology both conventional MR Imaging and Gd-enhanced 3D MR Angiography with 3D FGRE breath-hold acquisition was performed. Gadolinium bolus injection (0.2 mmol/Kg) was timed for maximum arterial contrast during acquisition of the central portion of k-space. Conventional arteriography and surgery in 10 patients were the standard of reference. Two radiologists who were unaware of arteriographic or surgical findings assessed for presence of three types of pathology: dissection, coartation or aneurysm. Results: Gd-enhanced 3D MR Angiography correctly diagnosed all aneurysm (n = 19) and defined the maximum diameter as weil as its proximal and distal extent, The type of dissection was correctly determined in all patients (n = 4) as weil as the presence of coarctation (n =2). This data were also evident with conventional MR Imaging, but obtained with longer acquisition time and sectional view. Stenosis of major branch vessel origines were detected in 5 cases; no evidence was obtained with conventional acquisitions. Conelusion: Gd-enhanced 3D MR Angiography is a rapid and accurate imaging modality in diagnosis of thoracic aortic disease, but does not detected the wall or periaortic region, that can be better evaluated by conventional MR Imaging. Purpose: To compare efficacy of stereotactic vacuum biopsy vs. automated core biopsy in the assessment of benign lesions diagnosed by 11-G, directional, vacuum-assisted breast biopsy (DVABB), 14-G DVABB and 14-G automated large-core breast biopsy (ALCBB). Methods and Materials: Retrospective review was performed of 108 consecutive lesions diagnosed as benign at 11-G DVABB (n =36),14-G DVABB (n =36) and 14-G ALCBB (n =36). Histopathological results of biopsy specimens were compared and scored from 0-3 (0 = no agreement, 3 =total agreement) with findings at subsequent surgical pathology. Results: DVABB either performed with 11-G (score 2.8 ± OA) or 14-G (score 2.8 ± OA) scored significantly better than 14-G ALCBB (score 2.6 ± 0.5) in benign lesions (p = 0.04 Purpose: In a prospeetive randomized study prone and silting stereotaxie breast eore biopsies were eompared with regard to their sensitivity, speeifieity, aeeuraey, eomplieation rate (ineluding all vasovagal reaetions) and patient's aeeeptanee. Methods and Materials: 115 women (average age 54.7 years) with mammographieally suspieious, non-palpable breast lesions underwent stereotaetically guided breast biopsies either in the prone (n = 58; Mammotest-MammoVision, Fischer, Denver) or in the silting (n = 57; Stereotix 2, GE, Milwaukee) position. All biopsies were performed by the same experieneed radiologist using 14G needles and an automated biopsy deviee (22 mm exeursion) (Bard/Angiomed, Covington). An average of 6 passes were done on eaeh lesion. All patients underwent subsequent surgieal exeision and the results were statistieally eompared. All eomplieations, vasovagal reaetions, eomplains were noted to assess whieh biopsy position is generally prefered by the patients. In a post-biopsy questionaire patients have been asked, if the proeedure was as expeeted, more/less eomfortable and whether or not they would have the intervention again. Results: On silting eore biopsy 3 malignaneies were missed (in 1 ease only breast tissue was harvested due to patient's movement, in 1 ease only 2 passes eould be aehieved before the patient eollapsed; in 1 ease atypieal hyperplasia prooved to be DCIS). On prone eore biopsy 2 malignaneies were missed (in 1 patient with a invasive lobular eareinoma only fat tissue was harvested; in 1 ease atypieal hyperplasia prooved to be DCIS). All other biopsy diagnoses were eonfirmed by surgery. 6 patients presented with vasovagal reactions on silting position (1 eollaps during proeedure leading to termination of biopsy, 3 eollapses afterwards), whereas none of the patients in the prone position presented with any kind of reaetion. Post-biopsy hematomas were noted onee in either positlon. 8/58 (13.8%) patients ofthe sitling and 2/57 (3.5%) ofthe prone position would not repeat the biopsy; 17/58 (29.3%) patients of the silting and 12/57 (21.1%) of the prone position found the biopsy to be less, 5/58 (8.6%), respeetively 8/57 (14%) more eomfortable then expeeted. Conclusion: Prone position seems to be the more sensitive, accurate, easier to tolerate and, for patients, more aeeeptable method for stereotaxie guided eore biopsy of the breast in eomparison to silting position. Thus, lt should be preferred to the silting position. Table with Autogu ideTM. All large core specimens were examined histopathologically. In ease of malignancies reexcision or mastectomy followed. All 15 patients completed follow-up visists for evaluation of the scar and to answer a patient salisfaction questionnaire . Results: In all fifteen cases (5 eareinomas, 4 fibroadenomas, 1 ADH, 5 fibroeyst ic changes) a represantative large eore specimen was obtained which was in agreement with the mammographic findings. Complete exeision was possible in 0/5 careinomas (3/5 < 10 mm) and in 2/4 fibroadenomas (both <10 mm). There were no mechanical failures. No electroca utery was neeessary to contro l bleeding. Conclusion: The SiteSeleePM deviee allows aequisition of a large contiguous core of representat ive tissue suitable for diagnosis w~i1e preserv ing more healthy subcutaneous tissue Ihan .the ABB.I-devlce. Diagnostie accuraey appears comparable to vaeuum blopsy, Belng more invasive, ist therapeutic value remains questionable. Purpose: To investigate the feasibil ity and~linical. effeetivene~s of a newly designed minimally invasive breast biopsy instrumentation for removal or sampling of breast lesions. Methods and Materials: 40 nonpalpable breast lesions (32 microcalcifications and 8 masses) underwent pereutaneous stereotaetic biopsy (ABBI , USSC, Norwalk, CT) under local anaesthesia. Lesions in size 11 mm or smaller were completely removed , lesions larger than 11 mm were biopsied for a diagnostie sam pie. Results: 39 of the 40 lesions eould be removed or sampled successfully, in one case eonventional stereotactic localization. and res~?tion was necessary. 13 lesions were carcinomas and requlred additional surgical intervention or radiation therapy. 27 lesions were benign.~he procedure was weil tolerated in all patients. Due to the small size of the speeimen (1.6-20 g) the eosmetic result was better than after eonventional surgical removal of a breast lesion. Conclusion: The results after 40 proeedures suggest that the minimally invasive breast biopsy instrumentation is a feasible and effeetive method to remove or sample breast lesions. Purpose: To show that the results of the minimally invasive breast surgery with the ABBI (USSC. Norwalk. CT) depend strongly on the quality of the pre-, intra-and postsurg ieal imaging. . Methods and Materials: 105 patients with nonpalpable rnamrnographic lesions have been presented to our departement for radiologic assessrnent, if they are suitable for an ABBI treatment. Conventional and digital presurgical , intrasurgical und postsurg ical images were assessed. Results: Out of 105 patients, 48 had to be excluded from an ABBI procedure because of the size, multifocal~ceurrence,~r d.efinitely malignant aspekt of the lesions on the conventional presurpical Ima~es . In 17 cases , the targetting of the lesion with tne ABBI was not possible, In 4 cases out of the remaining 40, intrasurgical complications occured , where as in 3 cases the time-eonsuming reprocessing of the digital images gabe the decisive information . . . Conclusion: The minimally invasive breast surgery with the ABBI IS a switable method to remove nonpalpable mammographic lesions, but 5150 only if a good reprocessing and interp~etation of the images i~qiven. We made excellent experiences by shanng the tasks among radioloq ists and gynaecologists. because both specialists con bring in their specific knowledge . 667 High speed core cut biopsy of breast tumors: histologieal versus cytologieal examlnation K. Hagedorn, C. Böhner. K. Bock, R. Schulz-Wendtland , W. Bautz, Purpose: The high speed core cut biopsy of breast tumors allows the histological examination of breast leasions without surgery. The question arises if a cytology taken from the core cut biopsy is as reliable as an histological examination . Methods and Materials: In 1996 we performed slide preparations from core cut biopsies of 173 breast tumors consisting of 122 malignomas and 51 benign tumors. Results: Histology of core cut biopsies eould not be judged in 2 cases and eytological slide preparations were technically insufficient in 2 cases. Histology compared with cytology showed the following results: sensitivity : 99.2% vs.77.5%. specificity: 100% vs. 95.5%. positive predietive value: 98.1% vs. 63.5% and aecuraey: 99.5% vs. 82.8%. Conclusion: The histological evaluation of core cut biopsies is more reliable than the cytological examination. Cytology allows an immediate diagnostic guidance but diagnostic or therapeutic decisisons should be based upon the more retiable histology. 668 What is the risk for needle tract seeding or tumor implantation after mammographieally gulded punetures? M. Gelig Thurfjell . E. Thurfjell, T. Jansson , H. Nordgren , J. Bergh, A. Lindgren ; UppsalalS Purpose: To evaluate the risk of needle traet seeding or tumor implantation as the cause of locally recurrent breast cancer after breast conserving surgery. Methods and Materials: We reviewed a eonsecutive ser ies of 305 nonpalpable breast cancers treated with breast conserving surgery after pre-operative Iocalization with mammographic follow-up examinations . Breast irradiation at a standardised dose of 54 Gy given in small doses had been given to 212 cases. The suspicion of needle tract seeding or tumor implantation was based on the location of the recurrent lesion in comparison with the needle path in two orthogonal pre-operative projections. Results: A total of 28 local recurrenees was found after an average follow-up of 4.5 years. Breast irradiation showed a protectiveeffect in invasive cancers but not in DCIS. Needle traet seeding or tumor implantation was suspected in 4 reeurrenees. These 4 recurrenees.~ad not received radiotherapy. The histology reports support the susprcron in one case of adenoid cystic cancer and one case of mucinous cancer. The histoloqy reports does not exclude the possibility in the remaining 2 cases. Conclusion: Needle tract seeding or tumor implantation was suspected in 4 of 28 recurrenees. Radiotherapy might prevent these cases . Hip studies were performed separately for left and right joint using a prototype coil (W.I.P). Results: Dedicated MRI exam ination was performed without any problems for the patients (claustrophoby, motion art ifacts etc ..) in 100% of knee , ankle , wrist, and elbow joints. In 5/100 shoulders, and in 25/50 hips , MRI examination could not be performed due to the joint size . In all studies performed, the displayed FOV (14 cm .) allows for a complete and detailed anatomical evaluation of the joints. Conelusion: On the basis of our preliminary experience, we consider this "new dedicated open MRI system ", due to low cost, easy installation, reduced fringe field, patient comfort and high anatomical details, an excellent alternative to total body MRI units, especially in the study of the shoulder. Purpose: To assess the influence of sex and age on quadriceps muscle metabolism before and after exercise . Methods and Materials: 110 volunteers were examined by dynam ic phosphorus-31 magnetic resonance spectroscopy. In the magnet, the quadriceps muscle was stressed by an isometrie and an isotonic form of exercise until exhaustion, respectively. Results: Older volunteers showed a sign ificantly larger ratio Pi (inorgan ic phosphate)/PCr (phosphocreatine) than younger volunteers (r = 0.52 ; P = 8 x 10-9 ) . With increasing volunteers' age, the ratio r~-ATP (adenosine triphosphate)fTP (total phosphate) decreased (r = -0.36; P = 5 X 10-5 ) . PME (phosphomonoester)/ß-ATP and PDE (phosphodiester)/ß-ATP showed a strong age-dependence (r = 0.71 and 0.69; p =3 X 10-17 and 4 x 10-15 , respectively). The pH was the only one of the evaluated spectroscopic parameters wh ich showed a sexdependence: Female volunteers had a significantly lower pH (7.03 ± 0.02) than male volunteers (7.05 ± 0 .03; p =6 x 10-4) . With increasing age , max ima of Pi/PCr were less extreme during both of the exercises (r = -0.51; P = 3 x 10-16 ) . Likewise, the exercise-induced acidosis was less severe with increasing age (r =-0.51; P =7 X 10-16 ). After the end of the exercises, the tim es of half recovery of Pi/PCr and the pH did not correlate with the volunteers' age or sex. Conelusion: Sex and age may affect spectroscopic results in a sign ificant way. This influence has to be considered in the interpretation of spectroscopic studies. Purpose: Aware that asp irated jo int fluid in degenerative arthritis is viscous , in contrast to inflammatory arthritis, this study was undertaken to evaluate the potential of MR imaging using diffusion gradients to allow non-invasive determination of synovial fluid viscosity, and hence provide a non-invasive indicator of the underlying form of arthritls, Methods and Materials: 10 in vitro specimens of synovia I fluid from patients with both degenerative and inflammatory arthropathy were sutdied with navigator corrected diffusion grad ients ranging from 0 to 10 mT/m (B values 0-512) on a Philips 1.5 Tesla Gyroscan triggered by a peripheral pulse monitor. Diffusion coeffrcients of each specimen were recorded at 50 degrees, at body temperature and above body tempe rature . Subsequently, diffus ion characteristics were evaluated in 20 in vivo patients referred with jo int effus ions and known primary diagnoses. Results: Decreased diffusion was observed in patients with effus ions secondary to inflammatory arthritis includ ing gout, pseudogout and both seropositive and seronegative arthritis. Conclusion: Diffusion imaging allows non-invasive evaluation of joint fluid viscosity. Joint fluid diffusion characteristics may be used as further non-invasive markers of degenerative and inflammatory arthritis. Purpose: To evaluate the dependency of image quality on radiation dose in direct digital radiography of the appendicular skeleton using a selen ium detector array. Methods and Materials: A cadaveric forearm and hand with calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate cristal deposition arthropathy and generalized osteopenia was prepared for radiographie evaluation . Adequate image quality on conventional 400 speed film-screen system without grid was achieved with 50 kVp and 3.6 mAs. Digital radiographie images were obtained using a selenium detector array (DirectRay, Sterling Diagnostic Imaging) with a Nyquist frequency of 3.6 line pairs per mm and a spatial resolution greater than 0.75 at 1.81ine pairs per mm, capturing a 2560 x 3072 14 bit image. The tube-current time product (mAs) was gradually reduced from 3.6 mAs to 0.5 mAs for the digital images. Images were reviewed on laserprinter hard copies. Image quality parameters, judged by two experienced musculoskeletal radiologists were: image resolution, contrast and perceptibility of fine trabecular detail, erosions and calcifications, and soft-tissue contras!. Results: Digital images showed image quality comparable to that of conventional images (50 kVp, 3.6 mAs) for tube-current time products ranging between 3.6 and 1.6 mAs. At 1.6 mAs, the effective reduction in radiation dose (surface entranee dose) was 56%. Conclusion: Digital radiography with selenium detectors holds the potential to significantly decrease radiation dose while maintaining adequate image quality. Purpose: To determine the value of CT for therapy monitoring regarding the museie size in patients with chronic heart failure and consecutive muscle atrophy. Methods and Materials: In 4 patients (mean age 60 years) the transverse area of the thigh was analyzed in a defined position by single slice CT imaging before and after neuromuscular electrical stimulation and in 2 patients without therapy. CT findings were further compared with the results of isokinetic and isometrie strength measurements. Results: Patients, undergoing therapy revealed an increase in museie slze, whieh was in mean 589 mm2 tor the extensor museie group and 613 mm2 for the entire museie group. In the patients without therapy a decrease of muscle size was found. Conclusion: CT single slice measurements of the mid thigh muscles area correlate weil with isokinetic and isometrie strength measurements. The CT measurements are not influenced by non-compliant patients. Purpose: The aim of this work in progress is to assess the role of Power Doppler (PD) ultrasound in the evaluation of the postsurgical changes in tendons. Methods and Materials: 20 operated tendons were evaluated. We subdivided the patients depending on the surgical procedure performed. We used high frequeney linear array transducers (7-13 MHz), provided with PD. We depicted changes in ultrasonographie and PD signal one month after surgery and during a follow-up period of 6 to 20 months. All the patients underwent clinical examination at the time of the US evaluation. The outcome was establish as poor or good based on ciinical results. Results: Hypervascularity was found higher, in first proeedure, in patients operated for inflammatory disorders. The dissociation between gray-scale and PD, increased in the follow-up. PD changes proved an excellent correlation with c1inical status in 90% of cases. Conclusion: PD is an objective method in evaluating the normal development of postsurgical tendinous changes, becoming an useful control tool in obscure and eomplicated cases. Further studies are needed to evaluated the possibility of using PD signal as prognostic faetor. The dissociation between PD and HRUS, makes the former the most essential tool for evaluation. Results: A comparison of the speetra between fibromyalgic patients and eontrols showed inereased relative concentrations of Pi (0.074/0.089) in the first group whereas the eslimated relative concentrations of PCr (0.405/0.370) and NTP (0.132/0.116) were decreased in this group. In addition to this differences the signal intensity of the phosphodiesters in fibromyalgic palients was found to be increased. Differences in the pH-values between both groups were not deteeted. Conclusion: The observed differenees in the phosphorus speetra indicate metabolie changes in FM in the investigated museie tissues. The measured changes do not fully explain the symptoms of FM but they indicate a reduced metabolie status and the appearence of membran damages in the museie tissues. in maximal abduction. To assess compression, the minimal distance between the first rib and the c1avicle, measured in a sagittal plane, was determined. Results: In the neutral position, no significant difference was found between patients and volunteers. In 90°abduction, the patients had significantly smaller distance between rib and clavicle than the volunteers (p < 0.05). On coronal reformatted images, the compression of the brachial plexus could often be visualized in maximal abduction. Conclusion: MR examination seems to be a useful diagnostic tool in TOS. Examination in abduction, which is feasible in an open scanner, is essential for the diagnosis. (TS-LOCT) was performed.. Lesions ;::: 10 mm were followed with TS-LOCT. In nodules >10 mm or increasing in size our aim was to obtain histology. Results: In 335/816 (41%) a total of 751 nodules ;:::10 mm were observed. Ouring follow-up (maximum interval: 24 months) no lesion ;:::10 mm showed an increase in size. 21 lesions >10 mm were observed in 20 persons (2.5%). Of these 10 (48%) represented bronchogenic carcinoma (NSCLC 9: ;::: stage 11, SCLC:1, limited disease). 1 lesion was benign (bronchoscopic biopsy), 10 lesions were considered benign because of a decrease in size in the interval between LOCT and TS-LOCT or their CT-morphology and are followed with TS-LOCT. Conclusion: LOSCT demonstrated 10 bronchogenic carcinomas all of which represented early tumor stages. Only one invasive procedure was performed for benign disease. The relevance of nodules ;:::10 mm remains unclear and requires further follow-up. 679 Clinical experiences with a combined contrast agent for both, MR-and RXlCT-arthrography in 80 patients K.U. Wentz, K.E. Leupi-Skibinski, J. Fröhlich, C. von Weymarn, Ch.L. Zollikofer; WinterthurlCH Purpose: To evaluate a combinated contrast agent containing Gd-OOTA and iobitridol (iob) for f1uoroscopy, digital arthroradiograms, MRarthrography and CT-imaging. Methods and Materials: Relaxivity values were assessed with 60 different mixing ratios of Gd-OOTA and lob on a 1.5T Gyroscan-NT to determine the optimal concentration. 82 patients underwent MRarthrography of the shoulder after f1uoroscopically controlled instillation and a digital arthrographic documentation. MR-data were acquired using a T1-SE (TR = 500, TE = 15), a T2-w Turbo-Spin-Echo (TR = 2990, TE = 90, ETL = 9) and a 30-turboGRE sequence (TR = 23, TE = 14, FA = 27°). Qualitative evaluation was performed by consensus oftwo readers with respect to image quality and differentiation of cartilaginous joint and bursa surfaces. Contrast/noise ratios were assessed for the contrast filled bursa and joint space versus surrounding tissue. Results: Optimal relative T1-1T2-signal and X-ray absorption were found for a gd concentration of 3.125 mM Gd and 150 mgl/ml. Analysis of the imaging data demonstrated a better delineation of the cartilaginous structures by the T2-weighted TSE-technique as compared to T1-SE. The best results were obtained using the 30-turboGRE sequence. Conclusion: Preclinical and clinical optimisations allow to define the ideal mixture of a iodinated and gadolinium based contrast agent for the combined X-ray and MR arthrographic examination of the shoulder.  The purpose of our study was to examine the necessity of ehest CT scans as part of the routine follow up of patients with ovarian carcinoma. We retrospectively examined the radiological follow-up of 127 women with ovarian carcinoma who underwent surgery and chemotherapy between the years 1985-1996. Of the cases examined, 82 (65%) had at least one ehest CT scan done, with over 50% of them having three or more scans. Thirty-two (39%) of the examinations showed no evidence of disease. Twenty-eight (34%) showed disease in the abdomen or pelvis but no disease in the ehest. Eighteen (22%) had both positive ehest and abdominal/pelvic CT scans. Chronologically abdominal/pelvic disease appeared before disease in the ehest in all of these cases. Four (5%) patients had isolated ehest disease of which three had only pleural effusion. Overall, only 6 of 82 patients (7%) with ehest CT scans had evidence or suspicion of lung metastases. All cases of pulmonary metastases were preceded either by abdominal/pelvic disease or by a rise in tumor markers. We suggest that ehest CT scans may be excluded from the routine follow-up of patients with ovarian carcinoma, and reserved for cases with rising tumor markers without evidence of abdominal/pelvic disease. Purpose: To determine the influence of routinely performed ehest radiographs on early detection of thoracic malignancy and surv ival of heart allograft recip ients . Methods and Materials: In a retrospective study, the cases of de novo thoraeie malignancy occurring in 301 patients after orthotopic heart transp lantation between 03 1993 and 03 1997 were reviewed. Only patients surviving one month or more after transplantation were ineluded. All patients were subjected to a elose post-transplantat ion follow-up ineluding regularly performed ehest radiographs every 1 to 8 weeks. The investigation that led to the first suspicion of malignant thoraclc disease was determined, and the preceding images were reevaluated for missed diagnoses.  Purpose: A prospective study has been undertaken in preopera tive patients to investigate the value of bronchoscopically assisted cytologic diagnosis vers us dynamic c.e. CT. Methods and Materials: 50 preoperative patients with solilary pulmonary nodules have been exam ined by helical CT (3 mm coll imation , pitch 1, increment 3 mm) before, 2 and 4 minutes after i.v, application of lopromid 300 (1.5 ml contrast medium/kg at 2 ml/sec.) The preoperative cytologic outcome and the CT findings have then been correlated with the h/stopathology. Results: Histopathology yielded a malignant nodule in 27 cases and benign nodule in 23 case s. The cytologic outcome showed the following : dignity was correclly assessed in 75% (20% false negat ive, 5% false positive diagnoses). On CT correct elassification was possible in all (27) malignancies and in 9 benign nodules. All malignant nod ules enhanced, 9 benign nodules showed no contrast enhancement, 14 benign nodules enhanced , yielding a correct diagnosis in 72% (0% false negatives, 28% false positives .) Conelusion: CT ls at least equ ivalent to bronchoscopic cytology, but appears elinically more useful due to its much lower false negative rate. (Submitted by Internet) Purpose: Determining a patient's skeletal maturity by hand radiographs is an important procedure in pediatric radiography. We present a new method for the automatie segmentation of hand radiographs. Methods and Materials: The proposed algorithm uses an active shape method for model initialization and an extended active contour rnodel for segmentation of hand bones. This incorporates a-priori knowledge of shape and topology of bones. This "scene knowledge" is integrated in a complex hierarchical image model which is used for image analysis. Our new method yields an automatie complete segmentation of the phalangeal and metacarpal bones and ROls of the epiphysis. This allows an intensive examination of bones regarding existence, shape and texture. The results of these examinations are used to perform a maturity determination. Results: The algorithm has been applied to 150 hand radiographs of which 142 were automatically and correctly segmentated. The remainders needed small interactive correction. Conclusion: Higher processing like image analysis and interpretation will only be reliable if the preceding segmentation step is of high quality. This, however, depends on the correct use of relevant model knowledge. Our method of shape modelling, scene knowledge and initialization of active contour model shows the desired accuracy. The described concepts can directly be applied to other scenarios by using a different initialization algorithm. Im 905 Computer assisted diagnosis perception  The aim of this work is to describe the CT findings in 28 primary mucinous adenocarcinoma of the lung. Methods and Materials: Histological proof was obtained by transthoracic or transbronchial biopsies (n = 12), open lung biopsies (n = 3), and surgical specimens (n = 13). The following subtypes were c1assified: 15 bronchioloalveolar, 3 acinar, 2 papillary, and 2 cystic adenocarcinomas. Six cases were unclassified. CT scans were reviewed by 3 thoracic radiologists. Results: Four CT patterns were found: (a) solitary nodule (n = 5); solitary mass (n =5); segmental or lobar consolidation or ground-glass opacity (n =6); and (c) multicentric or diffuse disease (n =12). In 13 cases the tumor-density was lesser than 30 UH. In all of these cases, contrast enhancement was lesser than 20 UH. In 3 cases follow-up CT scans showed progression of disease, in 2 cases by aerogenous spread, and in a case by aerogenous and hematogenous spread. In twelve non-mucinous type, 6 were solitary and 6 were multiple. There were mass/nodule type (n =11) and mixed type (n =1). Airbronchogram and pleural tag were observed in 4 cases of solitary lesion. Surronding hato was seen in 2 cases of solitary lesion. 692 Computer-assisted scoring of rheumatoid arthritis K. Boegl, F. Kainberger, K.-P. Adlassnig; ViennalA Purpose: Evaluating radiographs of rheumatoid arthritis by scoring systems is internationally established. An accurate quantification of erosive diseases gives an appropriate assessment of the disease status at a given time, serial measurement of radiographie damage provides a view of the disease course and the essential data for calculating a progression rate. Methods and Materials: We have developed a computer program that allows a fast, accurate, and reliable documentation of erosive and degenerative changes on radiographs of hands, wrists, and feet in rheumatoid arthritis. Based on these data the program is able to calculate the score (we are currently using the Larsen Score but the software is able to support other scoring systems as weil) and to deliver diagnostic hints based on the characteristics of morphologie changes. Examinations are stored in a database to facilitate the assessment of the longterm follow-up of patients. The system has been programmed in Java to provide cross-platform-and Internet-compatibility. In addition to a fully operative Java stand-alone application, a demo version is available in form of a Java applet in the WWW. Results: We are currently testing the software in an evaluation study. Two groups of radiologists and rheumatologists are involved, of which the first scores by using the traditional paper-based method whereas the other employs the new software. with proven pathology of CMC were studied. The Jack-knife procedure was used to classify each case independently. The performance was evaluated by ROC analysis. Results: All seven parameters differentiated significantly (p < 0.001) between malignant and benign cases. The area under the ROC curve (A z ) describing the results ot the classifier based on the seven mammographic parameters was 0.93. When age was added as an eighth variable, the A z did not change significantly (A z = 0.92). Conelusion: A DAC using seven quantitative parameters extracted automatically from an image proved to be highly indicative in differentiating malignant from benign clusters. Inclusion of a demographic factor, age, did not affect the result, Microcalcifications are often a presenting sign among early breast cancer. We present a novel system for computerized localization of microcalcifications from digitalized mammograms. The algorithm is based on mathematical morphology theory combined with segmentation and dynamical statistics methods specially designed for microcalcifications extraction. In order to test the system, we retrospectively reviewed 154 mammographic studies showing microcalcifications in 104 of them, for which surgical verification was available. The film screen mammograms were digitalized with aresolution of 8 bits per pixel in order to make the system suitable for real time diagnosis and a spatial resolution of 790 pixels/cm. The discriminating power of the process was corroborated via the ROC analysis which shows an area under the curve of Az = 0.89. The percentages of errors made by the algorithm were the following: Isolated microcalcifications: 7%. Clustered microcalcifications: 8%. Microcalcifications with an associated nodule: 5%. Normal cases: 3%. The proposed system is able to detect isolated and clustered rnlcrocalcifications independently from the breast tissue and the parameters used in the digitalization process. This system could be used as a Radiologist Aid System (RAS) and it would allow improving the efficiency in large screenings. (Submitted by Internet) Introduetion: Because of the expected availability of digital mammography units in the near future, for interpretation and diagnosis a growing number of digital mammograms has to be displayed on computer monitors. Softcopy reading provides the possibility to use computerized elaborated contrast enhancement techniques. Purpose: Development of a highly efficient contrast enhancement tool for softcopy reading of digital mammograms, which preserves the typical mammographic visual impression radiologists are accustomed to. Methods and Materials: The coefficients of a redundant wavelet transform are modified by a non linear function providing a significant improvement in local contrast without requiring additional radiation. In particular, areas of low contrast are enhanced more than areas of high contras!. Additional to the resulting edge enhancement, the whoie information of the mammogram is visible in one window setting, including the skin and the details of the dark subcutaneous tissue. In cooperation with radiologists, the algorithm has been optimized with regard to the restoration of the typical mammographic visual impression making the powerful tool acceptable for c1inical routine. Results: The present results suggest that computerized elaborated enhancement tools will be inevitable for softcopy reading of mammograms. Conelusion: Additional studies with many radiologists are recommended for further optimization of our enhancement tool. Methods and Materials: The enhancement algorithm is based on hierachically repeated unsharp -masking allowing consistent access to structures of all size. It is noise resistent in the sense that it prevents unacceptabtable noise amplification. We evaluated the new processing in cooperation with Philips. 20 radiographs covering a essential range of daily routine were randomly selected and processed as weil with the new enhancement as with our unsharp -masking based standard processing to be judged by 14 radiologists from our institute. The evaluation based on following criterions: 1. overall valuation 2. perceptibility of details 3. sharpness 4. contrast 5. noise 6. image harmony 7. representation of critical parts 8. relevance with respect to primary and secondary diagnostic interest. The criterions were judged by a seven step scala ranging from standard processing essential better to new processing essential better. Results: The images get a more three-dimensional impression and most of the radiologists declared that visibility of details is improved in a way that is helpful for daily diagnoslic routine without unacceptable nolse amplificalion. obtained and the two 'best' images were captured and processed using five image processing algorithms . Still images and videoclips were shown to five independent, experienced observers, who scored the images using five set criteria. Results: Aigorithms were given a mean rank for each criterion, and an overall mean rank. All criteria were perceived better with contrast enhancement. Following statistical analysis, it was found that contrast enhancement outperformed every other algorithm (p < 0.01). Of the criteria, only one was perceived better on the videoclips (p < 0.05). However, the majority of the criteria were perceived as equivocal. Conclusion: Examination of the results shows that proper selection of image processing algorithms can significantly enhance the perception of image features, possibly leading to more accurate diagnosis. Further work is being carded out in this area. The results for real-time imaging were probably skewed by observer bias, and will require further evaluation by ROC analysis. (Submitted by Internet) Purpose: to compare observer performance in detecting pulmonary nodules on a 1K-monitor and a 2K-monitor within an alternative freeresponse receiver-operating-character istic (AFROC) study. Methods and Materials: 36 patients with pulmonary nodules and 12 patients without nodules were included. For all patients, digital chest radiographs and CT scans of the chest (GOLD standard) were available. In total there were 68 pulmonary nodules evident in the CT scans with a diameter of 3-35 mm. The chest radiographs were interpreted by six radiologists using Purpose: Three-dimensional inner-surface-imaging is commonly used for virtual endoscopy. The purpose was to analyze wether the recon-S158 structed volume correspond to the real volume and to determine the influence of scan and reconstruction parameters. Methods and Materials: Three tracheal preparations of pics were scanned by spiral CT, using the same set of examinations, in which several parameters varied. Scan collimation 2-5 mm, pitch 1.0-2.0, overlapping reconstruction 0-75%. Measurement of cross-section were made semiautomatic after optimization of threshold and algorithm of reconstruction. After that there were made replicas of the lumen by plastic. These were scanned by a 3D Laser scanner and the computed volumes compared with results from CT scanner. Results: Slice thickness and threshold are the decisive factors for accuracy. Increasing of pitch factor up to 1.5 shows no significant influence. Using of an edge enhancing algorithm ls better than standard algorithm of reconstruction. Using a overlapping reconstruction interval can only reduce stairsteps artifacts. Conclusion: Spiral CT with a slice thickeness <5 mm is adequate with regard to the volume for 3D rekonstruction of the trachea. A pitch up to 1.5 can be helpful to increase range. . The neck was imaged in a standardized manner from the subclavian approach to the submandibular region in standardized length slices. These images were digitally archived. The slice packages were compared to the transversal slices in CI. The sensitivity regarding the detection of enlarged Iymph nodes greater than 0.5 cm diameter was 93% compared to CI. In the submandibular region and in the nape of the neck, the Iymph nodes were difficult to image because of osseous artifacts (false negative results). There were also false negative results because of scanning to fast and/or with changing the angle while scanning. The incidence of false positive results was less than 3% Discussion: 3D-Color-SieScape™ is an alternative method for staging of Iymph nodes of the neck. It is much easier to perform than SieScape and results in good tomographie images. Hopefully there will be an improvement in the coronal and sagittal plane and an automatie measuring system in the near future. 708 Multivariate analysis of the adjustment of the colour duplex unit for the differential diagnosis of Iymph node alterations Purpose: The intranodal angioarchitecture was used as criterion for the differential diagnosis of Iymph node alterations by colour duplex sonography. The influence of the adjustment of the duplex unit on the diagnostic accuracy and on the rate of Iymph nodes with detectable intranodal flow signals was tested. Methods and Materials: 243 superficial Iymph nodes in 127 patients were included in a retrospective study. Diagnoses were approved by histopathology (n =173) or clinical follow-ups (n =70 reactive Iymph nodes). The intranodal angioarchitecture and sonomorphology were assessed. We used nonparametrie discriminant analysis in order to define appropriate settings for transducer frequency, flow mode, power and threshold which result in the best diagnostic quality. Results: 87% of the Iymph nodes displayed flow signals using a threshold of > = 13 and the flow modes low or medium. Vascularisation was detected only in 47% of the nodes assessed with different adjustments. Diagnostic accuracy dropped from 94% to 68-84% if threshold was <13 or power was <-11 dB. Conclusion: An insufficient adjustment of the colour duplex unit decreases the chance to detect intranodal flow signals and impairs the diagnostic quality of colour duplex sonography. Flow mode, power and threshold are the most important parameters which have to be adjusted properly. image update times 2 s -5 s), were compared with regard to their temperature accuracy in-vitro (gel phantom) and in-vivo (2 pigs). Temperature increase was induced by RF ablation (liver n =10; paraspinal muscle n =20). For comparison, temperatures were also f1uoroptically acquired. Results: The PFS-Technique based on TR/TE: 40/20 ms, image update 5 s; revealed highest temperature sensitivity and accuracy (± 2°C.) in gel. Temperature accuracy obtained in-vivo was significantly lower (liver: ± 5°C; muscle: ± 3°C). Correlation between f1uoroptical-and PFSmeasurements was still high (r =0.87 for muscle; r = 0.79 for Iiver). Temperature accuracy (r = 0.75 museie, r = 0.69 liver) and sensitivity were significantly lower for PFS-measurements obtained from the 2 s-GRE. Conclusion: The PFS shows promise with regard to quantitatively assessing temperature distribution during RF treatment in an 0.5 T interventional MR. Purpose: Tracking invasive devices and acquisition of images that correspond to the position of these devices are essential for most intraoperative applications performed under MR guidance. This project evaluates the temporal and spatial advantages of MR projection reconstruction acquisitions. Methods and Materials: Two types of Fluoroscopie Gradient Echo Projection Reconstruction (F-GEPR), 180 view sequences were implemented on a Siemens (Erlangen, Germany) Open 0.2T MR imager. One was an interleaved acquisition; the other was a continuous acquisition of a limited number of views. Unlike in 2DFT imaging in which half of the Purpose: In ten years of interventional MRI we learned how difficult it can be to get a good compromise between the representation of the anatomy and the needle. With the new idea for a future MRI puncture needle set with artefact size adaptability we intend to make the therapist more independent of thinking about the needle appearance, so that he can concentrate exclusively on optimising the anatomical contrast. Methods and Materials: In phantom experiments commercial needles (18 G-21 G) and MR compatible wires were imaged at 2 Tesla and 0.064 Tesla using various spinecho-and gradientecho-sequences under different geometrical conditions. We developed fluoroscopie and breathhold sequences for specific interventional applications and a prototype interventional needle set. Results: Depending on sequence parameters and geometrical conditions commercial puncture needles might appear thin or thick, sharp or faded and sometimes they are invisible in MR images. In the worst case the precision of the needle representation is not sufficient for the guidance of the percutaneous procedure. With our self-made prototype needle set we could adapt the size of the needle representation to the requirements of the therapy. Conclusion: Our new MRI needle set will help to perform safe and efficient microtherapeutical procedures. Methods and Materials: A prototype perfused MR-imaging balloon was developed (Schneider Europe AG, Switzerland). The receive coil was mounted between two layers of balloon and connected to the outside coi! electronics over a small diameter coaxial cable. For balloon perfusion, the catheter wall was provided with holes proximal to the balloon. The flow rate through the catheter was determined experimentally. In vitro intravascular imaging of five human femoral artery specimen was performed under pulsatile flow conditions. The catheter concept was evaluated in vive in the internal carotid arteries of two pigs. Results: The measured flow rate of glycerol/water as perfusate ranged from 50 ml/min (80 mmHg) to 69 ml/min (120 mmHg). During perfusion, image quality remained unaffected by f1ow, motion, and pulsatiliy artifacts. Due to high velocity flow effects, the perfused guidewire lumen appeared dark in the acquired fast spinecho images. The achieved inplane resolution was 117 x 156 mm within 3.16 min for all weightings. The in vivo flow rate was determined to 25 ml/min. Conclusion: The availability of an autoperfused intravascular catheter design can be considered an important step toward high resolution atherosclerotic plaque imaging in critical vessels such as the carotid and coronary arteries. Purpose: To report our experience with MR-guided percutaneous drainage of abdominal fluid collections on a hybrid interventional MR system, which combines a closed bore magnet with aC-arm fluoroscopy unit. Methods and Materials: Ouring the last two years, we have performed four drainage procedures in four patients (mean age 47). Three patients had abcsesses (psoas muscle, kidney, subphrenic location) and the fourth patient had a recurrent splenic cyst. All procedures were performed on an interventional MR system consisting of a 1.5 T ACS-NT scanner combined with a specially shielded C-arm (BV 212, Philips Medical Systems). The punctures were guided by T1-weighted fast gradient echo images, T2-weighted single shot turbo spin echo images or both. A standard 18 G stainless steel needle with a teflon sheath was used for the punctures following wich a 0.9 mm nltinol guide wire was inserted into the fluid collection. Thereafter, the patient was positioned in the immediate adjacent fluoroscopy unit and a drainage catheter was placed under fluoroscopie control. Conclusion: MR-guided drainage procedures on a system combining an MR scanner with a f1uoroscopy unit ls feasible. The eombination is partieularly helpful for abseesses in the subphrenic loeation. Coagulation was monitored adopting two GRE sequenees (TRITE 18-40/10-20 ms, image update 2 or 5 s). The proton frequency shift (PFS)changes were color eoded, and superimposed on the updated GRE images. MR-Iesion sizes were compared to macroseopy. Introduction: One promising approach for MR temperature quantification is based on the temperature dependency of water proton resonance frequency (WPRF). Most studies, which have been performed to determine the relation between temperature and resonance frequency, were carried out with phantoms and tissue specimens. In vivo, however, is still an unknown uncertainty of the MR temperature mapping due to perfusion changes during heating. The aim of this study was to determine this influence during interstitial laser eoagulation within brain. Methods and Materials: To minimize non-physiologie sources of error we performed MR temperature imaging during interstitial laser coagulation within the brain of six pigs in vivo and post mortem. For laser eoagulation a Nd:YAG laser in continuos wave mode was used. MRI was performed on 1. Purpose: Iron oxides comprise a useful tool for future interventional radiologie treatments of malignant tissue, making use of their heating capabilities after exposure to alternating magnetic fields. Nevertheless, several parameters are to be optimized for a controlled heating. Methods and Materials: Selected commercial sampies (particle size: 10 to 20 nm) were investigated in relation to their magnetic properties. Temperature elevations were investigated depending on the magnetite concentration (7 to 28 mg), the magnetic field amplitude (1.4 to 6.5 kAlm) and the exposure time (2 and 10min) to the alternating magnetic field (frequency: 400 kHz). Temperature profiles around areas of iron oxide deposits were measured in dependence on distance. Results: Measured specific loss power (SLP) varied appreciably for different magnetite particle types. Best values are near 100 W/g (fequency: 410kHz, amplitude: 6.5 kAlm). For the dependence of SLP on the magnetic field a square law was found. Temperature increases linearly as function of the magnetite concentration. Temperature elevations in dependence on heating time showed non-linear curves with saturation behavior. While getting up to 80°C in the center of magnetite deposits, temperature decreases within a distance of 10 mm to ambient. Useful parameter combinations were investigated. Conclusion: Controlled heating of tumors can be achieved as exemplified by the present co-ordination of investigated parameters. Purpose: To characterise the sequential changes in reflectivity of liver lesions on B-mode ultrasound (US) following intravenous BR1 (US contrast agent), and to correlate with histology. Methods and Materials: 10 patients were assessed. Using preset parameters each lesion was examined at baseline and after four separate doses of BR1 (1.5-12.0 mg). Digital images were analysed in a program which derived pixel brightness averaged over a representative area. Sequential images were sampled at the same depth. The pixel brightness estimated tissue reflectivity. The degree and time course of changes in reflectivity of lesion and parenchyma were compared and correlated with histology. Results: Histology showed hepatocellularcarcinoma (n = 2), bowel metastasis (n = 4), lymphoma (n = 1), focal nodular hyperplasia (n = 1), gastric metastasis (n = 1), bronchial metastasis (n = 1). Normal liver parenchyma showed increased reflectivity following administration of BR1 in all patients. In focal nodular hyperplasia the increased reflectivity was delayed compared with parenchyma, bowel metastasis showed enhancement preceding parenchyma. Lymphoma showed no enhancement. Conclusion: This preliminary data suggests that following repeated doses of BR1 the B-mode characteristic of focal liver lesions dernonstrate different patterns of enhancement. This may be a useful method of differentiating focal liver lesions. Purpose: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of EchoGen® as an ultrasound contrast agent in adult patients with a c1inical diagnosis for which an ultrasound examination of the liver was indicated. Methods and Materials: Ten patients with hepatic lesions (7 male and 3 female, age 33-67 years) were studied with gray-scale and colour Doppler sonography performed on a Toshiba ECCOCEE, pre-and postinjection of EchoGen at a dose of 0.05 mLlkg. Patients gave informed consent to participate in the study. The anatomical attributes evaluated were: facilitated visualisation of vascularity within lesions, or the course and branching of vessels surrounding lesions, and duration and intensity of contrast enhancement. Results: Vascular enhancement surrounding the lesions was observed in all ten patients with EchoGen and colour Doppler. Three patients did not show vascularity within the lesions pre-or post-injection. tncreased branching of vessels was present in nine patients post-injection. Increased enhancement was graded as weak in 2 patients, adequate in 5, and excellent in 3 patients. Enhancement had a maximum duration of 1500 seconds with colour Doppler. The greatest peak enhancement occurred immediately after injection. Conclusion: EchoGen is useful in the evaluation of hepatic masses, by providing vascular enhancement and delineation of hepatic lesions. (Submitted by Internet) Spectral and Power/Color Doppler were performed at baseline and after four doses of SR1 (0.3, 0.6, 1.2, 2.4 ml) randomly injected in each patient. Degree and duration of contrast enhancement were evaluated ; the visualization of tumour vascularization was also determined . Results: in 10 lesions SR1 did significantly enhance the Color or Power Doppler signal intensity of tumour vascularization. The intensity of contrast enhancement was dose-dependent. The best c1inically useful doses were 1.2 ml and 0.6 ml. Signal intensity enhancement became evident 10" -30" after SR1 adm inistration and lasted 240" on average (range 120"-360"). Contrast enhancement allowed beUer visualization of tumoral vessels, wh ich wer e fairly detected on base line examination, as the depiction of neoformed vessels.. No adverse events occurred throughoutthe study. Conclusion: SR1 is a safe and effective agent; the degree and duration. Methods and Materials: Fourteen complex (side range 2.5-10 cm) and 16 small solid (size range 1.5-3 cm) renallesions were prospectively evaluated by color Doppler US before and after intravenous bolus injection of Levovist (10 ml -300 mg/mi). In the first group 8 adenocarcinomas, 3 multilocular cystic nephromas, 2 inflammatory and 1 haemorragic cysts and in the second group 9 primitives neoplastic lesions (7 adenocarcinomas , 2 leiomyosarcomas), 1 metastasis, 1 non Hodgkin (NH) lymphoma, 4 ang iomyolipomas and 1 infarct were included. The diagnosis was obtained in all complex cyst ic lesions and in 11 small solid neoplastic lesions with surg ical procedures; in benign solid lesions the diagnosis was confirmed by clinical and radiological follow up (C'I, MR) . Results: At baseline investigation 12/30 lesions (8 cystic and 4 solid adenocarcinomas) were hypovascular; in 18/30 lesions color signals were not detected. After contrast, in all 30 pts enhancement of parenchymal vessels and in 19 /30 intralesional enhancement were observed . All 8 cystic adenocarcinomas showed intralesional enhancement, whereas 3 multilocular cystic nephromas, which had a similar sonographie pattern did not show intralesional color signals and neither did 2 inflammatory and 1 haemorragic cysts, 2 leiomyosarcomas, 1 metastasis, 1 NH lymphoma, I infarct. Four small solid adenocarcinomas showed intralesional enhancement; at the end ot contrast enhancement duration 1 or 2 afferent vessels were visual ized in 7 small solid lesions wh ich were hypovascular at baseline (3/7 adenocarcinomas and all 4 angiomyolipomas). Conclusion: Color Doppler US with contrast agent is a useful tool to asses renallesion vascularity and to increase diagnostic effectiveness for the malignant lesions; its usefulness is a particularly evident in complex cysts , because it is able to distinguish benign from malignant lesions. Embryo skull (SD) and abdominal depth (AD) from the maternal skin surface were determined in the anteroposterior direction. Uterus depth was measured in the control group. Measurements were taken pre-and post-void. Gestational age, maternal age, height and weight were noted. The mean embryo pre-and post-void SD was 8.3 and 5.7 cm while AD was 8.5 and 5.9 cm respectively. The mean pre-and postvoid UD was 9.5 and 4.7 cm. Mean AD and mean SD were significantly different than mean UD for full bladder (p < 0.05) and empty bladder (p < 0.01). Embryo skull and abdomen depth was found to be significantly correlated to maternal body mass index (p < 0.01). Conclusion: Mean embryo depth differs significantly from uterus depth which is usually assumed to be the embryo depth in dosimetrie studies. Methods and Materials: Standard Image quality parameters, ineluding slice sentivity profile, noise, spatial resolution, contrast resolution and dose, are measured by means of phantom measurements (Catphan 500). We compare 7 different units (CT's introduced 10 and 7 years ago, 2 CT's having a double array of detectors, 2 CT's of the third generation, and a CT of the fourth generation). Objective measurements of image quality (MTF, NPS, detectability at low contrast and SSPs) are presented for all the units. The dose estimator (CTDI) and the image quality criteria described in the CEC recommendation are also compared. In the framework of patient dose optimisation, the effective doses delivered to the patient with these 7 units are also compared for 4 standard adult examinations (Le. thoraco-abdominal, liver metastasis, pancreas and standard abdominal examination). The CTDI dose estimators measured in a 32 cm FDA test-object vary from 0.050 to 0.128 mGy/mAs. Thus, with the same acquisition parameters patient dose can vary by more than a factor of 2. The comparison of the acquisilion protocols used in the different centres involved in the study show that this increase can be controlled by an optimisation of the parameters such mAs, slice thickness and pitch using the results produced by phantom measurements. To investigate the influence of two different X-ray detector systems on CT image quality in routine examinations. In addition, the influence of reduced x-ray tube current on scans of the ehest and abdomen acquired with an ultrafast ceramic detector (UFC) system was evaluated. A standard phantom (Catphan) was scanned to determine high contrast resolution and image noise on a helical CT scanner (Siemens Somatom Plus 4A) equipped with a Xenon and UFC detector system. In patient CT images of the skull (n =100), ehest (n = 150), abdomen (n =150) and lumbar spine (n =60) the effect on image noise was measured in different anatomical regions. Results: Images of the skull and the lumbar spine showed significantly lower image noise (p < 0.01). In CT scans of the ehest, UFC showed significantly less beam hardening artifacts (p < 0.001). No significant change in image noise was found in the abdomen, even if x-ray tube current was reduced by 17%. To gain full image quality the use of 2 k acquisition systems seems to be necessary. Measurements of the spatial resolution with lead grids, tests of the image quality with phantoms and first clinical examinations were performed with a digital fluoroscopie system (Siereskop SX with Fluorospot TOP, Siemens). The image intensifier with 40 cm nominal diameter enables geometrie entrance window diameters between 34 cm and 17 cm with maximal zoom. Digital image acquisltion was performed with 1 k and 2 k resolution and 45 degree grid rotation to avoid interference phenomena. Phantom examinations were performed with hand-skull-and pelvic-phantoms. The use of 2 k digital systems improves the image quality of large high quality image intensifiers. Spatial resolution inereased from 1.5 Ip/mm with 1 k to 2.1 Ip/mm with 2 k and no zoom (34 cm). With maximal zoom (17 cm) spatial resolution increased from 2.8 Ip/mm with 1 k to 3.3 Ip/mm with 2 k. New high quality large image intensifiers enable spatial resolutions whieh exeeed the limits of 1 k digital systems. A 2 k system enables improved spatial resolution and image quality. Purpose: The purpose of this work was to determine the AGD delivered to symptomatic women and those involved in screening programmes, to compare the doses for cranio-caudal (CC) and medio-lateral oblique (MLO) views, and to analyse the relation dose-quality criteria. AGD is the quantity directly related to the risk of breast-cancer induction. Methods and Materials: Data from 327 women distributed in 9 centers were collected. AGD per exposure and AGD per examination (indicative of risk) were determined following the European Protocol on Dosimetry in Mammography. Quality criteria for a good radiographic technique were analysed according to the EUR 16260 document. Results: Differences of 13% for dose and 7% for thickness were observed between the two groups for the CC view, being the dose for the symptomatic group lower. A difference in dose of 6% was found between the CC and MLO views. No difference in mean compressed breast thickness was observed. No relationship between fulfilment of quality criteria and dose delivered was found. Conclusion: The risk can be estimated from AGD measurements from the CC or MLO views. Differences in dose between centers is due to differences in techniques and equipments utilized. Purpose: An eleven year old X-ray system has been compared with a new digital X-ray system, being are designed for cardiac angiography. Methods and Materials: The old equipment had continiuos f1uoroscopy, cine with 25 frames per second and no added tube-filtration, the image intensifier-entrance doses were 0.7~Gy/s and 4~Gy/s respectively. The new equipment had two f1uoroscopy programs, with II-entrance doses of 0.2~Gy/s (P1) or 004~Gy/s (P2), and a cine program with 12.5 frames per second and 1.25~Gy/s. The added tube filtration was 0.1 mm Cu and for cine it was 0.2 mm, 0.1 mm Cu or no added filtration, depending on the tube-load. A special phantom and reference procedures were used. The entrance dose was determined by calculation or measurement and the dose-distribution by TLD's and EPD's attached to a dummy-user. An evaluation of the dosimetric records of the past 4 year was performed. Results: The reduction of the occupational dose is 40% for P1; 5% for P2 and 70% with eine. The reduction on the patient entrance dose is 50% for P1, 11% for P2 and 85% with cine. The dosimetric records showed a reduction of almost 40% for the cardiologist and 40-60% for the assistent. Conclusion: New equipment can reduce patient entrance dose and occupational dose to the staf, when the equipment is propely adjusted. In the first phase of our study, image quality at a fixed reduced dose was scored as a function of patient diameter. For a specific clinical question, a reference patient diameter was defined as the one, below which the particular reduced dose gave sufficient diagnostic quality. In a second phase we adapted kV and mAs settings to the difference between the reference patient diameter and the actual patient diameter as computed from the scanogram. In this procedure, errors in the actual patient diameter mainly arise from geometrical magnification and patient movement. Comparison of scanograms and CT images from three different hospitals shows that routine patient positioning practice results in patient diameter estimates that are typically better than 5%. Results: With this automatic dose adjustment we achieved for a 5 mm pancreas protocol an average dose reduction of 29% while image quality was good. Conclusion: We have shown that this simple method of dose adjustment that can be easily implemented on current CT scanners is an effective way to reduce dose while maintaining diagnostic quality. Purpose: A standard angiographic C-arm system that acquires 2D projection images is used for a 3D reconstruction of intracranial vasculature for diagnostic review as weil as during interventional procedures. Methods and Materials: A rotational angiography is taken around the patient's head over 200 0 in 5 s with a conventional, though specially calibrated X-ray C-arm system. A single arterial injection of about 15 cc of contrast agent is sufficient. Patient dose is low. Projection images are transferred to a separate workstation. After several preprocessing steps a 3D volume is generated through a cone-beam CT reconstruction. Results: The reconstructed volumes can be arbitrarily visualized, edited and evaluated on the workstation (e.g. volume measurement). Display modes are surface shaded display, maximum intensity projection and more advanced techniques Iike volume rendering and virtual endoscopy. A selection of interesting c1inical cases will be presented. Conclusion: A single rotation of the C-arm and one injection of contrast agent is sufficient for generating a 3D reconstruction of vessels over the whole head. The reconstructions show very good image quality with excellent, isotropic spatial resolution and high diagnostic value. This additional 3D information will be available right away in the interventional angio lab (work in progress). (Submitted by Internet)  Cross-seetional imaging of vascular struetures is improving every day for detail and speed and is progressively replaeing invasive angiography. In the new millennium, therefore, cross-seetional imaging will be the primary means of investigation of vaseular pathology. Digital angiography will be then reserved only to those eases when imaging is not satisfaetory or for visualizing vessels just before starting an interventional procedure. The aeeeptanee of vaseular and non-vaseular interventional proeedures, by the medical eommunity, has made people aware that these mini-invasive therapies offer more advantages to the patients as compared with surgery; thus spurring the interest of many specialists towards an active involvement in this field. With the advent of stent teehnology, in vaseular interventions, vaseular surgery has undergone a eonsiderable reduetion of the indications for surgery beeause many vaseular pathologies eould be satisfaetorily treated without any operation. However, despite the velate interest of eardiae surgeons to extend to peripheral vessels and the advent of the gene therapy there will not be a further decrease in the need for vaseular surgery but an increase because vascular diseases are considerably undertreated and the population is aging. In the future, vascular interventions-although established by radiologists-will be carried out by radiologists themselves and by other specialists, such as cardiologists with experience in hemodynamics and by the few surgeons who have mastered the technique of vascular intervention. In the future the non-vascular and vascular procedures es: treatment of a bleeding, AVM or tumor, etc. will still be performed by interventional radiology, since it does not stimulate the competitive interest of more aggressive colleagues because of the complexity and sofistication of the proeedures and less brilliant results. Purpose: Contrast media-enhanced 3D MR-Angiographie permits a high intensity contrast between arte ries and stationary tissue. Because there is only a short time period before the contrast medium enhances the veins also, data acquisition has to be performed in about 10 seconds, if a selective visualization of arteries is desired. We are praposing a tool to separate single vessels fram an entire tree in a postpracessing step applying pattern recongnition methods to MRA images. Methods and Materials: Data acquisition of patients with caratid stenoses and volunteers was performed with 3D gradient echo sequences on a Siemens Vision 1.5 1. Pralonged acquisition times leads to high spatial resolution. Arteries and veins are both enhanced. Segmentation of the vessels is done using a three-dimensional region grawing algorithm. Special care has to be taken to avoid false connection of adjoint vessels. Therefore, we prapose a two-pass vessel-tracking algorithm. Results: The segmentation result is presented both as a maximum intensity projection and as 3D surface reconstruction. It is possible to display the single vessel segments, so arterial vessels can be examined apart fram veins. Conclusion cases. Contribution to the arterial supply was from the anterior circulation in 13, posterior circulation in 6 and external carotid artery in 3 eases. 3D SSD of the CTAs was superior to MIP in most AVMs, particularly in those with a eortieal loeation and superfieial venous drainage. CTA eorrectly identified main arterial feeders, associated arterial aneurysms, venous drainage pattern, venous variees and stenosis in all cases. A few very small feeding vessels were not deteeted with CTA and their detection was more problematie on 3D SSD than MIP images beeause of a thresholding effeets. Conclusion: CTA is able to deteet most of the important angioarehiteetorial features in AVMs. It is based on true volumetrie data which allows 3D reeonstruetions and may have a future role in providing more aecurate volume caleulations to assess the effeets of treatment. On plain films erosions and destructions are found in both. Bone scans are positive either and differential diagnosis is complicated by similar MRI appearances with bone marrow edema and enhancement in the disc space. On MRI bone marrow edema in infectious spondylitis is more severe than in patients with erosive osteochondritis and often reaches the opposite endplate on STIR images. The low signal intensity cortical endplate is preserved on T1-weighted unenhanced images in degenerative processes but destroyed in infectious disease to a different degree. Epidural, soft tissue and disc space abscesses can be found only in infectious spondylitis. Signal intensity of the disk space is water equivalent on T2-weighted and STRI images in infectious spondylitis. ABDOMINAL AND GASTROINTESTINAL l EB 1101 Imaging of congenital and inflammatory disorders of the bile ducts and pancreas Progress in neuroradiology essentially refers to scientific knowledge, technology and experience. These three domains are producing important consequences in common clinical practice and management of infectious diseases of the Central Nervous System (CNS). The increasing sensitivity and the excellent visualization ability of latest generations of medical modalities, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) above all, are occupying the gap between pathology and in-vivo imaging. Pathologie lesion is always our gold standard, but contemporary MRI image appears so strictly related to it to permit to ensue the lesion's advance during time, its eventual answer (or missing answer) to medical therapy, a timely upcoming of surgical indication. This is great when you need to know something about physiopathology. But that is not all we need to know. The primary limit of this approach is the relative lack of specificity, above all up to the point of etiology. Often we can handle just "suggestions", most of them coming from anamnesis, medical examination, c1inical considerations, laboratory reports. Only astriet partnership with neurologists and infectivologists would c1arify the c1inical background, and this must be considered mandatory.  infections) The embryology of the liver and biliary tree will first be described in order to explain anomalies of the bile ducts, some of which can be a source of danger during cholecystectomy. Consideration will be given to the feasibility of imaging the important anomalies prior to surgery. An anomalous common terminal segment of the bile duct and pancreatic duct leads to congenital cystic dilatation of the biliary tree, the spectrum of which includes choledochocoele, choledochal cyst and Caroli's disease. The classification of this spectrum of diseases will be considered, together with the related c1inical syndromes and complications and how modern imaging can best be used to diagnose them. In Europe, inflammatory change of the bile ducts is most commonly related to choledocholithiasis, but in this presentation particular emphasis will be given to noncalculous inflammatory disorders, including primary sclerosing cholangitis, primary biliary cirrhosis, recurrent pyogenie cholangitis, AIDS related cholangitis, drug induced cholangitis and parasitic infestations. Biliary atresia, which occurs in approximately 1 in 25,000 live births, is thought to be the result of an inflammatory or infectious process that commences in the prenatal period or immediately after birth. The resulting obstructive cholangiopathy results in inflammatory change and progressive fibrosis. Ultrasound and seintigraphy are at present the most helpful tests in the investigation of obstructive jaundice in infants. In the first part of this section the imaging patterns of congenital disorders of the pancreas are evaluated, explaining their embryonie origin. Not only the usual patterns detectable by ERCP, and more recently by MRCP, are considered, but also the characteristic findings shown by US, CT and MRI. The knowledge ofthese patterns may avoid diagnostic mistakes (i.e. wrong diagnosis of tumour etc.). Finally, the aspect of the pancreatic gland affected by congenital and inflammatory disorders (Le. chronic pancreatitis in pancreas divisum) is demonstrated. In the second part, the imaging of chronic pancreatitis (CP) is evaluated with the aim of defining its primitive or secondary type, since the correct diagnosis affects prognosis and therapy. To date, primitive CP is not a single entity but a group of disorders. Among these, alcoholic calcifying and caleified CP is listed but is not the most frequent. Recently, the diagnosis of primitive autoimmune CP has been suggested on the basis of CT and MR findings. This diagnosis is important since the lesion can be cured with simple steroid treatment. Secondary or obstructive CP is certainly more frequent than the literature suggests. New imaging easily shows this type of CP and its causes. Among the latter, cystic dystrophy of the duodenal wall is particularly interesting, since its presence makes pancreato-duodenectomy necessary. However, certain protocols have to be followed in order to obtain all the possible diagnostic information. Based on the current data on MRFP imaging, it is a realistic assumption that MRFP imaging in combination with eine or tagging MRI will provide us with a better understanding for differentiating stunned and hibernating, from non-viable tissue, and to obtain better outcome data. The main obstacles for a wider use of these new diagnostic tools to assess perfusion is the lack of a large c1inical data base since the manufacturers of MR systems and pharmaceutical companies have not yet reached a consensus on the support of major multi-center trials. However, with the recent development of novel intravascular contrast agents there are plans for larger trials in the near future. In particular the development of dedicated and userfriendly perfusion analysis software will create the necessary standards to accurately evaluate MR perfusion data acquired in large patient populations. Furthermore it is conceivable that the MR methods discussed here will be useable in MR systems geared towards interventional procedures in the heart, and with further progress in cardiovascular MR research, methodologies for screening, treatment monitoring and intervention will be able to coalesce. These studies need to be conducted in a collaborative fashion between cardiologists, heart surgeons, and radiologists to be fully embraced by health care providers who are eager to learn about new modalities with accurate outcome data in an increasingly cost-averse and competitive health care environment. Myocardial perfusion is one of the most important functional parameters of the heart. Therefore a reliable non-invasive determination of the myocardial perfusion would have a considerable impact on early recognition and staging of patients with possible ischemia as i.e, in coronary heart disease, chronic systemic hypertension, aortic stenosis, diabetes mellitus or chronic hemodialysis program. Using EBT technology it is possible to perform CT-data acquisition with a very short exposure time of just 50 ms imaging nearly simultaneously up to 8 levels each 7 mm thick. After the determination of the individual circulation time 50 ml of contrast agent is injected intravenously by power injector and 6-8 tomographie levels are imaged. Each tomographie levels is obtained 13 times at 80% of the R-R-Interval at each 2 or 3 heart beat by ECG-gating. The left myocardial contrast enhancement over time is measured by drawing manually the outline of the myocardium using the time-density software of the IMATRON workstation. For calculation of the myocardial perfusion the so-ca lied "initial slope method" is used. The global myocardial perfusion is calculated in ml/100 g/min. The results of the myocardial perfusion measurements in above 200 patients will be presented and discussed in connection with the extent of coronary artery lesions and of coronary calcification, left ventricular functional parameters and in part with myocardial scintigraphic results. The 4th frame-work programme of the EC Radiation Protection Research action (nuclear fission) focuses on the reduction of diagnostic radiation exposure to the patient. Herein, the minimal dose applied must be considered in direct correlation to the diagnostic quality. To reduce patient dose, the acceptable quality must be defined at first by the creation of certain quality criteria, that can be defind in the resulting image itself. The quality criteria concept has proved to be an efficient means for optimising the use of ionising radiation in medical imaging procedures involving conventional and paediatric radiology. The adoption of the quality criteria to CT has become necessary due to the relatively high collective dose which derives from CT within the European countries. The definition of quality criteria can only be conducted through direct evaluation of CT exams in co-ordination with dose measurement. The major problems in the discription of image quality encounters the different levels of image perception and definition of terms Iike "visualisation" or "sharp reconstruction". Although there are inherent limitations in the definition of quality criteria, the EC-concept can be accepted as a first step towards a quality assurance programme for CT. 765 Definition on CT-dosimetry and diagnostic reference doses KA Jessen; ArhuslDK Computed Tomography (CT) is firmly established as a relatively highdose imaging modality which in some European countries accounts for more than one third of the total collective dose from diagnostic X-ray examinations and therefore a proper and unambiguous dosimetry is essential. The complex conditions of irradiation in CT, involving highly collimated X-ray beams, necessitate the use of specially defined dose descriptors such as the Computed Tomography Oose Index (CTOI). The selection of appropriate diagnostic reference dose quantities has proved particularly challenging since they are required to provide a meaningful indication of patient exposure for all types of scanner and technique, whilst being simple to assess. Two reference dose quantities have been defined on the basis of measurements of CTOI made with a pencil ionisation chamber in standard head or body CT dosimetry phantoms: weighted CTOI for a single slice and, which due account of the thickness and number of slices in a complete examination, dose-Iength product ( Radiation exposure to the patient during CT is relatively high. It is therefore important to optimize the dose to be as low as consistent with required diagnostic image quality. The quality criteria concept as developed for conventional X-ray examination has been proved to be an effective method for optimising the use of ionising radiation. In a EU working document, EUR 16262, regarding Quality Criteria for CT this concept has been used to provide an operational framework for radiation protection initiatives in which technical parameters required for adequate image quality is considered in relation to patient dose. The document includes diagnostic requirements specifying anatomical/diagnostic image quality criteria for six main groups of examinations: cranium, face and neck, spine, ehest, abdomen and pelvis, and bones and joints. The image criteria refer to characteristic features of imaged anatomical structures with a specific degree of visibility. The usability of the image quality criteria in c1inical practice has been evaluated in a multicenter pilot study for five types of examinations: 1) face and sinuses, 2) vertebral trauma, 3) HRCT of the lung, 4) liver and spleen, and 5) osseous pelvis. The results will be presented with regard to standardization of image quality assessment in daily c1inical practice. 768 The role and impact of reference doses in CT J.w. Oestmann; GöttingenlD Computed tomography accounts for 30% of the resultant collective dose in some western European countries with the percentage still growing as new technologies, diagnostic protocols and therapeutic procedures are introduced. Areas of concern and fields of potential action are the justification for the individual study, the applied dose, the diagnostic quality of the study and the competent interpretation. The "Quality Criteria for Computed Tomography" are an effort to make use of basic principles used in conventional radiography looking at only two of these factors: dose and diagnostic quality. The diagnostic criteria, problematic already for the highly standardized conventional studies, try to name those structures whose visualization also ensures the visualization of pathology -a less than perfect but pragmatic approach. The dose evaluation is hampered by the variation between scanner types, the large number of different specific CT studies and their comparative complexity as weil as by the ongoing technological and methodological improvements: CT is a "moving target". The collection of base data concerning dose (reference dose value) and tube current for general recommendations requires large, costly studies which are hitherto available only for a few study types. The reference dose for some high frequency CT studies has been based for a large part on surveys in the UK and represents third-quartile values of the observed dose distribution. It must not be seen as a fixed value but represents a pragmatic starting point for an evolving program. The impact of these values may be nonexisting or even negative if they are not applied in repetitive surveys with large numbers of participants from all levels of the radiological community, that document current usage, aid the participants in tuning their hardware and protocols and -in turn -document the induced improvement. Such an improvement -"raison d' ätre" and objective of the whole effort -has been beautifully documented -in US-American programs. With all inherent problems, the "Quality Criteria for Computed Tomography" represent a set of tools , with which the collective dose due to CT in Europe could definitely be reduced. lt should be born in mind , however, that cost conscious "evidence based medicine" schemes defining and enforcing proper indications for particular CT studies as weil as regulatory measures ensuring sufficient diagnostic expertise may weil have a higher impact on the collective dose due to CT than any other act ion. 16:00-17:30 Room F1 vertebral body ), the middle column (from posterior third of the vertebral body to posterior longitudinal ligament) and the posterior column (comprehensive of all osseous and Iigamentous structures posterior to the posterior longitudinal ligament). Disruption of any single column alone does not produce instability, while disruption of two contiguous columns will result in vertebral instability. Plain X-rays analysis constitute the main screening modality for spine trauma evaluation, even if, at present Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) is considered necessary for a complete investigation of trauma patients with suspected spinal lesions. Some radiological signs, both detectable at plain X-rays and at MRI , are indicative of disruption of a major skeletal ligamentous or ar ticular structure. The presence of at least one of them is sufficient to diagnose vertebral instability (Daffner et al. 1990 ) . The radiologist must provide the surgeon with a complete and aecurate analysis of the morphologie and topographie elements of the lesion together with an estimation of the stability of the injured spine. Iim 1111 Brain deathNertebral post-traumatic The CT technique for imaging of the proximal airways (trachea and bronehi) depends on the nature of the suspected pathology: For analysis of diffuse abnormalities (e.g. bronchiectasis) thin (1-2mm) collimation high-resolution scans with slice intervals of 10 mm are adequate in most instances. This technique allows visualization of the airways to the level of bronch i with a diameter as small as 2 mm . Occasionally, narrower spacing or cont iguous thieker (3-5 mm) slices may be required . For assessment of focal abnormalilies (e.g. bronchial stenosis or dehiscence) sp iral CT should be performed with collimation ranging from 1 to 5 mm and pitch from 1 to 2 depending on the area of interest and the patients ability to hold their breath . Volume data aequisition at spiral C'T is the basis for further image proeessing such as rnult lplanar reformation (MPR) , minimum intensity projection (MinIP) or virtual bronchoscopy. Due to high inherent contrast low-dose techniques can be used, partieular in benign disease . Intravenous contrast is usually not required. In this course , the normal lobar and segmental bronchial anatomy as weil as normal variants will be presented. Abnormalities that will be dlscussed include developmental, inflammator y, neoplastic, posttraumatte. posttherapeutic and other pathology. Definitions and Principles: The question of brain death arises in patients with absence of the nervous system functions because of an isolated brain lesion and in which we take over, with our technology, the breath ing, thus preventing the cessat ion of the cardiopulmonary system and keeping the functions of all the tissues and organs intact. Brain death is the state of irrevers ible cessation of all cerebral and brainstem functions, despite continued cardiopulmonary activity, mainta ined by advanced life-support systems and mechanical ventilation. Brain death is always associated with absence of intracranial circulation. The diagnosis of brain deat h is only possible with certa in "conditio sine qua non" Diagnosis: The intracranial circulation comes to an arrest when the intracranial pressure (ICP) rises, exceeding the mean arterial blood pressure for a long period. Multimodal ity monitoring in the intensive care unit helps in selecting patients who are possible brain death, but cannot be used as a legal confirmatory test for brain death because the sampies comes from a small brain volume This is the first step (in some countries the only step) in the official diagnosis of brain death . The pitfalls are the test of the papillary light reflex and the examination of spontaneous breathing. 2. Confirmatory tests . The law in many countries asks for a confirmatory test, beside the c1inical neurological examination. There are two groups of tests : those testing the brain funetion (EEG), and tho se who examine the intracranial circulation. Radiological imaging belongs to this category 3. Imaging methods. The transcranial Doppler technique is an inexpensive, noninvasive technique, done at the bedside. It cannot be included in a legal protocol because it doesn't examine all the intracranial vessels . Several studies report the use of MR, MR angiography and MR spectroscopy, but up to now there are no pathognomic MR parameters of brain death . The only legally accepted imaging method is the cerebral angiography. Because brain death is whole brain death , the four major intracranial vessels has to be examined, either by selective catheterisation or by a catheter in the aortic arch . 770 Vertebral post-traumatic instability U. Salvolini, S. Perugini, G. Polonara, T. Scarabino; Anconall Vertebral column stability allows preservation of spinal structures normal alignment, support of head and trunk and protection of spinal cord from physiological and abnormal mechanical stresses. Vertebral column stability relies upon bones, joints and ligaments integrity. F.Denis (1983) identifi es three anatomical zones within the spine: the anterior column (ranging from anterior longitudinal ligament to anterior two/thirds of the Small airways disease (SAD) is generally defined as a pathological condition in which the small conducting airways are affected. The bronchiolar involvement can be the primary finding but ls more often a component of a more widespread lung disease. Small airways disease may be associated with a variety of pathologie findings including luminal and mural inflammatory cellular infiltrates, intraluminal proliferation of granulation tissue and the development of submucosal collagenization. HRCT is partieularly valuable in showing small airways disease not only when it is part of widespread disease involving also larger bronchi and airspaces but also when bronchiolitis is the primary finding. In addition, although there is overlap between the different pathologic types, HRCT is often able to suggest a more specific diagnosis. In this presentation a review will be given on the HRCT features of the different types of bronchiolitis, by using the pathological changes as a starting point for classification. renal cell carcinoma, lymphoma and metastasis), and abscesses (for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes  This session will first review the relative roles of conventional sialography, US, CT and MR imaging (including MR sialography) in the diagnosis and management of diseases affecting the major salivary glands. It will demonstrate how to integrate the information available from these imaging studies with the clinical findings and nonradiologic diagnostic tests. The anatomy of the major salivary glands will be reviewed with emphasis on the critical anatomic relationships that may influence the surgical approach. The most common non-neoplastic conditions affecting the major salivary glands will be discussed, namely acute and chronic recurrent sialadenitis, sialolithiasis, autoimmune diseases, sialosis, granulomatous diseases and cysts. Emphasis will be placed on the correlation between clinical-pathologic presentation and imaging findings. In addition, the implications of a precise pretheraputic workup as weil as the key questions the radiologist has to answer in a specific clinical context will be discussed with respect to the newer treatment modalities. Tumours of the salivary glands are rare, accounting for only 3% of all head and neck tumours. About 80% of tumours is located within the parotid gland, 10% within the submandibular glands, 1% in the sublingual glands and the rest in the srnall salivary glands of the mucosa of the upper aero-digestive tract. Parotid tumours are benign in about 75% of cases, pleomorphic adenoma being the most common histologic tumour type (80%), followed bij adenolymphoma (15%). Malignant tumours make up about 25% of parotid tumours and they are histologically divers. Small malignant tumours resemble benign lesions and only in case of infiltration into adjacant structures and bone erosion by tumour a malignant nature can be predicted correctly by imaging. Pleomorphic adenomas must be surgically removed because they become highly malignant tumours in the long run. Adenolymphomas do not have malignant potential. In many cases the clinician knows the nature of a palpable mass before imaging is requested. imaging is needed to show the exact localization and extension of the lesion: within or outwith the parotid gland, superficial or deep l.e, simple parotidectomy with virtual no risk of damage to the facial nerve or a total parotidectomy risking damage to the facial nerve. Imaging is needed also to demonstrate c1inically unsuspected extension along cranial nerves (Vllth, Vth) intracranially. This finding may change therapy strategy and patient outcome dramatically. W. Jaschke, P. Waldenberger, P. Springer; /nnsbruck/A Stents are nowadays commonly used for the treatment of vascular stenosis and ocelusion. Stentgrafts are prefered for exclusion of aneurysms . We report our experience with both devices in the i1iac and subclavian artery. Subclavian artery occlusion is an accepted indication for endovascular treatment. Using a transaxillary approach, the occluded segment is recanalized using a hydrophilie guide wire followed by balloon angioplasty. We use an undersized angioplasty balloon (for example 5 mm) for the initial dilatation. Then, a selfexpanding flexible stent with a diameter of 6-9 mm is introduced and expanded to the nominal size of the vessel. Overstenting of the origin of the vertebral artery is avoided if possible. Also, care is taken that the stent does not extend into the aortic arch more then 5 mm. Iliac artery occlusions are treated similarly. Usually, an ipsilateral approach is prefered since recanalization is easier accomplished compared to a eross-over procedure. Local fibrinolysis is not regularly performed, but is an additonal option if mechanical recanalization fails. After recanalization, PTA with a 5 mm balloon is performed followed by implantation of a selfexpandable stent. Balloon expandable stents are only used for special indications. In cases with lesions close to the aortic bifurcation , a double stent technique is used to avoid overlapping of the ostium of the contralateral i1iac artery. Aneurysms involving the ostium of the internal i1iac artery require special attention. Backbleeding into the aneurysm has to be prevented by embolization of the ipsilateral internal i1iac. The contralateral approach is prefered for selective catheterizat ion of the interna! iliac artery. Stents and stent graft are widely used for a variety of vascular disorders. In this workshop it will be demonstrated for which indication stents and stent grafts are weil indicated. (1) In the iliac arteries it has been shown that based on appropriate patient selection and adequate material selection a very high success rate might be achieved: Initial 5-year results of a randomized multicenter trial -iliac artery stenting versus PTA -indicated that primary stenting had higher success rates. Early success, longterm suecess, complication and patency rates are significantly beUer after stenting with p values <0.01-0.005. In the PTA group distal iliac artery lesions were more prone to failure than proximal lesions (p < 0.03). Conclusion: The higher morphologie and e1inical benefit after primary stenting seem to result from less teehnical failure and, more important, from beUer morphologie repair as compared to balloon angioplasty. (2) In the renal arteries, particularly in ostium stenoses, it has been shown, too, that based on proper patient and material selection a high sueeess rate might be achieved that exceeds results of angioplasty alone and deserves to be considered an alternative to surgical therapy. From our experience and from the literature it can be concluded that technical success rates of renal artery stenting are close to 100% associated with a e1inical success rate of 60-80%. Re-stenosis rate vary between 15-35%. For this indication short segment balloon expandable stents are preferable. The different steps of the implantation are the following: -bilateral femoral access (surgical cutdown or percutaneous puncture according to the device) -Aortogram for mapping of the renal arteries -Orientation of the prosthesis before implantation -Main body delivery (using road mapping/mixed f1uoroscopy/radiopaque ruller or needle on the abdomen) -Balloon insuflation for stent fixation -Catheterisation of the aortic stump (various catheters and obliques) -Delivery of the controlateral limb and dilation -Control angiogram Different techniques of main body placement, stump catheterisation and a summary of technical tricks will be demonstrated on video and further eomments will be proposed using additionnal slides. We will also discuss our protocol used for preparation of the angio suit for stent grafting. This video workshop will enhance the participants capability to starUdevelop endovascular treatment of aortic aneurysms in their institution and to beUer understand the links between pre -operative anatomie work-up and outcome of the procedure.  Aortic aneurysm is an important cause of cardiovascular mortality in Occidental countries, and as the population is aging, the incidence of aneurysm is on the rise. Because of the risks and complications associated with aortic surgery, stent-grafting of the aorta is emerging as a new technique in aneurysms of various etiologies and in traumatic ruptures of the aortic isthmus. The enthusiastic interest in endo-grafts has lead to the development of a wide variety of devices. The technical challenges of these stent-grafts include the need 1 1to be of sufficiently small profile to be delivered by small vessels such as femoral arte ries 2 1 be flexible to cross tortuous vessels, 3 1 to accomodate different lengths and diameters, and to anchor the devices without migration inside the aorta. The precise sizing of the device obtained from digital substraction angiogram with calibrated catheter and spiral CT with 3D-reconstructions is certainly one of the most crltical points of these endovascular procedures. A number of prospective studies using a variety of devices for abdominal aneurysms have now been published in the literature, but so far no randomized studies are available. For thoracic aortic lesions the theoretical advantages are multiple: a simple arteriotomy under mild anticoagulation is performed without thoracotomy or aortic clamping, which, theoretically, lessens the risk of medullar ischemia. and major bleeding complications observed with a surgical full heparinization of traumatic injury. In conclusion, stent-grafts offers a good alternative to surgery for abdominal and thoracic aortic aneurysms for elderly patients and those with previous opsratlons, obesity, respiratory insufficiency or other concomitant illnesses with potentially lower morbidity and quicker recovery but further long-term studies are needed to extend their c1inical field of application. In this course the fundamental concepts, methods and technology of shaded surface display and volume rendering will be reviewed and classified, with an emphasis on specific implementalions and illustrations of several significant applications in radiology. This course will also include an introduction to virtual reality (VR), provide an overview of virtual reality systems architecture and environments. Interfaces related to human factors will be addressed. These interfaces include immersive displays and gesture analysis systems. Methods of analyzing patient specific anatomy and VR-endoscopy will be described and demonstrated. Important applications and c1inical aspects of virtual endoscopy Iike bronchoscopy, colonoscopy and angioscopy will be demonstrated and discussed. Benefits: • become familiar with the methods of 3D imaging and virtual reality • learn the role of volume imaging and graphics in radiological VR applications • synthesize theories and concepts, and formulate them into practical c1inical implementations 783 B. The operating room of the future A.L. Jacob, P. Messmer; Basel/CH Traditionally diagnostic radiology provides imaging, images and image interpretation to its referring colleagues. Interventional radiology (IR) provides minimally invasive, image guided methods to complement or in some instances replace more invasive surgical procedures. IR, however, is limited to lesions that can either be reached and treated through a pre-existing vascular or ductal pathway or through a linear percutaneous approach. IR is bound to the presence of capable imaging equipment. Surgery traditionally needs to open the body to be able to reach and act on the lesion to be treated. The open approach accounts for a major part of the iatrogenic morbidity added to the natural course of the underlying disease. Even then the surgeon can not normally look beyond the exposed surfaces. Surgery is bound to the presence of a sterile operating environment. The limitation of both approaches can be overcome in an integrated approach, where modern imaging equipment is introduced into a sterile surgical environment. Integration however must not only comprise radiological, but also other imaging modalities (e.g. endoscopy of existing and newly created cavities) as weil as surgical hardware (e.g. tools and tables), life-support equipment and others. Motivation, technology, implementation strategies and funding of this image-guided, integrated and intra-disciplinary operating room as weil as a comprehensive approach combining emergency care and eleclive computer assisted therapy as pursued in Basel will be the main topics of our presentation. Pax Vobiscum, meaning "walk with peace", is the name of a joint developrnent and installation project between Örebro County Council (OLL), Sectra Imtec AB and RadiSoft AB. The purpose ot lhe project ls to digitise all radiological imaging, excluding mammography but including nuclear medicine, within the country. The project started in 1994 when the need to modernise the country's radiological resources had been identified. The radiological modernise the country's radiological resources had been identified. The radiological departments look the bold decision to move over from film technology to digital imaging equipment (PACS). The system should not only result in less administration and higher efficiency, but also enable the different radiology departments in the country to collaborate more c1osely. All image would be produced, reviewed, inspected and stored using digital and film-free technology. Some of the advantages with the introduction of Pax Vobiscum are • More time for patients. • Setter service to referring doctors • Complete on-line supply of reference material both within and outside the radiology department. • Environmentally friendly image handling and less use of chemicals. • General rise in the competence of the staff. All users have undergone an extensive training program, covering everything from word processing to digital imaging and the PACS products. They have also undergone an extensive training in RIS and all new modalities. PACS is based on the transmission of digital images. CT, MR and nuclear medicine images are intrinsically digital but conventional x-ray imaging, the bulk of radiological work, uses analogue film. New x-ray detectors which produce images in digital form and retain the high resolution and large area of film are therefore required. In the current standard method of digitisation, computed radiography, photostimulable plates are exposed as with film then read-out to a computer using a laser reader. However more direct methods of detection are being developed and are starting to be introduced. Examples are detectors based either on direct conversion of x-rays to electrical positional signals or on indirect conversion of the light generated in a semiconductor detector either direclly or by so-calied charge coupled detectors. The large area deteetors are made in the form of eassettes whieh may eventually replaee sereen/film cassettes and image intensifiers for most, if not all, x-ray, mammographie and f1uoroseopie applieations. Potential advantages of the new deteetors include inereased sensitivity and therefore deereased radiation doses to patients and staff, remote reporting, better diagnostie ability through digital image proeessing and inereased work efficieney and quality. The prineiples and relative advantages of the new deteetors will be diseussed. 786 A. Extra-axial neoplasms, cysts and tumor-Iike lesions AG. Osborn; Salt Lake City, UTIUSA Extra-axial neoplasms, eysts and tumor-like lesions aeeount for approximately one-third of all intraeranial primary neoplasms in adults and about one-quarter of brain tumors in ehildren. The differential diagnosis of an extra-axial mass varies signifieantly with both patient age and geographie loeation. In this session we eonsider the pathology and imaging appearanee of extra-axial masses, subdividing them into supraand intratentorial lesions and then eonsidering the speeifie differential diagnosis by partieular anatomie loeation. The ineidenee of brain tumors has been estimated at 4.5 per 100.000 habitants. In this chapter we will analyze supratentorial hemispherie tumors of the eentral nervous system (CNS) in the context of the WHO criteria, published in 1993. We described the radiopathologieal correlation in the: low-grade astrocytoma; anaplastic astroeytoma; glioblastoma multiforme and their variants; the new tumoral entities deseribed in the reeents years, such as, pleomorphie xanthoastrocytoma, eentral neuroeytoma, dysembrioplastie neuroepithelial tumor and desmoplastie infantile ganglioglioma; ependymoma; ehoroid plexus papiloma and neuroepithelial tumors of the uneertain origin. Finally, we analyzed the radiopathological correlation in the lymphoma and metastasis. to that in rheumatoid arthritis, but the degree of inflammation is mueh lower and consequently the destruction of cartilage and bone in not so pronouneed (with the exeeption of psoriatie arthritis). Sacroiliitis is an early manifestation of different seronegative spondlyloarthritides, partieularly of ankylosing spondylitis. Early radiological diagnosis of saeroiliitis is difficult mainly due to the eomplex bieompartmental anatomy of the saeroiliae joints. During the course of different sero negative spondyloarthritides, a variety of changes affect the discovertebral junctions, apophyseal and eostovertebral joints, atlantoaxial artieulations and posterior ligaments. The most frequently involved peripheral joints in ankylosing spondylitis are hip shoulder, knee, and metacarpohalangeal joints. Psoriatie arthritis often involves small joints of the feet and the hand. The radiographie features are highly distinctive. An enthesitis at the insertions of the Aehilles' tendon and the plantar aponeurosis is fairly typical for Reiter's syndrome and present in more than half of patients. The use of different imaging modalities (radiography, CT, MRI) and demonstration of deffinite radiological abnormalities is indispensable for early diagnosis, differential diagnosis, following of the disease progression, presentation of complieations as weil as evaluation of therapy. Many erystals are known to cause an inflammatory response in man. However three are signifieantly more important; monosodium urate monohydrate (MSUM), calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) and hydroxyapatite (basic calcium phosphate or BCP). The relationship between these erystals and the pathogenesis of arthritis remains contentious. Characteristic radiological changes are c1aimed for the arthropathy of eaeh, yet research indicates that neat causal relationships may not be real. Acute gout is indueed by crystals of MSUM although tophi may be years old. Deposition reflects a solute driven systemic disorder, with excess of urate being widespread. The causal relationship is uncertain but the radiology of c1assical gout is mostly typical. CPPD crystals cause aeute arthritis (pseudogout) when they are shed as superficial layers of hyaline cartilage in which they are present are stripped or worn off. A hypertrophic form of osteoarthritis (OA), originally described in some such patients, suggests a degree of disease modification. However inconsistencies occur in this apparent relationship. lt is more likely that crystals, produced by chondrocytes, and hypertrophic osteophytosis (also a "repair" mechanism by chondrocytes), refleet two parallel responses to joint failure. Differences in crystal morphology are described between those found in pseudogout, and those in hypertrophic OA Further the distinction between "crystal" and "non crystal" OA may be artifieial. BCP crystals in joints appear to reflect another mechanism. Initially thought responsible for rapidly destructive arthritis (particularly of the shoulder) it is now clear that many such erystals represent"bone dust", It is possible that bone failure to joint insults may reflect a more generalised inability of the patient to resist bone damage. Further the presenee of BCP in joint fluid may be anormal finding. The radiology of eaeh "crystal" arthritis will be reviewed, but emphasis will be placed on the causal relationships between crystals and arthritis. The term seronegative spondyloarthritis has been introdueed by Moll et al in 1974 to distinguish a group of heterogenous inflammatory rheumatic deseasses from rheumatoid arthritis. The spondyloarthritides eonsist of several rheumatic diseases: ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, reactive arthritis and Reiter's syndrome, entheropathie arthritls (Crohn's desease, ulcerative eolitis), juvenile ehronie arthritis and undifferentiated spondyloarthritis. A controversial candidate is pustular arthrosteitis (SAPHO syndrome). Pathoanatomieally, two types of joint deseases oecur in the seronegataive spondyloarthritides: an inflammatory enthesopathy and a peripheral inflammatory arthritis. Inflammatory enthesopathy affeets different sites of ligamentous insertions into the bone, most often the insertions of ligaments around intervertebral dises and the saeroiliae joints, which is the reason for the name of the whole group (spondyloarthritis). The synovium in peripheral arthropathy is changed in a way similar 8:30-10:00 Iim 1220 A practical clinical approach Chairperson: J.wAJ. REEDERS (Amsterdam/NL) Room C or MRI, non-invasive alternatives in the diagnostic work up are given. Helical CT techniques are already in c1inical use for detection/exclusion of pulmonary thromboembolism. The disadvantages mainly concern peripheral pulmonary disease and reconstruction artifacts. MRI and MRA have been implemented in the diagnostic of the pulmonary vascular disease since the introduction of contrast enhanced MRA. In breathhold techniques, the entire lung vascularisation can be delineated and thromboemboli can be detected. Clinical experience still is Iimited, but the potential of MRI is given to demonstrate a superiority over CT due to improved demonstration of peripheral disease and due to a more comprehensive display of the reconstruction. The last two decades AIDS has become one of the most devastating illnesses in human history. Not long aga the concept of retroviral infection rewriting the genetic code and causing destruction of the immune system was in the realm of science fiction. The AIDS epidemie differs from most other diseases in many ways, has challenged conventional medical thinking and has broadened the boundaries of knowledge of human biology and medicine. The patterns of disease and pathological changes seen in AIDS patients can be perplexing and challenging, particularly in the Medical Imaging department. As the epidemie continues to spread, AIDS patients are no longer confined to a few specialized AIDS hospitals, and are now seen in general hospitals and clinics everywhere. Radiologists will need to recognize its appearances, to understand how, safely, to look after patients with the disease and to know enough about the illnesses to be able to council their patients, their staff and their colleagues. This categorical course will present a review of current knowledge about the wide range of gastrointestinal manifestations in AIDS and how the role of modern medical imaging techniques and diagnosis and treatment can be applied. The imaging aspects of the diseases of the gastrointestinal tract (conventional double contrast, ultrasound, CT) will be systematically discussed in two parts (Part I: lumenal gastrointestinal tract, part 11: solid abdominal organs). Candidiasis, cytomegalovirus, cryptosporidiosis, histoplasmosis, isosporiasis, salmonella, toxoplasmosis and unusual mycobacteria account for a majority of non-neoplastic disorders. Neoplasms include Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) and high-grade B-cell lymphomas. Multiple sites may be involved in significant numbers of patients. As radiologie experience accumulates, the predominant radiographie patterns will become more clearly defined. This course will produce a cohesive account of AIDS, that will educate and guide GIradiologie practice. It is the hope, that the coming years will see light shed upon our current state of ignorance of this baffling affliction. Conventional coronary arteriography (CA) is the standard of excellence for the evaluation of coronary artery disease. However, non-invasive imaging modalities have developed that can play an important c1inical role. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can offer a comprehensive evaluation of the heart and the coronaries by virtue of its high soft tissue contrast capabilities, double-oblique tomographie sections and the possibility to quantify many physiological parameters without the need of ionizing radiation or contrast agents. Magnetic resonance coronary arteriography (MRCA) using breath-hold and free-breathing techniques have been investigated but are still traversing an experimental phase to identify their precise role for the assessment of coronary stenosis. Nonetheless, MRCA has proven clinically relevant to determine the course of anomalous coronary arteries and patency of bypass grafts. Novel intravascular contrast agents promise faster coverage of the cardiac anatomy and may provide the long awaited essential boost for MRCA. Contrast-enhanced electron-beam computed tomography (EBT), another competing imaging modality, has also begun a widespread evaluation following initial encouraging results. With the advent of computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and ultrasonography (in particular transesophageal echocardiography), non-invasive imaging of the great vessels of the ehest has become a reality. Spiral CT and 3D contrast-enhanced MR angiography allow fast volume imaging of vessels of interest. Post processing techniques such as maximum intensity projection and multiplanar reformatting are available, and may improve the detection of lesions. In most circumstances, these imaging techniques allow an accurate description of abnormalities of the thoracic vasculature and can be considered as a valuable substitute for contrast angiography. A comprehensive review is given on the current techniques dealing with vessel imaging, discussing their role in the diagnosis of the most frequent disorders of the thoraeie aorta and pulmonary arteries.  Evaluation of the pulmonary vasculature is mainly indicated in patients with suspected pulmonary thromboembolism. Today, a routine ventilation-perfusion scintigram, in combination with the diagnostic work up of a deep venous thrombosis is the standard procedure. Still, the results are not reliable for the majority of patients. In equivocal diagnoses, invasive conventional angiography is considered the gold standard. By steady improvements in tomographie imaging, like CT S180 Aim and Purpose: Stereotactic interventions in the breast are, essential for localising breast lesions detected by mammography er sonography and for making such lesions accessible to preoperative biopsies. Methods and Materials: About 4000 localisations have been carried out at our department. Initially such localisations were usually performed in the presence of suspected malignant lesions. Nearly 800 stereotactic biopsies have been carried out in 5 years. Preoperative localisations were initially done by using self-constructed grids. Since 1986 a stereotactic device of TRC Company is in use. Localisations were performed in a silling position, using the stereotactic localisation aids of Medical System GE Stereotix and the cytoguide of Philips. Since 5 years a device of the Fischer Company Mammotest and Mammovision are in use. Until 5 years aga localisations were done with Indian ink. Sterile Indian ink and a sterile 4% mixture of carbon and saline were used. In recent years we have been using Cook X-reidy's localisation needles, wh ich are available in 3 sizes. For breast biopsies, 11 and 14 gauge needles are used with a BARO high-speed applicator or vacuum-assisted breast biopsy cannulas. Results: The B/M index in preoperative localisations has changed. In the beginning of interventional activity it was 1:2. Subsequently it changed to 2.5 benign to 1 malignant finding. Thanks to stereotactic biopsy methods the B/M index has changed in favour of malignant lesions. In stereotactic core biopsies the rate of error in the various systems varies between 2 and 3 per cent. Conclusion: Lesions that are suspected to be malignant are preferably localised before surgery, while lesions that are probably benign are usually subjected to biopsy. Upon the referring physician's request, an increasing number of malignant lesion are subject to preoperative histologic clarification; the ratio between referring physicians and radiologists is 1:1. 795 B. Stereotaxy versus ultrasound guided biopsies R.Ch. Ollo; Baden/CH Imaging techniques like mammography or sonography (as weil as others) demonstrate focal tissue alterations quite weil, however, they often do not permit to indicate the definite diagnosis of these in respect to their benign or malignant character. This statement signifies that their sensitivity is high, while their specificity remains low which is inadequate for correct evaluation and treatment. In this dilemma guided biopsy and tissue examination may be helpful. Fine needle punctures with aspiration of tissues allow material to be collected for cytological or bacteriological evaluation and furthermore are used for the evacuation of cysts. The larger biopsy needles permit to get larger tissus sampies which can be investigated histologically. Fine needle biopsies and core biopsies have different advantages and disadvantages. Their accuracy depends not only on the needle type, but on the guidance method of sampling (ultrasound guidance oder stereotaxy) and especially on the ski 11 and experience of the person who is responsible for performing the biopsy. The results of more than 400 cases are discussed. Ultrasound guided biopsy and stereotaxy are described in detail. The presence of necrosis or hemorrhage may cause problems for exact interpretation, but the whole interventional procedure is absolutely dependent on the experience of the operator. As weil a technician has to be ready to spread the material immediately onto the slides and then fix or air dry these slides correctly to maintain constantly high-quality smears. The accuracy in different studies ist between 72% and 94%. Oigitalized stereotaxy today has become as important as ultrasound guided biopsy though the indication for each technique is different. 796 C. Fine needle versus core biopsy E. Azavedo; Stockho/m/S Cytology has been used since late fifties to plan both conservative and surgical treatment of palpable lumps in a breast. Ouring the last decade or so larger needles have been used to obtain tissue fragments for histological assessment but the techniques are not competitors of each other. Modern breast imaging technology early cancers but also early cell/tissue changes of which some may represent neoplastic changes. The laller type of lesions are sometimes more confidently diagnosed with larger sampies than with individual cells. While availability of trained cytologists is limited the same can be the case with histopathologists. A histopathologist reading core biopsies should have special expertise in breast pathology especially to evaluate borderline lesions and/or early cancers. Cytology does demand a skilIed performer of the FNA in order to get an acceptable sam pie and the result of a FNA has to be integrated with the corresponding breast image to get the final diagnosis even in the case of malignancies. Core biopsies can be performed by less skilied personnel since stereotactic techniques have always been able to target alesion with ±1 mm precision. Cytology specimens can be stained and read while the patient is still on the examination table and histology specimens need around 2 days before the result is ready. Core biopsies allow the possibility to judge whether a carcinoma is invasive or not. This is helpful in planning type of surgery but in cases where cores only show CIS we know that it is not the whole truth in all cases. This delicate issue can be satisfactorily dealth with with cytology without depreciating the need and value of cores which of course play an important role in breast diagnostics. Spinal cord development occurs through two consecutive periods: primary neurulation (18 th_27th day) produces the uppermost 9/10 of spinal cord, whereas secondary neurulation and retrogressive differentiation (28 th-48th day) results in the conus tip and filum terminale. Oefective primary or secondary neurulation produces spinal dysraphisms, characterized by anomalous differentiation and fusion of dorsal midline structures. However, the most complicated forms (complex dysraphic states) may be related to gastrulation, the formation of the three embryonie layers prior to neurulation Spinal dysraphisms states may be categorized c1inically in two subsets. In open spinal dysraphisms (aSO) the placode (non-neurulated neural tissue) is exposed to air through a bony defect. aso include myelomeningocele, myelocele, hemimyelomeningocele and hemimyelocele, and are always associated with a Chiari 11 malformation. C/osed spinal dysraphisms (CSO) are covered by intact skin, although cutaneous stigmata usually betray their presence; !wo subsets may be idenlified based on the presence of a subcutaneous mass. CSD with tumefaction comprise lipomyeloschisis, Iipomyelomeningocele, meningocele, and myelocystocele. CSD without tumefaction comprise complex dysraphic states (ranging from complete dorsal enteric fistula to neurenteric cysts, diastematomyelia, dermal sinuses, caudal agenesis, and spinal segmental dysgenesis), bony spina bifida, tight filum terminale, filar and intradural llpomas, and persisting terminal ventricle. S 181 deep myometrial invasion of an endometrial carcinoma will allert surgeons to the necessity of Iymph node dissection, rather than sampling, and invasion of cervical stroma by cervical carcinoma will require a radical rather than simple hysterectomy. Imaging is important in staging the disease, with emphasis on myometrial and cervical stromaI invasion and Iymph node status. MR imaging has proved superior to both CT and ultrasound in the identification of tumor size, locatlon, depth of stromal invasion, parametrial invasion, and loco-regional extent. MR imaging is the method of choice for planning radiotherapy and provides the best information for differentiating postoperative scar from recurrent tumor. CT and MR imaging proved to be versatile imaging modalities for characterization of primary ovarian neoplasms. With both modalities, tumor size, wall thickness, presence of vegetations and solid structures are criteria for lesion characterization. However, CT remains the primary imaging modality for presurgical staging of the whole abdomen and pelvis. Learning Objective: To get acquainted with the normal appearance of the female pelvis on MR images and to understand the potential impact of imaging on patient management in cases of endometrial, cervical andovarian cancer. The ehest radiograph remains the single most common imaging procedure in the world accounting for up to 30%-40% of all conventional radiologie examinations performed in Europe as weil as in the United States. In spite of its high frequency of performance obtaining a high quality ehest radiograph remains one of the greatest challenges in diagnostic imaging. Conventional film-screen radiography has been the standard radiologie medium for ehest radiography because of its semplicity, low cost, excellent spatial resolution and sensitivity. However there are limitations in its ability to provide optimal contrast in both the lungs and mediastinum. Current film screen radiographie technique requires a compromise between the need for adequate contrast in local regions of the ehest and overall image latitude. Limitations of conventional film-screen systems are more pronounced in bedside radiography. This course will explore various approaches that have been developed to produce consistently high-quality ehest radiographs. Techniques utilizing conventional screen-film combinations and equipment will be presented as weil the rationales for specific choices and combinations. The most frequent indication for ehest MRI is to assist in the staging of lung cancer. Chest MRI, Iike ehest C'T, has Iimitations when staging lung cancer. Chest MRI is not a routine imaging modality for ptients with lung cancer. It is used to try and solve specific problems, notably to exploit the multiplanar imaging capability of MRI and to demonstrate invasion of mediastinal fat which can be weil demonstrated with Iiltle motion artifact using ECG triggering. MRI has particular value in showing the extent of superior sulcus tumours, neoplastic involvement of the aorto-pulmonary window and the sub-carinal region and vascular invasion. MRI can also provide useful information about mediastinal masses, the aorta and great veins. Neither cardiac MRI or pulmonary parenchymal imaging will be discussed in this particular refresher course. Imaging of the infrahyoid region of the neck is performed using different modalities, including ultrasonography, CT and MRI. The normal anatomy of the infrahyoid space is reviewed, emphasizing the normal appearance of the tissues on radiological images. Soft tissue masses of the neck include lesions which are remarkably heterogeneous for site of origin and histology, a reflection of the various anatomical structures of this region. Different imaging techniques can be used to assess the more Iikely diagnosis and the precise extent of the disease. Generally, the choice among ultrasound, C'I, MR and angiography, or their combined use, depends both on clinical data -such as the age of the patient, symptoms, history -and the specific location of the mass. For example, if an infrahyoid neck mass is detectable by US, its content (liquid, vascular, solid) can be properly assessed (with the aid of echocolour Doppler techniques) or citology easily provided by ultrasoundguided FNA. Conversely, if the lesion extends into deep spaces, i.e, the retropharyngeal and perivertebral spaces, CT or MR are required to precise its relationships with the spine and neural structures. Lesions arising from the visceral space (pharynx, larynx, trachea, thyroid, parathyroid gland) or from the thoraeie inlet need CT or MR because of the limitation of US in examining structures in close proximity of airways and the mediaslinum. Particular attention should be paid 10 bacterial infections which arise from the oral cavity (dental disease) or pharynx because they may give rise to cellulitis or to abscesses with eventual spread along the adjacent fascial planes toward the skull base or into the mediastinum (from the supra and infrahyoid neck, respectively) . The purpose of this part of the video workshop is to describe the current status of MR-guided percutaneous biopsies of the abdomen and the musculoskeletal system. For MR guided biopsies, different types of biopsy needles for soft tissues and for skeletal biopsies are commercially available. Like in other biopsy procedures, the appropriate needle choice depends on the tissue to be characterized. Whenever possible, a cutting needle is recommended to provide enough material for a histologie work-up. For skeletal biopsies, either a cutting needle or a drilling system for sclerotic lesions is required. Lesion targeting can be performed manually or by active instrument tracking on open MR systems, which allow interactive positioning and guidance of the biopsy device. For control of the biopsy pathway and the correct needle position within the target, either fast gradient echo techniques or fast spin echo techniques may be used, depending on the tissue contrast, which enhances the lesion most effectively. Current indications for MR-guided biopsies include aillesions, which are only or better visualized on MR like some liver tumors or bone marrow edemas of unknown etiology. In addition, MR guidance is helpfull if a lesion is located subdiaphragmatically. With some experience the procedure time is not longer than in CT or USo The diagnostic accuracy is similar to other established procedures. CT, MRI, US and UsgFNAC are all significantly more accurate than palpation for staging of the neck. In spite of the excellent detail depicted at CT and the superior soft tissue discrimination of MR imaging, UsgFNAC proves to be the most accurate technique for the assessment of the status of the neck. Ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration cytology has gained popularity in staging the clinically NO neck in patients with head and neck carcinomas. On the one hand it can be used to upstage the NO neck, thus enabling adequate treatment, on the other hand it can give more certainty that the neck is really free of metastases. The reported sensitivity of US-g-FNAC in the NO neck ranges from 44% by Takes (Radiology, 1996) , 50% by Righi (Head Neck 1997) and 73% by our group (Radiology 1993). In our clinic, in the last 3 years we conducted a study in which US-g-FNAC negative patients, who in the past would have had an elective neck dissection, were now followed at regular intervals with palpation and US-g-FNAC. However, if the neck had to be entered for resection of the primary tumor, or for reconstruction of the defect, an elective neck dissection was carried out. In aseries of 92 US-g-FNAC NO patients, who were followed for 1-3 years 19 (21%) developed a neck node metastasis. Six of these 19 died of distant metastases or locoregional recurrence, one is alive with distant metastases and two died of unknown cause without metastases or locoregional recurrence. The characteristics of these patients will be discussed in terms of level, number and extranodal spread of metastases and delay of treatment. It can be concluded from these preliminary results that US-g-FNAC is false negative in a considerable number of patients and the reasons for these false results as weil as possible solutions will be discussed. Room I Contrast-enhanced 3D MR Angiography is emerging as the primary non-invasive technique for assessing arterial vascular pathology. The availability of intravascular contrast agents permits updates over a time period extending beyond 3 hours provides a basis for guiding intravascular interventions. For this purpose catheters and wires must be adapted for use in the MR environment. Materials must be totally non-ferromagnetic, and must provide a means of visualization within the vascular system itself. Electrically active approaches, requiring the implementation of small signal receiving antennas can be employed for instrument visualisation. The anten na receives signal, based on which it can be localized in three dimensions. This technique permits the display of the position of up to 4 instruments in real time (20 updates/sec) simultaneously in two planes. Furthermore, the active availability of spatial coordinates corresponding to the position of the anten na allow for the continuous acquisition of update images traversing the antenna itself. The technique can be modified to depict a longer region of the instrument, and has been employed to guide antenna equipped catheters and guide-wires for various applications. Preliminary 'in vivo' intravascular interventions such as embolization, PTA and TIPS have been successfully completed in animals. In addition, early experience with MR-guided PTA in humans will be shown. Similar to conventional angiography, MRA only displays the vascular lumen and does not depict the vascular walls. The concept of interventional MRA permits to overcome this limitation. By integrating an imaging coil into the balloon of a PTA catheter images with an in plane resolution below 150 um can be obtained of the vascular wall. Experiments documented the ability of intravascular MRI to define the structure and components of atherosclerotic lesions contained in 'ex vivo' human femoral artery specimen as weil as 'in vivo' atherosclerosis animal models. Correlation with histologie sections obtained in identical planes revealed excellent agreement regarding location and size of the plaques. Plaque components could be reliably identified based on their signal appearance on T2-weighted images. Purpose: To demonstrate the potential of passive MR tracking techniques for guiding endovascular interventions. Methods and Materials: Passive MR tracking of devices was achieved by visualisation of paramagnetic markers incorporated into the wall of the devices. Balloon catheter positioning was effectuated with MR dedicated 0.038-inch fibreglass guide wires. Imaging was done with dynamic 20 gradient-echo technique. Tracking was accelerated with keyholeimaging and reduced field of view, resulting in up to 2 images/sec. Oevices were visualised by on the f1y subtraction of a baseline image from successive dynamic images. After extensive in vitro testing, passive tracking was applied in experimental animal studies and recently in hemodialysis patients with a stenosed hemodialysis access graft. Results: Manipulation of devices could easily be monitored, especially when the subtraction images were projected onto a previously acquired road map. The effect of balloon dilation could be evaluated in terms of a reduction of stenosis related flow voids in the MR angiograms and by a post-treatment increase of the volumetrie ftow rate. Conclusion: The reported in vitro and in vive experiments demonstrate the potential of MR for guiding and evaluating balloon angioplasty. Whether MR will playa role in routine interventional radiology depends on future developments that extend the ftexibility of the MR system. BiJ1218 Impact of radiology in computer assisted surgery and therapy MRI play now a key role in the diagnosis and management of paed iatric diseases. In order to maxim ize the information, high quality images must be obtained. In children motion during imag ing sequences produces artifaets. Adequate sedation or general anesthesia eliminate the gross body motion . The effects of the physiological random or periodic motion (bowel peristaisis or cardiac pulsation) can be controlled with a variety of techniques , including abdominal binder , respiratory and cardiac gating , kspace phase reordering , grad ient moment nulling , even echo-rephasing, anterior presaturation , and >NEX. Fast and reduced-acquisition matrix Fourier-acquired steady-st ate techniques allow acquisition of a set of im ages in less than 30 sec . Ultrafast techniques virtually eliminate all mot ion. Other artifacts may simulate pathologie eond itions and produ ce pitfalls in MR images (aliasing , truncation , chemieal-shift and magnetie susceptibility, vascular and CSF pulsation artifacts), ineluding those related to MR angiography (disordered/turbulent flow, slow f1ow/saturation effects , in-plane f1ow). With an understanding of MR physieal principles, instrumentation and techniques, artifacts can be ident ified , eorreeted, minimized, or avoided. Moreover, in paediatrie MRI the imaging parameters for the aequisition of optimal images differ from those of the adult because standard adult imaging does not consider the changing appearance of develop ing brain, thymus gland, and bone marrow. An understanding of these physiolog ical variations with age is important in exam ining MR images, determining whether they are poten tial disease process or normal variations . 1. The principal purpose of this pa per is to emphasize the importance of spermatic vessels' spiral twist detection to assess the diagnosis of testicular torsion. 25 pat ients, aged 11 to 26 years, with acute scrotal pain, were evaluated by sonography in emergency (ATL UM9 HOl maehine with linear 5-10 MHz transdueer and color doppler). Testicular echogenicity, eehotext ure, volume and perfusion were analyzed. The spermatie cord was identified in the inguinal canal and followed into the serotum on ser ial scans , its shape and size were precised. All exam inations wer e correlated with surg ical findings. In all 25 cases of proved testicular tors ion , a spiral twist was detected, appearing as a snail-shell shaped structure, in paratestieular situation. This was reeognized , whatever were perfusion (color doppler demonstrated lack of intratestieular flow in only 15 of the 25 patients) and morphology of the involved testis. 81000 flow was found or not within the twist, correlated with the testieular flow detection. So, even in case of partial torsion, visualization of the twisted cord appeared as a specific US feature of testicular torsion, whatever its degree, intensity and duration were . 2. In other acute scrotal disease (spontaneous detorsion, appendix torsion , epididymitis, orch itis) the spiral twist was absent and the spermatic cord rema ined normal in size and configuration. 3. Incarcerated inguinal hernia is a surgical emergency to preve nt test icular ischemia (8 cases). Conventional neurosurgieal plann ing requires the surgeon to build up a mental picture of the 3-0 loeat ion of the surgical target and its location in relation to sens itive stru etures wh ieh must not be damaged dur ing surgery and to the visible landmarks wh ich will guide hirn during su rgery . The surgeon will refer to scans on film (shown as sets of parall el slices) during pre-opsrative planning and will usually review the same scans intra-operatively to refresh his memory. Advanees in computer processing can ass ist the surgeon at every stage of the planning and operative process. The purpose of the presentation will be to explain those principles that are essential for a practical understanding of neurosurgical systems, and to describe capabilities of current commercially available systems as weil as some advances implemented in research systems. Pre-operative computer facilities include tools ? a localiser (hand-held pointing device) whose 3-D position is tracked and shown superimposed on pre-operative scan data, and ? other surgical tools. Navigation is a technique to improve anatomie precision of surgical procedures by "viewing" directly the instrument or tissue component on a 20 or a 3D image rendered on a monitor. New ways of thinking referring to image synthesis have to be established for surgeons as weil as for radiologists. Radiologist should enrol themselves actively into the process of surgical planning and feel as a "third man" or a pilot who, together with the anaesthesiologist, assists the surgeon to accomplish his tasks. Image synthesis can be described as to consist of three steps: (1) Image acquisition and preparation of data sets in a dedicated fashion (tailored imaging), (2) surgical planning and communication, and (3) performance of image-guided surgery with or without robotics. Besides neurosurgical applications, navigation during surgical procedures of bony structures has shown to be attractive because tissue movements are of minor relevance. In maxillo-facial surgery special attention has been drawn on navigation during reconstructive and orthognatic surgery. In otorhinolaryngology, surgical treatment of the skull and the paranasal sinuses are main indications for navigation. Computer-assisted orthopaedic surgery is mainly performed for spinal screw fixation and robot-assisted implantation of hip prostheses. Advanced volume imaging applications in computer assisted radiotherapy today rely in data transfer on-line from the -image acquisition modality (CT/MRI) over -local or wide area networks (LAN, WAN) into -3D planning system and simulation computers before they are used to guide -radiotherapy units (accellerator). Some typical risks within this chain are able to interfere with the completeness and correctness of the data transferred and include -errors in image acquisition -errors in patient positioning during image acquisition -errors in data formats used (DICOM, ACRINEMA, TIFF, ... ) -errors in processing steps on target machines and last not least in -errors in display of image data and results. This potential risks have to be realized and overcome by test images and meticulous quality assurance considerations to avoid hazard for the patient. Typical situations for radiotherapy of neck, ehest and abdominal tumours are discussed. on both professions to understand the changes that the new European directives, the Basic Safety Standard (96/29/Euratom) and the Medical Exposure Directive (97/43/Euratom) will make to their practice. It is a requirement that National Legislation is in place by May, 2000. This part of the refresher course on Radiation Protection will address primarily the issues for radiographers associated with the Medical Exposure Directive. As in past legislation, justification, optimisation and the ALARA principle are key elements of safe practice. The broadening of the scope of the directive beyond patients to include all those exposed in relation to medical exposure will be outlined. The opportunities presented by the directive in not defining professions but emphasising knowledge, abilities, training and competence will be suggested. The problems posed by the split of responsibility between prescriber and practitioner will be outlined. An explanation of 'reference doses' will be given and some emphasis will be given to the so called 'special practices'. Finally, equipment, the role of the radiographer in QA, in monitoring practice and in audit will be mentioned. One of the most important goals of Radiographers is to provide a maximum of information at the lowest possible dose of radiation to the patient. Radiographers are in many cases the patient's front line defence against excessive ionising radiation exposure; Radiographers are the individuals best able to limit the dose of the public to ionising radiation. Some studies have shown that some Radiographers have an apathetic attitude in practising radiation protection. These individuals are practising radiation protection only by mandate of law or departmental rules and they bring a declining professional role for the Radiographer that can never be recovered. The reasons of not being actively involved in radiation protection, the personal practical knowledge demonstrated by Radiographers and the degree of utilisation of practical radiation measures are thoroughly investigated in the first part of this refresher course. The practice of radiation protection requires, along with knowledge, a professional attitude that includes motivation, a willingness to educate others and leadership. Radiographers as professionals must also follow ethical standards that call for a higher level of care than the law requires. In order for the profession to assume a more responsible role in the health care team, Radiographers must develop reflective practices, become more knowledgeable and update their radiation skills. They must have the knowledge to exercise the proper judgements by critical thinking and must be prepared to respond easily questions received from patients. In the second part of this refresher course the available radiation dose reduction strategies that a Radiographer as gate keeper must develop and exercise are investigated. Definite confirmation or exclusion of pulmonary embolism (PE) in patients with c1inical suspicion of the disease is one of the most frequent tasks the radiologist has to face in c1inical practice. Radiologie techniques such as pulmonary angiography and spiral CT angiography are indeed often required to the determine whether anticogulation has to be initiated or not, especially in patients in whom previous clinical and scintigraphic results are not concluslve, For the radiologist, it is of paramount importance to acquire abasie understanding of the disease, to perform and interprete examinations properly and to comprehend the role of the various tests and imaging methods in the work up of patients suspected to have PE. In this state-of-the-art symposium, Dr. Massimo Pistolesi will educate the audience on epidemiologie, pathophysiologie and c1inical aspects of PE. In addition, Dr. Pistolesi will present adecision analysis model to shape the rationale use of imaging methods according to the level of c1inical suspicion of PE. Dr. Christian Herold will focus on spiral CT angiography of the pulmonary arteries as an increasingly important method to investigate patients with suspected PE. In his lecture, Dr. Herold will speak about the appropriate scanning technique, interpretation of findings and how to avoid pitfalls, and finally about how to integrate spiral CT angiography into diagnostic algorithms that currently exist. Dr. Jörg Debatin will introduce the most recent advances in MR angiography in suspected PE. Being one of the pioneers in his field, Dr. Debatin will specify whether improvements in MRI hardware and software as weil as introduction of new contrast media will allow MR angiography to be included in clinical algorithms. Finally, Dr. Peter Pattynama will strive to integrate the presented information and the current body of knowledge into a holistic approach towards the diagnosis of PE. Dr. Pattynama will attempt to develop optimal diagnostic strategies based on various tests, their absolute performance and costeffectiveness. Definitive confirmation or exclusion of pulmonary embolism (PE) in patients with c1inical suspicion of the disease is one of the most common c1inical tasks the radiologist has to face in the everyday practice. Radiologie techniques, l.e. pulmonary angiography and, more recently, spiral-CT-angiography, are indeed often required to determine whether anticoagulation has to be initiated or not in patients in whom previous c1inical and instrumental examinations are not conclusive. According to the PIOPED study (JAMA 1990; 263:2753-97) PAG is required in the vast majority (>70%) of patients with clinicaJ suspicion of PE. In fact, most of the literature studies aimed to establish cost-effective diagnostic strategies for PE are based on the deeply ingrained notion that the disease can be diagnosed or excluded by clinical evaluation and V/Q scan only in a minority of patients. For this reason the diagnostic strategies suggested sofar consider that most patients should undergo definitive radiologie testing. This widely held belief has been recently challenged by the results of a large scale prospective trial (PISA-PED) (Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;154:1387-93) showing that 1) accurate diagnosis of PE (sensitivity 92%, specificity 87%) is possible by perfusion scanning (Q scan) alone without ventilation, 2) combination of Q scan with clinical assessment (overall rate of correct c1inical classification 81%) helps to restriet the need for definitive testing to a minority of patients with suspected PE. Indeed, by relying only on clinical and Q scan data, PE could be confirmed or excluded in 76% of patients with abnormal Q scan with an accuracy of 97%. By applying decision analysis to a population of 1130 consecutive patients with c1inical suspicion of PE we found that the clinical decision to treat or withhold treatment can be made without further testing in 88% (742/845) of patients with abnormal Q scan by coupling prior clinical probability with Q scan result. In summary: 1) definitive radiologie tests to confirm or exclude PE should be applied to a limited proportion of the whole population of patients clinically suspected of PE by a radiologist aware of the pre-test probability of the disease; 2) the accuracy of the radiologie tests will be positively affected by the knowledge of the anatomie location of the perfusion defect(s) as obtained by Q scan.  Imaging techniques in SCTA have continuously been refined. Today, SCTA of the PA is performed using the single breathhold technique, mostly in a caudo-cranial scanning direction. To facilitate the assessment of subsegmental vessels, the lung volume scanned should span from the dome of the diaphragm to the top of the aortic arch. Commonly, imaging is performed using a slice thickness of 3 mm, a table speed of 5 mm/second (pitch 1.7) and a reconstruction index of 2 mm. The value of narrowing collimation to 2 mm for the analysis of subsegmental vessels has recently been demonstrated. While various contrast injection techniques have been identified as suitable for the assessment of PE, a high concentration -high flow approach (4 mi/sec, 300 mg I/mi) seems to yield the best results. Image interpretation in SCTA relies on the direct visualization of pulmonary emboli which appear as hypoattenuating filling defects within the contrast enhanced blood. Misinterpretations may be triggered by breathing artifacts, and by perivascular tissue in the hilar region mimicking PE. Contrast opacification of the PA may be Iimited in patients with cardiac or central venous disorders. Reported sensitivities and specificities for SCTA in the evaluation of PE range from 63 to 100%, and average around 90%, when compared to pulmonary angiography as the goldstandard. The Iimitations of SCTA in the assessment of subsegmental PE are currently attacked by refinements in scanning technology. The role of spiral-CT in the evaluation of patient with suspected PE is still under discussion. It appears however, that SCTA is accurate, cost-effective, safe, and widely accepted among clinicians and radiologists. With the future availability of spiral-CT scanners and improved education of radiologists, a continuous expansion of this method can be expected. 819 MR-angiography in suspected PE: are we there yet? Recent improvements in MRI hardware have provided the bases for acquiring 3D data sets within a convenient breathhold. In conjunction with the intravenous administration of T1-shortening contrast agents the pulmonary vasculature can be selectively displayed. In contrast to CTA, 3D MRA permits full visualization and assessment of the pulmonary arteries to a subsegmental level, Various techniques have been proposed and evaluated on Iimited patient groups. Thus the 3D data sets can be collected in the coronal or the sagittal planes. The former depicts both lungs within the same 3D acquisition, albeit at the price of a longer acquisition period. Patients suffering from extreme dyspnea may therefore benefit from the latter approach, in which the lungs are being imaged seperately. Beyond permitting use of a partial field-of-view and a reduction of the number of sections required to cover the pulmonary arteries, the sagittal acquisition provides better antero-posterior coverage and eliminates pulsatility artefacts emanating from the heart. Furthermore, it reduces the data acquisition time to below 15 seconds. Since breathholding must be considered mandatory for maximal image quality, the sagittal, !wo-Iung imaging approach appears better suited for assessing patients with suspected pulmonary embolism. Initial work had been based upon the use of extracellular, Gd-based contrast agents. While the coronal approach requires only a single contrast injection, the sagittal approach mandates a dose split, Clinical results regarding the detection of pulmonary emboli have been excellent with both techniques: sensitivity and specificity values beyond 90% have been reported. More recently, intravascular contrast agents have entered Phase land 11 evaluations in humans. By causing considerable shortening of Ti-relaxation times, these agents permit the selective display of the arterial vasculature over time frames extending beyond 2-3 hours. The intravascular nature of these agents permits for repeated vessel imaging. Suspicius appearing regions of the pulmonary vasculature can be imaged repeatedly in greater detail. Furthermore, the deep venous system of the pelvis and lower extremity could be assessed in the same sitting also using the fast 3D imaging techniques. Depiction of the pulmonary vasculature can be complemented by a firstpass analysis of pulmonary perfusion. The combination of parenchymal and vascular assessment in conjunction with the accurate and quick evaluation of the deep venous system promises to deploy 3D MR-Angiography as the imaging modality of choice in the examination of patients with suspected PE. approach ... A variety of potentially valuable tests are available for the diagnostic work-up of patients with suspected pulmonary embolism (PE). Same of these are imaging-based and designed to directly detect or exclude PE, such as VQ-Iung scanning, pulmonary angiography, spiral CT, and potentially, MRA of the pulmonary arteries. Other tests da not assess the lung vessels per se: Ultrasound of the leg veins, if positive for deep venous thrombosis, will obviate the need for subsequent testing for PE. A negative D-dimer blood assay that excludes fibrin degradation products and thus, thromboembolic disease, also obviates further testing for PE. Also, efforts are being undertaken to develop "clinical decision rules", to classify patients as having low or high probability of thromboembolic diease based on standardized physical examination. Each of these tests has its own specific merits and drawbacks. The challenge is to develop an optimal diagnostic strategy that makes use of a combination of these tests, in terms of either absolute performance or cost-effectiveness. A useful way to approach this problem is to perform an analysis of cost-effectiveness using a mathematical model (Preliminary analyses have indicated that ultrasound of leg veins followed by spiral-CT is optimal). Because of inherent limitations of such a theoretical analysis, the most promising strategies should then be prospectively tested in randomized trials. A prospective randomized trial with this goal will start in the Netherlands in the autumn of 1998, funded by the Dutch government, in 4 university centers and 2 community hospitals. Only the TSE-T2 sequence with 200 ms TE was analyzed. Quantitative analysis: measurement of the lesionlliver ratio. Qualitative analysis: independent assessment by two radiologists in a blinded fashion of the signal intensity of the lesion, labelling it as hiperintense (equallhigher than fat) or isointense (equallhigher than Iiver). Results: The average ratio for metastases was 1.95 and 6.5 for hemangiomas. 100% of the hemangiomas were hyperintense and only 5% of the metastases. Agreement belween radiologists was 94%. Conclusion: The TSE-T2 sequence with TE of 200 ms. contributes significantly to the differential diagnosis between benign lesions and metastases of colorectal adenocarcinoma, avoiding the use of Gadolinium in many cases. The absence of hyperintensity has a predictive value of 100% for metastases and its presence has a predictive value of 94% for benign lesions. Lesion-liver visibility at each single phase was compared between the 3D Gd-enhanced MRA images and pre (T2-and T1-weighted) and postcontrast T1-weighted images. The functionallesion characterization on the 3D Gd -enhanced MRA images was based on the comb ined information of all three phases assessing the spat ial var iations and temporal evolution of contrast enhancement. Results: All liver-Iesion were correctiy (35 of 35) characterized on 3D Gd-enhanced MRA images. These results were significantiy (P < .01) better than those with T1-precontrast (  Purpose: To assess the usefulness of MR imag ing in the quantitative evaluation of liver iron overload. Methods and Materials: 108 patients with b-thalassemia major were stud ied by a .5 T superconducting unit. Axial SE T1 images were obta ined . The ratio of the average signal intensity (SIR) of the liver to that of the paraspinal museie was calculated and expressed as a percentage. lron Iiver concentration (ILC) was measured by atom ic absorption spectrophotometry on Iiver biopsy. mg/gr/dry liver. Conclusion: MR imaging is useful in the quantitative evaluation of liver iron overload . lndeed ILC may be calculated as a function of SIR However, a validation study is needed before introducing this rule in the c1inical practice. MR-imaging characteristics were as folIows: OP-Image: markedly hypointense (n = 5 pts), IP-image: isointense (n =2 pts) or slightly hyperintense (n =3 pts), T2w-FSTSE-image: isointense (n =5 pts), T2w-HASTE-image: isointense (n =1 pt), slightly hyperintense (n =4 pts). In OP-Images all lesions were sharply demarcated and of spherical configuration. In two cases histology revealed intracellular fat deposition of about 30% . MR follow-up showed complete reso lution in two cases . with normal MRI had no suspicion hepatic infection during follow-up. In brain MRI, 19/50 showed alesion: especially Ciclosporine A drugtoxicity (n =7), lymphoma (n =5), mastoiditis (n =2), Aspergillosis (n =2), Toxoplasmosis (n =1), bleeding (n =1), and non-clarified (n = 1). Clinical indication for an infectious involvement of brain was found in 7/31 cases 4-122 days after initially normal brain MRI. No suspicion for an infectious involvement of brain was present in the remaining 24/50 cases. Conclusion: In fever of unknown origin and suspicion for Iiver involvement, MRI of the Iiver should be performed. In cases with persisting suspicion an initially normal MRI of the brain should be repeated because ot the delayed detectability of cerebral manifestations. Methods and Materials: The two members of 60 pairs of patients undergoing OCBE were randomly subjected to bowel preparation with sennosides and PEG-ELS (SELG®, Promefarm, Italy), or sennosides and a modified SELG preparation to which 7.5 g/Iitre of magnesium sulphate were added (SELG-Mg). Mucosal coating, residual fluid and colon cleansing were assessed. The null hypothesis was tested by means of Wilcoxon's signed-rank test. Results: Mucosal coating was judged to be significantly better in the SELG-Mg members (p < 0.0001). The amount of residual fluid was significantly lower in SELG-Mg members (p < 0.0001). There was no difference in colon cleansing (p =0.690). Conclusion: These results demonstrate that magnesium ions increase barium coating of the colonic mucosa. The underlying mechanism seems to be the increase in viscosity of barium suspension by free water subtraction owing to the hydrophilia of magnesium ions. The integration of magnesium in a newly designed isotonic PEG-ELS can be the correcting faetor for the poor barium mucosal coating that usual solutions for the oral colon lavage induce. The purpose of this research was to evaluate the diagnostic efficiency of hydrocolonic sonography in the visualization of the large intestine anatomy and detection of pathologie lesions. Hydrocolonic sonography with Toshiba CoreVision SSA 350A ultrasound system was carried out in 60 patients, with 3-3.75-6 MHz curved array and linear 6-8-10 MHz transducers, after filling the bowel with up to 1.5 I of water administered as an enema. The barium enema colography was performed in each patient with a standard double contrast technique. In most of the cases ultrasound examination gave an adequate image of the whole large intestine anatomy, except rectum, which cannot be clearly visualized by this method. 9 tumors suspected for the malignancy were found using US and all of them were confirmed in barium examination, and also during surgery. 1 tumor suspected for malignancy was properly evaluated by US as localized outside of the large intestine. 1 small malignancy was missed by the ultrasound, probably because it was localized between sigmoid colon and rectum. There were also problems with the visualization of the intestine in two cases of obese patients, but they were not the reason of diagnostic mistakes in our research. The sensitivity of hydrocolonic sonography in the detection of large intestine malignant lesions was 96% with the specificity 91.5% Hydrocolonic sonography is an efficient examination in the evaluation of large intestine, and performed with colonoscopy it can be alternative for the barium enema. Ultrasound is also more accurate in the evaluation of the extent of malignant lesions outside the bowel walls than barium radiography. Purpose: Perfusion varies with pathology, disease activity and response to therapy. Kinelic contrast enhanced spiral CT provides a noninvasive measure of tissue perfusion and has been successfully used in Iiver tumours. We measured perfusion in abnormal bowel in malignant, acute and chronic inflammatory disease. Methods and Materials: Perfusion studies were performed at a single slice location using 50 ml IV iodinated contrast pump injected at 7-10 rnl/s, Scanning commenced at 12 sand images were obtained every 1.9 s for 20 s. Perfusion index =maximum gradient in the lesion divided by maximum arterial enhancement. Pathological correlation was obtained in all patients, at surgery or on multiple biopsies. 39 patients referred for CT enteroclysis or pneumocolon were studied. Results: There were 18 patients with colon cancer, 6 patients with small bowel Crohns' strlcture, 6 colonic Crohns' and 9 diverticulitis. Perfusion measurements in colon cancer varied; mean 0.67 mllmin/ml (0.2-1 .4). Perfusion values in areas of active inflammation >1 ml/min/ml. Active inflammation seen histologically was mirrored in elevated perfusion rates in Crohn's and diverticulitis. Conclusion: Perfusion variability in carcinoma is multifactorial and further work is required to fully evaluate the signilicance. CT derived perfusion reflects disease activity in inflammatory bowel lesions with potential implications for patient management. Objective: To assess the role and reliability of CT pneumocolon in the diagnosis of colonic malignancy. Subjects and Methods: A prospective study of CT pneumocolon of 34 patients with suspected large bowel malignancy. Patients were referred: 1) by direct transfer from the colonoscopy suite following incomplete colonoscopy, or for immediate staging of suspicious colonoscopic appearances, 2) following inadequate barium enema examination or 3) for unexplained abdominal symptoms. All patients underwent bowel c1eansing, rectal air insufflation, administration of smooth muscle relaxant and CT with 5 mm collimation, 3 mm reconstruction, a pitch of 1.5 and IV contrast. Subsequent correlation with operative pathology (14 patients), colonoscopy (12 patients) and c1inical follow-up (4 patients Additional thin sections of the pelvis or intravenous contrast may be helpful. Extraluminal inflammation and complications (abscess, phlegmon, perforation, obstruction, fistula) are easily depicted. In mesenteric and pelvic abscesses CT-guidance is most helpful für percutaneous drainage prior to elective resection. Conclusion: CT should be used as the imaging modality of choice in suspected complicated diverticular disease to optimize therapeutic decision making and to guide percutaneous drainage. 837 Computed tomography and investigation of the blood-plasma from patients with rectal cancer using laser correlation spectroscopy V. Sokolov, A Belenko, V. Stepula; OdessalUKR Purpose: To study local dissemination of the tumor, the state of regional Iymphatic nodes as to reveal distant metastases using computed tomography. Laser correlation spectroscopy (LCS) was employed to evaluate blood-plasma indices. In 14 patients an additional CT and MRI were performed. In 18 patients CT only and in 17 patients MRI only could be evaluated, respectively. CT was performed with a Siemens Somatom Plus spiral unit (5 mm slice-thickness/3 mm recon-index), under intravenous contrast administration and rectal application of water-soluble contrast medium. MRI was obtained using T1 and T2 weighted SE-sequences in axial, coronal and sagittal plane and after intravenous contrast administration. Tumors were staged according to TNM-classification. In all cases histopathological correlation was obtained. Results: T-staging with TRUS correlated histopathologically in 83.7%, with MRI in 58.1% and with CT in 21.9%. N-staging with TRUS correlated histopathologically in 46.8%, with MRI in 58.6% and with CT in 51.6%. Conclusion: In predicting the local invasion of rectal carcinoma TRUS is more accurate (acc 83.7%) than MRI or CT. Therefore performance of TRUS should be mandatory for local preoperative staging of rectal carcinoma. Purpose: The purpose of this study was to evaluate time-resolved MRangiography of the lower extremity in comparison to La.-DSA. Methods and Materials: MRA-examinations were performed on a Siemens-Magnetom-Vision (1.5 T) equipped with a body-array-coil. A 3D-FLASH-sequence (TR 4.4 ms, TE 1.4 ms, flip angle 30°) was used. By using slice-interpolation it was possible to reduce acquisition time for a 3D-data setto 5-8 seconds . MRA-protocol contains 10 continuous measurements by simultaneous injection of Gd-DTPA (single-dose, flow 2 mlls) . Image subtraction and maximum intensity projection was employed for postprocessing . Results: We examined 22 patients suffering from peripheral arter ial occlus ive disease. All patients underwent additional La.-DSA within 48 hours. All MRA examinations were of diagnostic quality. Concerning the detection of hemodynamic relevant pathologie findings (stenosis> 50% and occlusions) MRA had a sensitivity of 92% and a specificity of 96%. Concluslon: Time-resolved MR-Angiography of the lower extremity is a fast and reliable procedure with excellent preliminary results. In comparison to contrast-enhanced-MRA using bolus timing this method provides additional information about the hemodynamic situation. Purpose: To determ ine the value of double contrast MR imaging (DC-MRI) in preoperative staging of rectal cancer. Methods and Materials: 112 patients (40 females , 72 males, mean age 65.5 y) with rectoscopic verfied primary rectal cancers were examined at 4 European centers. T1-and T2-weighted SE and gradient echo sequence were obtained by applying four different formulations of Ferristene (Abdosean, Nycomed) as an enema . In addition Gd-DTPA-BMA (Omniscan, Nycomed) was injected intravenously. Tumours were staged according to the TNM classification and findings were correlated with histopathology following surgery. Results: Ferristene enema caused a distention of the rectal wall and a signal void facilitaling tumour identification . Gd-DTPA-BMA facilitated the differentiation of mucosa and submucosa from the museie layer. Of the four different tested formulations of Ferristene a combination of high viscosity and high iron concentration provided the best deliniation of the tumours . By combining both, rectal and intravenous contrast medium application Sens.! Spec.! Ace. was 11%/75%/92.3. Conclusion: DC-MRI is an excellent method for preoperative staging of rectal cancer. Methods and Materials: CT study involved 82 patient with rectal cancer. SOMATOM CRX CT unit (Siemens) was used. The results of CT studies were verified by the data of intrasurgical study of the abdominal , retroperitoneal and small pelvis organs as weil as morphological study of the resected organs and tissues. Results: CT has been established to allow to reveal both the damage of the whole wall of the rectum and the exit of tumor from it. LCS methods allowed to set essential inclinations in blood-plasma homeostasis which consist in the significant evaluation of the low-molecular fractions. These changes are enhanced related to the prevalence of tumoral process. Conclusion: Possibilities of CT for determ ining the damage of definite structures of the rectum are Iimited. Accuracy of CT for determining patholog ic changes in regional and juxstaregional Iymphatic nodes was 0.82. CT is highly informative technique for diagnosis of regional rectal cancer metastases. The LCS technique is useful in both early diagnosis of rectal cancer and formation of relevant groups at risk. alone or combined with an endorectal coil (n = 12). Sagittal and axial sequences with T2-weighted fast spin-echo and axial T1-weighted spinecho techniques were employed. EUS was performed using a flexible endosonoscope. The results were compared to findings at histopathological sectioning of the specimen. Results: The T-stage on MR correlated with histopathology in 32 of 49 patients and on EUS in 29 of 49 patients. The N-stage on MR correlated with histopathology in 22 of 49 patients and on EUS in 26 of 49 patients. Tumour penetration of the rectal wall was predicted with 86% sensitivity and 65% specificity by MR and 89% and 33% by EUS. Three patients with surgically and histopathologically confirmed invasion of neighbouring organs in the pelvis were detected preoperatively on MR but none on EUS. Conclusion: Tumour penetration of the rectal wall and locallymph node metastases can not accurately be predicted with MR or EUS. However, for preoperalive identification of c1inically occult advanced disease, MR seems to be more useful. (Submitted by Internet)  Purpose: to compare conventional DSA with a contrast-enhanced 30-MR-angiogaphy for identifying and evalualing arteries of the foot before peripheral bypass surgery was planned. Methods and Materials: 24 feet of 24 patients with diabetes and limb threaten ing lower extremity ischemia were prospectively studied by 30-MR-angiography (MRA). All patients underwent either conventional DSA or selective fine-needle DSA of the diseased extremity within 1 week. MR imaging was performed at 1.5 T with use of the head coil. A 30-Flash sequence with the following parameters was performed: TRITE =3.8/1.3 ms, Flip =35 0 , pixel size 1.69 x 1.12 mm 2 , interpolated slice thickness 1.2 mm, acquisition time = 18 or 24 seconds (256 or 512 matrix). 4 sets of identical sagittal slabs were acquired consecutively. IV bolus injection of 20 ml of Gd-DTPA (Magnevist®, Schering) was applied during the first set. Angiograms after image subtraction were created using the Maximum Intensity Projection algorithm . Image ana lysis comprised the detection of patent, stenosed or occluded vessel segments. One vascular surgeon formulated treatment plans based on the conventional angiograms. He then formulated treatment plans based on DSA and MRA together. Results: Compared to DSA, MRA sign ificantiy better demonstrated the per ipheral "run-off" vessels (p < 0.001 , Mc Nemar test) . In 9 cases , it demonstrated patent pedal vessels that were not seen with conventional DSA. Due to the results of MRA , treatment plans changed in 8/9 cases , where these patent vessels were subsequently used as target vessels for distal pedal bypass grafts . Conclusion: Ultrafast contrast-enhanced subtraction 3D MR-angiography is a useful adjunct to conventional DSA before distal pedal bypass surgery. Purpose: To evaluate the capability of a high-resolution 3D-MRA technique to image the lower Iimb arteries in patients with PAOD in a clinical sett ing . Methods and Materials: The ent ire lower limb was imaged with three coi! positions: 1. body coi! -renal arteries to femoral bifurcation, 2. body coi! -femoral bifurcation to popliteal arteries, and 3. phasedarray-coi! -popliteal arteries to distal tibial arteries. I.a.-DSA served as the gold standard and was performed <24 h following MR-angiography with a total of 722 vessel segments imaged in 24 patients. MRA was performed with a 3D-FISP sequence using the following parameters: TR 4.5 ms, TE 1.7 ms, FA 30 0 , 200 x 512 matrix with a rectangular FOV, 0.82 x 1.58 pixel size , 100-1 10 slab thickness, 32-38 partitions , and an acquisition time of 23-27 s. Contrast injection was done by apower injector following measurement of individual circulation limes. The individual injeclion rate (1.0-2.0 ml/s) was adjusted to the patients bodyweight to cover >60% of the acquisition time and a dose of 0.1 mmol Gd-DTPA/kg bodyweight was used for each position. Vascular lesions were c1assified by two readers using a five-point-scale : 1. 0-50% , 2. 51-90%, 3. >90%, 4. occlusion , and 5. aneurysm . Results: Image quality allowed interpretation of MR angiograms with a sensitivity of 93%. Venous overlay was sometimes present in calf vessels in patients with long-circulation times, however, calf vessels were more often better visualized by means of Gd-MRA than by La.-DSA. Conclusion: The study demonstrates that 3D-Gd-enhanced-subtraction MRA studies can be performed in a clinical setting accurately dernonstrating PAOD. The method is ready to replace diagnostic La.-DSA , however, is equally time consuming with app . 60 min for the entire study. To determine the feasibility and accuracy of high resolution contrast enhanced Turbo-MRA (CE-MRA) in the evaluat ion of patients with obstructive peripheral arteriopathy. Methods and Materials: 16 patients with peripheral obstructive arteriopathy were examined with a 1.5 T magnet using a 3D T1 w. FISP (TRITE/NEX: 4.6/1.8/1; TA =23 seconds; Matrix =195 x 512) repeated 3 times (aorta and ilio-femoral axes, thigh and calt) each after i.v, bolus injection with apower injector of 20 ml of nonionic paramagnelic contrast agent. A phased-array coil was used to examine the abdomen, while the body coil was employed to evaluate the lower extremiti es. MIP reconstructions In all patients DSA was also performed. Results: In all cases CE-MRA provided diagnostic exams; correct demonstration of level and degree of stenosis was obtained in all 16 patients; in 12 cases iliac-femoral stenoses were demonstrated, with involvement of the arterial tree of the lower extremilies in 13 patients. Results comparable to DSA were obta ined in all cases . Conclusion: CE-MRA pravides allows complete evaluation of the arterial peripheral axis . Further techn ical improvements will allow acqu isition after single injection of contrast agent and reduce examination time , which is already acceptable (approximately 5 minutes). Corresponding mask scans were obtained before injection and subtracted afterwards. 100 patients (mean age 61, 70 males, 80/20 with moderate/severe claudication) scheduled for duplex ultrasonography also underwent MRA . Intra-arterial DSA was used as standard of reference in cases in which either or both techniques showed presence of >50% stenoses (HSS) . MRA was evaluated by two radiologists in blinded fashion. Kappa statist los were determined between DSA and MRAIduplex, respectively. Results: Of 600 vessel segments imaged with duplex and MRA 12% were discordant for presence of HSS . In 59% corresponding DSA results were present. Of discordances between MRA and duplex , MRA was the true positive exam ination in 67% of cases. Kappa values are 0.57 for duplex and 0.77 for MRA. Conclusion: MoBI-track MRA is a good alternative for duplex ultrasonography. Purpose: To evaluate the capability of high resolution MRI for identifyin9 long-term changes of the arterial wall after percutaneous rheolytic thrombectomy in patients with acute lower limb ischemia. Methods and Materials: Arterial wall and luminal changes were evaluated in 16 patients (10 men; 6 women; mean age 70 years) with a minimal follow-up of 12 months after thrambectomy with the AngioJet® catheter for acute lower limb ischemia. The initial occlusions were located in the superficial femoral artery (n = 7), popliteal artery (n =6) or a femoral-popliteal-bypass graft (n =3). The mean follow-up was 23 ± 7.6 months. High resolution MRI and MRA were performed on a 1.0 T Magnetom Experf'" system using an extremity coil and 20 TOF-, TSE-, 20 FLASH and contrast enhanced 3D FLASH-sequences. Results: In 2 of 16 patients, complete reocclusions were noted, and in 3 of 16 patients a moderate restenosis (~50%) was identified using MRI and MRA techniques. This was in accordance with color flow duplex sonography, physical examination, ankle brachial index and the treadmill test. 2D-high resolution MRI did not show excessive neointimal hyperplasia in any case. Conclusion: The long-term results demonstrate efficacy and safety of the thrombectomy catheter. There was no evidence for excessive intimal hyperplasia using high resolution MRI and MRA techniques. MR of the arterial wall can provide valuable information concerning vessel wall and plaque morphology to identify causes of restenosis.  Purpose: Practically, CE MRA of the entire peripheral circulation is most difficult, since a large vessel distance has to be covered and the limitation of the total dose to max. 0.3 mmol/kg body weight Gd has to be considered. Therefore, most published studies so far applied only a relatively rough scaling scheme for evaluation of stenoses. Methods and Materials: First, at two patients (50 and 87 kg BW) a 3D CE MRA was performed. Different Gd-injection protocols were used: 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 ml/s flow rate (30 ml NaCI flush) for each patient applying 0.1 and 0.2 mmol/ml Gd dose respectively. The entire bolus length at iliac and popliteal artery was measured by 20 time resolved GE-sequence. The resulting 3D in plane resolution was compared to slice select resolution after reconstruction of the data set in coronal and sagital views. Secondly, different 3D resolution optimized CE MRA protocols were developed in order to achieve the optimal image quality regarding to c1inical focused question. 21 patients with PAOD were investigated to visualize the entire peripheral circulation by CE MRA Following issues were varried: (1) coil handling, (2) spacial resolution, (3) contrast bolus geometry. A new formula for calculation of flow rate as a result of predefined CE MRA image resolution and Gd dose will be introduced. FR = BW . Dappl . BDF/(5s+ 60%MT) . c Gd (FR =üow rate, 0 =dose, BDF =bolus dilution factor, MT =measurement time, C = concentration) Results: Shorter acquisition time saves Gd but at cost of spatial resolution. Visualization of the lower leg arteries at vessel diameters below 2 or 3 mm and the entire collateral circulation system in case of occlusions requires adjusted optimized CE MRA protocols. The problems of resolution and different CM application protocols regarding a valid grading of stenoses and optimal image quality will be discussed. The results demonstrate that small voxel sizes are required for c1inical MRA when the correct grading of a stenosis affects therapeutical decision. Conclusion: The adjustment of sequence parameters and bolus geometry is necessary to achieve an effective use of CM for optimal angiographic image quality. Purpose: Assessing the diagnostic efficacy of a 3D MRA strategy combining a dedicated coil with a single injection, 2-station protocol to display the arterial system from the aortic bifurcation to the lower extremity runoff. Methods and Materials: MRA with a dedicated peripheral vascular coil (Medical Advances) was performed on 61 patients following convennonat DSA for suspectect peripheral vascular disease. The vasculature was displayed in two 3D GRE acquisitions (TRITE 5.2/1.5 ms, flip 30 0 , 2.4 mm slice thickness, 48 sections), each extending over 48 cm and collected over 30 sec. The acquisitions were separated bya 10 second break, during which the MR-table was manually repositioned. A dose of 0.3 mmol/kg Gd-DTPA was injected intravenously using an automated injector (Medrad) over 70 s. In a prospective blinded analysis each vascular segment (29 segments per patient) was evaluated for the presence of occlusive vessel disease. The following grading system was applied: 0-normal, 1-vessel irregularity with a luminal reduction of less than 10%, 2-mild stenosis (lumen reduction 10-49%), 3-severe stenosis (lumen reduction 50-99%) or occlusion. Results: MRA provided image quality comparable to DSA with an overall sensitivity and specificity of 92 and 96.6% for the detection of hemodynamically significant disease and 92.3% and 99.4% for the detection of occlusions. Conclusion: The diagnostic performance of the outlined MRA strategy with a dedicated lower extremity vascular coil was sufficient to consider MRA a noninvasive alternative to DSA in the assessment of the lower extremity arterial vasculature. imager, using phased array multicoil. After a timing bolus, + 0.1 mmol gadopentetate dimeglumine/kg was injected at a rate of 2.5 mi/sec using power injector. Intra-arterial DSA was method of reference. Doppler ultrasound was performed by two independent vascular radiographers. Two independent observers assessed CE-MRA; two other observers assessed DSA Infrarenal aorta, common and external i1iac arteries were evaluated (5 segments). Results: Compared to DSA, CE-MRA correctly classified 57/57 nonsignificantly stenotic segments (0-49%), 15/15 significant stenoses (50-99%), 3/3 occlusions and 1/1 Leriche's syndrome. Ultrasound correctly classified 0-49%; 55/57; 50-99%: 14/15; occlusions: 1/3 and Leriche's syndrome: not conclusive. Conclusion: The accuracy of CE-MRA in diagnosing stenosis of aorta and iliac arteries is higher than colour Doppler sonography; all significant stenoses were correctly c1assified. Purpose: Sonographically guided core cut biopsy allows the histological examination of breast tumors without surgery. But only the follow-up of tumors diagnosed as benign by the histology of core cut biopsy can show, whether it is justified to leave these lesions unoperated. Methods and Materials: From 6/92 up to 12/93 we dispensed with breast surgery in 75 patients because histology of core cut biopsy confirmed the diagnosis "fibroadenoma". Results: Tumor size ranged between 0.5 and 2.5 cm at time of core cut biopsy. In 5 of 75 tumors, a progression of the tumor size was seen (3-6 mm) and the tumors were removed by the surgeon. The diagnose "fibroadenoma" was confirmed in 4 cases. In 1 specimen a ductal carcinoma was found (one year after core cut biopsy). Conclusion: The core cut biopsy guided by sonography ls an adequate and reliable method for the histological confirmation of benign breast tumors if the preconditions such as the correspondence of clinical and histological diagnosis and the performance of close-meshed controls are followed. [1995] [1996] [1997] [1998] with real-time ultrasound (linear scanner: 7.5 MHz, 10 MHz, 13 MHz), colour-imaging and panoramicsonography (siescape, Siemens sonofine elegra®) as weil as mammography. Method of choice to clarify the assumed diagnosis was highspeed core cut biopsy (16 Gauche). Results: We evaluated 4 cases of breast-cancer, 1 case of lymphoma, 4 cases of adenoma and 7 findings typical for lactation. Though sonography proved to be more sensitive than mammography, ultrasound S194 features were not specific to discriminate between malignant and benign tumors. Especially adenoma and carcinoma were difficult to distinguish. Colour imaging showed no, panoramic-imaging slight advantage. Conclusion: Because of the incidence of malignancy in tumors associated with pregnancy or lactation ("" 1 per 1,500 pregnancies) and the mostly non-specific image-providing methods core cut biopsy is recommended for early c1arification. The lesions were evaluated according to 9 ultrasound criterion and were marked 1 or 0 (1 for malignancy criterion, 0 for benign). Our hypothesis was: The lesions marked 0-2 are benign, 3-5 are indetermided and 6-9 are malignant. The maschine Mammomat 3000 and Sonoline S1-40 and Sonoline Versa Pro, all from firma Siemens, were used for examinations. Aspiration biopsy were performed under ultrasound control, method free hand. Results: The study group consisted of 306 women 14-91 years old, the largest group of women were 50-59 years, then 40-49 years old. 9 basic criterion of the ultrasound examination were observed. There were 121 lesions marked 0-1, benign histology was performed in all casses. 52 were marked 3-5, 36 were benign ethiology and 16 were malignant. The last group consist of 133 lesions marked 6-9. 127 were malignt and 6 responded to postoperative changes. Using histology as the "gold standart", the senzitivity was 95.49% with specificity of 80.12%. There were 163 benign lesions and 143 malignant lesions from this study group. Conclusion: The number evaluation of the lesions shows the senzitivity 95.49% and the specificity 80, 12%. The lesions marked 0-2 are most Iikely of the benign ethiology. Their examination does not require the aspiration biopsy. The lesions marked 6-9 are refferend to surgical therapy, the aspiration is not necessary. The aspiration biopsy is essentialin the lesions marked 3-5. Purpose: The purpose of this investigation was to assess the diagnostic accuracy of MR arthrography in detecting and grading of subscapularis tendon lesions. Methods and Materials: MR arthrograms of 50 consecutive patients with arthroseopie or surgical confirmation (29 normal subscapularis tendons, 11 with alesion of the cranial quarter of the tendon, 7 with a major tear but not eomplete detachment, 3 with complete detachment) were evaluated independently by two radiologists. Diagnosis was established on axial and parasagittal images separately and in combination. Results: Based on the axial images alone, sensitivity for the diagnosis of a subacapularis tendon abnormality versus normal tendon was 95%/100% (reader 1/2). Speeifieity was 55%/62%. The corresponding values for the parasagittal images alone were 91%/91 %, 76%/90%, and for the combined evaluation 91%/91 %, 86%/80%, respectively. With regard to grading agreement of MR imaging to surgery was good (kappa = 0.71). Several single signs were specific (90%-100%) but insensitive (29%-62%) for subscapularis lesions: Contrast leakage onto the minor tuberosity, fatty degeneration of the subscapularis museie and major biceps tendon abnormalities (luxation, subluxation, tear). Conclusion: MR arthrography has a high accuracy in detecting and grading lesions of the subscapularis tendon. The specifieity ofaxial images for this diagnosis can be improved by including parasagittal images and indirect signs. Forty patients underwent MR-arthrography performed one hour after intravenous injection of 0.2 ml/kg of Gadolinium. Two radiologists analysed separately, firstly, the conventional sequences assessing the size of the meniscal remnant and the presence of tear or not, and secondly, compared the conventional and artrographic sequences. The sensibility, speeificity, and the concordance was calculated. Results: Meniscal remnants bigger or equal to the 2/3 were 25. Meniscus tears in arthroscopy were 32. MR offered a diagnostic accuracy of 50%, which was lower with small meniscal remnants, and a speeifieity below 10%. The diagnostic accuracy of MR-artrography was 63%, increasing the specifieity up to 71%. Concordance between radiologists was 45% with MR and 80% with MR-arthrography. Conclusion: MR-arthrography via i.v, gadolinium injection is a Iittle observer-dependent technique that significantly increases the diagnos-  Purpose: Shoulder pain is a common complaint among patients in primary health care. Differential diagnosis and management are difficult for both phisicians and radiologists. The aim of this work in progress is to establish the utility of Power Doppler ultrasound in the subgroup of patients with calcific tendinitis. Methods and Materials: Thirty patients with radiographie evidence of calcific tendinitis were evaluated, using high frequency linear array transducers provided with PD. We considered: 1-the existence of hyperechogenic foei wilh acouslic shadow, and their number and size.2-the presence of PD signal inside the tendon. All patients underwent clinical examination at the time of US procedures. In some cases the steroids response was assessed. Results: In 70% of the cases PD signal was not detected In the group in which there was PD signal a significantly minor size of the hyperechogenic focus was detected. Caleific tendinitis that were positive in PD study, demonstrated a better outcome after local steroid injection. The presence of PD signal seems to be a good prognostic factor in short term outcome. Xylocaine was administrated by means of a spray, or by deep injection in heavier patients. The level of the injection was the lower edge of the coracoid, keeping the needle about 30 degrees directed internally with the respecl vertical plane. Needle penetration arrested against the humeral head ; a slight internal rotat ion of the arm helped the needle to enter in the joint. The use of the low-resistence syringe allowed better confirm of being inside the joint. Results: Contrast medium did not penetrate in the joint in 8 patients. Nevertheless, in 3 of this patients, a small amount of the medium depicted the anterior portion of the joint allowing the proper diagnosis to be made . Needle penetration failed due to an inclination greather than 30 deegres, which caused the tip to strike the anterior surface of the labrum. In 52 patients MR-artrography yielded satisfactory results. Conclusion: US-guidance allows an easy inj ection of contrast medium in the shoulder. 865 Posterior capsular tear of the shoulder with isolated injury of the teres minor museie. Magnetic resonanee imaging and MR arthographie findings with arthroseopic eorrelation GA Hottya , P.F.J. Tirman, HK Genant; San Francisco, CA/USA Purpose: To demonstrate the magnetic resonance and magnetic resonance arthrography imaging findings in patients with posterior eapsular tear and teres minor injury after posterior dislocation. Methods and Materials: The findings at MR and MR arthrography in four patients with a history of shoulder injury due to posterior dislocation were recorded and correla ted with arthroseopic findings . The mechanism of injury was a posteriorly direeted force against an addueted internally rotated arm . Results: MR imaging findings included: poste rior capsular disruption at or near the interface with the hurnerus, edema within the teres minor and partia l tear of the tendon or muscle , and in one patient associated edema of the infraspinatus muscle. Conclusion: Posterior instability is uncommon , constituting only 2% to 4 % of all shoulder instabilities. Posterior labral tears are not present in all patients with this history and other structures mayaiso be damaged . The teres minor attachment to the greater tuberosity may become either partially or completely avulsed follow ing posterior dislocation and associated infraspinatus injury may or may not be present. A previous anatomical study detailing the possible mechanism of injury in cadavers with posterior dislocation and a non-arthroscopic surgical repa ir on a patient with a recurrent posterior shou lder dislocation have been reported but MRI examinations were not ava ilable at the time . The MRI find ings in our patients correlated weil with the arthroscopie surgical find ings . The ideal treatment of patients with posterior capsular tear is still of debate. In our study !wo of the capsu lar tears were repaired and one was left unrepaired. These addit ional MRI findings may help with the diagnosis of this condition and may have an influenee on decision making for treatment plans. Methods and Materials: 10 athletes clin ically suspected of posterosuperior impingement syndrome of the shoulder, underwent MRI stat ic examination employing a 0.2T permanent unit and a 1.5 T superconductive one (SE T1-w, Fat Sat TSE T2-w and GE T2-w sequences, on oblique-coronal and sagittal scan planes) . Dynamic examination was performed in all cases using the abduction and extrarotation (ABER) MRI projection (SE T1-w and Fat Sat SE T2-w sequences). Results: Statie MRI showed supraspinatus tendon partial tear (8 cases; a type 2 SLAP lesion was associated in 2 of them), supraspinatus tendon tendonitis (2 cases). Subchondral ischemic changes of the posterosuperior portion of the humeral head were evidenciated in 3 cases . Subacromial impingement poi nts were not observed. Dynamic MRI showed the impingement between the deep portion of the supraspinatus tendon and the postero-superior glenohumeral joint in all cases , showing that the subchondral humeral head ischemic changes were located at the level of the postero-s uperior impingement point. The aim of this prospective study was to evaluate the feasibility and image quality of a 0.2 T system after arthrography of the shoulder. Methods and Materials: 65 patients with suspected chronic instability or rotator cuff abnormalities proved at arthroscopy or open surgery were examined prospectively with MR arthrography at a low field 0.2 T MR system (Magnetom Open). Intra-articular injection of diluted Gd-DTPA was followed by coronal STIR-sequences, coronal T1 weigthed, sagittal and axial T2*-Flash 2D sequences. The images were evaluated independently by two radiologists who were blinded to the patients data, the surgical results and the clinical history. Results: Image quality was significant good or fair in 90% for the T1 and T2*-Flash 2D sequences and in 80% of the patients for the STIR sequence (p < 0.001). Motion artifacts were low or moderate in 100% for the T1 and T2*-Flash 2D sequences and in 83% for the STIR sequences with a significance of p < 0.05. Sensitivity and specificity for rotator cuff tears was 100%. Sensitivity for labrum pathologies was also 100% and specificity 93%. 1 MR diagnosis of a detached labrum was false positive (predictive value of a positive study of 86%). Evaluation of the labrum was not sufficiently possible in one patient. Conclusion: Based on our results, MR arthrography of the shoulder using a 0.2 T open MR system allows in almost all cases accurate evaluation of the intra-articular joint structures. Disadvantages are the duration of the examination and thereby the risk of reduced image quality caused by motion artefacts. Beside of cost-effectiveness the open MR system is especially a good alternative for patients with c1austrophobia and is useful for c1inical routine examination of the shoulder. Purpose: The aim of the study was to evaluate by spiral computed tomography (sCT) in noninvasive way regression of thrombi in acute massive pulmonary embolism treated with anticoagulants. Methods and Materials: Seventeen patients (8 male and 9 female) with acute massive pulmonary embolism, were studied at onset of disease and 3 to 4 weeks later. Diagnosis of acute PE was confirmed by perfusion nuclear studies in all and in 13 of 17 by transoesophageal echocardiography. Ten between seventeen patients had control sCT exams after six months later. Results: In initial 17 exams there were seen 349 thrombi in main, division of main pulrnonary, lobar and segmental arteries, after 3-6 weeks of therapy 151 were still present (42.3%). In patients who were examed at onset, after more the month and after six months of the anicoagulant therapy respectivly 177 thrombi, 62 (35%) and 43 (24.3%) were dedected. In exams after six months thrombi were seen in divisions of main pulmonary, lobar and segmnetai were seen and all of them were perimural and thin in comparission with the first findings. Conclusion: Follow up with spiral CT indicates partial and gradual disappearence of intraarterial thrombi in acute PE. Despite of total clinical recorvery some perimural thrombi are visible even after 6 months of anticoagulation. Scans were analyzed by three independent readers for the depiction of segmental and subsegmental pulmonary arteries. The contrast enhancement in the central thoracic vessels was measured in each patient. Results: 1120 segmental and 2240 subsegmental pulmonary arteries were analyzed. Most segmental and subsegmental arteries were coded analyzable with a frequency of more than 80 or 70%, respectively. One segmental (RA7) and one subsegmental (LA7b) artery in paracardiac segments were beUer depicted with EBT (p < 0.05). There was no significant difference between the two techniques in the total number of analyzable segmental and subsegmental arteries. The contrast enhancement in the thoracic vessels was significantly higher in the patients studied with EBT. Conelusion: An accurate analysis of peripheral pulmonary arteries is weil within the scope of advanced CT techniques. EBT has minor advantages in the analysis of paracardiac arteries, probably due to the reduction of motion artifacts and better contrast opacification. Purpose: Torsion of testicular appendage represents the most common cause of acute painful pediatric scrotum. Despite its characteristic clinical presentation it is also the most frequently misdiagnosed intraserotal lesion and in some instances it can not be differenciated from torsion of the testis. The aim of this study is to describe the gray-scale and PD sonographie findings of torsed appendix testis to better characterize it. Methods and Materials: We performed US and PD sonographie studies of 8 patients with clinical suspicious of torsion of testicular appendages. All US examinations were obtained using a Logiq 700 (GE) and according to age multifrequency Iinear-array transducer of 7-9 MHz or 10-12 MHz have been used. Results: The swollen appendix was identified in 4 patients and it appeared as an echogenie or heterogeneous mass. PD sonography demonstrated its avascular pattern as weil as associated epididymal hyperemia in two cases. No vascular testicular anomalies were depicted. The remaining 4 patients presented initially a focal or diffuse secondary epididymitis and no mass corresponding to a torsed appendix could be identified. Posterior studies demonstrated resolution of the inflammatory response with evidence of an avascular mass which progressed to a calcified small nodule and secondary detachement. Conelusion: Sonographie appearance of torsed appendix testis changes over the course of time. In an acute phase the inflammatory neighbouring response could simulate other serotal disorders such as inflammatory processe or subacute or partial testicular torsion. Control US studies can demonstrate the torsed appendix. Purpose: To analyze the recurrence and outcome in patients with suspected acute PE and a negative spiral-CT angiography of the pulmonary arteries. Methods and Materials: We retrospectively followed patients who presented with symptoms of acute PE between 2/93 and 1/96 and who underwent spiral-CT angiography (SCTA) of the pulmonary arteries. Patient outcome and recurrence of PE was determined on bases of a review of computerized patient records, and interviews with physicians and patients and data from the Austrian Bureau of Statisties Of 325 patients with negative scans, 269 were followed, of those, 49 reeeived antieoagulent treatment and no thromboembolic event recurred in this group. Of the remaining 220 patients receiving no anticoagulant medication, 1 patient who died from myocardial infarction 6 weeks after the initial spiral-CT scan, showed multiple peripheral emboli in both lungs at postmortem examination. In none of the other patients, PE reeurred. Conelusion: It appears that the risk of recurrent PE after a negative spiral-CT scan is low and similar to results from follow up studies in patients with negative pulmonary angiograms. 879 Eleetron beam eomputed tomography (EBCT) of regional pulmonary perfusion in primary pulmonary hypertension A.T Jones, D.M. HanselI, TW. Evans; London/UK Purpose: Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH) is characterised by a generalised small vessel arteriopathy, and a reduetion in the normal gravitational gradient of pulmonary perfusion. EBCT allows evaluation of pulmonary perfusion within specified regions of interest (ROI). Methods and Materials: Regional pulmonary perfusion was studied in 5 subjects with PPH using EBCT At a single level, repeated sections were obtained during the injection of non-ionic contrast. Subjects were studied before and during the infusion of adenosine. Perfusion was ealculated in five ROI along the dorsal-ventral lung axis. Results: Perfusion remained uniform aeross all ROI (p 0.99), both with and without adenosine. The administration of adenosine resulted in increased perfusion in all ROI (p < 0.01), but the perfusion gradient remained unchanged. Conelusion: The normal gravitational gradient in pulmonary perfusion is diminished in PPH. The post-adenosine increase in perfusion, illustrates the ability of this technique to reflect physiological changes in perfusion. Purpose: Our purpose is to describe the CT appearance of pulmonary fat embolism syndrome (PFS). Methods and Materials: Medical records of patients treated between 1993 and 1998 were reviewed, and fourteen patients met the diagnosis of PFS. CT scans were available for review in five patients who consisted of the study group. The radiographie and CT findings were described by two ehest radiologists with consensus. Results: Multiple iII-defined foci of ground-glass attenuation/consolidation and ill-defined nodules were noted in all patients. These abnormalities were seen predominantly in the upper lobes of the lungs, whereas in the lower lobes, gravity dependent density predominated. In two Purpose: Testicular microlithiasis ™ is an uncommon condition which has been reported in association with testicular malignancy. The purpose of this study was to report the c1inical and sonographie features of 28 patients with TM diagnosed since 1993, and to report the long term follow up in 12 patients diagnosed prior to 1995. Methods and Materials: Twenty-eight cases were reviewed. Patients diagnosed prior to 1995 were recalled for repeat USo Results: Testicular malignancy was found in association with TM in 12 cases (43%). Six patients had teratomas, 5 seminomas and 1 had a Leydig cell tumour. TM occurred in association with atrophie testes in 6 patients. One patient had an epidermoid cyst. Twelve patients had a repeat US at at a mean of 54 months (range 41-64 months) following their initial examination. In one patient a seminoma developed in a testis previously shown to have TM. Conclusion: Primary testicular malignancy is present in a high proportion of patients with TM. Although TM has not been definitely proven to be a premalignant condition, we advocate annual US screening in these patients. After pharmacological stimulation with intracavemosal injection of 10 mcg of PGE 1, we performed a PD examination with 3D reconstruction utilizing an HDI 3000 (ATL, Bothell, Wash.) equipped with a build in 3D module and a broadband transducer (5-10 MHz). The images were obtained during phases 1-2 of the erection. The conspiquity of arteriolar branches of cavernosal arteries visualised with PD was graded identifying three patterns (I high, II reduced, III poor). Results: the pattern of helicine arterioles was classified as type I in 13 patients (10 without diabetes, 3 with diabetes); as type 11 in 9 patients (2 without diabetes, 7 with diabetes); as type 111 in 12 patients (all with diabetes). The shunt vessels were recognised in all patients with the same conspiquity (type I). Conclusion: in the evaluation of patients with vasculogenic impotence 3D reconstruction PD can identify a group of patients with arteriolar disease. We propose the use of 3D Power-Doppler in addition to pulsed and color-Doppler in the diagnosis of vasculogenic impotence.  Purpose: To test the need of surveillance ultrasound examination (US) of the endometrium in asyntomatic breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant treatment with Tamoxifen. Methods and Materials: One hund red and ten patients (mean age 60 yrs) treated with 20 mg/d ie Tamoxifen (GT) and 54 healthy subjects (mean age 57 yrs) as contral graup (GC) performed a pelvic ultrasound (US). We evaluated the uter ine volume, the endometrial thickness and the aspect of endometrial echoes. 124 patients performed endometrial curettage. Results: The endometrial thickness was sign lficantly increased in GT (7 mm). No sign ificant difference was found in the uterine mean volume between Ihe two groups. In postmenopausal patients the endometrial thickness (P = 0.0002) and the uter ine volume (P = 0.0005) were significantly increased than in GC. Multivariate regression analysis demonstrated that Tamoxifen was the only significant independent factor pred icting for endometrial thickness. In 124 endometrial sam pies, positive pathological findings were present in 21 patients of GT and in 5 CG. No atyp ical endometrial hyperplasia or endometrial cancer were found in either group . Conclusion: Pelvic US exam ination is able to identify the sign ificant increase of endometrial thickness in the GT. However, the find ing of thickened endometrium on US is not necessary associated with endometrial pathology on biopsy. Purpose: Ovar ian fibromas are benign lesions (about 4% of all ovarian cancers) whose differential diagnosis is difficult. When they are solid and homogeneous, echotomography shows echogenie masses which cannot be distinguished from subserous uterine fibromas. Methods and Materials: We used high-field MRI (1.5 T) to exam ine 7 patients with ovarian fibromas (9 masses) later submitted to surgery. Results: The mass was solid and homogeneous in 6 cases , and complex with a solid-liquid component in 1 case . lt was hypointense in T1 and T2 in 5 cases, hyperintense in T1 and hypointense in T2 in 1 case , and hypointense in T1 and irregularly hyperintense in T2 in 3 cases. Gadolinium (.1 mmollkg) was adm inistered in 4 cases : a peripheral rim was seen in both T1 and T2 , but the enhancement was not of diagnostic quality. Conclusion: The MR signal was homogeneously hypointense in T1 and T2 in 5 cases and it was distinctive of ovarian fibromas. The mass shape and signal patterns can help make the differential diagnosis with subserous uter ine fibromas. Purpose: Our purpose is to define CT and MR diagnostic eriteria of vidian perineural neoplastic spread ing. Methods and Materials: Seven patients with neoplastic perineural extension along the vidian nerve have been studied with both CT and MR (1.5 T) , performed with axial and coronal scans . In 6/7 cases MR images were obtained before and after i.v, Gd-DTPA adm inistration , with fat suppression in 5/7 patients . Results: We found the following CT find ings: a) enlargement of pterygoid eana l, b) eros ion of its eort ieal wall, c) substitution of its eonten t. These findings were present in 7/7, 6/7, and 5/7 cases respectively. Results: Skull base involvement oeurred in 23/54 cases: 12/18 nasopharynx, 2/23 oropharynx., 1/2 parapharyngeal spaee, 3/4 infratemporal fossa, 5/7 nodal eervieal metastasis. Tumoral thrombus (gadolinium enhanced) within the internal jugular vein with secondary infiltration of the skull was eneountered in five patients with carotid spaee nodal metastasis. Perivascular infiltration of earot id artery has been established as a poss ible anatomie route of extens ion to the skull base of eerv ieal neoplasms. Tumoral thrombus within the internal jugular vein is also a possible pathway 10 Ihe skull base . Conclusion: Tumoral thombus within the internal jugular vein is a possible pathway of extension to the skull base of eervieal neoplasms that has not previously been deser ibed and must be taken into aeeount. Axial T1-and T2W images and a Gd-DTPA-enhanced 3D spoi led GRE MRA in a eoronal orientation were performed during arterial and venous phase . For obtaining a venography without enhaneement of arte ries, the data of the 1st measurement was substracted from the 2nd measurement. Afterwards MIP-reconstructions of the coronal images were performed. For image analysis axial images, MIP-reconstructions and coronal single slices were used. In all patients diagnosis was confirmed surgically and histologically. ) . Gd-OTPA (0.2 mmol/kg) was injected after acquisition of the baseline images . Image process ing of dynamic raw-data was performed on a pixel-by-pixel basis . ROls were measured in areas of tumor, muscle and Iymph nodes. Results: The rBV values in tumor and muscle tissue were (mean ± SO; 556 .3 ± 389.5 and 76.6 ± 20 .5), expressed as ratio (tumor/muscle) : 7.26 ± 2.81. Statistical analys is showed a significant (p « 0.05) correlation between radiotherapy response and rBV in the tumor areas with expotentially decreas ing rBV in tumor versus muscle. In 9 of 12 patients, Iymph node metastas is can be seen in the slice of rBV-maps and the rBV of metastasis was lower than that of original tumors. Conclusion: The method of rBV reconslruction can be used to monitor tumor response under radiotherapy without expos ing the patient 10 an invasive procedure. A decrease of rBV was detected following treatment. five groups . In group one (n =12) and two (n =12) the anode was placed in the tumor center, and four cathodes were placed in the tumor periphery. A dosage of 40 coulomb (C)/cm 3 and 60 C/cm 3 , respectively, was applicated . Group three (n = 13) and group four (n = 15) also received a dosage of 40 C/cm 3 and 60 C/cm 3 respectively, but the polarity of the electrodes was changed . Group five (n = 12) did not receive DCT. MR imaging (T 1-and T2-weighted spin echo images) was performed to determine tumor volumes one day before, and one and six weeks after DCT. Results: DCT treated animals showed a significant (P < 0.0001 ) reduclion of the tumor volumes . By contrast, in all animals without DCT a sign ificant (P < 0.0001) tumor progress was noted . No significant (P > 0.05) differences were found between the different DCT groups. Conclusion : In this model, DCT was found to be effective for the treatment of mammary carcinomas. DCT may allow percutaneous treatment of tumors that are unresponsive or unsuitable for conventional therapy. The polarity of the electrodes did not affect the efficiency of DCT. No significant differences in the examined voltage range were found. 902 Characterization of novel small and ultra-small applicators for thermoablation in laser induced interstitial thermotherapy C. Bremer, G. Krefft , T. Filler, E.J. Rummeny, P. Reimer ; Münster/D Purpose: Ta assess ablation characteristics of new short LITT applicators des igned for small volume ablation compared to standard LITT applicator. Methods and Materials: LITT was perform ed ex-vivo on small pig liver sampies using new ultra-small , small and standard LITT applicators (active length : 5, 10 or 20 mm respectively, group 1-3, n = 72, H ütttinqer, Germany). Laser energy was applied with an Nd:YAG laser (1064 nm, continuos wave) at various power settings (3, 5, 7 or 10 J/s) and coagulation duration (3, 5, or 10 min) until onset of carbon izalion . For online L1TT-monitoring T1 weighted 2D T-FLASH images (TRITEITI/FA 13/5/300 msecJ100) were acquired every minute during LITT. Standardized signal intensity of the lesion and horizontal lesion size were measured for each image. LITT induced Iiver lesions were exam ined macroscopically and histolog ically. Results: Continuos laser application for 5 min with small LITT applicators allowed maximum power settings of 5 J/s (groups 1 + 2) while the standard LITT applicator tolerated 10 J/s. Given the same power setting and duration of LITT, horizontallesion diameters were significantiy larger in group 1 + 2 as compared to group 3 (p < 0.05). Temperature dependent signal decrease w ithin the lesion was more pronounced in small LITT applicators (groups 1 + 2) compared to the standard LITT applicator (p < 0.05 at 5 J/s, p < 0.01 at 7 J/s). Maximum Purpose: Ta test the hypotheses that 1) RF-thermal ablation can be performed under MR guidance in implanted Iiver tumor in a rabbit model, and 2) MR imaging can accurately distinguish between thermallyinduced necrosis and residual tumor. Methods and Materials: RF-thermal ablation was performed on implanted VX2-tumor in 23 rabbit Iivers. Following RF application and immediate post-procedure imaging in all animals (T2-weighted, STIR , T1-weighted before and after gadod iamide administrat ion), nine rabbits were followed up 2 weeks later after adm inistration of a superparamagnelic iron oxide (SPIO) , and four were imaged aga in one month post RF ablalion . Liver was harvested in all cases for pathological examination. Results: Successful RF-thermal ablat ion was accomplished in all cases with an instrumentation time ranging from 19 to 85 min. Tumor-to-RFthermal lesion CNR was highest for T2-weighted and STIR imaging with a mean of 4.5 and 3.8, respectively. T2-weighted imaging never overestimated pathologicallesion size by more than 2 mm. On 2-and 4week follow-up imaging after SPIO administration, Tumor-to-RF-thermal lesion CNR was again highest on T2-we ighted and STIR sequences with a radiolog ical/pathological correlation coefficient not lower than .90. Conclusion: MR imaging-guided RF-thermal ablation in implanted liver tumor is feasible and safe. Thermal lesion size can best be mon itored using T2-weighted and STIR images . Purpose: Ta compare the efficacy of saline infusion mediated radiofrequen cy (RF) tissue ablation and intratumoral alcohol injection for the treatment of liver tumors in rabbits. Methods and Materials: Ninety liver tumors were induced in 49 rabbits by VX2 carcinoma implantation. Th irty-n ine tumors in 21 rabbits were treated with RF (90°C, 4-12 min., 5% saline infused at 1 ml/min .); 21 tumors in 12 rabbits were inject ed with 99.8 % ethanol (1.5--3.0 ml); 10 tumors each in the left and right lobes were treated with RF and ethanol respectively in 10 rabbits for intra individual compar lson: 6 rabb its with 10 tumors served as untreated centrot . The efficacy was evaluated with MRI, microangiography and histopathology. Results: Six control rabbits died within 2 months. In RF group , 6 rabbits surv ived langer than 6 months (absolute eradication 29%); 8 rabbits were found free of viable tumor when they were sacrificed (relat ive era dicat ion 38%); 7 rabbits (33%) showed local tumor relapse and/or lung metastasis . In ethanol group , tumors in 10 rabbits (83 %) were incompletely ablated. In RF-ethanol intraindividual camparisan group , viable tumor was found in 9 out of 10 ethanollesions and in none of 10 RF lesions. MRI proved useful in monitoring these therapi es. At microangiography and histology, remaining tumoral vasculature was found mainly with ethanol but not RF treated lesions. Conclusion: Saline infusion mediated RF ablation is superior to ethanol injection for treatment of liver malignancy in rabbits . Complete destruclion of intratumoral blood vessels explains the beller results of RF therapy. Virtual targets were defined in the liver and in both kidneys on MR images. FMPSPGR sequences were obtained during breatholds of 20 seconds in coronal localizing, axial, sagittal, coronal or axial oblique planes in a closed 1.0 T magnet (G.E.) using the body coil. The Targogrid (Daum) was applied for determining the selected cutaneous 5206 puncture point. Piglets were sacrificed and autopsied 1 hour after the procedures. Results: Mean duration of the procedure was 16.9 (11-37) minutes; mean number of acquisitions was 5.9 (3-12); mean number of reorientations of the needle was 0.6 (0-4). Pathological sam pies of good quality were obtained in 26-36 (72%) cases. A subcapsular hematoma was observed in 18/24 (75%) cases of renal biopsies and in 1-12 (8%) of hepatic biopsies. No correlation could be established between duration of the procedure and site of biopsy and between type of needle and complication. Conclusion: MRI guided needle biopsy in the abdomen is a feasible technique in piglets using a closed magnet. 15deg) sequence allowed for sustained scanning with 2 to 3 images/so Visual feedback was provided by an inroom monitor. An MR-visible needle holder served to guide the 22G titanium needle into the lesion. Results: All punctures were successful for needle visibility, confirmation of correct needle posltion and presence of sufficient aspirated material. With some experience the interventions took less than 15 minutes. Cytology revealed malignancy in 5 patients. Among the others goiter, muscle hypertrophy and cyst content was diagnosed. No complications occured. Conclusion: Fluoroscopic interactive MR-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy on a short bore high field scanner is an effective and safe way to obtain material for cytological evaluation. Methods and Materials: Stent and filter placement was performed on a 1.5 ACS-NT scanner. A sliding window reconstruction technique together with radial scanning allows updating of the images at a frame rate of 16 images per second. A specially designed backprojector performed the realtime reconstruction of the image data. Five MRcompatible, selfexpanding stents were placed in iliac arteries of five pigs. Retrievable, MR-compatible tulip filters were implanted into the inferior vena cava in the same animals. Placement of the stents and filters was directly controlled on LCD screens beside the magnet. The position of each device was verified by MR and conventional subtraction angiography. Results: The MR-f1uoroscopic technique allowed realtime observation of the stents and filters. The device-related artifacts were weil suited to the fluoroscopic images allowing accurate localization of each device without obscuring the vessel anatomy. Comparison of the MR-f1uoroscopic stent and filter positions to those obtained by MR and X-ray angiography showed excellent agreement. The average time for stent or filter placement, once the appropriate MR plane had been established, was 8 minutes. Conelusion: MR-guided placement of MR-compatible iliac artery stents and inferior vena cava filters is possible with this novel MR-f1uoroscopic technique. Methods and Materials: Twenty-one fetuses of nineteen pregnancies (mean gestational age, 25 weeks, range 13 to 34 weeks) suspected to have congenital anomalies on Ultrasonography (US) underwent MR examination using HASTE sequence at 1.0-Tesla. Images were analyzed for visualization of normal organs and fetal abnormalities suspected at USo Results: Fetal anomalies that were suspected at US including, hydrocephaly (n =6), posterior fossa malformation (n =1), nuchal translucency (n = 3), ureterohydronephrosis (n = 2) abdominal cyst (n = 1), abdominal wall defect (n = 2), sacral myelomeningocele (n = 1), vertebral malformations (n = 1), fetal hydrops (n = 1), and clubfoot (n = 1) were c1early seen on MR HASTE imaging. Other anomalies, including diaphragmatic hernia (n = 1) and right aortic arch (n = 1), were only detected on MR imaging. Fetal anomalies were confirmed at postpartum (n = 13) or by means of necropsy studies (n = 6). Conelusion: HASTE imaging is not only a useful complement to US in depicting intrauterine congenital fetal anomalies, but it might also be able to detect anomalies unsuspected at USo  Purpose: To assess the ultrasonographie patterns of cervical Iymphadenopathy in the most common diseases of childhood manifestated with cervical Iymphadenopathy at initial presentation. Methods and Materials: Sixty-four patients aged 2 months to 15 years with cervical lymphadenopathy at initial presentation were prospectively scanned with a 8 MHz or 10 MHz ultrasound probe. Evaluated signs included: long-to-short axis ratio (L/S), width of hilum, attenuation and homogeneity of texture, suppuration and/or matting of nodes. Final diagnosis was based on biopsy or clinical and ultrasonographie followup. Results: In respect with the cause of lymphadenopathy the following patterns were observed: Reactive hyperplasia: L/S > 2, wide hilum, homogeneity of texture (97% of cases); infectious mononucleosis: L/S < 2, wide hilum, hyperechoic-heterogenous pattern and bilateral distribution (85% of cases); lymphoma: L/S < 2, slit-like or absent hilum, inhomogenous, hypoechoic texture (80% of cases). Suppuration and matting were observed in bacterial, tuberculous and cat scratch disease (CSD) lymphadenitis (70% and 100% ofthe patients respectively). The distribution was mainly unilateral in bacterial and tuberculous lymphadenitis and bilateral in CSD, infectious mononucleosis and lymphoma.  Purpose: To present problems and solutions concerning clinical application of storage phosphor radiography (CR) in pediatric radiology with special reference to dose and image noise. Methods and Materials: Phantoms adapted to different absorption levels mimicking different age groups were exposed to fixed "low dose levels" (sensitivity class 400). Systematic variation of parameters for image processing to increase signal to noise ratio (SNR) was performed. Analysis of SNR was done quantitatively and visually. Results: Tailored image processing leads to improvement of SNR between 15-30%. For a given sensitivity level (speed class 400) SNR is lower than with film-screen systems. Spatial resolution of CR is lower too. Conclusion: Low absolute receptor dose levels with exposition parameters for speed class 400 in pediatric radiology lead to a low SNR with CR. SNR can be improved by image processing, but is still lower with CR than with film-screen systems. This applies to spatial resolution too. Dose reduction in this context is impossible. Conclusion: The comb ination of ultrasonographie findings seems to be highly suggestive of a specific diagnosis for cervical Iymphadenopathy in ch ildhood , although individual signs are not specific. Purpose: To present a discussion of this rare cond ition with par ticular emphasis on its classification and the imaging approach to the diagnosis to enable a beUer understanding of this lesion. Methods and Materials: Four ch ildren with atlanto -axial rotatory subluxation are presented . The c1inical presentation and imaging find ings are described. Conclusion: Atlanto-axial rotatory subluxation is an uncommon , poorly understood condition which is one of the causes of acquired torticollis in children. It may occur following trauma, infection or surgery to the head and neck region, or spontaneously. Most cas es settle spontaneously but in some the rotatory deformity becomes fixed and irreducible. Diagnosis is often delayed because of the expectat ion of spontaneous recovery. Clinically, the head is rotated and tilted and th is typical "Cock Rob in" appearance makes radiographie position ing difficu lt. The complex anatomy of the atlanto-axial region , coupled with problems of posit ioning , make the radiographs difficult to interpret. Computed tomography is essential in imag ing this condition and for treatment planning. Early diagnosis of atlanto-axial rota tory subluxation leads to improved outcome with non-operative management. Atlanto-axial rota tory subluxat ion may settle spontaneously so initial conservative management involv ing anti-inflammatory drugs, cerv ical collar and sometimes museie relaxants is advocated. Those children whose torticollis persis ts for more than a week need aggressive investigation by computed tomography. This approach will avoid over invest igation and over treatment yet will still detect atlanto-axial rotatory subluxation early enough to ach ieve a good outcome. In nearly all cases we used 120 kV and 50-90 mA. Tube rotation time : 0.75 sec , collimation: 5 mm, pitch : 5208 1.5 and reconstruction interval 5 mm. The Study was done with breath hold in inspiration and without contrast material. For the evaluation of both examinations we used the following score: lung meta stases, suspicious pulmonary nodules and no metastases. Results: In 62 of 80 investigations (23 patients with 2 CT) the results of CT were identical with scintigraphy. Different results we found in 18 cases. In 11 investigations with suspicious pulmonary nodules scint igraphy was negative in 7 and pos itive in 4 cases, in 5 normal CT-studies scintigraphy showed lung metastases and in 2 cases with nodules in CT scintigraphy was susp icious in one and negative in the othe r case . Conclusion: J-131-scintigraphy is the standard procedure for detection of metastases of papillary thyro id cancer. Even with repeated investigations CT is not able to differentiate between metastases and residues of treatment. CT shows early signes of lung fibrosis as a side effect of J-131-therapy. Purpose: to evaluate the role of MRI in primary diagnosis and postoperative follow-up of pulmonary artery malformation using fast imaging imaging sequences. Methods and Materials: 45 patients aged 3 months to 12 years with pulmonary atresia, aplasia of left or right PA, valvular, supravalvular or pulmonary branch stenosis in whom echocardiographic findings were unconclusive were examined with a 1.5 T MRI. The study protocol included fast spin-echo T1 wi, FLASH 20 eine and FISP 3D sequences. Multiplanar reformations were performed of the FSE T1 wi and the 3D image data sets. Results: 15 patients were studied pre-and 30 postoperatively (palliative shunt in 14, definitive surgical repair in 16 patients). The MR image quality allowed detailed diagnostic information in all but one examination. MPA atresia was present in 20 cases, valvular or supravalvular stenoses were diagnosed in 9, central pulmonary artery stenoses in 16, peripherical stenoses in 4, and aplasia of RPA or LPA in 6 examinations. Any type of echographically suspected stenosis could be excluded in 7 cases. All diagnoses were confirmed by surgery, angiography or c1inical follow-up. Conclusion: MRI as a minimal invasive modality is able to provide crucial information in patients with pulmonary artery atresia or stenosis especially in cases in whom echocardiography remains unconclusive. Signal intensities, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) was calculated. Results: On post-contrast images, a 36% increase in SNR was noted in patients with normal adrenal glands (0.7 vs. 11.1 on FS images, p < .05). In four patients, a focal lesion of the adrenal gland could be excluded. In five patients focal lesions were seen showing only a non-significant SNR increase on post-contrast images of 15% or less (mean, 10%): Delineation of these lesions was improved on post-contrast images; gland-tumor CNR increased from 1.0 to 3.1 (p < .05). Conclusion: Mn-DPDP provides a good enhancement and could be used for delineation of the adrenal glands, for detection/exclusion of focal secondary adrenal lesions. Purpose: To assess the safety of the highly concentrated Gadobutrol (1M) as a new MR contrast agent in patients with impaired renal function. Methods and Materials: 21 patients with impaired renal function and any indication for a contrast enhanced MRI were enrolled into this prospective study after written informed consen!. The patients were c1assified in 2 groups according to their creatinine clearance (group 1: n = 12, <80 ml/min and >30 ml/min; group 2: n = 9, <30 ml/min not requiring dialysis). Gadobutrol (1M) was injecled as an iv. bolus at randomly assigned doses of either 0.1 or 0.3 mmol/kg bw. Changes in vital signs, c1inical chemistry and urinanalysis including creatinine clearance were monitored before, 6 hrs and then every 24 hrs after contrast application until 72 h (group 1) or 120 h (group 2) respectively following the administration of Gadobutrol. Moreover, hematology was checked every other day. Results: No serious adverse events and no significant changes in vital signs occured following iv. bolus injection of Gadobutrol at doses of 0.1 and 0.3 mmol/kg bw. No c1in ically relevant changes in hematology, c1 inical chemistry and urinanalysis were detected during the observation period. Markers for glomerular filtration (creatinine, cystatin C, ß2-microglobulin) and for tubular function (ß-NAG, a1-microglobulin) were unaffected by Gadobutrol in both groups. Furthermore, creatinine c1earance was unchanged. Conclusion: Gadobutrol (1M) can safely be applied to patients with chronically impaired renal function, even to patients with marginal excretory function (creatinine c1earance <30 ml/min). Methods and Materials: Twenty New Zealand white rabbits underwent MRI of the bone marrow before and 2 days following 12 Gy total body irradiation. Spinecho (SE) 600/15 (TRlTE) and dynamic FLASH 60°/50/4 (aITRlTE)-sequences were performed before and following injection of 0.05 mmollkg BW CMD-Gd-DOTA (n = 10) or 0.1 mmol/kg BW gadopentetate (n =10). The contrast enhancement was quantified as~SI =i <Slpos t -SIpre)/SIprel * 100%. MRI data were compared with the histopathologic BMB-ultrastructure. Results: Dynamic bone marrow~SI-data steadily increased up to 10-15 min after CMD-Gd-DOTA-injection, while blood~SI-data slightly decreased. This bane marrow contrast enhancement was significantly higher in the irradiated group as compared to non-irradiated controls, corresponding to irradiation induced alterations of the BMBultrastructure shown on electron microscopy (p < 0.05). Following gadopentetate injection however, bone marrow ö SI-data of nonirradiated and irradiated animals were not significantly different (p < 0.05). Concluslon: Irradiation induced alterations in BMB-permeability could be reliably assessed with GMD-Gd-DOTA enhanced MRI, while gadopentetate dimeglumine was not suited to determine these changes. Purpose: In phamacokinetic modeling it is frequently necessary to take the arterial input function (AIF) into account. If there is no appropriate artery within the investigated region, the information must be gained simultaneously to dynamic imaging of the lesion from a different location. This is difficult scanning problem. The aim of this study was to find an approach , which enables the measurement of the AIF and the contrast media (GM) uptake at different locations with different coils. Furthermore , inflow effects must be suppressed for the measurement oftheAIF. Methods and Materials: The study was performed on a 1.5 T system with self-shielded gradients (Philips AGS-NT) using either a dedicated breast coil or the head coil and a surface coil. The AIF was measured in the subclavicular region or in the carotid artery with a multi stack 2D spoiled Gradient Echo sequence (TR =17. ms, TE =4.5 ms, flip angle = 60°, slice thickness = 4 mm, field-of-view = 220 mm, flow compensation =YES). A special pre-saturation pulse, which can be freely positioned, was used to suppress inflow effects in the artery. Without pre-saturation the maximal native blood signal could be determined. That was used to calculate the GM concentration after GM injection. Results and Conclusion: AIF and the GM uptake could be measured for maximal GM enhancement with a signal-to-noise ratio of 40 and 15, respectively. The temporal resolution was 3.5 s for each slice, which was absolutely sufficient for the time course of the used GM bolus. The applied parameters fulfill the condition of proton exchange minimization which is particular important due to the high GM concentration during first pass. It could be shown that with an interleaved multi stack 2D spoiled Gradient Echo sequence the AIF and the GM uptake can be measured simultaneously.  Purpose: The aim of this study is to compare thesensitivity of 3D-TOF MR angiography in detection of intracranial aneurysms with intraarterial digital subtraction angiography (I.A.DSA) Methods and Materials: We report our experience with 3D-TOF magnetic resonance angiography protocol at 1.0 T system, using a conventional maximum intensity projection (MIP) algorithm in 32 patients with clinical suspicion of an aneurysm; 19 of these were correleted with I.A.DSA. Results: 3D-TOF MR angiography and IADSA were in agreement both in negativ and positiv cases (6 and 13) as to aneurysms presenc, as weil locating the aneurysm site, as weil as their size. Concluslon: 3D-TOF MRA is rapid and noninvasive and can be implemented as a precise, reliable tool in intracranial aneurysms evaluation. Methods and Materials: 3D-TOF imaging was performed on 25 patients following treatment with the GDC system. 3D TOF MRA source data, maximum intensity projection (MIP) and 3D isosurface reconstructions were compared to IA DSA which was adopted as a gold standard. Images were assessed for parent and branch artery f1ow, the presence of neck recurrence and aneurysm re-growth. Results: No significant image arlifact resulted from the presence of the GDG coil in any case. Both 3D iso-surface and MRA source data correlated weil with IA DSA for parent and branch artery f1ow, the presence of neck recurrence and aneurysm regrowth. There was poor correlatian between MIP MRA and IA DSA findings. Conclusion: Three dimensional time-of-f1ight magnelic resonance angiography (3D TOF MRA) is now readily accepted as a non-invasive screening tool for familial aneurysmal disease and has been used as an alternative to IA DSA in the surgical management of aneurysmal subarachnoid haemorrhage. MRA in patients treated with GDC is safe , imparts no radiation dose and provides acceptable image quality. Methods and Materials: Eight GDC-embolized bifurcation aneurysms were examined by postmortal MRI , gross pathology, electron rnicroscopy, conventional histopathology and in situ lightmicroscopy of intraaneurysmatic thrombosis after performing a diamant cutting and grind ing techn ique. All embo lizations were performed under perlinterventional anticoagulation. The time intervals between intervention and death ranged from three to thirteen days . Results: In all patients the major part of the intraaneurysmatic volume (75-90%) cons isted of thrombotic material, which filled the spaces between the coilloops and fulfilled histopathological criteria of an intravital thrombogenesis. Histological indicators for a proceeding thrombus organ ization or a neoendothelialization of the aneurysmorifice could not be demonstrated . Early thrombus stages were detached from the coil surfaces by recurrent mechanic-hemodynamic influences of the pulsating blood stream followed by thrombusfragmentation and thrombolysis. The coil surfaces were than covered by multinucleated giant cells. Conclusion: Initially after GDC-embolization an intraaneurysmatic thrombosis additionally completes the aneurysm occlusion and stabilises the coilpackage. This thrombus formation is not prevented by per iinterventional anticoagulation. In some of the hemodynamical stressed bifurcation aneurysms further thrombusorganizations are prevented by hemodynamic and Iytic processes, which sustain a vicious circle resulting in compactations of the coilpackage and aneurysm reperfusion . Methods and Materials: CT angiographies were performed using a spiral CT scanner (Siemens Somatom Plus 4) with following scan protocol: 1 mm slice thickness, pitch 1, f10w 2.5 mVsec , 120 ml amount of contrast, delay 22-2&sec. 50 mm coverage was sufficient to include the circle of WiIIis, posterior inferior cerebellar arte ries and pericallosal arteries. MIP and VRT reconstructed images were created on workstation SIENET Magicview 31 VA. In the first part of our study we included 73 pacients with CT angiography from following groups : 1. Patients with acut e subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) . 2. Patients with proven history of SAH , but with negat ive DSA . 3. Patients with a suggested history of SAH (strang headaches, travma). 4. Patients without SAH, but with suspicious c1inical signs of an intracranial aneurism or an aneur ism-like lesion on a convencional CT or MRI. 5. Screening in "high risk population". We analyzed a number of aneurisms in each group separately. In the second part of the study we compared CT angiography and surgical findings in 24 patients with intracranial aneurisms. Results: First part of the study In the first group (45 patients) we found 34 aneurisms. In the second group (5 patients) we found an aneurism 5212 in one patient. In the third group (3 patients) we found one aneur ism. In the fourth group (15 patients) we found five aneurisms in four patients. In fifth group (5 patients) we also found one aneurism. 5econd part of study. Our prel iminary results in 24 patients with surgically proven intracranial aneurisms demonstrate high sensitiv ity to and specificity of CT angiography in preoperative evaluation . Final results including a higher number of patients will be present.  Purpose: Today most of the intracranial aneurysms larger than 3 mm can be detected with three-dimensional (3-D) CT angiography. Acceptable images of aneurysms located behind or adjacent to skull-base bane structures can often not be obtained . We evaluate the limitations of this technique to detect aneurysms and to characterise the correlation between 3-D CT angiography images and intraoperative findings . Methods and Materials: Betwcen July 1997 and September 1998, a total of 17 patients with cerebral saccular aneurysms were evaluated with 3-D CT angiograms. The exam inalion was performed using a Somaton Plus B 31 C, Siemen sf CT scanner with 3-D and maximum intensity projection (MIP) . Results: In 14 cases a good cerebral arterial image was obtained. These pictures were useful for planning the microsurgical approaches. Their correlation with the intraoperative findings was excellent. In five emergency cases , a neurosurg ical intervention after 3-D CT angiography alone was possible. Ten postoperative exam inations of aneurysms treated with Titanium clips confirmed the complete closure of the aneurysms. Three aneurysms bigger that 3 mm were missed using MIP. Conclusion: In our study the pre-and postoperative performed 3-D CT angiographies provide useful images 1) for planning the microsurg ical approaches 2) for defining the aneurysm's anatomy and 3) for controlling the operative results. The recognition of intracavernous and infraclinoid ICA aneurysms is difficult in case of simultaneaus cavernous sinus enhancement and a delayed peak time of maximum arterial enhancement. Two ophthalmic aneurysm missed on 3-D CT angiography were detected on MR angiography and DS angiography. Therefore, our device was not able to provide acceptable images of aneurysms located behind or adjacent to skull-base bane structures. 937 CT-angiography in combination with virtual endoscopy -will diagnostic workup of cerebral aneurysms improve using these techniques? Purpose: CT-Angiography as method for the evaluation of cereb ral arteries is weil recognized. The shape of an aneurysm can be dernonstrated by full volume rendered-or MIP-images. In same cases it seems not possible to identify small branches next to the aneurysm or thrombosis in the cavity of the aneurysm neither by DSA nor by CTA. Methods and Materials: A study of 16 patients with CT-proven subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH ) has been conducted. In all patients ruptured aneurysms could be identified using DSA as "gold standard". After performing an additional CT-angiography, data were computed to 3-D-images and a virtual endoscopy of the aneurysm and the surreunding vessels with regard to morphological appearance of perforat ing branches and thrombosis inside the aneurysm. Results: In this small group the endoscopic view inside the aneurysm and the surrounding vessels shows the origin of perforating branches. The inner surface of the vessel could be inspected. The neck of the aneurysm could be identified clear ly. Conclusion: The combination of full volume rendered images and the virtual endoscopy seems to simpl ify the pretherapeutic description of the anatomy of cerebral aneurysms. It is helpful to get additional information for planning interventional or surgical treatment. Purpose: The "gold standard" in the examination of patients with cerebral aneurysms is the digital subtraction angiography (DSA) at present. The CT-angiography (CTA) has been compared with DSA for the significance in the preoperative workup. Methods and Materials: We conducted a study of 121 patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage to compare CTA and DSA with regard to aneurysm detection, flow patterns and morphological appearance. CT has been processed to maximum intensity projection, 3-D-images and virtual endoscopy. Particular attention was drawn to the morphological appearance and flow patterns of partially or totally thrombosed aneurysms. Results: All aneurysms of anterior and posterior circulation could be identified clearly on CT-angiography. On DSA however, two aneurysms could not be identified, the CTA clearly showing the aneurysm origin. By rotating the CTA-images in MIP or 3-D-mode, all necks could be identified and measured in the respective plane. Conclusion: With false negative imaging in 2.0% in the actual series and a potentially higher complication rate, DSA seems inferior to CTA related to the preoperative workup of patients with cerebral aneurysms. In our view, CTA will replace DSA in many vascular imaging procedures in the near future. Purpose: To evaluate the accuracy of CT-angiography with intra-arterial contrast-application for the determination of the diameter of aneurysms. Methods and Materials: In 20 cases, a DSA-series and a spiral-CTA-series with intra-arterial contrast-application of the same aneurysm were acquired using a combined CT-DSA-equipment. 3D-views of the aneurysm were generated and presented in the same projection as the DSA. Three blinded observers determined the maximum longitudinal and transversal diameter of the aneurysm in CTA and in DSA after calibrating the system with the tip of the guiding catheter. Mean value, standard deviation and Student's paired t-Test were calculated. Results: Only for the longitudinal diameter, statistically significant differences between the CTA and DSA-measurement were found (CTA: 7.5 mm, DSA: 6.8 mm, p = 0.02). The transversal diameters did not differ much (CTA 7.5 mm, DSA 7.3 mm, p = 0.4). Conclusion: The statistically significant difference only for the longitudinal diameters must be attributed to the spiral-CT typical effect of an increased effective slice thickness. As the magnitude of this effect depends on various factors (especially: slice profile, contrast between vessel and cerebrum, pitch factor used), the diameter of an aneurysm can not be exactly deducted from 3D-CTA models. According to the delineation of an aneurysms, its neck and the related vessels, the results obtained with DSA, SSD and VECTA were rated as "poor", "sufficient" and "excellent". Results: Excellent visualization of the neck was possible in 12 aneurysms (43%) with DSA, in 17 aneurysms (61%) with SSD and in 20 aneurysms (71%) with VECTA. Excellent visualization of surrounding vessels was possible in 11 aneurysms (39%) with DSA, in 19 aneurysms with SSD (67%) and in 23 aneurysms (82%) with VECTA. Coil size could correctly be estimated in three GDC treated patients. Correlation between aneurysm visualization and intraoperative findings was equal or superior to DSA and SSD. Conclusion: For understanding of vascular details VECTA is superior to DSA and SSD, especially in patients with partly thrombosed aneurysms or tourtous surrounding vessels. The ability to measure distances and volume directly within the three-dimensional representation, makes this method ideal for therapy planning in GDC-procedures and prior to surgery. Results: From the 32 known Ans, 29 were nicely imaged by CTA, permitting evaluation of their morphology, dimensions and relations to adjacent arteries and, also, measurement of aneurysmal neck. 3 examinations weren't technically succesful while 3 additional Ans had been first imaged by CTA. The CTA findings significantly influenced the choise of treatment of 15 Ans (clipping or coiling) and this decision was confirmed during the treatment procedures. In 9 Ans, CTA provided information similar to DSA while in 5 cases DSA was better. In 3 cases was not performed because CTA findings were considered efficient. Conclusion: CTA is a very useful modality in the preoperative evaluation of brain aneurysms and can provide essential information for the choise of treatment. providing an update of current c1inical applications in the assessment of congenital and acquired cardiovascular disease as weil as at providing an update in some new developments which will direct this field of MR in the near future. 945 Acquired heart disease C.B. Higgins; San Franeiseo, CA/USA After years of R & D works, large f1at panel detectors (FPD) developers appear to be ready for starting the commercial step. Advocated advantages are a productivity improvements expected for faster exams, from wider exposure latitude and ease of operations, and from the electronic transport, storage and retrieval of images files in a PACS or teleradiology environment. Finally, digitized images are especially subject to protocols for procedures and to sophisticated post processing developments including automatie detection of abnormalities. Selenium or amorphous Silicium technologies allowed to make full size detector in one piece. Current size and resolution are roughly 40 x 40 cms, 2500 x 2500 x 14 bits and 3.5 1 p/mm. Static imaging is the current initial purpose for the short term future (1998) (1999) including high resolution smaller detectors for mammography. Dynamic imaging will be the following step (2002) (2003) . Today, clinical tests using Selenium FPD are very promising in spite of a lower spatial resolution compared to film; their dynamic is higher and should result in enhanced diagnosis. Less clinical tests using amorphous Silicium sensors are available, but are also promissing. Finally, large FPD seem accurate for an efficient ciinical use; obviously these preliminaries have to be much deeper confirmed in larger scale applications, including economical concerns. lt would be an essential step for PACS and teleradiology development. RoomA MRI ofthe heart has been conducted for more than fifteen years. Initially, it was employed for depiction of cardiovascular pathoanatomy and has been used most frequently for the following diagnoses: thoracic aortic disease; constrictive pericarditis; cardiac and paracardiac masses; right ventricular dysplasia, and congenital heart disease. In valvular heart disease, MRI can be used to identify the presence of stenosis or regurgitation, volume of regurgitation, and ventricular volumes and mass. Cine MRI and echoplanar MRI are used to precisely quantify ventricular volumes, mass and function. Cine MRI identifies valvular regurgitation and stenosis. Velocity-encoded cine MRI provides measurement of blood flow and can be used to quantify the volume of valvular regurgitation. In recent years, interest has focused upon the possibility of using MRI as a comprehensive imaging modality for ischemic heart disease by assessing regional ventricular function with eine MRI and perfusion by monitoring the first pass kinetics of MR contrast media. Additionally, coronary morphology and function are being addressed using magnetic resonance angiography and breath hold velocity-encoded eine MRI. The evaluation of congenital heart disease is one of the established indications for magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. Although the number of congenital cardiovascular abnormalities may be Iimited in general hospitals, the patient load is steadily increasing due to improved surgical methods. Therefore, MR imaging may playa pivotal role in the presurgical evaluation, but also during the follow-up of patients over many years. Established imaging protocols are now available to assess cardiac anatomy, function and large vessel f1ow. Spin-echo sequences are still of great value to assess morphological abnormalities of the heart and great vessels, especially to depict extracardiac anatomy and postsurgical conduits. Gradient-echo sequences help to identify flow alterations across condults, stenoses and other valvular problems. Gadolinium-enhanced MR angiography is useful to assess vascular bypasses and other large vessel abnormalities. Breath-held MR fast gradient-echo sequences are now routinely applied to study ventricular function. In the same imaging session right and left ventricular funclion can be measured wilh high accuracy and reproducibility. Especially, right ventricular function is difficult to evaluate with other imaging techniques, thereby providing MR imaging a great advantage over echocardiography. In addltion, to these anatomie and functional MR methods, MR allows also the measurement of valvular and large vessel flow by using MR flow mapping. MR flow mapping is highly accurate to measure intracardiac and large vessel f1ow, both in terms of velocity and flow volume. The integrated use of spinecho, gradient-echo, MR angiography and flow mapping provide a comprehensive tool 10 assess most aspecls of congenilal cardiovascular disease. In this presentation the clinical indications for these MR techniques will discussed and iIIustrated for common cardiovascular abnormalilies. 947 New developments G.K. von Schullhess; Zur/eh/CH The use of magnetic resonance (MR) applications for evaluating the cardiovascular system is rapidly evolving, so that radiologists and other physicians have to acquaint themselves with current state-of-the-art developments in order to define their position and how they will incorporate these new applications in their daily practice. The symposium aims at Cardiac MRI may finally be on the verge of becoming clinically relevant. Powerful gradient systems with optimized coils for cardiac imaging are now being installed at selected sites. This hardware will permit even faster and higher resolution data acquisition than the existing systems, however it carries MR imaging to the limits of physiological tolerance. While imaging of motion and flow has been an established MR technique, imaging of myocardial perfusion and of the coronaries ts still in development. Resolution and speed are available to perform myocardial perfusion imaging, but because of the lack of ideal contrast media, perfusion in MR can only be measured using bolus tracking lechniques. Data analysis with this technique is cumbersome and larger scale studies demonstrating that MR is superior to nuclear medicine techniques are not yet available. Coronary artery imag ing has been attempted by many groups but up till now the MR scanners were incapable of providing fast enough high resolution imaging to produce high quality coronary artery images. The new scanners possibly in conjunction with intravascular contrast agents may be the development needed to finally provide diagnostic MR coronary angiograms in rout ine investigations . In summary, there are good reasons to believe that the decade of cardiac MR has started. 948 Myocardial perfusion and function D. Revel , P. Croisille, M. Janier; LyonlF When studying different aspects of myocardial physiology and pathophysiology such as ischemic coronary artery disease, myocardial perfusion and left ventricular myocardial wall function should be assessed. Magnetic resonance imaging allows to study myocardial perfusion using ultrafast image acquisition combined with the iv. administration of paramagnetic contrast media, and to assess left ventricular local wall motion by different approaches such as breath-hold eine MRI, cine-myocardial tagg ing or MR velocity-encoding. Futhermore, myocardial perfusion as weil as myocardial function could be assessed at rest and during stress condi tions usually induced by pharmacological means. These different approaches will be presented and the ir clinical use for the diagnosis of coronary artery disease will be discussed on the basis of the existing c1inical data .  Purpose: A c1inical study was performed to assess prospectively the diagnostie value of CT and MRI for response evaluation in patients with masses of the gastro-esophageal junction (GEJ) and the stomach during neoadjuvant chemotherapy (CTx). Methods and Materials: 30 patients with advanced masses of the GEJ and the stomaeh, scheduled for neoadjuvant CTx were studied. CT examinations were done using spiral technique, MRI examinations were performed on a 1.5 T unit. Both examinations were obtained pretherapeutically, after 1 and after 2 cycles of CTx. For response evaluation maximum diameters in the distal esophagus, the cardia, and in the stomach were determined and categorized according to WHO c1assification from 1981. All the results were compared to endosonography (EUS) and histomorphology (HIS). Results: Preoperative T-/N-staging was correct in 73%/55% (CT), 78%/62% (MRI), and 83%/63% (EUS), respectively. There was no statistically significant differenee in response evaluation using CT or MRI. with diseases of the kidney (n =78), the shoulder (n =122), the spine (n = 105) and the cerebrum (n =96) were prospectively evaluated in four participating centers. All underwent c1inical evaluation, low-field and high-field MRI examination and surgical or follow-up confirmation of diagnosis. Clinical, histopathologie, high field and low field MRI diagnoses were recorded in standardized questionnaires that were centrally evaluated. ROC analysis assessed accuracy of MRI and clinical diagnoses, rates of concordance of high and low field MRI diagnosis were calculated. Results: We found no statistically relevant difference in high field MRI diagnosis compared to low field MRI diagnostic accuracy measured by clinical or surgical goldstandard in three of the four regions examined; in cerebral examinations there was a small yet significant advantage of the high field systems (p = 0.01). Conclusion: We conclude that compared to clinical and surgical goldstandard an open low field scanner is able to achieve comparable diagnostic accuracy compared to high field scanners at lower costs and greater patient comfort. Limitations due to field strength seem to be relevant only in a very small number of cases that warrant high field examination. 14:00 (7) or by incorrect contrast timing (2). The infradiaphragmatic aorta and ist rnajor branches could be clearly depicted. Vascular deviations Iike abberant right hepatic arteries or accessorial renal arteries were detected reliably. Merely small vessels have been visible better with conventional angiography. However, delineation of the portal vein and the hepatic veins was better in MRA in 71% of the cases compared with conventional angiography. Conclusion: Breath-hold ultrafast gadolinium-enhanced dual-phase 3D MRA provides consistent high-quality images of the abdominal vessels. Due to ist high accuracy and reliability this non-invasive diagnostic tool seems to be able to replace conventional angiography in most cases. Purpose: To assess the value of the DPI and vascular pattern as measured with signal enhanced color Doppler ultrasound in the differential diagnosis of malignant focal liver lesions. Methods and Materials: Doppler Perfusion Index (ratio of hepatic arterial flow to totalliver blood flow) were measured in 37 patients with histologically and c1inically proven malignant focal liver lesions (13 hepatocellular carcinoma, 6 multiple and 13 singular metastases, 5 lymphoma). Additionally signal enhanced studies were performed to assess intra-and peritumoral perfusion pattern of the lesion. The authors compared the diagnostic effectiveness of spiral CT and colorDoppler after contrast in the identification of residual tumoral tissue in hepatocarcinomas treated with local percutaneous therapy (alcoolization and RITA). In 30 nodules of hepatocarcinoma (2-10 cm), 19 underwent radiofrequency, 11 alcoolization: all the patients were examined before and after therapy with spiral CT and colorPowerDoppler. CT scans were performed with volumetrie dual phase technique (4/6 mi/sec of iodinated contrast agent, 150 ml of volume). After baseline colorDoppler, it was injected contrast agent Levovist (300 mg/mi), to improve intratumoral small vessels depiction increasing colorDoppler signal. In CT examination, 9 nodules showed pathological uptake in early acquisition according with residual malignancy. At colorDoppler with Levovist, in 6 lesions, presence of vascular signal, not evident to the baseline examination, suggested cancer persistence. In 3 lesions, it was founded CT pathological enhancement, but avascularity at colorDoppler after centrast. Remaining nodules confirmed the therapeutic effect both in CT and colorDoppler after Levovis!. Although colorDoppler after Levovist constitued an optimal guide for following percutaneous treatments, spiral CT demonstrated, in our experience, superior diagnostic value in the identification of residual tumor tissue. 14:35 x 1001 was calculated for each lesion. According to the PRSIL, lesions were c1assified as type 1 (PRSIL 0-33%), type 2 (PRSIL 34-66%) and type 3 (PRSIL 67-100%). Bioptic sampie were evaluated regarding histologie structure and pattern and degree of SPIO particle uptake. Degree of SPIO particles uptake in the HCCs was scored: Grade 1 (no uptake), Grade 2 (uptake lower than the surrounding liver), Grade 3 (uptake equal to the surrounding liver). Results: the mean lesion PSIL after SPIO was 20% (sd = 18.4) while the Iiver PSIL was 59% (sd = 10.3) (p < 0.001). The uptake of SPIO partieIes observed on histologie seelion was scored (11 Grade 1, 7 Grade 2 and 3 Grade 3). A elose correlalion was found between PRSIL type and partieIes uptake Grade. Three type 3 lesions demonstrated a grade 3 uptake. In these lesions a homogeneous tubular histologie structure was found and SPIO partieIes were localized mainly inside the neoplastic hepatocytes. Endothelium cells demonstrated some degree of particles uptake. Seven type 2 lesions showed mixed pattern of uptake with grade 1 and grade 3 areas. However grade 3 areas always showed a tubular histologie structure. Grade 1 had a solid pattern. None of the eleven type 1 lesions with grade 1 uptake showed areas of tubular histologie pallern. Conclusion: When a diagnosis of HCC is being made, it is important to detect distant metastases as treatment might change, although it seems there is no significant influence in survival. Conclusion: IVUS demonstrates that stent underexpansion is a common phenomenon leading to recurrence of symptoms in aortic and iliac disease. Purpose: To compare the visualization of coronary calcifications between the EBT system and a new multislice/multirow-detector prototype. Methods and Materials: We examined 30 patients with coronary heart disease. The patients underwent CT examinations for detection of coronary calcifications. All examinations were performed on a multi-slice scanner (multirow-detector system) prototype ("Somatom Plus 4 VZ", Siemens) and an EBT system. Consent was obained from all patients. The images were analyzed by three readers -experienced in heart imaging -in consensus. Results: There were no significant differences between the two systems concerning the c1inical results. This was valid on the one hand for the qualitative evaluation, at the other hand for the quantitative analysis. Furthermore, no significant differences were found regarding the overall image quality of both systems. Conclusion: In this preliminary study no significant differences were found concerning the visualization of coronary calcifications between a multislice/multirow detector-prototype and a conventional EBT system. Purpose: Ta evaluate the use of MR imaging in the diagnosis and characterization of isolated gluteus muscle tears as a source of hip pain. Methods and Materials: 16 patients (12 f, 4 m, aged 48-79 years, mean age: 65 years). who presented with chronic hip pain and MRI findings of isolated gluteus medius muscle tears in the hip comprised the study group. The cases were collected over an 18 month period and were retrospectively analyzed. MR images were evaluated for the presence of gluteus museie tears or distal tendon rupture and edema in the region of the greater trochanter. Clinical correlation was obtained in all of the patients. Patients with history of recent local steriod injection were excluded from the study group. Results: 19 museies tears were identified in 16 patients. 13 patients showed an isolated tear of the gluteus medius museie. In 3 patients a tear of both the gluteus medius and minimus museies were identified. MR imaging features of the gluteus muscle tears include discontinuity of the muscle fibres at the insertion on the greater trochanter. On T2W images high signal fluid Iike intensity is seen within and around the museie tears. Conclusion: MRI is useful in detecting and characterizing isolated tears of the gluteus muscles. In patients with therapy resistant chronic hip pain MRI can help to differentiate between patients with gluteus muscle tears or trochanteric bursitis. Purpose: One of the most common congenital osseous disorder is the hip dysplasia leaded to secondary caxarthrosis in middle age. The arthroplasty must be often implanted very early. The very good room orientation in the changed anatomic relations is very important for a surgeon. The knowledge of the really size of the acetabulum and the thickness of the acetabular bottom helps to choose the right size of the arthroplasty components. Methods and Materials: 50 patient with the dysplastic hip undergone the computed tomography with the three-dimensional SSD reconstruction before the arthroplasty. The axial (not a helical) protocol was used with the collimation 2.5 mm. The reconstruction were performed with the volume -treshold rendering. The acetabulum was reconstructed separately from femur too. Results: The joints were divided in four groups: normal, dysplasia in situ, subluxation and luxation. We used 47 normal iliac bone anatomic preparations as a comparative group. Conclusion: Three dimensional CT of the dysplastic hip takes the very important information to surgeon and helps to choose the best size of the prosthesis and the optimal operation method. Purpose: To demonstrate the appearance of the acetabular labrum with magnetic resonance arthrography (MRA) with gross anatomic correlation in cadavers and surgical correlation in patients. Methods and Materials: MRA was performed in 6 cadaveric hip joints and 40 patients who underwent subsequent arthrotomy of the hip. The MRA examination consisted of a T1-weighted 3D gradient-echo sequence in the coronal and sagittal oblique plane after the intraarticular injection of a 2 mmollL solution of gadopentate dimeglumine. The normal and pathologic appearance of the acetabular labrum was assessed, and the labra were evaluated on the basis of morphology, signal intensity, presence of a tear, and attachment to the acetabulum. MRA findings were correlated with anatomic sections of the cadavers and surgical results in patients. Results: MRA images allowed visualization of the normal labrum which was of triangular shape and of homogenous low signal intensity. The sensitivity for detection of labrallesions with MRA in the patient study was 91%, the accuracy 88%, and the specificity 71%. Conelusion: The normal labrum is triangular in shape and there is no normal sulcus between the labrum and the acetabular articular cartilage. MRA allows excellent assessment of the normal and pathologic acetabular labrum. Purpose: To evaluate the rate of false-negative and false-positive plain radiography examinations of the sacro-i1iac joints, compared to C'T, Methods and Materials: In 1465 CT examinations of the sacro-iliac joints 914 patients had been examined also with plain radiography. The radiology reports from the radiography examinations were compared to the reports from the CT examinations. Results: Clear signs of sacro-ileitis were observed in 11.8% of the radiography examinations, equivocal changes in 29.4%. 58.8% of the examinations were normal, or with mild degenerative changes. In patients with radiographic sacro-ileitis, CT confirmed bilateral or unilateral sacro-ileitis in only 63.9%, with plain radiography thus having 36.1% false-positive examinations. On the other hand, in patients with normal plain radiography 18.7% false-negative examinations were found when comparing to CT, with an additional 13.7% CT examinations showing equivocal changes, totally 32.4% false-negative radiography examinations. Conelusion: The high rates of false-negative and also false-positive examinations of conventional radiography compared to CT lead to the recommendation that plain radiography not be used for evaluation of sacro-ileitis, as it has a low c1inical utility. To avoid delayed diagnosis CT should be used, being more cost-effective. In cases of coccygodynia pain may last for years, defying treatment. Analysing the mechanism of coccygeal fracture we came to opinion that not only coccygeal bone injures, causing vertebra dislocation, but sacrococcygeal joint (SCJ) too. And very rarely the patology of SCJ one can see X-ray photos of coccyx. Traditional X-ray image does not give full information about volumentrical state of coccix and surrounding tissues. CT-examination was performed in order to confirm the SCJ's injury of 30 patients with coccygeals fracture. In the process the state of bone structure of coccyx, ligamentous apparatus and surrounding soft tissues was assessed. The results of examinations showed than all patients've got changes in SCJ, and surrounding tissues of different extent. Incomplete dislocations of SCJ, narrowings of inter articular space, osteophytes, induration and heterogeneity of surrounding tissues were determined. One main find that extent of changes is proportional to the distance back in time-talking of traumas of long standing. All patients had been operated, and subsequent morphologie examinations of removed coccygeal bones confirmed changes had been rerealed by C'I. Therely, all coccygeal fractures are accopanied by SCJ's injury and coccygectomy should be carried out, not simple resection of fractured fragment, which does not relieve the source of pain in the region of SCJ. Purpose of apophyseal facet joint HRCT investigations was on one hand to increase the sensitivity of detection, and on the other hand to find specific changes, characteristic enough to give help in differential diagnostic complex elinico-radiological evaluation. Methods of conventional film, radionuclid imaging and high resolution bone algorythm CT was compared in context of clinical history, actual clinical status and radiological investigations of other organs (gastrointestinal tract, CT and selective enterography, lung radiography and HRCT). Patients suffering in Crohn's disease, sprue syndrome, ulcerative colitis, malabsorbtion, seronegative spondartritis and DISH syndrome were compared. Results of sensitivity in case of HRCT are highly significant versus conventional radiography in detecting articular erosions and new bone formation/ligamentar calcification showed independent on actual inflammatory activity and disease duration. There is some diagnose related positive correlation between localisation and symptome-combination of HRCT findings in the particular diseases of different aetiology. Conelusion of the study suggests the much higher sensitivity of HRCT versus plain film and better, than nuelear medicine bone scans, in the later periodes of the disease. A differential diagnostic impact in the clinical evaluation seems to be helpful. .68-.85). Interobserver agreement for vIa scintigraphy was 56% (range: angiography as a final test had higher mortality, but some were cheaper. The strategy which uses perfusion-ventilation scintigraphy, ultrasonography and angiography was the best overall, while the strategy using perfusion scintigraphy, spiral CT and angiography had similar mortality, however, at significantly higher costs. Other strategies were either too expensive or resulted in unacceptable mortality. Conclusion: The optimal diagnostic strategy should include pulmonary angiography. The use of lung scintigraphy and ultrasonography reduces the number of patients requiring angiography by 40-50% and is costeffective. A strategy which uses perfusion scintigraphy and spiral CT prior to angiography yields similar outcome, but at greatly increased costs. Purpose: To evaluate the role of Sliding-thin-slab-MIP (STS-MIP) in diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE) with CT-Angiography (SCTA The server can be accessed by any hospital over the Web and will be composed by the following modules: web interface for images visual lsation , parallel library of 3D image process ing functions, teleradiology tool , PACS system capable of stor ing full multimedia patient records . VRML and JAVA will be used for 3D rendering. The presentation is aimed to report the user requirement analysis, based on a survey performed among 120 european radiologists, and to describe the first prototype of the system available on the web. 14:50 Results: Digital are viewed and stored in an IMACsystem. A conventional RIS has been updated with functions appropriate for image management and Intranet distribution . By adding a fast www server to the system , images from the last 1-2 months are available ant any computer in the hospital. We have developed a simple and fast access to relevant information through an WWW-RISinterface. During the last 8 month s over 17000 connections to the main URL at our ser ver has been made and many more reports and images retrieved. We have added extended funetionality as simple messaging system , archive control , and remote printing via the www browser. Conelusion: Our presentation shows that the WWW technology gives a low-cost, high availability access to radiology data. Systems open to integration can easily be connected to the technoJogy thus extend ing the benefits of digital infor mation management beyond what hitherto has been seen.  Methods and Materials: A requirement for a filmless radiology department is the possibility to provide access to the digital images for referring physicians. In our institut ion, we used a web-based system to integrate radiological reports and image information in a hypertext documen t. All computed radiographs and a seleetion of CT and MR images are sent to the web-server by the reporting radiologist. Images are eonverted to JPEG with lossy compression by the factor of 1:20 to 1:50. Reports are exported trom the radiology information system to the web-server as soon as they become available . Results: During the last 6 months, we evaluated our system in the medical and surgical departments of our hospital. We observed an average access to 150 images and reports per day and a daily transfer volume of 5 MB. The advantages of the system were platform independance, central admin istration and relat ively low requirements for bandw idth and hardware on the e1ient side. Only standardized data formats and nelworking protocols like DICOM , HTML and JPEG were used . Conelusion: Web-based information systems are very weil suited for distribution of reports and images in a clinical environment. Purpose: To examine and compare the resolution properties of three common compression algorithms (JPEG , wavelet and fractal ) on digital radiographie images using the Modulation Transfer Function (MTF) . Methods and Materials: A nuelear med icine point source was used as the image source and its image was compressed by the three methods at various ratios with an increment of 40:1. The Point Spread Function (PSF) was generated in Mallab 5.0 by analysisng the pixel values along a direction through the centre of the point source on each image. The MTF was then calculated by the Four ier transform of the PSF. All the compressed images in the three formats were first compared with the uncompressed image using the MTF 's. Then the images compressed at the same ratios were compared with each other. Results: Wavelet compression shows less degredation compared to JPEG and fractal techniques and retains more information on the original image. The greatest degredatipon was seen in the fractal compression. Conclusion: Although JPEG compression is the currently accepted compresion format for DICOM 3.0 standard our results using objective criteria show that wavelet compression is the best method resulting in the least data loss of the methods studied. Results: The entire maxillo-mandibular bone, teeth, dental pulp and the content of the mandibular canal were weil depicted. Patients with pulpitis demonstrate bone marrow edema in the periapical region. Dentigerous cysts and their relation to the surrounding structures are clearly shown. After contrast media application marked enhancement of the dental pulp can be demonstrated. Conclusion: Dental MRT promises to provide a tool for visualization of the jaws and detection of dental diseases using magnetic resonance imaging. 14:00-15:30 Purpose: Our goal was to assess the potential advantage of fat suppression sequences in the MR diagnosis of mandibular osteonecrosis following high-dose radiotherapy. Methods and Materials: Sixty patients with oral and pharyngeal tumors who received 50-70 Gy radiation therapy were included in a prospective study. The MR study was performed in axial and parasagittal planes with a 1.0 T system. Conventional SE T1-w and PD-T2-w images, STIR and fat saturation SE T1-w images were obtained in all patients. Some lesions detected with MR imaging were proven by means of biopsy or surgically excised specimens. Results: Among the 60 patients investigated 14 (23.3%) has revealed alteration of mandibular MR signal. We have found three fat saturation patterns: 1) cleary demarcated variable signal intensity [related to ischaemia with residual fat-Iike areas), 2) poorly delimited intermediate to high signal [related to oedema) and 3) poorly or well-delimited low signal intensity [related to marrow replacement). In 2 cases the STIR sequence has revealed inhomogeneous zones of high signal scarcely visible with the conventional SE sequences. In 6 cases (10%) with type 2 and type 3 appearance the biopsy has confirmed the presence of mandibular necrosis. Six months after the irradiation 4 cases (6.7%) with type 1 appearance have shown the regression of the signal alteration. Conclusion: In our experience fat suppressed MR imaging has permitted to improve sensitivity in detection of mandibular bone radioiesion and has been useful to document normalization during follow-up. 14:10 Purpose: To evaluate alternative treatment regimen e.g. neutron therapy determination of treatment efficacy as weil as side effe.cts is irnportant, The aim of this study was to evaluate wet.her densl~~try by CT at regions of interest (ROls) can contribute to objective radiation induced flbrosis after combined photon/neutron therapy. Methods and Materials: In the course of their follow-up period (median 45 months) 12 patients with malignant salivary gland tumours who had postoperatively received neutron (1/12) or photon/neutron therapy (11/12) were examined by means of CT densimetry on 3 representative scans in the area of radiotherapy. In 3 ROls in subcutaneous fatty tissue the density at the irradiated and non-irradiated side was determined and correlated with the clinical degree of fibrosis. Results: All CT measurements showed higher density levels on the irradiated side than on the non-irradiated side. The median density on the irradiated side was -57.7 ± 4.7 HU and on the non-irradiated side -69.4 ± 5.8 HU (p =0.002). Conelusion: With the described method it is possible to graduate radiation induced subcutaneous fibrosis in correlation to the c1inical fibrosis degree. Especially slight changes can be characterised. In the examined patients subcutaneous fibroses after photon/neutron therapy were moderate.  Methods and Materials: 46 volonteers (age = 40.6 ± 3.6) were studied (26-w; 20-m) at "Toshiba-SSH-140A" with linear 5.0 and 7.5 Mhz transducers in standart and color doppler variants (24 cases). In standart sonography determined size, form and structure of glands. In color doppler sonography measured V max , V min ' resistive index (RI) of salivary glands arterial vessels. Results: Parotid glands had vertical size -60.4 ± 1.6 mm, transverse -23.6 ± 1.6 mm, area-9.6 ± 1.3 cm 2 ; submandibular gland: vertical -19.7 ± 1.4 mm, longitudinal -27.3 ± 1.6 mm, area-5.2 ± 1.5 cm 2 . Parotis in all cases had oval form, submandibular gland had various forms: round in 60 (65.2%), oval -18 (19.6%), trigonal -8 (8.7%) and irregular in 6 (6.5%) cases. Parotid glands had c1ear contours in 78 (80.4%) and unclear -18 (19.6%) cases, submandibular gland, accordingly, in 18 (19.6%) and 78 (80.4%) cases. Regular borders of parotid gland were in 81 (88.0%) and irregular -11 (12.0%) cases, submandibular gland, accordingly, in 35 (38.0%) and 57 (62.0%) cases. Parolid capsule determined in 80 (87.0%) cases, while in submandibular gland non of them. Parotid structure was homogeneous in 85 (92.4%) cases, parenchyma of submandibular gland was homogeneous in 52 (56.5%) cases. In parotid gland V max = 22.7 ± 3.6 cm/c, V min = 5.2 ± 0.4 cm/c, RI = 0.77 ± 0.05; in submandibular gland V max = 37.5 ± 4.1 cm/c, V min =9.7 ± 1.2 cm/c, RI =0.74 ± 0.04. In facial artery was more high speed in olderly and men up to 30 year. Conelusion: Standart and color doppler sonography permit determine different parameters of normal salivary glands, which allowed different pathological features. Results: Separate using of imaging method did not show full volume of pathologie mass. Complex investigation revealed lymphadenitis in 6 patients, sialadenitis (6).154 patients with salivary mass were operated, 18 had fine needle aspiration biopsy for diagnosis. We find 155 tumors of parotid (131) and submandibular (24) salivary glands, 17 cysts (11 and 6). Sonography, CT and MRI revealed all tumors. Symptomatic pattern had only lipomas (10) in sonography and CT-densitometry (-108.3 ± 7.8 H). Mean density of pleomorphic adenomas was in 2-3 times higher (29.6 ± 4.2 H) than surrounding parenchyma, mean tumor size was in parotid gland 2.9 ± 0.9 cm, and 3.6 ± 1.3 cm in submandibular gland. In standard sonography pleomorphic adenoma have oval or roundshape form with clear contours and homogenous hypoechoic structure. Intermediate vascular grade (+ and ++) and basketlike pattern was in 32 benign tumors. Peak systolic velocity was less 50.0 cm/s (M =23.0 ± 4.5). In salivary glands mean intratumour velocity was characteristic for benign tumors. MRI had same results as CT. Complex using of sonography and CT allowed localized mass in gland in 181 of 184 (98.4%) patients. Conelusion: Sonography is the first imaging method in investigation of patients with salivary gland tumor, show structure and character of tumor vascularisation. Complex usage of CT and sonography had practically 100% accuracy in tumor determination. Results: The mean transcutaneous oxygen pressure before PTA was 32 ± 24 mm Hg in supine position and 29 ± 21 before angiography. Immediately after PTA an increase to 34 ± 20 was noted, whereas a significant decrease to 17 ± 17 in the control group appeared (p < 0.05). Twentyfour hours after PTA tCp02 was 37 ± 20 and 23 ± 19 for the angios. Six weeks after treatment a further significant increase to 45 ± 20 in the PTA group was noted. The control group showed a value of 34 ± 21. Conclusion: PTA improves the microcirculation of the foot. Diagnostic angiography decreases the microcirciulation, probably due to effects of the iodinated contrast material. 14:25 lower Iimb ischaemia were managed over aperiod of 14 months. Twenty -four had native artery occlussion, !wo had a prosthetic graft trombosis and the one patient had post -catheterization thrombosis. The symptoms were disabling c1audication in 14 pts and critical ischaemia in 13 pts. Initially two bolus doses of 5 mg rtPA were delivered at the proximal part of thrombus over aperiod of 20 min, and subsequently one or two additional boluses of 5 mg rtPA were delivered through a catheter with multiple side-holes. If underlying stenosis were detected, baloon angioplasty with stenting when neccesary was perfomed. Results: Succesful recanalization was achieved in 23 pts (85,1%) Sixteen of these were further treated by PTA alone (6pts) or with stenting (10 pts) and 5 required an operation. None of the above pts experienced a major or minor amputation within the first 30 days. Follow -up using Colour -Doppler for aperiod up to 2 years, showed patency in 16 recanalized native arteries and 4 grafts. Therewere two late amputations. Conclusion: Transcatheter -Thrombolysis with high -dose bolus rtPA seems to be a safe and effective therapeutic method in pts with lower -limb ischaemia.  Methods and Materials: 24 Patients who had a stenosis or occlus ion measuring more than 5 cm in length in the superficial femoral artery or a restenosis underwent endoluminal irradiation. By individual caleulation , an isodose of 14 Gy was applied to the vessel wall using a Ir-192-HDR brachytherapie uni!. Results: In a mean follw up of 15 months we found a eumulative pateney rate of 60%. These results are belter than the expeeted patency rates in this patient seleetion, but differ significantly from those reported with irradiation and stent implanta tion . This is in our opinion related to the important role of constrictive arterial remodeling. Conclusion: Endovaseular irradiation is a safe and brief procedu re. Our results with regard to preventing restenosis seeondary to noeintimal hyperplasia were promising , but there seems to be an importent role of eonstrietive arterial remodeling . Statistical methods were chi2 test and mean comparison for clearance evolution (2.5 years). Results: Restenosis rate was 25% in the first year. Two groups were significantly different (p = 0.03): -A group "renal function salvage" (n = 26) corresponds to bilateral stenosis or solitary kidney stenosis (p = 0.01). The stabilized or improved rate is 74% at the end of follow-up. -The other group "renal function preservation" (n = 53) corresponds to unilateral stenosis (p = 0.01). The improved or stabilized rate is 66% and current data show a stabilization during the firt two years and a progressive deterioration after. When CC exceeds 30 ml/min before procedure, patients profil from angioplasty (stabilized or improved rate 74%). At the opposite those with CC < 15 ml/min have poor results, requiring dialysis, half of them because of contrast toxicity. If clearance is between 15 and 30 ml/min, results are ambigous (improved or stabilized 57%). Conelusion: Angioplasty seems to be useful in the case of renal function salvage or when initial CC exceeds 30 ml/min in the case of renal function preservation. depend on the detection of pathology and on the experience of the radiologists especially for the youngest ( The purpose of this prospective study is to assess the influence of temperature of the contrast medium used for micturating cystourethrography (MCUG) on the frequency of detection of reflux. Methods and Materials: We performed MCUG on 1795 consecutive children (mean age 3.5 + 1.5 years) for possible presence of vesicoureteral reflux using contrast material of room temperature (group 1). Group 2 included 1301 consecutive children (mean age 3.1 + 1.2 years) which received warmed contrast material at body temperature. The most common clinical indication for MCUG was urinary tract infection for both groups. We compared the results regarding the frequency of reflux in the two groups using the x 2 analysis. Results: Reflux was detected in 189 children in the first group (11%) and in 231 children in the second group (17.8%). The difference in the frequency of reflux between the two groups was statistically significant (p = 0.000001). Conelusion: The temperature of contrast material may influence the frequency of detected reflux in children undergoing MCUG. Purpose: Traditionally several ionizing radiation methods are involved in pediatric urogenital tract imaging. In order to reduce irradiation and simplify the work-up, we wanted to evaluate whether MRI could replace the traditional methods. Methods and Materials: 30 patients (aged 2 weeks-8 years, mean 1.9 years) with known or suspected urogenital pathology were examined with MR urography. The technique was based on rapid spin echo (T1 and T2W TSE and single-shot TSE) and rapid gradient echo (Dynamic multislice TFE after Gadolinium DTPA) sequences. The children were Iightly sedated and/or fixed with elastic bands. Comparison with US, urography, CT urography and renal dynamic scintigraphy were made. Results: About 20% of the examinations were insufficiently performed mainly due to patient movement. Immobilization was best preserved in infants or children above 5 years of age. The majority of the examinations performed were of excellent quality. Detailed information of morphology and function were achieved, with good correlation between the MRI-and scintigraphy functional studies. Important additional informations were obtained. Conelusion: MR Urography can easily and rapidly be performed in pediatric patients. MRI has the potential of giving accurate morphologic and functional informations of the urogenital tract. This is particulary important in infants with congenital anomalies, where high image quality and low radiation exposure are preferred. Methods and Materials: In 15 children, aged 4 weeks to 13.8 years, GMRU was performed after an intravenous injection of Gd-DTPA and low dose Furosemide. Coronal 3D-gradient-echoimages and maximumintensity projections were obtained 5 to 30 minutes post injection in a 1.5 T Gyroscan ACS-NT scanner. None of the children were sedated. Respiratory triggering was used. Results: GMRU showed anormal upper urinary tract in two, horseshoekidney in two, pelviureteric junction obstruction in three, a ureteral stenosis in one, duplicating collecting system in two, unilateral megaureter in two, orthoptic ureterocoele in one, a residual ectopic distal ureter in one, and postoperative changes in one children. Complete visualization of the ureter, including the ureterovesical junction, was successful in 24 of 30 ureters. The collecting system was visible in all cases, except two nearly functionless kidneys, one multicystic kidney and one very small dysplastic kidney. Conclusion: GMRU is in particularly useful in the assessment of upper urinary tract abnormalities associated with non-dilated collecting systems and ureters. The investigation carry out on the: sonography -"Aloka" SSD1100; CT -"Somatom" "Simens"; MRI -"Toshiba" 50A. A clinicopatological grouping which determined the extent of tumor at the time of diagnosis and at surgery was utilized in the NWTS-3. 2), arachnoidalcyst (n =1), holoprosencephaly (n =1), pineal teratoma (n = 1)). Conclusion: Ultrafast fetal MRI is highly diagnostic in the evaluation of complex brain pathologies. In addition, brain maturation can be evaluated. MRI is indicated where ultrasound is ambiguous or impaired, e.g. maternal obesity. MRI is investigator-independent. Conclusion: This study demonstrates the accuracy of MR imaging in the detection of brain lesions of toxoplasmosis and in the evaluation of response to therapy. spin echo images, mimicking multiple sclerosis (10 patients); multiple supratentorial und infratentorial brain lesions, mimicking metastases (8 patients); solitary intraaxial mass, mimicking high grade astrocytoma (2 patients); solitary extraaxial mass, mimicking meningioma (1 patient); leptomeningeal enhancement (8 patients). Conclusion: Neurological involvement is a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with sarcoidosis. MRI shows a wide spectrum of brain abnormalities associated with neurosarcoidosis. These findings however, are not specific for sarcoidosis and one must consider appropriate clinical circumstances in arriving at the diagnosis. In selected cases with isolated brain involvement, meningeal or cerebral biopsy may be required.  Purpose: To evaluate MR patterns in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Methods and Materials: We examined 15 patients with ALS as weil as 15 age matched healthy volunteers. All examinations were performed on a 1.5 T system (Philips ACS NT) with following sequences: transverse TSE dual echo, SE T1, FFE T2*, FLAIR 1, and FLAIR 2, sagittal TSE T2 and coronal FLAIR 1. The images were analyzed by agreement of 3 readers. Results: In a minority of the patients FLAIR 1 showed definite hyperintense signal changes in the precentral gyri. The volunteers revealed no signal changes. FLAIR was superior to TSE dual echo and FFE for changes attributed to ALS, whereby the stronger T2-contrast of FLAIR 1 was advantageous compared to FLAIR 2. Atrophy of the corpus callosum was seen in ALS patients exclusively. In few patients T2weighted TSE images showed low signal rims in the precentral gyri. Conclusion: Signal alterations in the pyramidal tracts in ALS can be seen earlier with FLAIR than with other sequences. In combination with the criteria "corpus callosum atrophy" and "Iow signal rim of the precentral gyrus" in T2-weighted TSE images, MR diagnosis of ALS will be more specific. Purpose: To study the incidence of dural enhancement in focal calvarial lesions studied with MR imaging. Methods and Materials: 185 patients with proven focal calvariallesions were studied with plain films and computed tomography, and 32 of them with contrast enhanced MR. The presence of dural enhancement, lts continuity and dural soft tissue mass were analyzed. Fisher's exact test was employed for statistical analysis. Results: 72.9% lesions were benign and 27.1 % were malignant. The 32 cases studied with enhanced-MRI were 9 hemangioma, 8 eosinophilic granuloma, 3 epidermoid cysts, 1 osteoma, 9 metastases and 2 primary intraosseous meningioma. Dural enhancement was observed in 16 patients (7 benign, 9 malignant) but not in the rest (14 benign, 2 malignant) (p = 0.01). One malignant lesion presented discontinuous enhancing dura with invasion. Pathologically, 6 cases presented dural invasion, with no statistical differences between patients with dural enhancement or without it. The non-tumoral cases of dural tail were attributed to dural inflammatory reaction secondary to compression changes. Conclusion: Dural enhancement is a nonspecific reaction present in calvarial lesions and do not necessarily represent invasion of the under-Iying duramater. Discontinuous changes and dural tumor are promising characteristics for identifying dural invasion. Purpose: Clinical studies report a rate of 5% and autopsy results a rate of 25% of brain involvement in sarcoidosis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the diagnosis of patients with neurosarcoidosis. Methods and Materials: The MRI brain scans of 22 patients with sarcoidosis were retrospectively reviewed, along with the clinical intormation that was provided in the request form. All patients had signs and symptoms referable to the head and were examined with gadolinium enhancement. Results: Cranial (facial) nerve paralysis was the most common clinical manifestation identified in 10 patients. A wide spectrum of MR findings was noted: Periventricular and white matter lesions on T 2W The purpose of the present course is to provide an overview of the diagnostic features of a variety of benign and malignant diseases occuring in the infrahyoid neck as seen on CT and MR images and to correlate the radiologic findings with the underlying pathologicanatomical changes. The initial discussion will briefly cover the normal spatial anatomy and the anatomic relationships between the different spaces. Specific diseases typically occuring in each anatomical space will be presented. A discussion of congenital or developmental lesions of the infrahyoid neck includes branchial c1eft cyst, thyroglossal duct cyst, venous malformations and Iymphangioma. The most important neoplastic lesions affecting the visceral space, namely squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx and hypopharynx will be discussed with emphasis on patterns of submucosal tumor spread and implications for TNM c1assification and treatment. Among the neoplasms affecting the carotid space and the posterior cervical space the following entities will be discussed: metastatic Iymphadenopathy from squamous cell carcinoma and lymphoma, neurogenic tumors, lipomas and paragangliomas. The inflammatory and infectious lesions presented in this course include cervical chain nodal inflammation, cellulitis, abscess and necrotizing fasciitis. 1065 B. Imaging of the face, suprahyoid region and temporal bone F. Veillon; Strasbourg/F The aim of this lecture is to emphasize the methods of reading the tumors and pseudotumours of the face and temporal bone. The problem considering alesion of the face is to answer with the results offered by CT (horizontal, frontal, sagittal) and MRI (T1 horizontal, T2 frontal, T1 horizontal, frontal with Gadolinium and FATSAT) to several questions: are the limits sharp of hazy, is there any disproportion between the volume of the lesion and the possible bony destructions, what is the topography of the tumour? This one has to be defined in 5 areas: how are the compartments of the sinonasal cavities, (from the nasal cavity to the sphenold sinus), the orbit (normal or not), how is the anterior part of the skull base (particularly the cribriform plate), how are the deep regions of the face, what about the fissure and canals of the face? Benign and malignant tumours of the face are then presented with the best way to lead to the right diagnosis. For the temporal bone tumours and pseudotumours the study with CT and MRI is different considering the ear cavities. For the external auditory meatus CT considers the integrity of the facial nerve, MRI demonstrating the possible extension to the middle cranial fossa above or the lateropharyngeal space below. to distinguish a partial lesion from a complete one using high contrast sequences. MRI gives also specific information about the bone and the associated soft tissue lesions; lesions of articular cartilage and underlying subchondral bone are weil depicted by MRI which shows the partial attachment of an osteochondral fragment or the presence of a loose body in the joint fluid. The synoviaI disorders, primitive and secondary are weil depicted by MRI. For the middle ear, CT allows to analyze the walls and content of the cavity, MRI in T1 with or without Gadolinium enhancement evaluates the structure of a mass, T2 analysing the adjacent middle and posterior cranial fossa. The bony labyrinth is easily analyzed with CT; T1 with and without Gadolinium demonstrates a possible extension of asolid mass in the labyrinth confirmed by a fluid T2 sequence in high resolution. Different kind of benign and malignant temporal bone tumours are then presented. The facial nerve must be analyzed considering not only its structure (Gadolinium enhancement) but above all its volume. To conclude: in face and temporal bone CT and MRI will be essential to lead to the right diagnosis (compared with histological material) but the most important part for the radiologist is to precisely analyze the lesion's extension. Cross-sectional imaging (US, CT and MRI) increasingly take over the diagnostic role of conventional radiological examinations in diseases of the GI-tract. Appendicitis, diverticulitis, Crohn's disease, abscesses of enteric origin, lymphoma, intussusception, small bowel obstruction are all primarily diagnosed by cross-sectional imaging. US is dynamic, non-invasive, inexpensive and well-accessible and as such often the initial imaging modality. Graded compression is necessary to compress or displace air-filled bowel and to approach the pathologie bowel closely, which allows the use of a high frequency transducer. Ultrasound has an excellent resolution, but requires expertise and is limited in obese patients. CT, especially spiral CT, is not hampered by bone, gas or obesity and is less operator-dependent than USo The resolution is constantly high in all parts of the abdomen. In most cases oral, rectal and intraveneous contrast media are administered. MRI has become the modality of choice in the diagnosis of perirectal abscesses and fistulae. Other applications of MRI in GI-tract disease, such as Crohn's disease and the staging of colorectal carcinoma, are under research. The shoulder has a very complex morphology and a spatial situation. Therefore, the imaging study of choice for the most frequent pathology in instability and impingement syndromes is that of MRI due to its high sensibility, specifity and multiplanar recostruction. In instability, only in the acute lesion is it possible to have a good rappresentation of the intra-articular structures due to the synovial effusion as a natural contrast. Whilst, in the chronic lesions, it is necessary to perform an arthroMR using the paramagnetic contrast. Therefore, it is possible to make an evaluation of the entity of the glenoid labrum tear together with a correct and c1ear diagnosis of the legamentous and capsular lesions. In the impingement syndrome, MRI is very useful as it enables the study of both tendons and bone structures in the three spatial planes with several kinds of sequences. As a rule, T1 and T2 weighled SE sequences are used 10 evidence tendon ruptures, floqistic processes and muscle hypotrophy. In addition STIR sequence is helpful in as much as it is a very sensitive test for partial tendon involvement and bone bruising. Sometimes, it is preferable to use arthroMR to study the pathology of the long head of the biceps tendon in the intrarticular space to identify the instability and degeneration of this tendon. In conclusion, the shoulder study by imaging, starting from Xrays, passing to ultrasounds, is completed in complex cases and in presurgical planning, by the selective use of MRI.  Knee pain is a c1inical condition primarily related to trauma and degenerative joint disease. A traumatic event involving the knee often determines particular c1inical pictures due to the anatomical and biomechanical complexity of the region. Meniscal tears, caused by an asynchronism between f1exo-extension and rotator movements of the knee, are weil studied on MRI which allows a differentiation of different types of meniscal lesions; on the sagittal scan plane both vertical lesions and horizontal ones are weil depicted. On SE T1-w images the meniscal tears show an higher signal intensity than the normal meniscus. MRI is also useful to identify the lesions causing anterior knee pain, as meniscal dysplasia, patellar luxation, synovial changes and tendinous disease. In acute injuries MRI allows an assessment of Iigamentous First of all we will consider paraphysiologic post-operative patterns, particularly as regards those signs that should be considered to be normal in recently transplanted patients; post-operative patterns will be examined with reference to the heart disease responsible for the transplantation. Following, we will examine, particularly as regards plain film patterns, most important post-operative complications in heart, pericardium, pulmonary circulation and lungs. As regards post-operative course, we will consider both subacute complications and heart and pulmonary circulation morphological changes. At last we will consider long-term complications due to immunosuppression, such as rare tumors and infections. Furthemore, present longer survivals, even after many years from the transpantation, bring up the problems due to the rapid development of atherosclerosis in transplanted coronary arteries. Physicians usually seek radiological assistance in order to confirm a suspected clinical diagnosis and plan the patient's further management. Sometimes radiological procedures refute the clinical impression and identify a completely unsuspected diagnosis. This may radically alter the proposed management plan (e.g. promote surgical rather than conservative treatment). Furthermore as new radiological investigations evolve, any displacement of existing radiological and other investigations can be assessed. All such research requires close co-operation with those clinical colleagues who refer patients for radiological investigations; only by asking them to record their diagnostic and therapeutic thinking at various stages of the diagnostic process can the necessary data be obtained. But these intermediate outcomes of diagnostic and therapeutic impact provide powerful evidence for radiologists who wish to prove the value of their contribution and to seek additional funding to expand their practice. New radiological strategies can then be promoted through the use of local or national guidelines and these can be reinforced at regular clinico-radiological meetings. Compliance with such guidelines provides another measure of physician's thinking. 1073 Diagnostic and therapeutic thinking A. Dixon will follow presenting how radiologists can have a strong diagnostic and therapeutic impact on their clinical colleagues in close cooperation. M. Hunink again will move to the concept of cost-effectiveness in radiology and its analysis that is measurement of the costs in monetary terms versus specific effective factors such as improved morbidity, mortality, quality of life, avoiding further tests, ecc. R. Dondelinger will conclude explaining how to write a tender for purchasing high cost equiments selecting criteria equally between technical considerations and capital and maintenance costs. 1072 Diagnostic test performance M.G.M. Hunink; Rotterdam/NL The performance of a diagnostic test in discriminating diseased from non-diseased patients is typically evaluated with sensitivity, specificity, and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. Ideally a prospective cohort study is performed in which the diagnostic performance of the "new" test is compared with a reference test ("gold standard"). The tests to be evaluated are generally performed in addition to the normal diagnostic workup. If sufficient papers are available of cohort series among which sensitivity and specificity pairs have been determined, a meta-analysis of these series may be helpful to systematically review, extract, and combine the data. The data are best combined in a summary ROC curve which adjusts for the different positivity criteria used by various authors. Using data on diagnostic test performance in the clinical setting requires transforming the sensitivity and specificity information, together with the prior probability, to post-test probabilities of disease conditional on the test result (predictive values). Alternatively, a prediction rule can be developed expressing the post-test probability of disease as function of the clinical variables and the test results. Radiology of the heart is an essential aspect of patient care following cardiac surgery. Plain film radiography is usually the first line of investigation to look for complications of chest drains cannulae and intubation. Other complications might include diagnosis of pneumothorax, lobar collapse and cardiac failure. Transoesophageal ultrasound, is used in the case of valve surgery to determine the integrity of the valve. Transthoracic echocardordiography is usually sufficient to diagnose pericardial effusion and major changes in cardiac function as weil as many valve abnormalities but can be difficult following surgery due to access. Computed tomography is useful for abnormalities of the aorta and lungs including pulmonary embolism. MRI is becoming the method of choice for cardiac follow up and can give agiobai picture of cardiac anatomy, funclion and perfusion. It is Iimited by patients with irregular rhythms, non-compatible implants and claustrophobia. In specialised centres where electron-beam CT is available this is often the method of choice for post-operative studies. Both CT and MRI can be used to assess by-pass graft patency. Cardiac perfusion post-operatively is best determined by nuclear medicine using either PET, technetium SPECT or Thallium SPECT. Small perfusion defects following revascularisation are common in the myocardial territories proximal to the grafts. Finally intravascular ultrasound is becoming more frequently used in post operative graft assessment. The goal of radiology departments is to offer technically excellent images and reports at low cost in a timely fashion. Hence we must carefully assess the effectiveness of the various aspects of our work and than measure each against the cost. Only then can we start to consider the cost-effectiveness of various of our daily practice. This is crucial in these times when everyone (patients, hospitals, injuries, providers, etc) expects proven value of money. In this symposium three main experts onf the field will present the different aspects which characterize an efficient management of a radiology department. M. Hunink will present first the basic principles of diagnostic testing and their role in clinical decision making. The decision to implement a new medical technology involves a tradeoff between the risks and benefits to the patient as weil as a tradeoff between the potential effectiveness to be gained and the limited resources at hand. The unique feature in the technology assessment of diagnostic tests is that the results of such tests are intermediate outcomes implying that the effectiveness gained in terms of improved survival or quality of life, and the potential cost savings, are largely an effect of the treatment strategy chosen on the basis of the test results. Both randomized controlled clinical trials and decision analysis have an important role to play in the assessment of diagnostic tests. Important points to considerwhen performing a cost-effectiveness study are posing a well-defined question, what perspective to take, comparing the technology to the next best strategy, including both effectiveness and costs, distinguishing between describing and valuing the quality of life, taking into account intangibles such as the value of information, the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio, and performing a sensitivity ("whatif?") analysis. R.F. Dondelinger; Liege/B When writing a purehase order, the radiologist should identify precisely what type of equipment he requires and divide selection criteria equally between technical considerations and capital and maintainance costs. With respect to the technical specifications the objective and general commitments of the tenderer should be outlined along with the specifications of the basic offer which should include maintenance and cooperation agreements, financing deals and specification of options. The seiler should agree that the specifications of the tender will be integrated part of the purehase order. To provide for obsolescence of equipment, the seiler should commit to upgrade or replacing the old equipment without charge if it is superseded by new equipment in the next years. This also applies for delivery of items that are currently regarded as an option but which will become integrated part of the equipment in the future. Penalty c1auses should be included pushing the companies to unveil their future projects. The aim is that the customer and the seiler could develop a close partnership. Other clauses should be included requiring the seiler to ensure that all installed items are fully operational when assembled. Avoid wording such as "is available" or "is compatible" but use precise alternative phrases. Installation is made easy by including a commitment from the seiler to deliver all minor architectural changes, such as additional furniture, electrical boxes, air-conditioning, automatie power injectors, etc. When writing technical specifications speil out in detail what is needed avoiding generic terminology. Concerning software specifications define software by function and not by name, without using acronymes. Always define image storage capacity by the number of images and parameters. Include previsions for upgrading all existing software programmes free of charge during the amortization period. Purehase order should include penalty c1auses for delivery and installation delays and preliminary acceptance of the equipment should be signed by the customer only if all items are fully operational. In drawing up the maintenance contract a fixed price of X-ray tubes should be included and all items excluded by warantee be listed. Provision for maintenance outside working hours is of utmost importance. The maximum acceptable delay between a service call and the start of repairs should be stipulated and the seiler should commit to paying for lost revenue above a certain amount of downtime. Stick to astriet agenda when comparing the offers and taking decisions. Do not get lost in the technical details or base your decision on the impression of a visit to a production site. Visite clinical sites alone. MRI offers unique possibilities to differentiate between various disorders of white matter. It is, however, beyond the capabilities of MRI to look at myelin separately from the other constituents of the neuropil. To make inferences about disorders beyond the observed signal change in a white matter area, one will have to take other characteristics into consideration, such as morphological distribution, swelling or shrinking (gliotic retraction) of the white matter, pattern of spread, symmetry or asymmetry, confluency of lesions, the presenceof calcifications, the presence of hemorrhage, cyst formation, enhancement of lesions, and the information obtained by using special MR techniques, for exampie Magnetization Transfer Imaging (MTI), Diffusion Weighted Imaging 5242 (DWI), Perfusion Imaging (PI), and in some cases MR spectroscopy (MRS) . Using this extra information we have described a pattern recognition program for white matter diseases, both hereditary and acquired (M.S. van der Knaap, J. Valk. Magnetic Resonance of Myelin, Myelination and Myelin Disorders, 2nd edition, Springer Verlag 1995). In this lecture we will shortly review the pattern recognition program and demonstrate how this can be used to diagnose white matter disorders with known pathophysiological background and to identify unclassified white matter disorders. How a diagnosis is reached in cases of which so far no diagnosis was established will be shown in a demonstration of typical cases. 1077 Infectious diseases of the brain C.F. Andreula, A.P. Garribba; Barili The involvement of the Central Nervous System along the course of infectious diseases causes different clinical, anatomopathological and neuroradiological aspects, due to the different microbical agents, to their virulence and the efficacy of the Immunitary System of the host. Brain infections are distinguished according to the life period occurring: lesions affecting the foetus in the first and second trimester of pregnancy with organogenesis disturbances and consequent malformations, and infections of the late pregnancy, perinatal period, childhood and adulthood. Lesions are divided in diffuse and focal ones. The diffuse lesions are: meningitis, meningo-encephalitis and encephalitis. Acute meningitis are almost always neuroradiologically negative. In Chronic meningitis the most frequent is the tubercular granulomatous form, then Mycosis as Cryptococcosis and Coccidioidomicosis. Neuroradlology monitor the complications of meningeal infections, such as severe hydrocephalus, ventriculitis, subdural effusions infections and cerebrovascular complications. Among Congenital Encephalitis the most frequent infections contracted during the pregnancy are listed below the acronym TORCH. Among the Peri-and Post-natal encephalitis we should report Herpes Simplex type 1 Virus acute meningoencephalitisand acute disseminated encephalomyelitis with demyelinating "plaques". Chronic encephalitis is very uncommon. The focallesions are cerebritls, immature form, and abscess and granuloma, mature forms and cysts. The agents responsible for abscesses are bacteria. The agents responsible for granulomas are mycobacteria, fungi, and protozoa (toxoplasma). Parasitic cysts are related to Echinococcosis, Cisticercosis and Cryptococcosis. 1078 Aging brain C. Manelfe, Ph. Arrue, C. Cognard, I. Berry; Toulouse/F Normal changes of the aging brain (successful aglng) are important to differenciate from frequent neurodegenerative disorders affecting elderly people. Computed tomography (CT) has been now replaced by Magnelic Resonance Imaging (MRI) to show the various changes involving the aging brain. In this presentation, the normal patterns of the aging brain and the most frequent neurodegenerative disorders will be presented. 1. Normal aging brain. Hyperintense foci on T2W images are commonly found in healthy patients in the anterior and lateral frontal horns, in the periventricular white matter (ependymitis granularis), and in the white matter subcortical regions. They increase in size and number with age and vascular risk factors. Dilatation of the perivascular spaces are more frequent with advancing age and must be differentiated from lacunar intarcts. Hypointensity of the putamen on T2W images corresponds to iron deposits. Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, common in the elderly, can manifest by superficial lobar hematoma, often multiple. 2. Neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by gradual progressive impairement of intellectual faculties. They are represented mainly by Alzheimer disease which is the most common cause of dementia, Pick disease, multi-intarct dementia, Creutzfeld Jacob disease and normal pressure hydrocephalus. greater use of teleradiology. Teleradiology is one of the fastest growing aspects of radiological practice. This session will concentrate on the network facilities that are necessary to make delivery of teleradiology possible. After attending this session the attendee should be able to recognize the place of broadband networks in radiology and the relationship between the size of images and the bandwidth of the networks necessary to transmit those images. The place of multi-media and its relationship to store and forward technology versus client/server transactions will be explained. In this context, the use of both lossy and lossless compression will be discussed with particular emphasis on their impact on radiological practice. The place of the Internet in radiology will be defined with reference to business transactions, access to teaching files, access to medical resources and the influence of the Internet on evidence based practice. The attendee will gain a good understanding of the requirements of security and confidentiality of data that are transmitted over both Intranets and Internets. High Resolution Computed Tomography has had a major impact on the diagnosis and management of diffuse infiltrative lung disease. It is the investigation of choice following clinical assessment and chest radiography. Diagnostic accuracy is such that a Iikely diagnosis can be determined prior to biopsy in a significant number of patients. Furthermore, HRCT analysis enables prediction of appropriate biopsy sites and biopsy techniques. HRCT also determines the likely response to therapy in some patients with diffuse lung disease. In this lecture the various HRCT patterns will be described and the role of HRCT in the investigation and management of patients with diffuse infiltrative lung disease discussed. A large number of studies have assessed the use of high resolution (HR) CT in the diagnosis of diffuse infiltrative lung disease (DILD). However, one may sometimes encounter difficulties in identifying mild forms of lung infiltration as several technical and/or anatomical parameters are known to interfere with the HRCT appearance of normal lung parenchyma. The purpose of this lecture is to summarize the most commonly encountered difficulties with special emphasis on the various means to overcome the interpretive difficulties. Concerning the assessment of lung attenuation, the clinical usefulness of spirometrically controlled HRCT measurements will be reviewed as weil as the current knowledge on expiratory quantitative CT Since the introduction of spiral CT, several reconstruction techniques have been demonstrated as useful complements to obtain objective diagnostic criteria. The technical protocols as weil as their clinical impact will be emphasized. In addition to the analysis of peripheral lung anatomy, the HRCT appearance of normal airways will be described for the purpose of an easier recognition of the CT features of lung fibrosis and the detection of small airway disease. As smokers and elderly patients are often scanned, specific attention will be also directed toward the description of the corresponding underlying changes, usually referred to as smoker's lung and senile lung. Disk displacements (DD) with reduction and DD without reduction are two major forms of internat derangements of the temporo-mandibular joint (TMJ). A common symptom of DD with reduction is a rsclprocal clicking of the TMJ, whereas DD without reduction frequently results in limited mandibular mobility. MRI has replaced arthrography and computed tomography in the diagnosis of DD because it is noninvasive and has superior soft-tissue contrast and high in-plane resolution. MRI also enables dynamic studies of the TMJ in order to evaluate the physiological and pathophysiological function of this joint. These MRItechniques and a correlation between sectional anatomy and MRI are presented. In addition dynamic MRI-techniques to delineate the motion of the TMJ are also demonstrated. The masticatory space (MS) extends from the skull base to the mandibular ramous. Because the MS is located anteriorily and laterally to the parapharyngeal space (PPS) pathology may extend from the intracranial space into the MS and then into the PPS or originate in the PPS and extend up through the MS into the intracranial space. In order to describe MS anatomy and pathology, MRI is the imaging modality of choice, especially when perineural or perivascular tumor spread is present. In conclusion, this presentation demonstrates the effectiveness of using modern MRI-techniques in depicting MS and TMJ anatomy and pathology. Chairperson The pathogenesis of TMJ-dysfunction is poorly understood. Internal derangement refers to asynchrony of anatomic subunits of the joint: the disk, condyle, and glenoid fossa. Disk displacement is the most common abnormality. Conversely, myofascial pain dysfunction syndrome is stressrelated (psychophysiologic) and (ar) involve primarily the muscles of mastication (extracapsular disease). Nowadays, MRI has become the mainstay of diagnosis in TMJ-and muscle disorders. It allows also visualization of bony abnormalities in the condyle, glenoid fossa and articular eminence. Complimentary modalities are plain radiography, arthrography and CT Particularly arthrography plays still an important role in the detection of distal and posterior ligament perforation. Internal derangements of the TMJ are best seen with MRI (accuracy rate >90%). Special dual surface coils and closed and open mouth views are standards, (sagittal and coronal T1-w. Se and T2-w. GRE). Disk-position and configuration is evaluated first. It is important to remember that displaced disks may be seen in up to 20% of asymptomatic population. Diskai mobility is proven by closed and open mouth views. Joint effusion and degenerative joint disease (joint space narrowing, osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis and cartilage destruction) may be exactly dernonstrated. MRI has been established as a highly sensitive and accurate procedure of early AVN (bone marrow edema). Late changes are depicted because of hypointense fibrous tissue and sclerotic bone. In rheumatoid arthritis typical MR-findings are joint effusion and pannus formation. Th.J. Vogl; Berlin/D stent insertion is migration. This complication occurs more often with covered stents and in stents placed at the esophago-gastric junction. Stent placement is very effective in reducing the dysphagia index and improving the quality-of-life in these severly i 11 patients. However, the long-term results are impaired by recurrent dysphagia due to tumor progression and stent obstruction. The primary dysphagia-free patient rate after 6 and 12 months in large studies is about 55% and 40%. Conclusion: Insertion of self-expanding stents in the esophagus offers rapid relief of dysphagia and is associated with minimal complications. However, reinterventions are required during long-term follow up to preserve patency. 1086 B. Gastroduodenaloutlet obstruction; treatment with self-expanding metallic stents Ch.L. Zollikofer; WinterthurlCH Modern imaging of the temporo-mandibular joint and masticatory space has significantly influenced the c1inical outcome and the therapeutic decisions in patients suffering from neoplastic diseases. Conventional radiographs in several projections are used as a first tool of assessme nt. If c1inically a space-occupying lesion of the masticatory space is suspected, spiral computed tomography -enhanced and non-enhanced -is a well-accepted routine imaging procedure. Improved differential diagnostic criteria and topographie information are provided by the additional use of magnetic resonance imaging. Standard MRI evaluation includes a head coil examination with T2-and T1-weighted TSE sequences, enhanced and non-enhanced (0.1 mmol Gd-DTPAlkg BW). If the c1inical examination gives an indication about the presence of a space-occupying lesion of the temporo-mandibular joint and masticatory space, MRI should be the first examination following conventional radiography. Due to its superior tissue contrast and multiplanar capabilities, MRI is an effective imaging modality for providing precise differential diagnostic information on the underlying disease. Newer concepts include fusion images -the combined use of CT and MR images -as weil as additional use of MR angiography and MR spectroscopy. Nowadays state-of-the-art CT and MRI are essential diagnostic tools for evaluation of suspected neoplastic diseases of the temporo-mandibular joint and the masticatory space.  Gastroduodenaloutlet obstruction is most commonly caused by malignancy arising either from the gastric antrum, from duodenal stricture or obstruction secondary to direct invasion or extrinsic compression. The two c1assical treatments are surgery or percutaneous jejunostomy. Recently however, endoluminal stent placement has been introduced as a minimal invasive, non surgical treatment. The aim of palliative stenting is to improve the quality of life particularly in patients with inoperable gastroduodenal outlet obstruction by relieving vomitting and permitting oral food intake. Also a small group of patients with stenoses secondary to chronic ulcers of the pylorus or duodenum resistant to conservative treatment may benefit from stenting as an alternative treatment to surgery. Before stent placement an accurate diagnosis is important to chose between acurative and a palliative approach. Besides CT an upper gastrointestinal Barium study is helpful to evaluate the length and the location of the stenosis. Insertion of stents via gastrostomy or the pyrolus has been described. At our institution all interventions are performed on a tilt-table with digital fluoroscopy and with endoscopic assistance using the working channel of the endoscope to advance a stiff guidewire through the stenosis. Thereafter a self-expanding vascular Wallstent (Schneider Euorope, Bülach) with a diameter of 16 mm and a lenght of 56 mm fully expanded is advanced over the guidwire via the working channel of the endoscope which allows for an easier passage through the generally dilated stomach particularly when the stent has to he advanced far into the duodenum. Correct deployment of the stent is controlled under f1uoroscopy. In contrast to others we do not perform balloon dilatation before stent placement. Usually spontaneous stent expansion is sufficient within a few hours so that dilatation after stent placement is not necessary. We favour the 16 mm vascular rolling membrane Wallstents on contrast to other stents with larger diameters because of the good longitudinal f1exibility and adequate radial force. The immediate technical success rate can be expected at 89 to 100% with successful palliation of symptoms in 78 to 100% according to the literature and our own experience. No major complications have been described today. The advantages of this new minimal invasive approach are its safety and the fast recovery from acute symptoms in patients with a short life expectancy. 1087 C. Treatment of colonic obstructions with metallic stents: indications, technique and complications M. Maynar; Las Pa/mas de G.C./E Background: Uncovered and covered self-expanding metal stents are implanted in the esophagus or esophago-gastric junction for palliative treatment of malignant incurable dysphagia due to endoluminal or extrinsic obstructions of the esophagus or esophago-respiratory fistulas. Methods and Materials: Since the early ninties self-expanding metal stents are available for the symptomatic treatment of high-grade esophageal obstructions. The stent design was changed several times. Currently, the typical metal stent for esophageal use is self-expanding and covered with a polymer coating to prevent tumor ingrowth and to seal esophago-respiratory fistulas. The diameter of the fully expanded stents is about 20 mm. Stents are placed in conscious sedation under fluoroscopie guidance. The implantation can be performed as an outpatient procedure. Results: Several prospective trials have shown unique technical and functional success rates of above 95%. The procedure-related rnortality rate in most series is 0%. The most frequent complication of 5244 Carcinomas of the colon and rectum are common in the United States; the estimated annual incidences is more that 150 000 new cases. The incidence of obstruction in patients with colonic carcinoma ranges from 7% to 29%. Emergency surgery in a patient with an unprepared colon ls associated with high morbidity and mortality rates. The traditional surgical management of left-sided malignant large-bowel obstruction consists of a two-stage operation (Hartmann's procedure) that includes primary tumor removal and end colostomy with a subsequent colostomy closure because the are unfit for surgery or refuse further operation. Colostomy closure is not a simple procedure; the morbidity is as high as 37% and the mortality rate ls around 7%. Recently, some authors have promoted a single-stage procedure that includes either subtotal colectomy or segmental resection with intraoperative irrigation and primary c1osure. Subtotal colectomy imposes technical challenges in the dissection of the whole obstructed colon and carries the risk of diarrhea or fecal incontinence, particularly in elderly patients. The technical aspects of these operations demand considerable experience in colonic surgery. Metallic stents have been recently used in the treatment of acute malignant colonic obstruction. Metallic stent placement is an interesting alternative that can provide an effective, nonsurgical decompression of the obstructed left-sided large bowel to avoid an emergency colostomy. Ventilation perfusion lung scans are an easy quick method to distinguish the different causes of the 'smalI' or 'hypertranslucent' lung on chest radiograph. Regional cerebraI blood flow (rCBF) is invaluable in the surgical work up of children with intractable epilepsy. rCBF is also useful for the diagnosis of brain death, cerebro vascular incidents and in certain psychiatric disorders. The radioisotope milk scan to assess both oesophageal and gastric function provides the ability to study these organs for prolonged physiological periods with a very low radiation burden. 16:00-17:30 This review will summarize mainly the current concepts about the diagnosis and treatment of intussusception. In many cases, the c1inical symptoms can be confusing. It is, therefore, desirable to use diagnostic tools that are as innocuous as possible. Sonography has a high diagnostic accuracy and it may lead to alternative diagnosis. US imaging of intussusception is complex. There are two bowel loops involved (the intussuscipiens or receptor and the intussusceptum or donor), but three bowel walls intervene because the intussusceptum is folded: the everted returning limb of intussusceptum with the intussuscipiens form the hypoechoic external ring of the doughnut image whereas the mesentery enclosing the entering limb of the intussusceptum forms the center: "crescent-in-doughnut sign". The presence of fluid inside the intussusception is significantly related to irreducibility and ischemia. The aim of a therapeutic enema is to safely reduce the greatest number of intussusceptions without producing perforation. The differences in reduction and perforation rates among the various therapeutic enemas are related more to perforations that occur prior to the enema, on patient selection criteria and on the pressure exerted within the colon than on the contrast material used. We prefer the use of hydrostatic US-guided enemas owing to the absence of radiation exposure. Helical technology has expanded the usefulness of CT in the evaluation of pediatric disease. There are some important advantages of helical CT compared to conventional CT. We can acquire a volume of scan data acquisition from which a contiguous series of images is reconstructed that can improve lesion depiction without increasing radiation exposure. Shorter scanning time allows contrast material-enhanced studies to be performed during peak vascular enhancement, reduce the volume of contrast medium used, help eliminate or decrease motion artifacts allowing high quality two or three-dimensional reconstruction and less sedation in needed. When finer detail and higher-resolution images are required, the overlapping section technique allows high quality two and three-dimensional reconstructions ( The integration of nuclear medicine techniques into pediatric radiology allows the investigation of children to be undertaken using low radiation burden techniques as weil as providing a combination of anatomical and functional data. In nepro-urology Nuclear Medicine is now the reference technique for the detection of a renal scar using Tc 99m DMSA. The search for vesioureteric reflux (VUR) is now possible with out the need for bladder catheterisation; the indirect radioisotope cystogram will allow the assessment of renal function, drainage of the upper tracts, assessment of bladder function and the visualisation of VUR. The isotope of choice for this investigation is Tc 99m MAG3. For children who are not toilet trained, the direct isotope cystogram offers the advantage of a very low radiation burden. In the investigation of sustained systemic hypertension in childhood, Tc 99m MAG3 is an early test to exclude renal aetiology of the hypertension, especially if the test is undertaken following the pharmacological stimulus of an ACE inhibitor (Captopril). Dynamic renal scintigraphy using Tc 99m DTPA is valuable in the assessment of the transplant kidney. All these examinations are undertaken in conjunction with a full ultrasound examination. In children with symptoms suspected to be skeletal in origin and a negative plain radiograph, a radioisotope bone scan may focus attention on the specific area which is the cause. Bone scans are also valuable in children with malignancy to search for deposits. Certain sarcomas (primary bonemalignancy) may show multiple drug resistance, this may be detected using Tc 99m MIBI. Chairperson: PP. DENDY (Cambridge/UK) 1091 3D image reconstruction in radiology P. Grangeat; GrenoblelF In this course, we present highlights on fully 3D image reconstruction algorithms used in 3D X-ray Computed Tomography (3D-CT) and 3D Rotational Radiography (3D-RR). We first consider the case of spiral CT with a one-row detector. Starting from the 2D fan-beam inversion formula for a circular trajectory, we introduce spiral CT 3D image reconstruction algorithm using axial interpolation for each transverse slice. In order to improve the X-ray detection efficiency and to speed the acquisition process, the future is to use multi-row detectors associated with small angle cone-beam geometry. The generalization of the 2D fan-beam image reconstruction algorithm to cone beam defined direct inversion formula referred as Feldkamp's algorithm for a circular trajectory and Wang's algorithm for a spiral trajectory. However, large area detectors does exist such as Radiological Image Intensifiers or in a near future solid state detectors. To get a larger zoom effect, it defines a cone-beam geometry associated with a large aperture angle. For this case, we introduce indirect image reconstruction algorithm by plane rebinning in the Radon domain. We will present some results from a prototype MORPHOMETER device using the RADON reconstruction software. Lastly, we consider the special case of 3D Rotational Digital Subtraction Angiography with a restricted number of views. We introduce constraint optimization algorithm using quadratic, entropic or half-quadratic constraints. Generalized ART (Algebraic Reconstruction Technique) iterative reconstruction algorithm can be derived from the Bregman algorithm. We present reconstructed vascular trees from a prototype MORPHOMETER device. The medical objective of CAMI (Computer Assisted Medicallntervetion) is to perform previously defined operative strategies more accurately and less invasively by use of guiding systems under intra-operative sensor surveillance. CAMI can be described in three steps: Perception -Decision -Action. Perception is performed both pre-operatively and intra-operatively. The relevant information comes mostly from medical imaging devices. Information coming from other types of sensors borrowed from Computer Vision, such as video cameras or range imaging sensors, is also available. Various signals (electrophysiology, pressure, Doppler, tactile feedback) can be analysed. Finally, since they contribute apriori statistical knowledge, geometrical and anatomical rules and models (such as Atlases) have to be taken into account. We will analyze the various issues raised by the acquisition and analysis of such multimodal data. Decision is an important step involving both construction of patient models and intervention planning. Construction of patient models means merging all the available information in order to build a "virtual patient". This implies accurate registering of all information sources to make optimal use of each one. This will lead us to introduce segmentation and registration concepts. Intervention planning is the modelling of an intervention and the simulation of its morphological and functional consequences. This puts interesting problems of user interface and modelling of the behaviour of soft and rigid tissues, that will be discussed. Action consists in guiding the selected strategy while it is performed. This implies interaction of the physician with the patients and with operating devices, in a frame of "augmented reality" that will be introduced. • the use of distance education techniques for academic learning, clinical training and assessment • the use of adequate study materials for problem based skills training • continuous student support facilities at a distance • the provision of a flexible programme wich can be used across the world but wich also can be tailored for individual student's needs • reducing financial and time costs for both the student and employer 1094 B. Educating radiographers for the new century A.M. Paterson; CanterburylUK Radiographers are the core non-medical staft group practising within c1inical radiology. With the UK (and elsewhere within the Western world) they are educated to first degree standard with opportunities to obtain higher degrees, including MPhiIlPhD. This has provided a platform for them to develop into areas that have, traditionally, been undertaken by radiologists, so freeing radiologists to undertake more complex and c1inically demanding work. In the UK radiographers roles now include plain film reporting; medical, non-obstetric ultrasound examinations; the giving of intravenous injections; and the conduct of barium studies, particularly barium enema studies, and venograms. Education of radiographers for these roles has been vital and, in looking at the education of radiographers for the new century, a number of malters will be considered. These include the need for radiographers to be graduates and to undertake formal postgraduate study; the nature of education programmes and the need for workplace learning to be a significant component; and the role of continuing professional development within radiographers' education; Plain film reporting will be used as a case study to demonstrate how education at all levels must contribute to preparing all radiographers for this new role.  Rapid technological change, training and education ls seen as an ongoing necessity, enabling radiographers to remain current with required skills and knowledge. Many radiographers are seeking secondary education and training opportunies although the framework to support this initiative is often hampered by lack of resources, principally of time and money. With the financial support of the Commission of the European Communities under the Leonardo da Vinci Programme, Haarlem University of Professional Education, South Bank University London, the Dutch Open University, Siemens UK and Netherlands were able to start the ECTMUS-project. (Education and Clinical Training in Medical Ultra-Sound) This project adresses the problem of these high costs by offering a high quality education and training programme with the following advantages: Thursday, 8:30-10:00 RoomA erosion, an arthropathy or mineralization may indicate the diagnosis. This presentation will concentrate on MR imaging which has greatly aided the detection and diagnosis of these lesions and differentiation from synovial cysts/ganglia etc. and juxta-articular pathologies. Helical CT has improved the ability of CT to evaluate the entire abdomen, and MR is rapidly improving. In some cases there is a clear competition between these modalities. In other, they are complementary. CT still has advantages on several points: -availability, cost, standardization of the method, ability to compare different examinations on the same patients are betler optimized for CT than for MR; -CT has also a c1ear advantage for the examination of cancer patients, due to the possibility to focus on several areas in a single session; -in emergency patients, CT is a standard tool, still underused in many institutions. As a conclusion, we will try to determine cases clearly idenlified as CT or MR dedicated and cases in which the correct decision remains to be elucidated. This course will review the value of imaging techniques in the diagnosis of benign bone tumors and tumor-Iike lesions. Plain radiography, which in this connection still represents the most important imaging modality, can be used to determine the biologie activity of a solitary bone lesions and in many cases can provide sufficient information for further management of the patient. Cross seclional imaging (CT and MRI) can be helpful, especially when plain films are inconclusive or misleading, or the lesion is located in a site of complex skeletal anatomy. The value of CT and MRI for preoperative differential diagnosis, definition of tumor extent, detection of malignant transformation and other tumor-related complications, as weil as therapy planning and postoperative follow-up will be discussed in detail. Specific problems in the diagnosis of different tumor entities will be illustrated on the basis of histologically confirmed cases. Room B 8:30-10:00 Female pelvis: For imaging of the female pelvis, transvaginal ultrasound is the method of first choice. Magnelic resonance (MR) imaging and computed tomography (CT) provide important additional information in various disorders. MR imaging is superior to CT in diagnosing benign and malignant tumors of the uterus. The same holds for the characterization of adnexal masses, where MR imaging reliably differentiates dermoids, ovarian fibromas, and most endometriomas. imaging is based on identical morphological criteria; no superiority of MR imaging over CT has been established. CT is still the preferred imaging modality for staging ovarian cancer. A thorough knowledge of the pathomorphological changes associated with the different disorders of the female pelvis not only helps to choose the proper imaging modality and examination protocol but also improves image interpretation. Male pelvis and scrotum: Technical advances in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), notably in high resolution MRI, have opened up new diagnostic applications in male pelvic pathology. A major indication is the preoperative staging of prostate cancer, where MRI is more reliable than other imaging modalities in differentiating between localized and advanced disease. In monitoring local recurrence after radical prostatectomy MRI is also valuable in differentiating scar tissue from new growth. In benign prostate disease, MRI effectively displays the congenital cysts that may be associated with infertiIity. Other disease, howevernotably benign prostatic hyperplasia -is generally an incidental finding. In isolated cases, MRI is also a valuable diagnostic aid in conditions of the penis, testes and scrotum, e.g. in the preoperative localization of ectopic testes in cryptorchidism. However, ultrasound remains the imaging modality of choice in the evaluation of benign and malignant intraserotal masses and in diagnosing acute scrotum. 1096 Synovial tumors SynoviaI tumours may be categorized in one of !wo ways. First, as benign or malignant and second, as neoplastic or non-neoplastic. The former c1assification is preferable as there are many mass lesions of joints and extra-articular synovium which are due to abnormal synovial proliferation and not strinctly neoplaslic. These include synoviaI chondromatosis, pigmented villonodular synovitis and lipoma aborescens. The malignant entities which may involve joints are synovial sarcoma, synovial chondrosarcoma (arising in synovial chondromatosis) and secondary invasion from an adjacent sarcoma. Conventional radiographs are of Iimited value apart from late in the disease process when bone This course will review clinical applications and new developments in MR imaging (MRI) of the abdomen. An emphasis will be placed on optimized imaging techniques for abdominal organs, such as liver, pancreas, spleen, and others. New results of MRcholangiopancreaticography and MR-angiography of the abdominal vasculature will be discussed. The role of MR imaging in the detection and differentiation of abdominal diseases will be demonstrated and will be compared to results achieved with currently available CT-techniques. The role of extracellular and tissue specific MR contrast agents, such as hepatobiliary agents and RES specific contrast agents will be explained. An emphasis will also be placed on the relative performance of contrast enhanced MRI of the liver, which will be compared with results obtained with different modalities of contrast enhanced CT, such as spiral CT during different perfusion phases and CT-portography. Learning Objectives: To develop the rational for optimal use of abdominal MRI and to recommend diagnostic imaging algorithms for this task. 20-TOF studies to search for non-anatomie run-off will replace diagnostic La. DSA for planning of reconstructive surgery with acquisition slabs displaying projections similar to La. DSA. Color duplex should also be the first non-invasive technique applied for the detection of peripheral aneurysms. Preoperative or preinterventional planning of aneurysms may be performed by CTA or CE-MRA. Compression ultrasound is the imaging procedure of choice In deep venous thrombosis (DVT). In the preoperative assessment of venous incompetence color duplex is the imaging technique which is sufficient in most cases. With the advent of ultrasound (US), Doppler and color-f1ow Doppler imaging, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) the ability for non-invasive studies of the abdominal vasculature has been enhanced considerably. In this paper an overview on various abdominal vascular pathologies is presented. Because of the dramatic improvements in image quality, special emphasis is given on the potential role of breath-hold contrast-enhanced three-dimensional (3D) MRA which appears to be a versatile non-Invasive alternative to conventional angiography. Non invasive assessment of vascularity is a new diagnostic approach to characterise tumours. Vascular assessment is based on the pathophysiology of tumour angiogenesis and its diagnostic implications for tumour biology, prognosis, and therapy response. Two current techniques investigating vascular features in addition to morphology are Doppler ultrasonography and contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Diagnostic differentiation has been shown to be possible with Doppler, and a high degree of observed vascularity could be linked to an aggressive course of the disease. Dynamic MRI using gadolinium chelates is already used clinically to detect and differentiate tumours. The histologie correlation shows that capillary permeability is increased in malignant tumours and is the best criterion for differentiation from benign processes. Permeability and perfusion factors seem to be more diagnostic than overall vessel density. New clinical applications are currently being established for therapy monitoring. Further instrumental developments will bring harmonie imaging in Doppler, and faster imaging techniques, higher spatial resolution and novel pharmacokinetic concepts in MRI. Upcoming contrast agents for both Doppler and MRI will further improve estimation of intratumoural blood volume and vascular permeability. Various MR techniques have been applied by different groups worldwide. Unfortunately results also vary. In order to avoid negative influence of methodology on the accuracy, both knowledge of potential pitfalls and standardisation appear most important. The following highly relevant technical factors will be treated: necessity for thin slice imaging and influence of partial volume, spatial in-plane versus temporal resolution, methods for elimination of fat signal and their pitfalls, choice of correct echo time (in phase images), importance and ways of motion reduction, reduction of hormonal influences on imaging, pitfalls of postprocessing (motion or partial volume and visual or quantitative evaluations with respect to lesion size), correct choice of ROI and important aspects in the selection of interpretation criteria. Signal behavior of contrast-enhanced dynamic MR mammography depends on the vascularization an the tissue matrix of the breast. After intravenous injection, nonspecific gadolinium-based contrast agents (CM) distribute in the extracellular space. Important criteria for the evaluation of dynamic MR mammography are the initial signal increase after CM administration, the following signal behavior, the kinetics of the CM uptake and the morphology of the CM-enhanced region. In contrast to benign lesions, most of the invasive breast carcinomas show typical signal changes in MTR mammography due to their pathologie angioneogenesis. Usually, they are characterized by a strong inital uptake (>100% compared to preCM imaging), a following plateau phase or wash out, a centropetal distribution of CM (rim sign) and/or ill-defined margins. In summary, MR mammography has a very high sensitivity (>98%) in the detection of invasive breast cancer. Some benign findings, however, can mimick malignant tumors. In contrast to invasive tumors, intraductal carcinomas of the breast (DCIS) often do not show typical changes due to the lack of sufficient angiogenesis. In some cases, dendritic CM uptake is seen in these tumors. However, the sensitivity of MR mammography for DCIS is low. The results of all series agreed in the high sensitivity of breast MRI in detecting invasive breast carcinomas whereas the results varies widely for in situ breast carcinomas. Despite some controversies, breast MRI appears to be a non specific imaging modality as far as the characterization of breast lesion is concerned. In the diagnosis of local relapses of breast neoplasms, series agreed in the higher sensitivity and specificity. Therefore, breast MRI should be the main modality used to exclude suspicious local relapses. In the diagnosis of palpable breast lesions, breast MRI can be used in highly selected cases where all other diagnostic modalities failed to exclude breast neoplasms. In the diagnosis of non palpable breast lesions imaging-guided biopsies had a higher sensitivity and specificity combined with a lower cost. Therefore, excepted and in some particular cases, breast MRI is not usefull. Some series have emphasized the high accuracy of breast MRI to determine the extent of invasive breast carcinomas. Therefore, some specialized centers currently used breast MRI combined with MRI-guided core biopsies in the preoperative evaluation of invasive breast neoplams. In all series carried out to determine the value of breast MRI in monitoring neo-adjuvant chemotherapy., breast MRI is by far the best imaging method to assess the extent of residual disease after neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Moreover, breast MR imaging have proved useful in the follow up of women with silicone breast prostheses either for cosmetic reasons or after mastectomy. The diagnosis of local recurrence and implants complications (intra/extra capsular ruptures, silicone leakage) is now an established indication of breast MRI. In conclusion, breast MRI offers tremendous potential in the management of breast pathology which are currently not plainly used due to (a) high cost, (b) insufficient knowledge of clinicians of this diagnostic method and (c) lack of experienced specialized breast imaging teams. value for treatment is, however, not determined yet. Parenchymal hypoattenuation as detected by computed tomography within the first three hours of symptom onset is less sensitive but similar specific for tissue damage. It has been demonstrated, that systemic (l.v.) fibrinolytic treatment in stroke patients may increase the rate of favorable outcome up to 13% (NINDS/ECASS I). However not all patients with an acute neurological deficit, but only those with strokes due to a sustained vascular occlusion can possibly benefit from fibrinolysis. Inadequate patient selection, based on plain CCT and clinical findings only, may be the reason why recently ECASS II has failed to proof the superiority of i.v, fibrinolysis over placebo. In the future neuroradiological techniques and expertise as on MRA, CT Angio, even DSA should become decisive tools for patient selection in advance of fibrinolytic stroke treatment. The meaning of stents for carotid angioplasty has recently become more evident. The concept to place a stent in order to fight intimal flaps only after flaps have occurred already is burdened with more complications than leaving the intimal flaps alone after angioplasty. In almost all ease however it is possible to place a selfexpandable stent in a carotid stenosis without a preceding dilatation. Primary placement and secondary dilatation avoids free floating flaps to occur and hence minimizes the risk of thrombembolisme. The status of the "Stent Protected Angioplasty versus Carotid Endarterectomy" (SPACE) trial ls to be reported. Imaging in stroke victims has two objectives: (1) to assess the immediate pathophysiological state of the cerebral circulation and tissue and (2) to assess the underlying vascular disease. Diagnosis of the underlying disease will help in the choice of adaequate secondary prophylaxis. Assessment of the brain's current pathophysiological state is aprerequisite to choosing adaequate treatment and is the more urgent of the two objectives. The imaging modality should reliably differentiate cerebral ischemia from other causes of a sudden central nervous deficit and should be able to differentiate early on normal brain tissue from tissue at risk and from tissue already irreversibly damaged. Historically, vascular imaging was developed first and provided the rationale for the surgery in cases of high grade carotid stenoses and for prophylaxis with antiplatelet agents. Brain tissue imaging with CT later allowed both the diagnosis of ischemic stroke and thrombolytic treatment which has recently been shown to be beneficial. A variety of new tools are now available for vascular and tissue imaging: Ultrasound, CT-angiography (CTA), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and spectroscopy (MRS), single photon emission tomography, and positron emission tomography. Computed tomography and MRI/MRS are most promising for meeting the above-mentioned objectives in the c1inical setting of acute stroke. Imaging of perfusion and diffusion by magnetic resonance is highly sensitive and specific for irreversible tissue damage. fts prospective In primary tubereulosis radiologie findings may vary between normal to hilar and mediastinallymphadenomegaly, and/or smalI, ill defined opaeities to frank lobar eonsolidation assoeiated with Iymphadenomegaly and/or pleural effusion. Reactivation tuberculosis presents in many different radiologie patterns. Typically, predominantly apical, inhomogenous densities with frequent cavitation are encountered. Rarely consolidation and eavitation of a eomplete segment or lobe may oecur. Endobronchial seeding results in bronehopneumonie foei in rarely affected segments. Infected Iymph nodes may erode into a major bronchus or the airway mucosa may be involved resulting in emphysema or atelectasis. Hematogenous spread result in a miliary pattern of small interstitial nodules. Tubereulomas, usually weil circumscribed granulomatous masses with frequent calcification, may oceasionally develop. Altered immunity due to AIDS, transplantation, haematologic or other malignancies may further affect the radiologie presentation. Pleura may be involved, usually in conjunction with peripheral tubereulous foci, and longstanding, unexplained pleural effusion must arouse suspicion of tubereulous pleuresy. Chest X-rays are usually suffieient for diagnosis in most cases of pulmonary tuberculosis. CT, either conventional or HRCT, is used to investigate activation, cavitation, progression, hemoptysis and/or other complications. The essence of radiology is reducing large data volumes, esp. of helical CT and MRI, into speedy relevant information facilitating clinical decision making and surgical navigation, resp. minimal invasive therapy. Pattern recognition is the key to success. Ten years of experience have proven graphie workstations to be basic tools in disease pattern analysis rendering hard copy reading less reliable. The "Big Three" are: Cine Display offering more intuitive perceplion and markedly reduced case reading times; Multi Planar Reformation becoming more flexible as tortuous structures can be tracked and slze, shape, volume and orientation assessed; Maximum Intensity Prajection providing an overview of morpholog ie data relative insensitive to partial volume averaging as in CTA, MRA and MRCP. However, source images only allow accurate measurements. Three Dimensional applications as Shaded Surface Display, Virtual Endoscopy and Volume Rendering have a Iimited elincal need and are still time consuming. Computer Vision is essential in the clinical process and influences design of reporting areas, conference rooms and operating theatres as weil. This course is intended for radiologists not addicted yet to a clinical workstation. After aperiod of deeline in the ineidenee, because of the rapid increase in severely immunocompromised patients and development of multidrug resistant strains tuberculosis has reemerged as a major health problem all over the world. While it is primarily considered a pulmonary disease, tuberculosis has the potential to infect almost every organ system via Iymphohematogenous and direct dissemination. Extrapulmonary tuberculosis mostly affects musculoskeletal, genitourinary, gastrointestinal and central nervous systems. In the rnusculoskeletal system, tuberculosis manifests characterist ically as a monoarthr itis or osteomyelitis involving vertebral column, hip and knee most frequently. Abdominal tuberculosis can mimie many other diseases. It can manifest in the form of enteritis, peritonitis or lymphadenitis. lIeocecal involvement is seeen most frequently because of abundance of lymphoid tlssue. Hepatobiliary involvement is either in the miliary or pseudotumoral form. Genitourinary system is also a common site of infection affecting kidneys, ureters, bladder, prostate and seminal vesicles. Within the CNS, tuberculosis may manifest as meningitis or mass lesions, Iike tuberculoma or tubereulous brain abscess. The reported rare sites of involvement include eye, larynx, paranasal sinuses, pericardium and breast. Since it may be confused with many other pathologies both elinically and radiographically, radiologist should be aware of the different radiographie appereances of tuberculosis and should consider it in the differential diagnosis. The course will give a tutorial overview of current state-of-the-art computer vision techniques in radiology. Modern volume visualization goes interactive for impraved understanding of the 3D context, surgical simulation and faster analysis. We show several examples of this fast interactive manipulation of 20 and 3D data. The speed of modern computers allow for real-time ealculation of any direction and type of view. The eomplicated task of segmentation is mueh assisted by hybrid teehniques (automatie and manuallinteractive combined). An example is realtime angioplastic manipulation and repair control assisted by arealtime LCD display next to the patient in a standard MR scanner. Computer Vision teehniques allow for automatie detection of the catheter and fast subtraetion and denoising of the images. Multimodality matching can now be applied to any type of funetional and anatomical data. A suecesssful method employs the ealeulation of the "mutual information" in the pair of images. A range of visualization techniques will be presented as inspiring examples. Computer Vision techniques for quantitative measurements are discussed, notably for the applications MR perfusion and diffusion. We tackel new applieation areas like 3D ultrasound (example: folliele analysis for in vitra fertilization) and postoperative 3D trabecular bane structure analysis. A challinging but sofar very complicated role for Computer Vision is in the computer assisted elassification and diagnosis of images. We discuss the application of X-thorax images for TBC screening . The course is intended for radiologists to show them applications and recent developments in this exciting field , and for researchers in this area. Few subjects in body imaging have generated such intensive debate as the optimum strategies for delivering contrast agents in CT. Despite this, research on this subject has focussed on experimental studies, with relatively Iittle attention paid to the underlying principles. In the first half of this presentation, therefore, some of the underlying principles of contrast delivery and pharmacokinetics will be reviewed, in a simple and elear fashion. An understanding of these has become particularly important with spiral CT, whieh permits scanning at any phase (or several phases) of contrast delivery. The value of theoretical analyses will be illustrated: for example, simple computer modelling can be used to help develop strategies for the optimal detection of "hypovascular" Iiver metastases . The second half of this review will be essential practical, and will suggest algorithms for the enhancement of different body areas. The need to tailor enhancement to the elinical problem being addressed will be emphasised. An understanding of scanner technology is also important, as different algorithms may be apprapriate for different machines and for spiral compared to incremental scanning. 8:30-10:00 Pulmonary arteriovenous malformations (PAVMs) are abnormal communications between the pulmonary arteries and pulmonary veins which allow a right-to-Ieft shunt. The majority of patients have associated hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia. The most common presenting features in patients with PAVMs include dyspnoea on exertion, fatigue or neurological symptoms. The last of these, which include transient ischaemic attacks, strokes or cerebral abscess formation, occur as a result of paradoxical embolization and are the cause of the major morbidity and mortality seen in these patients. Treatment by embolization is successful in the majority of patients and can be performed with metallic coils or detachable balloons. This video presentation will discuss the technique of coil embolization of PAVMs. Two interventional radiological procedures will be presented: embolization of the uterine arteries for fibroid disease and vaso-occlusion of the lumbo-ovarian veins for pelvic varices. Selective arterial embolization of uterine fibroids is a technically easy procedure. A unilateral femoral approach is usually adequate for catheterization of both uterine arteries by a homolateral and cross over technique. Selective embolization is obtained using standard angiographic catheters and coaxial rnlcrocatheters. The preferred particulate embolization material are polyvinylalcohol (300-700 microns). Complete and definite vascular exclusion of the fibroid is mandatory. Analgesia during and after the procedure is an important issue and should be tailored to the requirement of each patient by the anesthesiologist. MR is the optimal imaging modality for follow-up. Peri-utero-ovarian varices are responsible for the pelvic congestion syndrome and other symptoms. Percutaneous unilateral or bilateral embolization of the lumbo-ovarian vein is performed under local anesthesia by a right femoral vein approach. For selective caudal catheterization ofthe lumbo-ovarian vein, mini or microcatheters may be advisible in addition to standard catheters. Vaso-occlusion is achieved with bucrylate or sclerosing agents. In large veins coils can be placed to obtain a reduction of flow before complete vaso-occlusion. Follow-up is best achieved with Doppler studies. In this workshop the basic technique of embolization of primary liver tumors is briefly reviewed. Planning of the procedure, pre-and postprocedural care, and choice of catheters and embolization materials used are illustrated. The complementary role of embolization and other percutaneous techniques such as ethanol injection and radiofrequency ablation is also emphasized. This workshop will be presented in the format of a "Video presentation". Clinieal cases that can be encountered in common practice will be shown and discussed. The different possible and alternative solutions to common problems will be presented and eritieally analyzed. Primary and secondary malignant Iiver tumors are frequent neoplastic diseases and local as weil as systemic control of these cancers means an essential step forward in oncologic treatment. A variety of techniques are currently available for performing tumor ablation in patients with malignant liver tumors. Local alcohol instillation is the most controlled and effective method for the destruction of oligonodal hepatocellular carcinoma. Radiofrequency ablation and cryoablation are effective tools for the local destruction of solid tumors within the Iiver, both hepatocellular carcinoma and liver metastases. MR-guided laserinduced thermotherapy has beeome an additional and effieient method especially for the local treatment of Iiver metastases. Due to the low rate of side effects and the enormous preeision, this technique provides an improved local control and prolonged survival for those patients who are not eligible for surgieal resection. In conclusion local tumor ablation becomes inereasingly important in the treatment of cancer patients suffering from primary and seeondary liver tumors. Although US, CT, and MRI are used as screening modalities for the diagnosis of liver hydatid disease, US is considered the method of choice for the classification of the different type of appearances. However, these classifications do not only cover all range of appearances but also not provide any information to choose for probable therapeutie method. Therefore, we need a new c1assifieation to connect between ultrasonographie features and different treatment options. Different c1assifications of Iiver hydatid cysts and the new approach will be discussed. Percutaneous treatment is mainly carried out in patients with pure fluid colleetion. The other indications and eontraindieations of the proeedure will also be discussed. After the neeessary preparations, all interventions are performed by either PAIR or eatheterization techniques under sonographic/fluoroscopic guidance. As scolecidial agent hypertonie saline (15% NaCI) and/or 95% of absolute alcohol are used. During follow-up, sonography is performed to assess the changes in size, eontent and wall of the cyst. Reduction in size and volume, thickening and irregularity of the wall, decreased fluid content and solid appearance of the remnant on US examination are accepted as positive criteria of healing. Major eomplieations are anaphylactic shock (%0.1) and abdominal dissemination (%0). Minor complications include pain, temporary fever, allergie reactions, cysto-biliary fistula and infection of the cavity (% 10-19). Recurrenee rates (%0-4) and mean hospitalization period (2.5-4.2 days) are also eneouraging. Pereutaneous treatment of the Iiver hydatid cysts is a serious alternative to surgery in selected cases. Room L1M criteria in differentiating benign from malignant lesions, and in inflammatory processes. Contrast agents in sonography were first implemented as direct injections of microbubble suspensions into the aortic root. Although these simple teehniques give useful information within the right chambers of the heart, their application is somewhat restrictive. Development of pharmaceutical microbubble formulations have recently been introduced allowing a wider area of clinical application. These have the ability to cross the pulmonary vascular bed allowing a persistence in the blood for a sufficient period of time. Sonographie blood flow imaging methods have proven to be extremely useful for assessing valvular heart disease and other anatomical defects within the ventricles and major vessels. They have been established as a diagnostic method for primary vascular evaluation, organ perfusion and tumour vascularity as weil. Ultrasound contrast agents designed for enhancing the backscatter from blood contribute to improve ultrasound examinations where difficulties are experienced due to lack of signal from vasculature. Clinical studies have shown that due to an increase in signal intensity of upto 20 dB with echo enhancers, c1inical examinations proven to be undiagnostic improved diagnostic confidence after enhancement. This presentation discusses ways in In this course, the principles of Spiral CT will be reviewed. Particular emphasis will be put on image quality considerations. It is accepted that there are no significant drawbacks to spiral CT; in fact, the inherent continuous scanning in the longitudinal direction (z axis) provides advantages for 3D resolution. Technical developments will also be summarized and discussed. Spiral CT is now available on practically all CT systems. Further developments aim for higher efficiency, in particular by using multirow detector systems, and higher f1exibility. Anatomically adapted tube current modulation is one technique which is specifically suited for spiral CT and which allows for significant dose reduction. Spiral CT offers c1ear advantages for standard c1inical applications due to the short volume scan times. It also has provided a number of new applications, as for example CT angiography, cardiac imaging with ECG oriented reconstructions, support of computer-aided surgery, and lowdose procedures. The technical background of these techniques will be explained in detail, c1inical examples and results will also be presented. Technical developments in probe technology, digital multi-channel beamformers and software evolutions have contributed to improved image quality, making ultrasound a reliable modality in breast imaging. High frequency: where 7 MHz was standard until recently, modern equipment uses frequencies of 10 MHz and higher; this is made possible by the high signal-to-noise ratio and broadband capabilities of modern equipment. Multi-D array: the problem of near field focusing of linear probes is improved by using multiple rows of crystals, making focusing in the elevation plane possible, and reducing slice thickness and thus partial volume effects. Real-time panoramic ultrasound: this modality makes it possible to make cross seetions up to 60 cm; the image is acquired in real-time, without need of position sensors. Imaging of larges structures becomes possible with an otherwise small probe. Tissue Harmonie Imaging: by using the echoes of the second harmonie frequency, artefacts are greatly reduced ant tissue contrast is increased. Color Doppler: the high Doppler sensitivity of modern equipment, especially in power-mode, makes it possible to study vascularisation of breast lesions, and is also used as a guidance for precise spectral Doppler measurements. Color Doppler provides additional diagnostic S252 Chairperson: P. PAVONE (Rome/I) P. Pavone; Rome/I MR Cholangiography has been introduced in clinical practice at the beginning of this decade, although most of c1inical series have been published in the mid '90s. In the early phase, it seemed that this technique would have been just another fancy sequence, with low clinical impact. However, further experience have shown that MR cholangiography can offer consistent and reproducible results and may indeed play an important clinical role. All papers published on the different potential applications of MR eholangiography have always provided very consistent results, with 90% accuracy in the definition of each disease. These results have been obtained with use of different equipments, and both high and medium field strenght equipments may provide the same type of data. The only technical requirment to fulfill is the use of powerful gradients, with strenght over 15 mT/m. All currently available equipments have this kind of gradients installed and therefore we can state that MR Cholangiography can be performed basically in every center. The clinical role of MR Cholangiography will be addressed by the speakers of this state of the art symposium. It is important to stress the fact that, thanks to this new technique, the radiologist is now being able to play once again an important role in the management of these patients, characterising the biliary disease and defining the most proper type of treatment. A final area of concern for radiologists is in trends for current practice of ERCP. There is decreasing interest in the quality of ERCP radiographie images demonstrated by endoscopists, as weil as radiologists. There is also a tendency towards locating ERCP f1uoroscopy units outside the Department of Radiology. Shifting diagnostic emphasis to MRCP will address these concerns. MRCP has gained wide-spread acceptance for the diagnosis of cholangiolithiasis. Its role in the evaluation of other biliary diseases is less welldefined. For assessment of biliary diseases, T2w single-shot thick-slab images show gross morphology. For anatomie detail, T2w multi-slice breath-hold pulse sequences should be obtained in at least two planes (coronal/oblique and axial). In patients with hilar strictures, ERCP and PTC often can not visualize the whole biliary system and define the extent of strictures. MRCP demonstrates distal and proximal end of strictures without the risk of inducing sepsis. By supplementing MRCP with fat-suppressed T2w TSE and contrast-enhanced T1w images, tumor staging and assessment of resectability can be done in one examination. MRCP is very promising for evaluation of patients with suspected complications after biliary surgery, such cholecystectomy, bilio-enteric anastomosis, and Iiver transplantation. Bilomas, anastomotic strictures, leakage, and stones can be detected. In children with congenital biliary anomalies, MRCP allows exact 3D-visualization of intra-and extrahepatic biliary cysts before surgery. MRCP is the method of choice for evaluation of high strictures and postoperative biliary complications. It allows non-invasive assessment of resectability of hilar tumors. In non-surgical patients, MRCP helps to define the best interventional access to achieve biliary drainage. Object: To investigate the possibilities of color Doppler and contrast agent in the diagnosis of pancreatis carcinoma. Methods and Materials: In 20 patients with carcinoma of the pancreas, Levovist contrast agent at concentrations of 300 mg/mi was applied in several fractions. Flow was measured in the pancreatic artery, and analysis of tumor neovascularization was performed. In addition to spectral analysis, systolic-diastolic flow and resistive index were measured. The same parameters were measured in the patients with chronic pancreatitis and an enlarged pancreas (25) and in the control group of healthy subjects (10). Age ranged 50-75 years. Results: In 18 patients with pancreatic carcinoma pathologie neovascularization within the tumor and increased flow in tumor and the pancreas supplying vessels were found. In 2 patients accurate intrapancreatis flow analysis was not possible due to artifacts. In chronic pancreatitis and in healthy subjects pathologie neovascularisation was not found, and artery flow was lower in the pancreas supplying vessels than within malignant tumors. In malignant tumors, RI was 0.52, in healthy subjects 0.78. systems. However, we may consider MRCP a democratic technique: in fact, it is possible to obtain high level diagnostic images with low, medium and high field equipments. The only truly important technical requirement is the use of high power gradient (over 15 mT/m). When low or medium field systems are used, a non breath hold Turbo Spin Echo sequence is employed. At high field is nowadays possible to acquire images of the biliary and pancreatic ducts using the half Fourier technique, obtaining images in very few seconds. With these lalter imaging procedures it is also possible to perform dynamic studies (Le. of the pancreatic duct after secretin injection). Further improvement are expected in the future, but we can consider already now MRCP a mature technique, able to find a consistent clinical role in pancreatobiliary imaging. As far as biliary diseases are concerned, we may consider MRCP mostly in two importants c1inical roles: the evaluation of patients with suspected common bile duct stones, and the evaluation of symptomastic patients after laparoseopie cholecystectomy. In the first group of patients, MRCP may act as a screening procedure in those patients presenting mild symptoms, and with negative of doubtful USo The prevalence of stone disease in these patients is only 27-30%, and the goal is to avoid ERCP with simple diagnostic role in a large number of patients. MRCP may have an accuracy over 95% in detection of CBD stones. In patients with persisting symptoms after laparoscopic choleystectomy MRCP may play ain important role in defining those with residual CBD stones and those with iatrogenic stenosis, from those patients with no relevant findings. Surgeons want these patients to be evaluated in a non invasive way, in order to define the most appropriate treatment, if needed. Aim: To illustrate the technique and pitfalls of secretin-enhanced MRP and provide data concerning its rationale and specific c1inical applications. Technique: For selective ductal display, a secretin-enhanced dynamic single-shot Turbo spin-echo T2 weighted sequence with ultralong echotrains is performed. Parenchymal evaluation is performed with breathhold T1 and T2 weighted fat-suppressed sequences. In case of suspicion of a pancreatic cancer, 3D contrast MR angiography provides data concerning the vascular network. Clinical Applications: The rationale for the use of MRP in the investigation of pancreatic diseases is related to its accuracy to selectively display the ductal anatomy, but sholud also take into account the high performance and availability of CT and of therapeutic endoscopy in a specific clinical environment. According to this, we use secretienhanced MRP to investigate: Acute relapsing pancreatitis with normal CT examination. Acute pancreatitis with an abnormal CT scan if the integrity of the pancreatic duct is questionable. Chronic pancreatitis, if endoscopic treatment is the option in order to have a baseline examination which will be useful for follow-up studies. Cystic and Pseudocystic lesions. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma if CT is not conclusive. Critical factors increasing the worldwide use of MRCP are as folIows: 1. Applicability on all modern MR scanners. 2. Accuracy for a wide range of pathology comparable to ERCP. 3. High quality breath-hold acquisition permits use as a screening procedure for biliary and pancreatic disease. Conversely, ERCP is being re-examined with respect to: 1. Distinction of its use as a diagnostic vs. a therapeutic method. 2. The real false-negative rate for small common duct stones 3. The high Iikelihood that papillotomy and stenting are required after diagnostic ERCP. 4. The high cost of the procedure and its complications. 5. The new availability of endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) as an additional gold standard. Established indications for MRCP presently include failed or incomplete ERCP, follow up of chronic pancreatitis, suspected common duct stone and question of biliary and pancreatic duct anomaly, including prelaparoseopie cholecystectomy evaluation. Hormonal stimulation with Conclusion: Lower RI and higher systolic-diastolic flow in tumor and pancreatic supplying vessels strongly suggest a malignancy. 1127 Neural plexus invasion due to carcinomas of the pancreatic head region: is it possible to be diagnosed by thin section hellcal CT? S. Matsumoto, Y. Yamada, H. Kiyosue, Y. Hori, T. Maeda, H. Mori; Purpose: To evaluate the neural plexus invasion due to carcinomas of the pancreatic head-region by using thin-section helical C'T, Methods and Materials: Thirty-five patients with carcinomas of the pancreatic head-region (15 in pancreatic carcinoma, 20 in common bile duct [CBD] carcinoma) underwent dynamic thin-section helical CT (5 mm slice-thickness, 5 mm/sec table speed, 2.5 mm reconstruction). The CT assessment was focused on the neural plexus invasion around superior mesenteric artery (SMA) because it is an important prognostic factor. On the basis of changes around SMA, the CT criteria was established as folIows: grade 0, normal; grade 1, minimum increase in density; grade 2, strandlike structures; and grade 3, mass formation. Additionally, inferior peripancreatic veins (IPV) were evaluated. The CT images were evaluated by three radiologists and correlated with pathological findings. Results: The neural plexus invasion was pathologically confirmed in nine patients with pancreatic carcinoma and in seven patients with CBD carcinoma. The CT scans allowed for 81% in accuracy for pancreatic carcinoma and 100% in accuracy for CBD carcinoma. The false-positive was seen in three patients with pancreatic carcinoma, which was mainly caused by secondary pancreatitis. The evaluation of IPV improved the detection of neural plexus invasion. Conclusion: Helical CT can sufficiently diagnose the neural plexus invasion due to carcinomas of the pancreatic head-region. All studies were performed on a 1.5 T during one breath-hold (TR = 6.3 rns, TE =3.0 ms, FA =70°, slice thickness = 5 mm) using a phasedarray coil. The results concerning the vascular status were compared with surgical and histological findings. Results: In 23 out of 33 patients (70%) a carcinoma was proven. In 18 out of these 23 patients a comparison between MRI findings and surgical results was possible. In 78% (14/18) a vascular infiltration was present, which could be correctly diagnosed in 13 patients (93%). The overall accuracy of the True FISP technique in predicting vascular involvement in general was 94%. An involvement of the arterial system could be surgically verified in 10/18 (56%) cases, whereas a portalvenous involvement was present in 13/18 (72%) cases. The corresponding accuracies of True FISP were 94%, and 89% respectively. Conclusion: The True FISP technique shows a high accuracy in . predicting vascular status in the abdomen. Therefore this method can be used alternatively or in addition to MR angiography. Results: From all malignant primary pancreatic tumors (n =105) there were 73.3% adenocarcinomas. Benign lesions (n = 28) included 78.6% patients with chronic pancreatitis. Four malignant lesions were pancreatic metastases of other carcinomas. In assessing vascular infiltration, the overall accuracy of MR-angiography was 90.2%. In the evaluation of liver metastases, MR showed an overall accuracy of 89.3%. In view of the prime airn, to seperate the operable from the inoperable patients, MR had a sensitivity of 97.3%, a specificity of 88.3% and an overall accuracy of 93.3%. Conclusion: The "one-stop-shopping" MR approach provides the surgeon with all the necessary information prior to pancreatic surgery. By avoiding conventional angiography, ERCP and eventually CT the concept will provide for a reduction of costs with increased time efficiency. Purpose: To assess the value of interactive 'all-in-one' magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for diagnosis and treatment planning in patients with pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Methods and Materials: Interactive MRI was performed by an experienced radiologist in 283 patients with suspected pancreatic disease. A standardized protocol consisting of snapshot double echo HASTE, snapshot black blood HASTE, and snapshot turbo FLASH were always used. If required, dynamic breath hold RARE imaging, contrastenhanced FLASH imaging and/or time-resolved MR angiography were performed in the same session. The results for diagnosis and preoperative staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma were assessed retrospectively. Histology and/or c1inical follow-up were used as gold standard. Results: In 268/283 patients, a c1eardiagnosis could be proposed after interactive MRI. In this patient group, the sensitivity and specificity of MRI for diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma (n = 73) was 93% and 95% respectively. The positive predictive value for diagnosis of resectability was 89%. Conclusion: Interactive 'all-in-one' pancreatic MRI is a new concept that may become the 'one-stop shopping' diagnostic approach in many patients with suspected pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Purpose: The purpose of this prospective study was the comparison of MRI after administration of Mn-DPDP and endosonography for the diagnosis and staging of pancreatic tumors. Methods and Materials: 30 patients with suspected pancreatic tumors underwent MRI and endosonography. MRI imaging was performed with a 1.0 Imager (Magneton Impact, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). Mn-DPDP was injected in a dose of 5 umollkg b.w.. T1-weighted gradient echo and T2-weighted fast spin echo sequences were employed 3 hrs after administration of the contrast agent. A pathologic diagnosis was obtained in all cases with surgery (n =23) or biopsies (n =7), resulting in 27 carcinomas. Results: Overall diagnostic sensitivity was 97% for endoscopic US and 91% for MRI. Specificity was 97% for endoscopic US and 97% for MRI. The sensitivity for the detection of tumors less than 2 cm in diameter was 94% for endoscopic US and 88% for MRI. Conclusion: Endoscopic US is still more accurate than MRI in the diagnosis of pancreatic tumors, particularly for tumors less than 2 cm in diameter. (Submitted by Internet) I H 2 0 and a Buscopan®-induced hypotonia, a native spiral scan of the upper abdomen is performed (8/12/8 mm). After a bolus tracking (15 ml, 4 ml/s, 8s delay, 12 images at a rate of 1/2s) in the abdominal aorta at the level of the pancreatic caput a double spiral scan (5/5/4 mm) of the pancreatic region folIows: the first spiral scan starts after injection of 150 ml of contrast medium with the delay determined by bolus tracking and the second after 70 s. Each investigation is evaluated according to achecklist concerning tumor localisation, tumor extension, infiltration of duodenum and vessels, and Iymph node status, The results were compared to those of the corresponding endo-sonography. Gold standard was laparascopy or tumor free follow-up >6 months. Results: Four of 61 tumors were detected with spiral CT only, one with endosonography only. For tumor localisation, no significant differences were found between spiral CT and endo-sonography. Regional Iymph nodes were detected more reliantly with spiral CL Only spiral CT was able to visualize the relation to arterial and venous vessel structures. Infiltration of duodenum was detected with spiral CT in 58%, with endosonography in 45%. Conclusion: Therapy decision in pancreatic cancer is highly dependant of tumor localisation and extension. Therefore exact diagnostic is of great value. Hydro-spiral-CT delivers relevant and exact information superior to endo-sonography and is recommended despite its high expenditure. Purpose: To assess the diagnostic accuracy of dual-phase helical CT for detection and loco-regional staging of patients with suspected pancreatic cancer. Methods and Materials: 43 patients (26 F, 17 M, Mean age: 54 +/-7) with a suspicious pancreatic mass based on clinical symptoms, laboratory findings and results of ERCP or US were studied. Unhenanced scans of the liver and pancreas were followed by two sequential helical CT scans (5/5 mm collimation) acquired at 20 and 45 sec after l.v, bolus injection of 120 ce of an iodinated contrast agent at 4 mI/sec. CT images of both phases were blindly analyzed by !wo independent readers who were asked to evaluate on each phase tumor resectability and conspicuity. Results: In the 43 studies performed, a final diagnosis was available in 30 cases. There were 17 malignant and 13 benign lesions. Arterial-phase imaging showed the highest diagnostic accuracy for the assessment of celiac trunk invasion whereas portal-phase imaging resulted in the highest lesion conspicuity and superior mesenteric vein opacification. Overall, dual-phase helical CT showed an accuracy for tumor detection of 90%, with sensitivity of 94%, specificity of 85%, and positive and negative predictive value of 89% and 92%, respectively. Conclusion: Both arterial and portal-phase are needed for accurate detection and loco-regional staging of pancreatic cancer resulting in improved prediction of resectability. 1134 Detection and staging of suspected pancreatic carcinoma: comparison of mangafodipir-enhanced MR imaging and bi-phasic helical CT W. Schima, R. Függer, E. Schober, P. Götzinger, C. Oettl, G. Novacek; Purpose: To compare the accuracy of mangafodipir-enhanced MRI and bi-phasic helical CT for detection and staging of pancreatic carcinoma and differentiation from focal pancreatitis. Methods and Materials: 20 patients with suspected pancreatic cancer were prospectively studied. MR was performed at 1.5 T, using T2w TSE with and without fatsat; T1w SE and T1w GRE with and without fatsat before and after mangafodipir trisodium. Bi-phasic enhanced helical CT (150 ml, 4 ml/s) was performed in the pancreatic (40 s delay) and portal venous phase (68-75 s delay). Findings were correlated with surgery, laparoscopy, biopsy, or follow-up. Results: Masses were present in 17 pts (careinoma, 9; focal pancreatitis, 8). Tumor staging was accurate in 9 pts with MR and in 8 with CT (1 false-positive). In 8 pts with pancreatitis, MR was correct in 6 (2 false-positive diagnoses of tumor) and CT in 5 (2 false-positive, 1 falsenegative). Accuracy for differentiation of cancer versus focal pancreatitis was 82% (CT) and 88% (MR). Conclusion: Mangafodipir-enhanced MRI can improve detection and staging of pancreatic carcinoma, as compared to bi-phasic helical C'F, However, differentiation of carcinoma versus focal pancreatitis at MRI and CT remains a c1inical problem. Purpose: To compare MnDPDP enhanced MRI and CECT for diagnosis and staging of pancreatic carcinoma. Methods and Materials: Nineteen patients with known or suspected pancreatic carcinoma were evaluated with MRI and CT. Unenhanced T11T2, and T1 images 20 minutes and 24 hours following MnDPDP were obtained at 1.0 T. CT was performed during the pancreatic and portal venous phases of enhancement. Scans were assessed for the presence of a pancreatic mass, extraglandular extension, vascular involvement, Iymphadenopathy, peritoneal spread and hepatic metastases. Imaging and surgical findings were then compared. Results: Pancreatic adenocarcinoma was diagnosed histologically in 15/19 (79%) patients. MRI and CT both identified 15/15 (100%) tumours. Clear evidence of non-resectability was identified in 6 patients at MRI, who did not progress to surgery. CT findings were equivocal in one of these cases, Nine patients progressed to laparoscopy (n = 2) or laparotomy (n = 7). Resectability was correctly assessed in 7/9 (77.8%) on MRI and 6/9 (66.7%) by Cl. Overall accuracy for reseclabilily was 86.7% for MRI and 73.3% for C'I, Liver metastases were demonstrated by MRI and CT in 3/15 patients. Indeterminate liver lesions on CT in 2 patients were shown to be benign on MRI. Conclusion: MRI performed better than CT in assessing resectability and evaluating associated liver lesions. There was no difference in tumour detection between MRI and CT. In 6 patients Houston valve thickning was observed. Conelusion: We suggest defecographic examination after endoscopy and biopsy to diagnose the ulcer, especially to assess rectal intussusception pathologies. They are not detectable by instrumental and imaging techniques except defecography, and besides according to Womack theory, seem to share ethiopathogenetic causal relationship with the SRUS. Purpose: Chronic anal pain (CAP) represents for the c1inician areal problem of difficult diagnostic and treatment approach. The patients often land to the diagnosis after long time, consulted many specialists and carried out a lot of examinations as X-rays, manometry, electromyography, barium enema, defecography, CT, MRI. The purpose of this study is to determine the role of defecographic method, and to verify eventual relantionship between radiological findings and the desease. We studied by defecography 21 subjects affected by CAP (14 women and 7 males: mean age of 46 years, range 18-61 years) without organic lesions of anorectum. 8 patients showed sphincterial hypertone at manometry, and 11 referred anxiety disturbs. Results: The seat of pain was anorectal in 12 cases, anoperineal in 4 cases, anosphincterial in 4 cases and rectovaginal in 1 case. The pain resulted in connection with evacuation in 28% of cases. The length pain changed from some hours (57%) to a few minutes (43%). Defecography provided 13 cases of rectocele, 6 cases of puborectalis muscle syndrome, 5 cases of sphincters spasm, 4 cases of perineal descent, 2 cases of fecal incontinence and 1 case of intussusception. We retain defecography is a useful method in the patients with CAP, because diagnoses morphofunctional anorectal deformities, and besides it permits the assessement of dynamic disorders of sphincters and puborectalis museie, that according to many authors and our opinion, they can play an important role within complex and multifactorial etiopathogenesis of CAP. The desease is characterized by a benign chronic ulceration on the anterior lower rectal wall, rectal bleeding, tenesmus, and is associated with evacuation difficulties and pelvic musculature disfunctions. The purpose of our study is to evaluate the role of defecography combined with videoproctography and endoscopy in the diagnostic approach of SRUS and its functional anorectal anomalies. Methods and Materials: Our series consists of 30 patients (22 women and 8 men, with mean age of 36 years) investigated by endoscopy, biopsy, and defecography with videoproctography. Histopathological findings were examined in order to Rutter and Riddel criteria. Defecography was carried out sitting the patient in lateral projection on a dedicated commode and detecting X-rays images of pelvic f100r in different dynamic phases. Results: At US all patients revealed perianal fistulas. In US examination the fistula appears as a hypoechoic longitudinal structure, which can be followed from the skin to the rectum. In 15 patients a corpuscular fluid collection inside the fistula was seen. In all patients a hypervascularised rim along the fistula wasseen. 2 patients had a perirectal abscess. All fistulographies showed connection to the rectum. symptoms and findings of fistula in ano were examinated by using 1.5-T GE8.2 employing a dedicated endoanal coil (inflated with 60-100 ce of air). A intramuscular injection of 1 ml of butylscopolaminebromide (20 mg/mi) was performed in all patients before imaging. 3 mm contiguous slices were obtained using SE T1-weighted and FAST T2-weighted with FAT-saturation sequences. In 5 patients saline solution was injected directly into the fistula and heavy T2-weighted sequences with MIP reconstruction were performed. All data were compared with surgical findings. Results: MRI provided a high soft-tissues contrast and was able, in our series, to define correctly the site and the relationship with internal and external sphincter, according to the Parks c1assification, in 72% of the cases of fistula. Great detail in defining the abscess was also provided in all cases with concordance of surgery in 100% of the examinations in the site detection. Conclusion: Endoanal MRI is an accurate modality in the evaluation of abscess and fistula in ano for an appropriate preoperative assessment. 1141 MR imaging in anal fistulae L.H. Ros, PR Ros; ZaragozalE, Boston, MAIUSA Purpose: The aim of this study is to revisit anal anatomy and to show the MR imaging possibilities in the study of perianal fistulas and abscesses. Methods and Materials: At our institution not less than 50 patients with perlanal fistulas and abscesses were examined with MR imaging (0.5 T GE) in the last two years. The exams were performed with body and/or surface coils, with a minimum protocol that included axial proton density and T2 weighted images and coronal T1 weighted images. Park's classification was used to describe the findings. The obtained images show the normal anal anatomy, allowing the definition of the internal and external sphincter, and the evaluation of the subcutaneous, ischiorectal and para-anal spaces. The pathological findings, abscesses and fistulas in different locations: subcutaneous, intersphincteric, transsphincteric, ischiorectal and supralevatoric were also sharply defined. The different sequences used allowed us to establish semiological criteria in order to differentiate scar fibrous tissue from inflammatory, active collections. The multiplanar imaging capabilities and the non-invasive nature of the procedure make MR imaging the method of choice in the study of this pathology, against other imaging modalities. It is a reliable method of detecting perianal abscesses and fistulas and of classifying these complications according to the surgical terminology.  Purpose: One decisive criterion in selecting the type of operation to be performed is the evaluation of a possible sphincter invasion. Together with the essential digital palpation, the Transrectal Ultrasonography (TRUS) has achieved considerable significance for preoperative local staging of the rectal carcinoma. Until now, no publication regarding the evaluation of sphincter infiltration by means of TRUS was available. Therefore, it was of interest to investigate the value of TRUS in the preoperative assessment of tumor infiltration into the anal canal. Methods and Materials: 38 patients (24 male, 14 female, mean age of 65) with bioptic verified lower rectal carcinoma (up to 12 cm from the anal verge) were given a TRUS examination (B and K Medical, 360 0 rotating 7-10 MHz endoprobe). In all cases with infiltration into the anal canal, differentiation was made between infiltration of the mucosa, internal and external sphincter museie respectively. All results were compared with the histopathology of the surgical specimens. Results: Within our patients, we found in 12 cases a histopathologicallyproven infiltration of the anal canal. In 11 cases this was correctly diagnosed by means of TRUS; and, furthermore, the extent and depth of the infltration was determined. In one patient, the sphincter infiltration was underestimated, in two cases overestimated. Altogether there was an accuracy of 92%, a specificity of 92% and a sensitivity of 91%. Conclusion: TRUS can detect an infiltration in the anal canal with great accuracy and therefore plays an important role in the preoperative evaluation of lower rectal carcinomas. 1143 Evaluation of rectal cancer with MRI: use of a pelvic phased array coil to establish the depth of parietal invasion A. Laghi, P Pavone, V. Panebianco, C. Catalano, R Kayal, R Passariello; RomeIl Purpose: To evaluate the use of a pelvic array coil in the evaluation of the anatomical layers of the rectal wall, and to establish the depth of parietal infiltration in patients with recta! cancer. 5ubjects and Methods: Fourteen patients with known rectal cancer were studied using a 1.5 T magnet (Magnetom Vision Plus; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). In all cases T1 and T2 weighted sequences were employed (T1 gradient echo breath hold; T2: breath hold Turbospin-echo; non breath hold Turbo spin-echo; HASTE). Non breathhold Turbo-spin-echo sequences were acquired with high resolution matrix (360 x 512). Preparation was performed using an enema of positive (n. 10; diluted solution of Gd-DTPA, Schering) or negative (n.4; Lumirem, Guerbet) contrast agent. Images obtained on different sequences were compared, for both the evaluation of anatomical and pathological features. Results: Anatomical layers of the rectal wall were evident in all images. In pathological cases, the evidence of the muscolaris propria proved to be an important anatomicallandmark to define the stage of the disease, in patients with cancer. Stage 111 (n. 4) cases, with muscolaris propria infiltration were differentiated from stage land 11 cases (n. 3). In one larger tumor the extrarectaI extent of the tumor was weil defined. Conclusion: Use of phased array technology provides consistent anatomical detail and allows evidence of rectal cancer with good definition of the information needed to perform a correct staging. Purpose: Our goal is to prospectively analyse the value of high resolution MRI versus CT in predicting the extent of a locally advanced primary or recurrent rectal cancer. Methods and Materials: Nineteen patients with proven cancer were evaluated with standard CT and MRI at 1.5 T with a phased array coil. The CT and MR images were independently scored for invasion of 9 neighbouring pelvic structures and the results were compared with surgery and histology. Results: Invasion occurred 50 times in 18 patients. Most commonly involved were the presacral space, the piriform muscles and the internal genitals. MRI demonstrated 98% sensitivity, 97% specificity, 92% PPV and 99% NPV. For CT these figures were: 75% sensitivity, 79% specificity, 59% PPV and 88% NPV. In 6 cases MRI showed tumour involving the sacral bone or the lateral pelvic wall, not visible on CT. In 9 cases MRI correclly showed fibrosis only when CT had predicted invasion. One false positive MRI of suspected invasion of the prostate was probably caused by previous radiotherapy. The only false negative case on MRI was a missed bladder invasion. Conclusion: High Resolution MRI using a phased array coil is superior to CT in predicting tumour extent in locally advanced primary or recurrent rectal cancer and is recommended in the preoperative work up of these tumours. Contrast injection was done using an MR-power injector and 20 ml of Gd-DTPA were injected with an injection rate of 3 mUsec followed by a saline injection of 20 ml with the same rate. The acquired image mater ial was evaluated by two radiologists in conference for detecting of central (main stem, lobar, segmental arteries) thromboembolic material as weil as visualization of the arterial pulmonary tree. Image analys is was done on Maximum-Intensity-Projection reconstructions, source images and multiplanar reformations (MPR). Results: Image quality was considered as diagnostic sufficient in all cases. MPRs and source images were especially helpful in detecting thromboembolic material to the level of the segmental arteries in all cases . MIP reconstructions were similar to images obtained from intraarterial DSA Postoperatively, the improved pulmonary perfusion could be demonstrated in all cases. Conclusion: Contrast-enhanced 3D MR-ang iography of the pulmo nary vasculature allows for detection of chronic thromboembolic disease that may be trealed operalively. stenosis as folIows: 0 =no stenosis; 1 =mild stenosis «50%); 2 = moderate stenosis (50-75%); 3 =severe stenosis (>75%); 4 =occluded. Sensitivity and specificity of Gd-MRA and the kappa statistic for interobserver variability were calculated. Results: Gd-MRA and conventional angiography graded 55/68 vessels identically (21/26 CA, 23126 SMA, 11/16 IMA). Considering severe stenosis/occlusion as positive, Gd-MRA was 100% sensitive and 93% specific. All errors involved the IMA For diagnosing CMI (defined as severe stenosis/occiusion of at least 2 mesenteric arteries), Gd-MRA was 100% sensitive and 94% specific. Inter-observer agreement was excellent for the CA (K =0.90) and SMA (K =0.92) and moderate for the IMA (K =0.48). Conclusion: Gd-MRA accurately diagnoses proximal splanchnic arterial stenosis and is a promising screening modality for identifying CMI. The purpose of the study was to compare the value of a contrast enhanced 3D MRA in patients after kidney and pancreas transplantation with DSA and surgical history. 43 MRA examinations were performed in 40 patients after kidney transplantation, 21 of them underwent a combined kidney and pancreas transplantation. In order to detect postoperative vascular complications a MRA sequence protocoll was used, that included one measurement pre and three post gadolinium application. After subtraction MIPreconstructions were calculated. A DSA correlation was possible in 29 MR examinations. All of 18 hemodynamically significant arterial stenoses, that were identified with DSA in the i1iacarteries, the major allograft arteries and their first branches, could be identified with the previously performed MRA. No false positive results were found. Two stenoses were overestimated by MRA compared to DSA. Furthermore in two cases complications of renal veins and in 4 cases perfusion defects of kidney parenchyma were detected by MRA The results suggest that the used contrast enhanced MRA technique is reliable in identifying arterial stenoses after kidney and pancreas transplantation and can help to detect venous complications and perfusion defects after kidney transplantation, Purpose: To assess the patient's preference for CE MRA or DSA in visualizing the abdominal vascular anatomy. Methods and Materials: Forty-one patients who underwent within a period of three days both abdominal (liver, renal and pancreas) intraarterial DSA and contrast-enhanced MRA responded a six items questionnaire about their experiences and preferences for both procedures. Results: 76% prefer MRA, DSA is the examination of first choice for 14%, the remaining 10% did not have any preference. Because of ciaustrophobia 3 patients will refuse MR in the future, 11 patients don't want to undergo future DSA due to bad experiences. The average rating score in the non-claustrophobic patient is 7.6 for MRA and 5.6 for DSA on a ten point scale. Non-invasiveness of the MRA was mentioned by most patients as an enormous advantage. Conclusion: Breathhold CE-MRA is very weil tolerated and the "examination of choice" for the non-claustrophobic patient. If the diagnostic performance of 3D CE MRA is the same or better than of DSA, MRA should be the first step in the workup of patients for examining the vascular system. Methods and Materials: 22 L, 9 PK and 9 0 who underwent MRA and DSA within a 3 days interval were studied. The following costs per examination were analyzed: radiologist time, technician time, materials, contrast medium and equipment depreciation. The MR and DSA procedures were performed by one radiologist and two technicians. MR and DSA room costs per hour (includes 1 radiologist + 2 technicians + depreciation) is 584 and 284 US$ resp. Results: MR and DSA total costs =room + contrast + materials + data processing costs + review costs. Methods and Materials: Patients scheduled for biopsy of a c1in ical, mammographie or sonograph ie abnormality were included and underwent preoperative dynamic MRI on Siemens 1.0 (162 valid lesions 5 mm) or 1.5 Tesla (357 valid lesions~5 mm) using FLASH-3D (87 sec) before and 5 times after standardized bolus of 0.2 mmol Gd-DTPAlkg. MR data were correlated with histopathology. 1.0 and 1.5 T data were analyzed separately using discriminant analysis. Results: The best differentiation of invasive malignancy from benign lesions was achieved by a combination a maximum of 4 wash-in and wash-out parameters . Different weighting of MRI parameters allowed formulation of a statistically based interpretation scheme yielding either an optimized accuracy with sens.lspec . =95%n1 % (1 T) or 89 %/66 % (1.2 T) or a minimized number of false negative calls with sens.lspec. = 98 %131% (1 T) or 96 %/30% (1.2 T). Further improvements were possible by adding information concern ing presence of mammograph ically suspicious microcalcifications. Different weighting of the parameters and results allowed deduction of a statistically founded rule yielding either an optimized accuracy or a minimized number of false negative calls. Conclusion: Using a widely available standardized MR technique crlteria for differentiation of breast lesions were developed. Best results have been achieved by combin ing selected mammographie and MR information. The study was supported by Schering , Berlex laboratories, and Siemens. Purpose: The ability of MR imaging to visualize invasive breast cancer has been weil documented in various c1inical trials . The aim of our study was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of contrast-enhanced MR imaging in the detection of intraductal and minimally invasive breast cancer. Methods and Materials: Retrospectively the results of c.e. MR imaging were compared with histopathologie evaluation in a group of 41 patients with lCIS (n = 4), DCIS (n =26) and minimally invasive breast cancer (n = 11). C.e. MRI was performed with FLASH 3D and 0.2 mmol Gd·DTPA per kg body weight. Results: In patients with DCIS and minimally invasive cancer enhancement was strong (50%), intermed iale (40%) and IiUle or not significant (10%). 60% exhibited delayed enhancement. Focal contrast uptake occurred in 80% (among them 15% along ducts). All lCIS demonstrated delayed enhancement. Conclusion: The enhancement behaviour was typical for malignancy (fast, focal, iII-eircumscribed or along ducts) in only about 50% of in situ carcinoma . Little or no enhancement does not allow reliable exclusion of noninvasive malignancy. Results: In 20 cases arterial anatomy was scored identically. In 5 palients the same variant anatomy was identified on MRA and DSA. One variant was missed on DSA. MRA failed to elucidate exact arterial anatomy in 2 cases. More stenoses were identified on MRA due to its 3-D character. Peripheral arterial detail was less in MRA. The portal system was better seen by MRA. DSA failed to identify 2 thrombosed portal veins. On MRA 78 collateral areas were seen whereas DSA was able to depict 27. MRA showed with excellent detail the venous system, DSA failed to do so. In DSA three disseclions and one serious vasovagal reaction occurred, MRA was performed without any complications. Conclusion: Breathhold CE-FS-Turbo-MRA can replace La. DSA in the workup of OlT candidates. Purpose: To evaluate dynamic contrast-enhanced EPI sequence on a new developed gradient system (power track 3000) and to compare to contrast enhanced turbo field echo sequence in MR-mammography. Methods and Materials: Fifteen patients with suspected lesions in the breast were examined with a Philips 1.0 Tesla MR Gyroscan, equipped with the power track gradient system (23 mT). Dynamic contrast imaging was performed twice, once with the EPI imaging and once with turbo field echo imaging (TFE). Resulting images from the same patient were compared and read out by three radiologists (1 expert, 1 fellow, 1 beginner to MR) and judged in terms of image resolution, signal to noise ratio, artifacts and overall diagnostic value. Results: Preliminary results have shown that dynamic centrastenhanced EPI sequence is superior to the TFE sequence in terms of artifacts with a 3 mm slice thickness covering the entire breast. In particular, better resolution and less pulsation artifacts in the phase encoding direction were encountered in the axillar region, thus enabling to see lateral tumor masses as weil as Iymph nodes more ciearly. Conelusion: The EPI sequence should replace the TFE sequence in dynamic contrast enhanced MR-mammography, if the scanner is equipped with a high strength gradient. In dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, characteristic enhancement profiles are used to differentiate between benign and malignant neoplasm. This method is based on the assumption that microvascular morphology is altered in malignant lesions. However, in some cases enhancement profiles of lesions classified as malignant or benign respectively overlap. This can lead to false-positive, but also falsenegative diagnostic results. In order to investigate possible reasons for these uncharacteristic enhancement profiles, we have been analyzing tumor microvascular structures by electron microscopy. Methods and Materials: Using conventional electron microscopy we established a typical histopathological "basic vascular profile" of muscular and non-muscular vessels of benign lesions, and of feeding vessels and immature tumor vessels in vascular hot spots of carcinomas. In order to account for vascular leakiness, the following factors have to be investigated: absence or presence, thickness, and nature ofthe vascular basement membrane; presence of pericytes; number and nature of endothelial cells with presence of fenestration; and the nature of cell-cell contacts. After establishing the "basic vascular profile" we have been analyzing lesions which -according to dynamic MRI-were "mimickers" of benign or malignant lesions. Results: Although the study is not completed yet, preliminary results are very promising and might yield insights into untypical enhancement behavior. were localized and removed. Histologie findings were directly correlated with imaging results. Results: 72 Patients had a malignant tumor (68 stage pT1 or 2). 32% showed multifocal disease. Out of these mammography and sonography demonstrated all foci in 63%, MRM in 81%. In 12 patients (16%) additional biopsies based solelyon MR findings were performed (histologically 5 additional ipsilateral tumors (mean size 6 mm), 1 contralateral carcinoma, 6 benign findings). The rate of biopsies revealing additional malignant foci was 50% of all MR based biopsies and 8% of all cases. 5 invasive tumors (size 1 to 7 mm) and 7 intraductal carcinomas were not detected by MRM. Conelusion: Although MRM detects more small multifocallesions than mammography and sonography (potential benefit in 8% of cases) the prognostic value in breast conserving treatment inciuding radiation therapy remains uncertain. Disadvantages are 50% false positive biopsies and a considerable false negative rate. (C) a circular ROI as largest as possible within the lesion; (0) an irregular ROI contouring the lesion. The curves were ciassified malignant (early enhancement >90%); benign «50%); uncertain (51-89%). For sensitivity and specificity, the uncertain curves were considered as positive. Results: The sensitivity was: curve A, 100% with 9 uncertain curves; B, 91% with 6 uncertain curves; C, 91% with 9 uncertain curves; 0, 82% with 18 uncertain curves. The specificity was: A, 71%; B, 86%; C, 86%; 0, 90%. (20-72 yrs old; mean 42 yrs) were invited by mail; they inciuded 36 firstdegree relatives of cancer pats. and pats. with a previous open biopsy of atypical ductal hyperplasia (8 pats) , DCIS (7 pats) or LCIS (8 pats). MRM was performed in a 1.5 T-(49 pats) resp. 0.5 T-(10 pats) Gyroscan using adynamie T1w-FFE-sequence before and every minute after injection of 0.1 mmol/kg Gd-DTPA followed by extensive quantitative signal analyses. Results: Heterogenous patterns of enhancement were detected. 50 examinations were normal, 9 pats had a significant enhancement. 3 open biopsies were performed revealing 1 fibroadenoma, 1 invasive cancer and 1 DCIS. 6 years later, a follow-up control by phone of 52/56 pats without histopathological correlation was normal, 4 pats could not be found (they had normal enhancement). 1 patient needed psychiatrie therapy. Conclusion: Detection of high-risk patients seems to be promising. New lesions can be detected, but not all patients can be satisfied. Each enhancement type was categorized a normal type (no enhancement) K1, slowly increasing K2, strong initial enhancement with signal increase K3, strong initial enhancement with signal steady state K4 and strong initial enhancement followed by a signal decrease K5. All patients previously underwent multiple surgical interventions (mean: 5.8 per patient). Clinical follow up, three-phase bone scintigrams and antigranurocyte antibody immunoscintigraphy were availab/e. In 11 patients the final diagnosis was established by intraoperative bacteriology. The final diagnoses of the 17 evaluated body areas revealed: no infection (n =7), soft tissue infection (n =4), osteomyelitis with soft tissue infection (n =6). MRI identified all infected areas correctly but 5 showed false positive results due to postoperative edema/scarring in bone marrow (n = 4) and soft tissue (n = 1) up to 13 months postoperatively (mean: 10 months). Metal artefacts were present in 11 patients, preventing (n =2) or impairing (n =4) correct diagnosis. Additional CT was necessary in 4 patients for preoperative evaluation of sequestra (n = 1), possible bone fistula (n = 2), and cortical bone remodeling (n = 1). Postoperative scarring/edema occuring up to 13 months postop. is a major pitfall in this dedicated patient group leading to low specificity (63%) evaluating osteomyelitis. Metal artefacts may limit the diagnostic value. Methods and Materials: 65 patients with clinically suspected osteomyelitis were examined with a 1.0/1.5-T unit. T1SE, T2fastSE, fatsupressed T1SE, STIR, gadolinium-enhanced T1SE and fat supressed gadolinium-enhanced T1SE sequences were performed. Three radiologists evaluated the conspicuousness of the following MR signs: Marrow signal abnormalities, soft-tissue-involvement, abscess, sinus tract, periostal bone formation, loss of cortical integrity and sequester were assessed with each sequence. The results were statistically evaluated with the Friedman test. Results: Of 65 patients 53 had osteomyelitis. 53 patients showed bone marrow signal abnormalities, best seen on the fat-supressed gadolinium-enhanced T1SE, T1SE and STIR (p < 0.001). Soft tissue involvement (44 patients), abscess (25 patients), sinus tract (13 patients) were most conspicuous on fat-supressed gadolinium-enhanced T1SE, STIR and gadolinium-enhanced T1SE (p < 0.001). Cortical erosion (43 patients), periostal bone formation (21 patients, p < 0.001), sequestra (4 patients) were best identified on T1SE. Conclusion: Primary signs of osteomyelitis are most conspicuos on fat-supressed gadolinium-enhanced T1SE, T1SE and STIR. To relief differential diagnosis, the detection and evaluation of the secondary signs as abscess, sinus tract and soft tissue involvement is possible using the centrast enhanced sequences, bone erosion and formation on T1SE. Purpose: Gangrene, defined by gas production is a major diagnosis event in the clinical history of diabetic foot infection. Diagnostic methods such as bacteria sampies, foot radiographs (FR) or MRI are often insufficient. The aim of this study was to evaluate the benefit of CT as compared to FR. Methods and Materials: 31 diabetic patients (mean age: 65 ± 10.7 years, mean age of diabetes melitus history: 22 ± 11.7) with diabetic foot infection, were examined with 39 CT and FR. Osteitis, arthritis, cellulitis were assessed. Management care (Iocal treatment, surgery, with or without adequate anaerobic antibiotherapy) was determined separately based on CT and FR findings in order to establish the usefulness of C'I, Results: 11 On CT, osteoarhritis was only observed in 24 patients, with gas in 6 cases. On FR, osteoarthritis was observed only in 16 patients with gas in one case,. 21 Comparison between FR and CT improved diagnosis of gangrene in 5 cases. Early surgery was decided instead of antibiotherapy in 2 patients, and effective antianaerobic treatment was started in 3 cases instead of inadequate antibiotic treatments ConcJusion: CT appears to be useful in the management of diabette foot gangrene. Patients: A 7 and a 9-year-old girl presented with a subacute onset of pain and fever during two to three weeks. Clinical examination showed in both cases mild infiltration of the skin with red discoloration and an accompanying, painful soft tissue mass at the level of the groin. Results: Ultrasound examination revealed seemingly Iiquified adenopathies with an f1egmonous infiltration of the surrounding subcutaneous fat tissue. Power doppler showed a very hypervascular aspect of the adenopathies. MR imaging showed a poorly defined soft tissue mass with extensive surrounding edema in an efferent Iymfatic distribution. Mr imaging although not necessarily required for the diagnosis, gives excellent demonstration of the extent of the infectious proeess. Power doppler illustrates the strong vaseular nature of the adenopathies in cat scrateh disease; a finding that was not been deseribed in the literature before. Mycetomas are chronic infections involving the skin, the subcutaneous tissues and bones. They are characterized by swelling and presence of sinuses discharging pus and grains, which are agglomerates of bacterial filaments or fungal hyphae. There is Iiltle information available in the literature about MRI and radiological features of mycetomas. Twenty patients (12 male, 8 female) age range 18-78 years seen at Tawam Hospital (University UAE) medically treated in the Dermatological Dept. during 1981-1998. All cases were histologically proven and in 9 patients surgery was performed as weil. Location of mycetoma:foot 14, ealf 3, elbow 1, sKulf 1, chest 1. Numbers of examinations:plain radiography 57, three-phase bone scan (TC 99) 31, cr 28 and MRI 35 (Siemens Magnetom SP 4000). A standard MRI protocol of T1 images pre and post contrast, STIR, T2 and proton density images has been used. Superiority of MRI was seen in comparison to other imaging methods. MRI revealed soft tissue involvment in T1 images: low signaliesions with some contrast enhancement. Patchy or diffuse loss of normal cutis, subcutis and deep tissue signals were frequently noted. T2 images showed increased signals within previously low signal regions in T1 images. In 16 cases (80%), small paramagnetic lesions could be observed due to content of mycetoma grains, which have not been previously described in lhe radiologicalliterature. To our knowledge, this is a one of larges material of mycetoma palienls assesed by MRI. Methods and Materials: MR images of ten lesions in eight patients with pathologically proved tuberculous osteomyelitis were retrospectively analyzed. The most common location was the tibia (n = 5). The sites of long bone involvement were metaphysis with extension to epiphysis (n = 3), epiphysis (n = 2), diaphysis (n = 2) and metaphysis (n = 1). Multiplicity of the lesion was found in two patients, one with femur and ischium, and another with two separate lesions in tibia. Of the ten lesions, intraosseous abscesses (n = 6) were most common pathologie type, and followed by granulomas (n =3), and sequestrum (n =1). On T2WI, the signal intensity were intermediate or slightry hypointense in six, and hyperintense in four. On Gd-enhanced T1WI, the enhancement patterns of tuberculous abscess showed irregular inner rirn in four and smooth rim in two. Cortical bone destruction with surrounding soft tissue involvement was found in 6 lesions. Purpose: SAPHO-syndrome represents a heterogenous group of entities, forming partly similar arthroskeletal manifestations potentially connected to pustulous dermatosis. Radiological features have to be further c1assified. We analysed 69 cases with SAPHOsymptoms. A classification was built by clinical symptoms, biochemical and histological results, radiological findings (plain film x-ray, CT, MRI), Tc99-bone-scan and c1inical course. We Iike to differentiate the cases in 3 groups: a. Spondarthritis hyperostotica pustulo-psoriatica (n = 39, syn.: pustulotic arthroosteitis) with the triad of palmo-plantar pustulosis, sterno-costo-c1avicular hyperostosis and perivertebral hyperostotic desmo-phytosis, potentially with spondylodiscitis, arthritis of sacroiliac joint(s) and of peripheral joints b. Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis (CRMO, n = 18) characterized by a bland ehrenie sclerosing osteomyelitis and/or spondylitis in the adolescent or adult, showing palme-plantar pustulosis in 25% (adolescence), respectively 50% (adult) of the cases, sometimes with acne conglobata/fulminans and characterized by the type of localization of bone involvement and frequently showing anterior chest wall-syndrome (ACW). c. Circumscript syndromes (isolated SCCH, n = 5; isolated ACWsyndrome, n =7) infections. Group 1: 200 pts of suspected osteomyelitis, but no draining sinuses, had plain X-Ray of the affected part and sonography of the affected and contralateral normal part. Group 2: 30 pts with draining sinuses in musculoskeletal system underwent plain x-ray of the affected part, sonography of the affected and contralateral normal part followed by contrast sinography with ultravist of the sinus tract. 7.5 MHz linear phased array tranducer was used. Needle aspiration or surgery was performed to confirm diagnoses. Results: Group 1: out of 200 pts with no draining sinuses, 120 pts had osteomyelitis, 30 soft tissue abscesses, 10 cellulitis and 30 pts revealed limitations of ultrasound in diagnosis, as seen in sickle cell disease (10 pts), septic arthritis (10 pts), epiphyseal osteomyelitis (7 pts) and Brodies abscess (3 pts). Group 2: 30 pts with draining sinuses had couses Iike foreign body injury (12 pts-10 non radiopaque & 2 radiopaque), osteomyelitis (12 pts) and soft rissue abscesses (6 pts). differentiating it from soft tissue abscesses, pyomyositis and cellulitis (b) Imaging details of draining sinuses in musculoskeletal system, which may be termed as ULTRASONOSINOGRAPHY, and scored higher than contrast sinogrpahy. Limitations of ultrasound in above mentioned conditions warrants aspitrations of suspicious areas to make a diagnoses.  We estimated that in 16 cases (32.6%) origin of spondylodiscitis was tbc and 33 cases (67.4%) origin was pyogenic. All cases of tbc spondylitis (except two drug resistant tbc form) were with previously proved tbc diagnosis of different localisation. Radiological findings in tbc cases were more than two-vertebrae involvement (9), deformation of spine (12), paravertebral, epidural abscesses formation (8). Pyogenic spondylodiscitis (33) were derived from or after -discectomies (7), operation on retroperitoneal cavity (6) included 3 cases after abdominal aortoplasty, closed spine trauma (4), hematogenic dissemination of pyogenic infection from different localisation -skin, urinary tract, lung, mediastinum, sinuses (8). In 8 cases we did not estimate potential cause. Large bone destruction was common after discectomy. There are not specific radiological findings to differentiate tbc from pyogenic spondylodiscitis. A definitive diagnosis of spondylodiscitis was established by means of biopsy, histological evidence and bacterial culture. Inversion recovery or FSE Tz increase signal intensity of muscle (n:11), decrease in signal (n:I). Asymmetry (n:3), presence of subcutaneous fluid (n:4) perifascial fluid (n:5), atrophy (n:10), increase in muscle volume (n:2) and fatty deposition (n:9) were reviewed. Contrast (n: 11) increased diagnostic value in all cases Conelusion: MRI demonstrates site and severity of inflammatory myopathy, allowing optimal biopsy site localization and assists in monitoring disease.  We investigated the forefeet in 10 diabetic patients (6 male, 4 female, mean age 49 ± 6.5 years) with evidence of neuropathie osteoarthropathy by using sagittal T1 SE and T2 SE images with fat suppression (STIR), as weil as axial and sagittal T1 weighted SE images with fat suppression (SPIR) techniques after contrast application. Soft tissue and osseous changes were ranked on a 3 grade scale and concurrent HbA1c measurements were obtained. Results: Soft tissue changes with evidence of enhancement and/or edema were observed as extensive in 4 cases, moderate in 1 case and mild in 5 cases. An osseous affection was revealed as moderate in 2 cases and mild in 8 cases. HbA 1c tended rather to reflect osseous changes than soft tissue changes, however no definite correlation could be found. 14.2% of asymptometic subjects had severe emphysema compared to 63.6% of symptomatic subjects. The correlation between HRCT scores & ST was statistically significant. Conclusion: Clinically & radiographically occult emphysema is a common activity in heavy smokers. HRCT is an excellent modality to detect emphysema in this group. Results: In CFA patients without emphysema (CFApURE), disease extent correlated best with DLCO (r = -0.77, p < 0.00005); the magnitude of correlation was reduced when CFAEMPH cases were included. CFAEMPH patients were characterized by relative preservation of TLC (p < 0.00005) but a greater depression of KCO (p < 0.00005) when compared to CFA pURE. The functional influence of emphysema in CFA was dependent on its location relative to the fibrosis: emphysema that was intermingled with fibrosis was independently associated with preservation of spirometric volumes (FEV1, p < 0.0005; FVC, p < 0.001), whereas emphysema that was remote from fibrosis was an independent determinant of a preservation of residual volume (p < 0.005). Conclusion: Concurrent emphysema modulates the functional effects of CFA but the impact of emphysema is dependent on its distribution relative to fibrotic lung. 1181 Associations between abnormal diaphragm/chest wall motions and regional ventilation in pulmonary emphysemaevaluation with inter-study comparison between breathing MR and 133Xe5PECT K. Suga, T. Tsukuda, N. Kume, H. Awaya, K. Takano, N. Matsunaga; Ube/J Purpose: The relationship between abnormal diaphragm/chest wall (D/CW) motions and regional hyperinflation in pulmonary emphysema was evaluated by the comparisons between dynamic breathing MR imaging and 133XeSPECT. Methods and Materials: Breathing MR was performed utilizing Turbo-FLASH or HASTE sequences in mid-coronal and sagittal planes in 24 patients with emphysema including 9 patients who underwent lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS), and for controls in 6 normal subjects. With an acquisition time of 25-30 sec, 20-22 sequential images were produced at a single, fixed plane over 2-3 respiratory cycles of slow, deep breathing, which were viewed in a cine-Ioop format. Fusion MR displays of maximal inspiratory and expiratory imaging, and timedistance curves (TDCs) were used for analysing respiratory D/CW motions. Regional lung ventilation was quantified by 133Xe retention index (RI) on three-dimensional 133XeSPECT displays. Results: Compared to normal subjects with regular and synchronous D/CW motions, all the patients with hyperinflated thoraces due to marked 133Xe retention showed reduced, irregular or asynchronous D/CW motions with abnormal diaphragmatic configurations. Chest wall motion was focally reduced in the locations with marked 133Xeretention. Maximal amplitude of D/CW motions (MADM/MACWM) and the length of apposition of the diaphragm (LAD) in the hemithoraces with 133Xe RI > 50% (n = 11) were significantly reduced than those in the hemithoraces with less 13 3Xe RI (n = 37) (P < .05). Overall, these parameters were significantly reduced in the patients than those in normal subjects (P < .0001, P < .001, and P < .01, respectively). After LVRS, with reduction in 133Xe RI, all 9 patients showed improvements of abnormal D/CW motions with significant increases in MADM/MACWM compared to preoperation (47.5 mm ± 15.7 vs 36.3 mm ± 8.6; P < .01, and 20.8 mm ± 8.4 vs 15.5 mm ± 7.4; P < .0001, respectively). In this study we aimed to determine whether HRCT can detect lung abnormality in those asymptomatic patients. Methods and Materials: Twenty-eight symptomatic patients with history of ingesting Sauropus androgynus were evaluated with HRCT in full inspiration and full expiration and pulmonary function testing. Fourteen patients further received methacholine provocative test for airway hyperresponsiveness. Results: Pulmonary functions of these patients were within normal limits (FEV 1 = 91.3% ± 10.4 predicted; FEV 1/FVC = 83.3% ± 4.9; FEV zoO -1 ,zoo = 89.5% ± 17.6 predicted; OLco = 83% ± 14 predicted). Expiratory HRCT showed remarkable mosaic attenuation in non-dependent parts indicating air-trapping in 20 patients (71%), while none showed bronchial dilation. The positive airway hyperresponsiveness (10/14, 71%) was significantly associated with expiratory airtrapping signs (p =0.02) which suggested subtle bronchiolar injury by Sauropus androgynus. Conclusion: HRCT is more sensitive than conventional lung function test to detect subclinical small-airway injury in asymptomatic patients after ingestion of Sauropus androgynus. HRCT of the lung at inspiration and expiration before volume reduction surgery. Methods and Materials: In 10 patients with severe emphysematous lung changes, candidates for possible volume reduction surgery, a spirometrically standardized CT ot the lung was obtained (Somatom Plus 4, Siemens, Germany). The HRCT scans were performed with 2 mm slice thickness and 25 mm slice interval at 80% and 20% of the actual vital capacity (VC). For the whole lung, for each lobe, and for each slice the mean density and the emphysema index values were calculated. The results for inspiration (80% VC) and exspiration (20% VC) were compared. Results: HRCT of the lung allows quantification of the emphysematous changes. Separate analysis of the lobes of the lung and of each CT slice shows regional differences in severity of emphysema. Comparison of scans at inspiration and at expiration enables the identification of Jung parts that are less ventilated. Conclusion: Quantitative assessment of emphysema in candidates for lung-volume reduction surgery is potentially useful in showing the distribution of emphysematous changes and of non-ventilated lung regions. oxygen mixture for the examination. The respiratory status of the patients was monitored by an integrated spirometer, the scans were automatically triggered at 80% of the vital capacity. Breathing-curves were displayed on the CT-monitorin real-time modus. We performed two spiral-scans in single-breath technique in each patient, one plain-scan and one xenon enhanced scan imaging the whole lung. Subtraction of the plain and xenon scans allowed generation of multiplanar ventilation maps. Evaluation was done on a PC-workstation. Results: The measurements showed a mean xenon enhancement of about 100 H.U.. Local ventilation was in good agreement with clinical findings, local ventilation disorders such as emphysematous bullae could be detected. Spatial resolution was superior to competing methods such as scintigraphy. Conclusion: Xenon enhanced CT allows imaging of local lung ventilation and detection of ventilation disorders. Sreathing motion between plain and xenon scan remains a problem. Therefore, data-matching has to be improved by further software efforts and re-registration. 1186 Bronchial stimulation by metacholine and salbutamol in asthmatics: effects on lung density and bronchial caliber at CT C. Beigeiman, A. Capderou, M. Zelter, Ph. Grenier; ParislF Purpose: To evaluate changes in lung density and bronchial caliber induced by bronchial stimulation tests at CT in asthmatic patients. Methods and Materials: Six normal healthy subjects (metacholine test negative) and 6 asthmatics (metacholine test positive) were examined by helical thin-collimation CT before and after metacholine inhalation, then after salbutamol inhalation. CT scans were obtained during breath holding at pneumotacographically controlled 50% of vital capacity (VC). ROI densities were measured in the anterior, middle and posterior areas of the lung. Surface of bronchi cross-sections was segmented and calculated using a specific software. Results: The lung density did not change after bronchial stimulation in asthmatics (1.7 ± 3.5%, 0 ± 3.9%) and in normal subjects (0.5 ± 1.8%, 0.1 ± 1.7%). The percentages of change in bronchial cross seetion surface after metacholine and salbutamol were 27 ± 56% and 39 ± 83% respectively in asthmatics compared to 10 ± 8% and 8 ± 31% in normal subjects. The bronchial response to metacholine in asthmatics was constriction or dilatation with a heterogeneous distribution. 3) and roughly correlated between indices and the right ventricular pressure: r = 0.38 (p < 0.01). Nevertheless, no correlation with pulmonary arterial pressure and other hemodynamic parameters was identified. The above results show that there is a correlation between the Moore and Lupi indices and the pulmonary arterial pressure, as weil as the cardiothoracic ratio increase evidently indicates the right ventricular failure. Graphics, USA) with 180 Mhz processor speed and 4.1 Gb hard dlsk. Both endoscopic views and 3D surface modelling were generated. Results: Volume-rendering reconstructions of the aorta bdominat provided both external evaluation of the vessel as weil as endoluminal views, showing the major branches. Virtual colonoscopy images provided very realistic endoluminal views of the colon. In pathologic cases all the tumors were correctly evaluated. One polyps smaller than 5 mm was missed whereas two polyps larger than 10 mm were correctly evaluated. Conclusion: Volume-rendered 3D images provide accurate reconstructions of both vessels and colon. 3D modelling may be easily and quickly performed. Volume-rendering is also able to offer very realistic endoscopic views of both hollow structures and virtual spaces. 1189 To evaluate the virtual endoscopy software application (VE5A) and its automated "f1y-through" trajectory Purpose: Virtual endoscopy based on CT-and MRI-data gained increasing interest far the clinical use. One of the advantages of this technique is the patient independent availability of the 3D-dataset. The pur pose of the study was to develop a system to distribute these 3Ddatasets by the use of standard internet-tools JikeVRMI through the network. Using this procedure virtual endoscopy is hardware-independent available on every PC-or workstation with a standard internet-browser and VRML extension. Methods and Materials: Virtual endoscopy was calculated from Helical-CT and 3D-MRI datasets including angiography, gastroscopy, small-bowel and colonoscopy. A rendering method with marching cubes algorithms to trace the organ surfaces was used (Iris Explorer, Silicon Graphics, USA). The resulting 3D-datasets were converted into 3D VRML files. These 3D-worlds can be examined by the use of standard internet-browsers with VRML-extension. Pathological findings were compared between the virtual endoscopy on the original workstation and the distributed VRML-based display Results: There was no diagnostic difference between the workstationbased exmanination and the VRML-dataset displayed on secondary PC's or workstations. All examiners prefered the the simple, selfexplaining userinterface of the standard VRML-browser to navigate through the virtual endoscopy dataset.  Results: Since the installation of the navigation system, a wide variety of ENT procedures (FESS, acoustic neuroma surgery. transsfenoidal hypofysectomy, bone anchored hearing aids, ....) has been pertorrneo. Especially in regions with complex bony anatomy and in sinonasal reinterventions (Le. previous ablative surgery) CAS was found to be very helpful. Depending on the choice of anatomicallandmarks, an accuracy of 1 mm and even smalle could be obtained in a routine clinical setting. Conclusion: CAS has rnany applications in ENT surgery. It can however not be a substitute for insufficient anatomical knowledge and surgical ski/I. Since the accuracy of the system largely depends on the matching procedure and the choice of anatomical landmarks, we feel that further scientific work on this matter should be done. The Netherlands) was carried out, using 3-D FSE MRI data sets. Results: MRI data were postprocessed for VE and a cine loop sequence was created in all cases within approximately 20-30 minutes. The endoluminaJ surface of cochlea, vestibule and labyrinth was depicted coherently with high c1arity. Examination showed in all patients that the lumen was developed regularly without narrowing. Conclusion: Virtual endoscopy allows visualization of the intraluminal wall of the cochlea and the labyrinth and the relationships of these complex spatial structures. In order to get a complex three-dimensional comprehension it complernents maximum intensity projection (MIP) and digital surface reconstruction rendering views hitherto not available with other techniques. Virtual endoscopy is a promising tool for präoperative planning in cochlear implants. Purpose: CT based virtual cystoscopy ls a prormsmq modality for detection and follow up of bladder tumors. Despite the excellent correlation with conventional cystoscopy in tumors bigger than 10 mm, the method may fall to depict subtle changes and sessi/e tumors arising from the bladder wall. To improve the sensitivity of virtual endoscopy we developed a computer algorithm which color-codes the wall thickness of hollow organs. Methods and Materials: Three patients with known bladder tumors were scanned using thin section unenhanced spiral-Cl. We developed an algorithm, which computes the distance to the nearest neighbor on segmented axial images. Sy assigning a color to the wall thickness we created a three dimensional surface-shaded model. We imported this color-mapped model in our experimental virtual endoscopy software (VESA, GE) and compared our results with the source images. In this first test phase (three months) 10 models were assembled covering different surgery disciplines like maxillofa cial, craniofacia l or vascular surgery. Results: ABS-plastic models offer nearl y the same fields of application Iike the well-known stereolithography techn ique. The mak ing of models on site is a big advantage, therefore the whole model acquis ition process is simplified and the reaction time is shortened. As the material is non-tox ic and sterilizable the use of model s is poss ible in the operation theater. The building process takes 4-5 days to assemble a skull. Therefore the system works more effect ively when making smaller anatomical parts. Using models in preoperative planning reduces the operation time by an average of 20-50%. Surgical risks could thus be reduced and the qua lity of correction was decis ively improved. Conclusion: Fused deposition modelling has mostly the same field of application in preoperative planning compared to stereolithography at lower costs . or saline (10 NPVs). PK: For pharmacokinetics analysis, the determination of total iomeprol in blood, urine and fecal sampies collected predose and serially post-dose up to 120 hours , was performed by HPLC assay procedure. Safety: pre-and post-döse serial physical exams, vital signs measurements, ECG controls , lab tests, and continuous 7day NPV monitoring. . Results: PK: blood iomeprol level decay described by 3-exponential function consistent with a distribution phase (t112: 0.12-0.18 h), a rapid elimination phase (t1l2 : 1.44-1.84 h) and a slow elimination phase from a deep compartment (t 112 : 5. 1-9.4 h) . Apparent linearity in AUC-dose relationship, with -90% of BR21 eliminated by the kidney within 24 h. Safety: BR 21 was weil tolerated and no serious adverse event occurred through the study. The non serious adverse events (AEs) were all rnlnor, mild in intensity and rapidly self-resolving. In terms of total number of AEs there was no difference in the incidence of adverse events among the various doses of BR21 and between BR21 and placebo. Concluslon: BR21 was safe under the tested conditions . PK profile compatible with non-specific distribution into the extracellular-f1uid space and specific distribution into a deep compartment. Purpose: To compare the enhancement characteristics of cirrhotic and non-cirrhotic liver after the administration of Gd-BOPTA (MultiHance , Bracco SpA.) . Methods and Materials: 14 cirrholic and 20 non-eirrhotic patients were imaged before and at 60-120 minutes after the iv administration of Gd-BOPTA using T1-W spin echo (SE) and T1-W gradient echo (GRE) sequences . Cirrhosis was diagnosed by means of biopsy (n :: 6), surgical intervention (n :: 3) and clinical-radiological monitoring (n :: 5). Comparison was made of the signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio and of the signal intensity enhancement before and after Gd-BOPTA administration. Contrast enhancement was classified qualititavely as either homogenous or heterogeneous. Results: Quantitative analysis of post-Gd-BOPTA images revealed that the SNR ratio was superior in cirrhotic Iiver than in healthy liver. Analogously, the signal intensity enhancement after Gd-BOPTA was super ior in cirrhotic Iiver on T1-W SE images (p = 0.02) and on inphase T1-W GRE images (P < 0.001). No statistical difference was observed for out-of-phase GRE images. Qualitilative analysis revealed the enhancement to be homogenous in 7/14 and heterogeneous in 7/14 patients on T1-W SE images, and heterogeneous in 9/14 and homogenous in 5/14 patients on GRE images. Heterogeneity was due to hypointense nodules in 7 patients and hyperintense nodules in 2 patients. Conclusion: Gd-BOPTA is an effective MR contrast agent for differentiating cirrhotic from non-cirrhotic Iiver. Purpose: To investigate the efficacy of Gd-BOPTA for the MR detection of lesions in cirrhotic livers. Methods and Materials: 33 patients with cirrhosis and known hepatic lesions underwent MRI in a Phase 11 multicenter study before and after administration of Gd-BOPTA at 0.05 or 0.10 mmol/kg. T1W (GRE and SE) and T2W images were evaluated tor lesion number, location, size and confidence by three off-site blinded reviewers. Findings were compared to gold standard imaging [IOUS (25), CT-AP (6), and lipiodol CT (2)]. Results: More lesions were identified on Gd-BOPTA-enhanced images than on unenhanced images. There was no significant difference in lesion detection between concentrations. The number of lesions identified increased from 35 to 47, 36 to 45 and 40 to 45 for reviewers A, B, and C, respectively. The number and concordance of detected lesions after contrast was statistically significant (p < 0.03) for 2 reviewers. The largest benefit was for detection of more sub-centimeter lesions (10 to 17, 10 to 14, 19 to 20) . GRE sequences permitted the detection of more lesions than SE sequences. When compared to gold standard there were fewer false positive lesions identified after contrast administration. Purpose: To assess the usefulness of spio particles in the detection and characterization of benign liver lesion. Methods and Materials: 19 patients with suspected benign liver tumor were studied bya .5 superconducting unit. Baseline and spio-enhanced axial SE T1, OPfT2, GE T2' images were obtained. All the patients underwent biopsy. Results: 38 lesions were found: 25 hemangiomas, 7 focal nodular hyperplasias, 6 adenomas. Spio-enhanced MR imaging showed 37/38 lesions: 25 hemangiomas , 7 foeal nodular hyperplasias and 5 adenomas. Baseline MR imaging showed 33/38 lesions : 25 hemangiomas , 5 focal nodular hyperplasias and 3 adenomas. Particularly, spio-enhaneed MR imaging showed 3 more adenomas and 2 more focal nodular hyperplasias. Instead, baseline MR imaging showed 1 more adenoma. Spio-enhanced MR imaging showed central scar in all focal nodular hyperplasias . Conversely, baseline MR imaging in only 3/7 tumors . All MR imaging diagnoses were confirmed by biopsy. Conclusion: Spio particles may improve detection and characterizat ion of adenoma and focal nodular hyperplasia. Conversely, they do not seem to have a definite roje in the assessment of hemangioma. Purpose: To identify optimal pulse sequence or sequences combinat ion in MRI studies after SPIO infusion for HCC detection in cirrhotic patients. Methods and Materials: 36 cirrhotic patients with 42 histologie proved HCCs (1D-80 mm, mean 36, SO 16.7) were studied after SPIO infusion by 1T MRI unit using the following sequences: T1TFE breath hold (TR 15, TE 5, PPTI 450, FA 25, matrix 156 x 256), T2 TSE SPIR (TR 1900, TE 90, ETL 14 matrix 256 x 256), T2*FFE breath hold (TR 200, TE 21, FA 25, matrix 180 x 256). In all sequences the signal intensity ratio (SIR =SllesionlSlliver) and lesion-to-liver contrast-to-noise ratio (C/N :: [SI lesion-SI Iiver}/SI noise) were calculated . An arbitrary SIR threshold value «0.8 and >1.2) was chosen for quantitative analysis of lesions detectability. Qualitative analysis, regarding image quality and lesion depiction, was assessed by two readers in blinded fashion . Student T-Test was used to evaluate statistical significance of the observed difference between sequences. Results: The mean C/N was 5.6 (SO 3.8) for T1TFE, 14.6 (SO 5.4) for .7) for T2*FFE. The mean SIR was 1.67 (SO 0.73) for T1TFE, 3.41 (SO 2.09) for T2TSE-SPIR and 11.42 (SO 6.6) for T2*FFE . SIR and C/N were significantly greater «.001) in the T2FFE sequence . Considering the SIR threshold for lesions detection 32/42 (76%) lesions were visible on T1TFE while 42/42 (100%) were detected on T2TSE and T2*TFE (P <.001). Regarding image quality T2TSE sequence was tound to give better anatomical details and tumor delineation with lower flow and movement artifacts. Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that T2*FFE sequence provide best results in term of lesion conspicuity due to the high sensitivity to changes in magnetic susceptibility caused by SPIO particles . The drawback is a loss in image quality, low spatial resolution and flow artifacts. Mixed sequence implementation (GRASE, Gradient Spin Echo) will probably allows further improvements in image quality, combining better spatial resolution and high magnetic susceptibility sensitivity. contrast infusion based on a theoretical optimal Iiver-blood contrast assuming blood T1 = 1.2s and liver T1 similar to that of fat (-270 ms). Liver signal enhancement was determined from a breath-hold 2D T1 weighted FLASH sequence acquired pre-and post-contrast administration. Volume rendering, multi-planar reformats and maximum and minimum intensity projections were combined to integrate vessels, bile ducts and liver lesions and displayed in cine mode. Results: Average liver enhancement was 44%. Post-contrast signal comparison on the 3D data set yielded the following ratios between liver, blood, metastases, fluid (cysts) and bile against non-enhanced fat: 0.94, 0.40, 0.55, 0.16 and 2.43, respectively, used effectively for segmenting each structure prior to image display with volume rendering. The resulting MRA is flow independent. Conclusion: A single 3D T1 weighted data set can integrate Iiver MRA and MRCP to study their relationship with liver pathology after Mn-DPDP administration. Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic impact of SPIO-enhanced MRI in comparison to unenhanced MRI and contrast enhanced CT (CECT) in routine diagnostics of the liver. Methods and Materials: Prospectively, 373 patients suspicious for hepatic disease were studied by.CECT, unenhanced, and SPIO-enhanced MRI (breathhold GRET1-, fast SET2-, GRE-PD-weighted imaging at 1.5 Tesla). CECT and MRI were evaluated by 2 readers by consensus regarding number and characterization of focal hepatic lesions. The findings were correlated to histology (54%) and at least 12 month followup (46%). Additionally, the correlation was repeated after correcting the diagnoses only for the differentiation of malignant versus benign. Results: The diagnostic accuracy for CECT was 52%, for MRI 56%, for SPIO-MRI 63%, and for MRI together with SPIO-MRI 73%, respectively. After adjusting the diagnoses only for "malignant" and "benign" the accuracy increased for CECT to 78%, for MRI to 81%, for SPIO-MRI to 91%, and for MRI together with SPIO-MRI to 95%, respectively. In consequence, the higher diagnostic accuracy of SPIO-MRI caused a significant change of the subsequent therapy in 18% of the cases. Conclusion: In the general work-up of focal hepatic disease, SPIOenhanced MRI proved to be superior to CECT and unenhanced MRI affecting significantly the therapeutic procedere. Purpose: To compare the diagnostic accuracy of unenhanced and superparamagnetic iron oxide-(SPIO) enhanced MR imaging. with that of double spiral CT during arterioporotgraphy (SCTAP) in the preoperative evaluation in patients with liver malignancies. Methods and Materials: 18 patients with hepatic malignancies underwent surgical resection or exploration of the liver (including intraoperative ultrasound and biopsy). T2-weighted turbo-spin-echo sequences with selective fat suppression (T2-TSE-SPIR) pre and post l.v, administration and unenhanced STIR sequences as weil as double spiral CT during arterioportography were performed. MRI sequences were quantitatively analysed. Images were reviewed side by side by two radiologists. Subsequent intraoperative US and pathologic findings are correlated with preoperative imagings results. Results: From total of 95 pathologically proven Iiver 72 lesions were detected in unenhanced T2-TSE-SPIR (sensitivity 76%), 80 lesions in STIR-sequence (84%), 88 lesions T2-TSE-SPIR with SPIO (92%), and 92 lesions in SCTAP (97%). Quantitative analysis demonstrated a significant decrease in hepatic S/N (P < 0.005) and a significant increase in C/N MRI correctly characterised most of the benign lesions, while SCTAP could not differentiate the benign from malignant masses. Conclusion: SPIO-MRI seems to be comparable in the sensitivity to invasive SCTAP for detection of hepatic lesions with diameter of more than 1 cm with higher specificity and diagnostic accuracy. Purpose: Arthrography, arthro-CT and arthro-MR require fluoroscopic control for introduction of a contrast medium. Presented here via audiovisual techniques is a method which makes it possible to render the glenohumeral articulation radio-opaque without fluoroscopic control. Methods and Materials: A contrast medium was injected into the shoulder joints of 1000 patients without f1uoroscopic control, using a 20-gauge lumbar-pincture needle and a low-resistance syringe. The needle is inserted benath the coraco id process at a mediolateral angle of 20°. When the position is correct, the smoothness of the syringe enables ease of injection. In cases where the needle is not in the articulation, the pressure of introduction of the contrast medium disconnects the syringe from the needle. Results: No extra-articular injection or complications were found to occur. Time of execution was always less than 5 minutes. Conclusion: The method described makes it easy to render the articular cavity radio-opaque, at the same time preventing the risk of diffusion of the contrast medium in the para-articular tissues. The imposs ibility of injection using a needle that ls not properly positioned enables the manoeuvre to be performed without fluoroscopie control and safely thanks to the use of the above-mentioned syringe. The method reduces the amount of radiation and the time of execution , above all in candidates for arthro-MR, where the contrast medium is radiotransparent. Purpose: To evaluate the efficiency of puncture , aspiration and corticostero id injections (PACI) in painful rotator cuff calcifications. Methods and Materials: 50 shoulders were treated with PACI in 42 patients (mean age, 50 years) . All patients were referred after unsuccessful medical treatment. 97% of patients had supra and/or infra spinatus calcifications assessed with plain films. Treatment efficiency was evaluated and graded by a physician with a mean follow-up of 29 months . Results were classified as excellent (total relief of the pain), good (significant improvement), fair (mild improvement), and poor (no improvement). Results: Excellent results were observed in 62% of the patients; good results in 26% , fair results in 4%, and poor results in 8%. No significant adverse effect was observed. Conclusion: These results suggest that PACI is an efficient treatment in patients suffering from painful rotator cuff calcifications. PACI could therefore be proposed as an alternative to surgery in these patients . Purpose: To determine the accuracy and clinical value of an optical navigation system in CT-guided bone interventions. Methods and Materials: In a prospect ive study of 30 patients with bony lesions an optical navigation system assisting CT-interventions was tested. The bony lesions were in 16 patients osteoid osteomas which were treated by thermocoagulation and in 14 patients these were bony lesions requiring a biopsy. The optical navigation systsm registered the location of the CT-slices in the patient after which the puncture was performed outside the gantry under guidance of the optical navigation system. The puncture could be done in every desired plane (MPR). The main advantage of the system was the navigation of the needle with a toolholder, but without a fixed frame . Results: In the 16 patients with an osteo id osteoma theaccuracy to get to the center of the small lesions was measured . The accuracy to get to the chosen goal was on average 3 mm (0--6 mm) at a mean distance from the skin of 59 mm (11-132 mm). In the bone biopsy cases the planned mark was always hit. The number of control scans before entering the bone were reduced in all cases. The biopsy needle could be safely fixed in the bone before the first control scan was taken, avoiding the loss of needle position in the soft tissues during the control scan . Conclusion: The presented optical navigation system In CT-guided bone intervention has a high accuracy, allows punctures outside the scan plane and reduces the radiation exposure. Purpose: To evaluate safety and efficacy of Radiofrequency (RF) ablation in percutaneous CT-guided treatment of osteoid osteoma . Methods and Materials: Seven patients (6 male, 1 female; age range 13-40), with 8 osteoid osteomas identified with spiral CT, Gd-OTPA enhanced MR and bone scinli graphy were treated with RF ablation using a liquid cooled electrode needle with 2 cm tip exposure . Seven lesions were localized in the proximal tract of the femur and 1 case in the distal tract of the tibia. Results: All procedures were techn ically successful and no major complications occurred. Symptoms were completely relieved in all patients . To date, during a follow-up ranged between 4 and 18 months (mean 9 months) there were no recurrences. Conclusion: Percutaneous RF ablation an be proposed as a safe and effective alternative to surgery in the treatment of osteoid osteoma . Purpose: To evaluate computer tomography guided bone biopsy (CT-GBB), using a new non-disposable bone biopsy device, collecting a specimen in a 20 x2 mm chamber of a apple corer shaped needle. Methods and Materials: In 70 consecutive cancer patients that were candidates for bone biopsy, 74 CTGBB procedures, were performed in a uniform protocol for all lesions . Results were compared with data of bone biopsies , obtained with other techniques . Lesions with cort ical defects and or surround ing soft tissue infiltration are excluded. Results: Of 74 CTGBB procedures, 7 were ot diagnostic . Five of 7 inconclusive biopsies were repealed , alJ were conclusive , 1 malignant. Of 27 on CT indistinguishable lesions (detected on MRI or isotope studies) 35% were malignant. Thirty-five percent of the lesions were not accompanied by pain. In 90% of the cases , the procedure was less painful than injection of the local anesthetic prior to the biopsy. There were no complications. Conclusion: With the new device, CTGBB procedures can be performed safely. Biopsy with the described technique has a high diagnostic output, better than results of biopsy with reported uniform techniques and equal to the best results of combined techniques. If alesion is not distinguishable on CT, and/or not accompanied by pain, malignancy is not ruled out. CTGBB in the described technique is less or equally time consuming , less painful and cheaper than reported for other bone biopsy procedures . Purpose: to test the use of subtract ion imaging in MRI as a pre-surg ical guide for the biopsy of soft tissue tumours. Methods and Materials: 16 patients afflicted by soft tissue neoplasm ecographically demonstrated . previously submitted to US guided trucut needle (14 G) biopsy with non sufficient or inadequate histology, were studied by 1.5 T MR (Philips ACS NT). Technical parameters : T2 weighted turbo spin-echo (TRlTE , 2500/120); T1-weighted turbo spinecho (576/12), repeated after 0.1 mmol/Kg paramagnelic contrast agent i.v.: T1 weighted short tau inversion recovery (STIR). All the T1 images (with and without contrast) were subtracted in order to recogn ise areas of maximum enhancement. In these areas we have performed a second Us guided biopsy. All lesions underwent surgery. Results: in 13/16 patients the second biopsy was adequate (12 soft tissue sarcoma, 1 fibromyolipoma) . In 3/16 patients even the second biopsy was inadequate. Conclusion: the technique of image subtraction may be useful in choosing the best place for needle blopsy, continuous real-time imaging during the operation using a stereotactic guidance system and intermiUent, contrast-optimized imaging between various operative steps. The obtainable quality of the real-time images is limited. At this time it seems too poor to garantee a significant profit. The availabilty of intermittantly collected image sets was found more helpful. This proceeding ensures reliable informations and is a great help for executing a precise resection. 47 of 54 'tumors' were resected successfully without violation of the margins. Purpose: Low back pain can be caused by several pain sensitive foei: Lumbar zygapophysial and sacroiliac joint based on spondylarthrosis, muscle and ligaments. The CT guided thermocoagulation is a new therapy. Methods and Materials: 250 patients with chronic low back pain without any radicular symptoms were subjected to CT guided periarticular injection of 0.5 ml bupivacain and 0.5 ml ethanol 95% in the facet joint at the L4/5 and L5/S1 levels. We treated 50 patients with persisting pain in the lower back. We undertook an intraarticular block in the sacroiliac joint with 5 ml bupivacain. After temporary pain relief a CT guided radiofrequency thermocoagulation in the joint, using the Neuro N50 thermocoagulator (Leibinger/Germany) was performed. The monopolar electrodes were placed at an extremely f1at angle intraarticulary deep in the sacroiliac joint. The thermocoagulation was repeated at 4-6 different locations for a duration of 90 seconds and a temperature of 90°C at decreasing depth in 5 mm steps. Results: Three months after the treatment, satisfactory pain relief was achieved in 68% of the patients. 32% did not show any pain relief after the therapy.  Purpose: Gadophrin-2 has proved to be a necrosis-av id MRI contrast agent. We investigated whether the effectiveness of physical and ehernical ablation of Iiver tumor can be assessed by Gadophrin-2 enhanced MRI. Methods and Materials: Sixteen Iiver VX2 carcinomas in 8 rabbits were treated with radio-frequency ablat ion (n = 8) or absolute ethanol injection (n = 8). One day after therapy, T1-weighted spin echo (TRlTE: 520/12 rns) MRI (1.5 T) was performed before and up to 24 h after iv injection of Gadophrin-2 at 0.05 mmol/kg. Signal intensities were measured and contrast ratios (CR) were calculated. MR images was eompared with the outeome of animal survival as weil as mieroangiograph ie and histo logie find ings . Results: Before contrast, ablated tumors appeared slightly hyper-to hypointense relative to the Iiver. Immediately after centrast. these lesions were unenhanced in comparison to strongly enhanced liver. While Iiver enhancement was deereasing, the lesions were progressively enhaneed from the periphery. But the lesions above 1 cm were seidom completely filled up. During late phase (6-24 h), following CRs were observed (p Purpose: To investigate the enhancement of regional Iymph nodes after intracutaneous administration of Iymphotropic T1-contrast agents in MRI. Methods and Materials: Two gadolinium-chelated Iymphotropic contrast agents, Gadofluoramide and Gadofluorine 8, were injected intracutaneously (25 mmolfkg) in the hind legs of 6 pigs respectively. T1-weighted coronal 3D-gradient-echoimages and maximum-intensity projections were obtained 1 to 240 minutes and 24 hours post injection using a 1.5 T Gyroscan ACS-NT scanner. Results: Inguinal Iymph nodes, iliac Iymph nodes and Iymph vessels were enhancing within 10 minutes after intracutaneous administration of both Iymphotropic contrast agents. Paraaortal Iymph nodes were visible in 5 of 6 cases with Gadofluorine 8 and in 3 of 6 cases with Gadofluoramide. The thoracic Iymphatic duct was enhancing in 4 of 6 cases with Gadofluorine 8, and could not be delineated with Gadofluoramide. The enhancement of the Iymphatic system decreased after 2 hours, the liver and the bowel tract enhanced within 24 hours. Conelusion: Intracutaneous administration of Iymphotropic T1-contrast agents is efficient in the visualization of the Iymphatic system on T1weighted gradient-echoimages. The contrast agents were eliminated hepatobiliary into the bowel tract. Purpose: Gadofluorine 8 is a new Iymphographic contrast medium for magnetic resonance imaging. It is a lipophilic (but water soluble) gadolinium chelate with a perfluorinated side chain, which accumulates in regional Iymph nodes after interstitial injection. Due to the high T 1 relaxivity, small quantities were sufficient to enhance significantly Iymph nodes and Iymphatic vessels. It was the aim of this study to show that Gadofluorine 8 can be used for differentiation between normal and metastatic Iymph nodes after interstitial injection. Methods and Materials: The detection of Iymphatic tumor metastases was investigated in VX2 tumor-bearing rabbits after intracutaneous injection of 10.0 or 20.0 urnol Gd/kg of Gadofluorine 8. MR imaging of popliteal and iliacal Iymph nodes was performed using a T1-weighted gradient echo sequence (TRITE = 1015 ms, a = 40°). Lymph node metastases were histologically confirmed after hematoxylin-eosin staining. Results: Gadofluorine 8 resulted in highly increased signal intensity in normal Iymphatic tissue within a short period of time (30-90 minutes). There was no increase in signal intensity in malignant tissue, and therefore a detection of Iymph node metastases down to a size of 1-2 mm was achieved. Conelusion: Gadofluorine 8 is suitable as a T1-contrast agent for differentiation between malignant and benign Iymph nodes in interstitial MR Iymphography. Lately, it is widely observed a tendency for over utilization of the radiological examinations of facial bones and sinuses due to medicolegal problems. A critical organ as an eye lens ls exposed to radiation during radiological examination of sinuses. Comparison of routine rentgenography and spiral CT with different pitches has been undertaken. Alderson Rando Phantom with L1F chips thermoluminescent dosimeters (TLD-100) were used. Dosimeters were located at the place of both lenses. Spiral CT Siemens Somatom Plus 4 has been used with 1.0 and 1.5 pitches. Sinuses have been examined in axial and coronal planes for the fantom skull. Radiographic conditions were: 120 Kv, 110 mAs, cuts thickness 3 mm, interspace 3 mm and proper value of table movment due to chosen pitch. Scan time was 1.5 sec. Measurement of a radiation dose during conventional rentgenography of sinuses (Waters, Coldwells and lateral projection) was also performed for comparison. Conventional rentgenography yields 0.5 mGy dose to the lens. CT scan (sequential mode) pitch 1.0 shows on average 3.0 mGy in coronal and 13.5 mGy in axial plane. Spiral CT with pitch 1.5 in coronal plane reveals 2.5 mGy and 8.5 mGy in axial plane. Spiral CT with increased pitch showed a reduction in radiation dose to the lens. Technique with pitch 1.5 in coronal plane gave appr 37% less radiation dose to the lens in comparison with pitch 1.0. Dedectibility in both cases was acceptable. Radiation dose to the lens in axial projection was appr 4 times larger than in coronal plane. The lens dose from sequential CT in axial plane was appr 27 times larger in comparison with conventional rentgenography. Spiral CT in coronal projection with pitch 1.5 resulted with only 10 times more lens dose than the routine sinus rentgenography. Knowledge of the eye lens dose from different radiological examination gives the radiologist possibility to choose a proper technique with lower radiation to the lens and still maintained standard of good diagnostic of the sinuses. (Submitted by Internet) 1234 ECG-based phase oriented image reconstruction from subsecond spiral multi-row CT scans of the heart M. Kachelrieß, W.A. Kalender; ErJangenlD Purpose: Subsecond multi-row CT scanning offers potential for improved heart imaging. We developed and validated cardiac reconstruction algorithms for imaging of the heart. We modified our single-row spiral CT reconstruction algorithms for a 4-row spiral CT with 0.5 s rotation time (Siemens Somatom Plus 4 VZ). Two classes of algorithms were investigated: 180 0 MCD (Multi-row Cardio Delta), a partial scan reconstruction of 180 0 + ö with ö < fan angle resulting in effective scan times <0.3 sand 180 0 MCI (Multi-row Cardio Interpolation), a piecewise linear interpolation between successive spiral data segments belonging to the same heart phase. Segments are selected by correlation with the simultaneously recorded ECG. Theoretical studies and processing of c1inical data were carried out to evaluate these new approaches. Results: ECG-oriented image reconstruction provided significant improvements in image quality for both approaches. Phase selectivity with temporal resolution better than 0.2 s can be achieved due to the multirow acquisition. Artifacts were largely reduced as compared to standard spiral reconstructions. The use of subsecond multi-row CT in combination with the new z-interpolation methods significantly improves the quality of cardiac imaging. Phase selectivity of better than 0.2 s can be provided. 1235 Improving temporal resolution in EKG-gated spiral CT D.J. Heuscher, S. Chandra, R Shekhar, M.J. Garcia; Highland Heights, OHJUSA Purpose: Temporal resolution of spiral CT limits its usefulness in imaging moving organs, for example, the heart. Two new spiral reconstruction filters were designed to increase temporal resolution. Methods and Materials: Cardiac images were acquired from twelve patients scanned using a protocol that guaranteed contiguity of CT slices after EKG-gating the 60 rpm spiral data. The algorithms used for improving temporal resolution were: i) spiral interpolator with 420 ms-FWHM (R1), ii) slider-filter «230 ms-FWHM/lobe) applied to spiral data over three cardiac cycles (R2). Spiral (1 image/rev) images were also reconstructed using the standard 180 degree interpolator (STD). Image data sets reconstructed with R1 and R2 were both qualitatively compared with STD by viewing images side-by-side. The clarity of cardiac anatomy was judged by three radiologists and cardiologist. Results: Both R1 and R2 were evaluated to be beUer than the STD image sets, and R2 was assessed better than R1 for imaging coronary vessels as weil as systolic and diastolic volumes. Conclusion: These results show that the new algorithms reduce cardiac motion artifacts compared with standard spiral reconstruction, and when used in conjunction with cardiac gating could prove to be invaluable in assessing cardiac function. Purpose: The Ca-scores on SOMATOM PLUS4 with multirow detector are compared to the results on an Evolution EßT scanner for phantom and patient investigations 10 prove their equivalence. The investigations on the PLUS4 are performed in a 4-slice sequence mode with 500 msec rotation and ECGtriggering. Dedicated reconstruction algorithms provide 250 msec time resolution. The EBT scanner is operated in a 100 msec single slice sequence mode with ECG-triggering. The study evaluates a "beatingheart" phantom with defined calcifications and patient data of PLUS4 and Evolution. The Ca-scores are computed with the established "Agatston" method and with an extended "Agatston" algorithm with improved score pixel weighting. Results: The phantom investigation shows equivalence and stability of the "Agatston" scores for PLUS4 and EBT up to simulated pulse rates of 100 bpm -with an extended "Agatston" method utilizing refined computation of the score pixel weights even up to 120 bpm. The patient scores compare weil on PLUS4 and EBT using both regular and extended "Agatston" scoring. Conclusion: Conventional CT with 250 msec time resolution and multislice technology promises to be weil suited for accurate and reproducible Ca-scoring investigations with results equivalent to EBT. The presented extended "Agatston" scoring reduces the impact of strong cardiac motion. Purpose: To compare radiation exposure for routine investigation of the ehest, abdomen and heart applied by electron beam tomography (EBT), spiral-CT (SCT) and cardiac catheter (CC) angiography. Methods and Materials: Effective dose according to the ICRP 60 was estimated tor investigations performed with EBT (Imatron C-150XP), SCT (Siemens Somatom Plus 4A) and CC (Siemens Bicor TOP) using thermoluminescent dosimetry (ßicron-Harshaw TLD-100) and an Alderson phantom (Alderson Research Laboratories). Results: Effective dose was 5.3 mGy and 11 mGy for the chest and 8.8 mGy and 25 mGy for the abdomen with SCT and EßT, respectively. For investigation of the coronary arteries, effective dose was 2.3 mGy and 3.3 mGy with EBT and CC, respectively. Effective dose for cine investigation of the heart with EBT was 7.6 mGy. Conclusion: Effective dose for scanning of the chest and abdomen is significantly higher with EßT than with SCT. For investigation of the coronary arteries, effective dose with EßT is lower than with CC. In contrast to that effective dose for cine investigation of the heart with EBT is significantly higher than with CC. Purpose: Aim of this study was to investigate the ability of fMRI to localise the secondary somatosensory (SII) areas in healthy humans following upper and lower limb sensory stimulation. Methods and Materials: Nine volunteers (mean age 31 years) were involved in the study. They were briefly trained to lie down in a relaxed state, to avoid eye movements, and to maintain their Iimbs both in "rast" and "stimulus" conditions. Stimulus consisted of electric bulges, 0.200 ms in duration, for mixed cutaneous and proprioceptive median and tibial nerve stimulation. Stimulus was delivered at 1.9 sec repetition rate. fMRI exam was performed by using a 1.5 Tesla equipment (Vision, Siemens). Twenty-two 3 mm thick slices were acquired by FID echoplanar imaging technique from bicommissural line to the vertex, in 2 s. Results: In all subjects activated areas in the parietal lobes contralateral to the stimulated Iimb were found. They were consistent with the known homuncular organisation. A statistically significant increase of signal was localised in the slices passing through the supratemporal plane, bilaterally. Concluslon: fMRI can detect the activation of the primary somatosensory cortex. We hypothize that increased signal intensity detected in the supratemporal plane reflects the activation of SII areas. Purpose: It was the aim of our study to examine the retest reliability of the localization of language function with functional MRI (fMRI) and to assess its validity compared to functional transcranial Doppler sonography (fTCD), a method which has been validated in direct comparison to the Wada test. Methods and Materials: Nine healthy subjects were examined using a blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD)-sensitive EPI technique (TE: 64 ms, TR: 3 s, Matrix: 64 x 128, FOV: 210 x 210 mm). The fMRI paradigm consisted of different language related tasks (silent word generation, forming of opposite terms to given nouns) and different control conditions. Eight subjects were examined twice, one subject was examined ten times. Five subjects were left-, four subjects were right-hemispheric dominant for language as determined by functional TCD with a word generation task. Laterality indices were calculated by comparing the number of activated voxels in both hemispheres. Results: In all nine subjects, laterality indices were highly reliable in repeated examinations. Furthermore, fMRI results concerning hemispheric language dominance were in all cases consistent with the results of functional TCD. Conclusion: Our results demonstrate the high retest reliability of language localization with fMRI. This is an important prerequisite for lon-gitUdinal studies to examine, e.g., plasticity of cortical function following brain damage. Furthermore, our results show the validity of fMRI in comparison to a method which has been directly validated compared to the Wada test. Results: SPM analyses of normal subjects revealed activation of the contra lateral hand area but no signiflcant deactivation. In contrast, torticotlis patients showed a significant deactivation of the visual and acoustic association cortices and the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Overactivation was found in the contra lateral hand area. Conclusion: These findings in torticollis patients might suggest a disturbed balance of excitatory or inhibitory modulation of distinct cortical areas involved in the analysis of external stimuli and execution of movements. 14:00-15:30 Diagnosis of musculoskeletal abnormalities related to sports activity is being performed more frequently in a physically active population. For the diagnosis of acute and chronic injuries of the soft tissues MR imaging and ultrasonography offer both structural and dynamic information. Techniques, general principles and limitations, and special applications will be discussed. Ultrasonography represents a simple modality to study all pathologie conditions of museies, tendons and ligaments related to sports activities and is helpful in the follow-up period of injured museies and tendons. Dynamic real-time studies are easy to perform and inexpensive. In the shoulder, US is considered a self supporting method concerning tendon pathology. Differential diagnosis of synoviaI cysts, partial and complete tears of the rotator cuff, biceps tendon subluxation and acromioclavicular luxation, and diagnosis of impingement syndrome in functional positions will be presented. MR imaging is useful to demontrate injuries of the soft tissues, but it mayaiso reveal lesions of cartilage and bone marrow. MR arthrography enables diagnosis of cartilaginous and other intraarticular abnormalities, invisible to the unenhanced studies. MR imaging may be used to study functional aspects of joint kinematics. The different dynamic techniques will be presented with their application in the knee, shoulder, ankle, and wrist. In the knee, dynamic MR imaging may be applied for the diagnosis of pattellar tracking and detection of Iigamentous injuries; in the shoulder, this technique has been used to study instability and impingement. Further applications will be presented for the wrist and the ankle, where the technique may be used to detect instabilities, impingement syndromes, and tendon dislocations. Indications to US examination are: muscles ruptures and follow-up of repair process; tendons traumatic injuries in shoulder, elbow, wrist, knee and ankle. With dynamic US is possible to evaluate the presencelabsence of partial or total fibers tears, the site of the lesion, the entity of the damage. Dynamic real-time studies are also usefull to demonstrate good functioning of tendons after trauma. Also inflammatory conditions that may result from trauma are weil evaluated. In addition with US it is simple and rapid to follow-up post-therapy and post-surgery results, wich is a usefull information for sport activities restarting. In conclusion, real-time dynamic US provides essential informations in sports trauma evaluation (this method is rapid, weil accepted, non invasive) and it permits monitoring of tendons and muscles injuries. Sports lesions in the shoulder include many differential diagnoses among them we shall discuss: articular motion of different joints, as reported in the current scientific literature. We developed a new MRI technique which allows us to obtain images that depict the same region of interest during the articular motion; these possibilities are very useful for biomechanical analysis of complex and integrated movements such as the carpal structures of the wrist joints. Images of the wrist ean be aequired in sagittal scan planes during palmar or dorsal flexion and both in coronal and sagittal scan planes during ulnar or radial deviation. Especially in sagittal scanning, acquired during ulnar or radial deviation, it is possible to assess the integrity of the ligamentous structures. Using dedicated equipments it is easier to obtain images in stress condition in which it is possible to recreate transient subluxations or impigement conditions related to overload. The dynamie analysis of the ankle is useful to study painful limitation of articular movements related to bones or synovia I impingement. A particular dynamic analysis of ankle is performed comparing pre and post stress images in sport-trainees whose painful syndrome beeame stronger and stronger during and after heavy training sections. In some of these people it is even possible to assess tarsal tunnel syndrome in which compression of the nerves is caused by inflammatory reactions related to overload. Images aequired at different degrees of flexion are useful to assess particular tendon-tears or dislocations which cannot be evaluated with other imaging techniques. An important diagnostic support can be obtained by kinematic analysis of singular cases of metarsalgia for a correct definition of the origin of painful syndromes localized at the level of the forefoot. Furthermore it is possible to better understand the different theories of authors in scientific literature concerning the evaluation of the clinical signs of Civinini Morton's metatarsalgia. -Presence of fluid effusion in the bicipital groove and in the posterior recess of the joint. -Presence of synovial cysts, linked to labrum lesions. -Impingement syndrome and usefulness of scanning during the elevation of the arm. -Partial tears of the rotator cuff: location, appearance, significance. -Complete tears of the rotator cuff: fluid interposition between the two torn parts of the tendon. Visualisation of fluid movements during exercise. -Biceps tendon subluxation: use of the stress external rotation to let the tendon slide away from the groove. -Acromioclavicular luxation: visualisation of the width of the joint comparing with the normal side. In conclusion, Ultrasound, performed by experienced operators can be considered as a self supporting method concerning the tendon pathology around the shouder. Dynamic imaging adds confidence to the diagnosis in some cases. However, labrallesions are not weil seen and in this diagnosis, Ultrasound is inferior to ArthroCT or Arthro MR. ) or Gd-DTPA doped contrast material (0.15 cc/10 ce c.m.) is injected intra-articular. If exercise is possible, also indirect arthrography by i.v, Gd-DTPA is possible. Highly sensitive diagnosis of bone bruise (bone marrow reaction, bone marrow contusion) is mandatory in imaging sports injuries and stress related bone reaction. STIR images achieve superb high-lightening of free water protons in posttraumatic or stress-related bone marrow reaction with limitation in demonstrating anatomie details. Proton density fatsuppressed images eombine high sensitivity for free water and excellent spatial resolution and are recommended for routine use.  In patients with joint pain it may be advantageous to evaluate joint motion. MR imaging allows to study both anatomy and functional changes during active and passive motion. Different imaging techniques have been elaborated, which comprise static techniques (incremental positioning) and dynamic or active joint studies (motion-triggered and ultra fast teehniques). Open MR imaging systems allow to investigate a greater range of motion and to simulate physiologie loading. Latest fast sequences allow real time study of joint motion (MR f1uoroscopy). In the knee, kinematic MR imaging has been applied to analyze patellar traeking and the cruciate ligaments. This technique has provided noninvasive diagnosis of patellar tracking abnormalities, such as lateral and medial subluxation and lateral pressure syndrome, in elose correlation to arthroscopy. Kinematic MR imaging can demonstrate the effects of realignment surgery of the patella, and has been demonstrated to be helpful in the diagnosis of anterior cruciate ligament tears. In the shoulder, kinematic MR imaging in internal and external rotation of the humerus has been applied to study anterior instability, the capsulolabral-ligamentous complex, and the biceps tendon. Functional MR imaging has provided information on subacromial, postero-superior, and coracohumeral impingement.  Purpose: To compare the relative diagnostic value of biphasic helical CT arterioportography (CTAP) versus high flow multiphasic helical CT (HCT) in the detection and characterization of focal liver neoplasms. Methods and Materials: Identically collimated HCr and CTAP of the upper abdomen was performed before and after administration of contrast material in 26 patients with suspected primary or secondary hepatic neoplasms. Two blinded radiologists retrospectively evaluated multiphasic HCT scans and the biphasic CTAP scans respectively. Histopathology or intraoperative ultrasound was obtained in 14 patients, and results were compared with imaging findings. Remaining lesions were followed-up with CT examinations of the abdomen to document any change in lesion size (and the two modalities were compared regarding any change in therapy). Results: In 13 patients with a proved histopathological correlation of 25 lesions, the observers detected 23 lesions at multiphasic HCT (sensitivity 92%) and 24 lesions at biphasic CTAP (sensitivity 96%). In 20 patients 11 had intraoperative ultrasound and the remainder had follow-up examinations at least six months after CTAP or HCT respectively. Biphasic CTAP showed five false positive lesions (specifity 75%) and multiphasic HCT showed no false positive lesions (specifity 100%). Conclusion: Helical CTAP does not enable detection of significantly more focal liver neoplasms than does multiphasic HCr. High flow multiphasic HCT has significantly higher specifity than helical CTAP. mi/sec. A total of 100 (25 x 4) CT scans were then randomly and blindly analyzed by two expert readers who were asked to evaluate lesion conspicuity according to a five-point confidence scale. Semi-quantitative data were used to fit a receiver-operating characteristic (ROG) curve for each phase of hepatic perfusion. The area underneath the curve (AUC) was then calculated. Results: A total of 34 HCC nodules were identified in 21 patients. Pathologie proof was obtained in all cases. In four patients no evidence of focal disease was found. Arterial-phase imaging showed the highest diagnostic accuracy with an AUC of 0.93 ± 0.04 which was significantly higher than that of both pre-contrast phase (0.57 ± 0.09) and equilibrium-phase (0.74 ± 0.08; p < 0.001). This was higher than the AUC of the portal-dominant phase (0.65 ± 0.07). Conclusion: In patients with liver cirrhosis equilibrium phase imaging may be more effective for lesion detection than portal-dominat phase imaging. The examination included a scanning before and three phases (arterial, portal venous and equilibrium phase) after administration of intravenous contrast medium (120 ml non-ionic contrast with apower injector) in the anatomie region of the liver. The imaging findings were correlated with the pathological findings. Results: Spiral-CT demonstrated 56 lesions. 11 of them had size smaller than 1 cm. 14 lesions 1. All studies were performed with 3 mm slice collimation, 5 mm table feed and a reconstruction interval of 2 mm. Graft lengths varied between 120 and 195 mm. Following semi-automatic segmentation of the aorta and its large side branches, the median centreline (skeleton) of the vessels was determined employing three dimensional morphological thinning operations. Identifying the starting and ending points of the graft our algorithm could be validated by comparing the calculated length with the specifications of the grafts. Results: Employing our skeleton algorithm a precise measurement of aortic segmental length was possible. The differences in the measured length and graft length were <6% (range 4-12 mm). The average time necessary for segmentation was 7 minutes (range 3-10 minutes). Conclusion: Our skeleton algorithm allows for a precise measurement of aortic length and is therefore a valuable tool prior to endovascular treatment. Axial slices were used for assessment of degree of stenosis and plaque morphology. Results: 187 significant stenoses (129 ICA, 16 CCA, 42 ECA), and 29 occlusions (24 ICA, 2 CCA, 3 ECA) were detected. Except for 1 membranous stenosis all significant stenoses and all occlusions were demonstrated by CTA (sensitivity 99.5%). CFD failed or was not completely interpretable due to mural calcifications in 29 cases (sensitivity: 84.5%). CTA detected 9 stenoses which were false-negative in angiography. CTA was the best in assessment of plaque morphology, angiography best for ulcers. Conclusion: CTA is at least as sensitive as DSA in assessing stenosis and occiusion. If CFD is incomplete or ambiguous (e.g. in severe bifurcation calcification or postoperative air trapping) CTA should be performed instead of DSA. (Submitted by Internet) Purpose: Angiography and intervention may give a large radiation dose both to patient and statt. We have examined the influence of a number of angiographic parameters on radiation dose. The results can be applied to all fields of angiography and intervention. Methods and Materials: In a cardiac angiography lab an Alderson phantom was used to simulate a patient. The radiation dose to the patient (KAP, kerma area-product) and statt was measured with ionization chambers. For certain parameters a Monte Carlo simulation of the ettective dose was also performed. Projection: Placing the X-ray tube on the same side as the radiologist increases the dose from scattered radiation up to three times that of a posteroanterior projection. Filtration: Increased filtration lowers the dose to both patient and radiologist. Image intensifier size and collimation: The image intensifier input field size influences the dose rather little. However, even a slight collimation lowers the dose drastically. Protective screens: A protective screen between patient and radiologist gives a large reduction of scattered radiation dose. Results: Technical success of stent placement was 100%. 5 of 7 patients showed reperfusion of the IMA. Clinically, all patients improved by one or two stages. During the observation time, DSA and CTAyielded a patency rate of 100% with no restenosis. In addition to DSA, CTA was the only method to depict vessel wall detail and the relation of vessel wall and stent lattice. Morbidity and mortality were 0% and no late complications occurred. Conclusion: Percutaneous stent angioplasty of the infrarenal aorta is an effective and safe method with excellent clinical results and high immidiate and mid-term success rates (100% patency). Follow-up by 3D CTA is a fast, non-invasive, reliable modality and superior to DSA providing all the necessary information for assessment of patency, vessel wall, and stent-graft. 14:45 Purpose: To investigate a method of determining limb blood flow as a means of measuring limb perfusion after interventional radiology and medical treatment. Methods and Materials: 38 patients with documented peripheral vacular disease were positioned with their limbs within the field of view of a gamma camera. The arterial circulation was occlude by pressure cuffs placed above the knees and technetium HSA injected intravenously. The cuffs were released after three minutes and the time activity curve of both limbs measured, the cuffs were then reinflated for a further three minute period and then released with a further time activity curve measured. The limb inflow and outflow was then determined. In 20 patients measurements were taken before and after angioplasty and a further 18 patients were measured after medical therapy. Results: Limb blood flow showed a good correlation with patient symptoms and angiographic findings but relatively poor correlation with changes in ankle brachial index. Curve patterns were predictive of angiofraphic findings in determining the site of maximum obstruction to blood f1ow. Conclusion: Limb blood flow is a useful method of detrmining the outcome of angioplasty as weil as helping to detrmine the strategy for maximum benefit of angioplasty. Purpose: To test the diagnostic value of dobutamine stress MRI for predicting recovery of regional myocardial wall motion after revascularization. In patients with myocardial wall motion abnormalities, inotropic stimulation leads to an increase in systolic wall thickening only in viable, but not in non-viable, scarred myocardium. Methods and Materials: 20 patients with wall motion abnormalities were examined with a Cine FLASH-2d sequence at rest and during dobutamine stress (10 [tg/kg/min). Patients were re-examined at rest 3 months after revascularisation, and, in the case of persisting wall motion defects, another 3 months later by rest MRI and coronary angiography. Criterion of viability was an increase in end-systolic wall thickening during stress and/or at follow-up. Akinetic regions were c1assified as viable if > =50% of the affected segments improved. Results: There were no c1inically relevant complications. 2 patients were excluded from statistical evaluation due to restenosis. Sensitivity and specificity for the prediction of myocardial viability were 73% and 92% for tne segment related analysis and 85% and 100% for the patient related analysis, respectively. A significant increase of the ejection fraction was found only with the patients with viable myocardium. Conelusion: Dobutamine stress MRI allows to predict functional recovery of akinetic regions after revascularization. 14:50 Purpose: To investigate the extend of tissue necrosis and postischemic signal behaviour in occlusive myocardial infarction after TMLR. Methods and Materials: In ten sheep the first diagonal branch of the LAD was ligated via an minimal invasive thoracotomy. Four sheep served as controls, six sheep were treated by TMLR within one hour of ischemia. Four weeks later the sheep were sacrified 15 min after injection of 0.1 mmol Gd-DTPNkg. Short axis views were obtained in vitro at 1.5 T using T1-and T2-wei~hted spin echo imaging with a spatial resolution of 0.2 to 1.7 mm voxel size. Regional signal intensities (SI) and the presence of laser channels were determined in 36 myocardial segments per slice and compared to findings from macro-and microscopy. Results: An antero-lateral myocardial coagulation necrosis presenting with increased T1 and T2 SI was identically found in both, controls and hearts after TMLR. Wall thickness was significantly decreased in necrotic regions (3.6 ± 1.0 mm) compared to normal myocardium ( Results: The main sign of CPC on MRI were as folIows: The limit between visceral and parietal layer of pericardium was blurring, and the thickness of pericardium was irregularly thickening (more than 4 mm), as weil as most of them located in the right side of the heart. The thickening pericardium demonstrated middle signal intensity, or middling low signal intensity, among them, there were spots great low signal intensity or high signal intensity. The ventricular septum became rigid, and the chamber of ventricles were smaller with hypokinesis. The enlargement of right atrium and vena cava were seen in majority, and enlargement of left atrium and pulmonary veins in a few cases. The moderate to middle insufficiency of atrium-ventricular valves could be depicted in some patients, Conclusion: MRI findings of CPC are eharaeteristie by affirmation of the thickening of perieardium, but its utility is Iimited, because it is expensive and insensitive for calcification. Purpose: To correlate radiologie information with the histology particularly when the specimen are small. We are aware of many instances in decades of experienee in which diagnoses had to be changed when radiographs were correlated with the initial histology. Methods and Materials: 36 cases of radiological and histological discrepancies in children (25 eases) as weil as in adults (11 cases). 29 bone tumors were located on long bones, 29 were benign, 7 were malignant, 28 were osteolytic lesions, 8 were sclerotic lesions. Results: The most frequent errors occurred in cases of osteosarcoma (mainly of the chondroblastic type) and in cases of cartilaginous and/or fibrous tumors (especially of the cystic type). Conclusion: Plain radiography remains the single most valuable modality in determining a differential diagnosis for bone lesions. Radiographs are analogous to gross pathologie examination since they show the entire tumor in its anatomie eontext. Most diagnostic pitfalls can be avoided by insisting on the opportunity to correlate radiologie information with the histology, particularly when the specimens are small. Furthermore, clinical imaging techniques may serve as a check on whether or not a Iimited biopsy is Iikely to be representative. 1296 A preliminary experience in the study of superficial masses: ECO versus MRI A. De Marchi, P. Depetra, G. Regis, C. Faletti; TUfinll Introduction: An ECO test with mde and PWO offers information as to the presence/absence of vaseolarization moreover gives indications as to the characteristics inside the masses themselves. The aim of this study was to evaluate if the results obtained from elaboration of data frorn the wash-in and wash-out curves after the addition of contrast medium, enables us to make a diagnostic hypothesis. These data were compared to those of MRI without and with contrast medium and that of the histological examination. Methods Results: Five basic forms of radiographie patterns were found: 1. The osteoma Iike pattern (7 eases). 2. The c1assie pattern with "fiowing eandie wax" appearanee (5 eases). 3. The extraosseous myositis ossifieans Iike pattern (1 ease). 4. The osteopathia striata like pattern (6 cases). 5. Mixed pattern (3 eases with type four and three pattern, 1 case with type one and three pattern). In 5 eases the upper Iimbs including the shoulder girdle were involved, in 16 eases the lower limbs including the pelvis, in 1 ease the upper and lower limbs, and in 1 ease the sacrum. In 10 eases only 1 bone was affeeted, in 4 eases 2 bones and in 9 eases 3 or more bony elements. Conclusion: The radiographie speetrum of melorheostosis is broader than reported in the literature up to now. We elassified 5 basic forms of radiographie appearanee, that open a eorresponding speetrum of differential diagnosis (i.e, parosseal osteosareomas). As the histology of melorheostosis is unspecifie, a eorreet elinieal-radiologieal diagnosis is important. Possible pathogenesis and assoeiated c1inieal abnormalities of melorheostosis will be diseussed. Methods and Materials: MRI and the elinieal ease notes of 8 patients submitted for tumor investigation were reviewed. Images of 11 regions (9 with eontrast enhaneement) were analysed: knee n:2, bilateral hips n:6, ankle n:1, wrist n:1, shoulder n:1. They were eorrelated with histopathology (n:5) and surgieal notes (n:4). Results: MRI eharaeteristies distinguished amyloid disease from neoplasms by their joint association (n:11), large intraartieular erosion (n:5) with absence of bone marrow ehanges (n: 11), large soft tissue eomponent (n:5), eontrast enhaneement in and around masses (n:6), rim contrast enhancement (n:3), tendon (n:10) and bursal involvement (n:8). Most common signal characteristics were: low T1 .(n:9), predominanlly low T2 (n:5) and predominantly high T2 (n:6). Tendon involvement of gluteus minimus museie was seen in 9/12 and iliofemoral ligament thickening in 12/12 hips. Soft-tissue tumors characlerization is not easy, not only because of their intrinsic peculiarities, bul also because the relative unexperience of most of Ihe radiologisls in Ihis area. Purpose: To develop a confidence compuled-aided system to Ihe diagnoses of these tumors with MRI. Methods and Materials: We have studied 236 histologically proved soft-tissue tumors (144 benign and 102 malign) wilh MRI analizing clinical and image variables. Two artificial neural networks were developed 10 c1assify tumors into benign and malign eategories and into specific histologieal groups respectively. Neural networks were multilayer perceptrons with a single hidden layer. A "Ieave-one-oul" was the validation melhod employed. Results: 206 tumors (87.7%) were correclly classified inlo benign and malign. Correct specific diagnosis was obtained in 153 masses (64.8%). Conclusion: Artificial neural networks can be an effective computedaided system to the diagnosis of these tumors. System optimization is based in variables selection (that will be described). Methods and Materials: The MR images of 11 eases, originaling from 5 centers, were relrospectively reviewed by two radiologisls. All masses were assessed for location, size, shape, homogeneity, margin, signal intensities, enhancement pattern, inlralumoral necrosis, and bone involvement. Results: Two lesions were loealed in the hand, 2 in Ihe Ihigh, 2 around the knee, I in the groin, I in the axilla, and 1 in Ihe Achilles lendon. Mean size varied from 2 to 11 cm. Four lesions were oval, 3 were rounded, and 2 bilobular. On T1-WI, SI of Ihe lesion was slightly to obviously higher than thai of skeletal muscle in 5 out of 8 patients. In 2 patients, SI equals that of museie. On T2-WI, intermediate (7/9 patients) to high (2/9 palients) SI was seen. Strong inhomogeneous enhancement was present in 6/7 eases. Intralumoral necrosis was present in one lesion. All de novo lumors were weil circumscribed, whereas recurrenllumors showed unsharp margins. No bone involvemenl was seen. Conclusion: Since c1ear cell sarcoma often has sharp margins, is homogeneous on all imaging sequences, and lacks necrosis or bone involvement, this rare high-grade malignancy may be mislaken for a benign lesion. The high SI on T1-WI, reflecting the intracellular melanin content, must attract the attention of the radiologisllo include this lesion in the differential diagnosis. 14:00 Purpose: To determine the diagnostic performance of the VE in patients with bronchogenic carcinoma. Comparison was made between bronchoscopy, axial CT-images, and minimal intensity projections (MinIP). Methods and Materials: 25 patients were referred for a helical CT because a bronchogenic carcinoma had been detected by bronchoscopy. The CT parameters included 3 mm sections and a pitch of 1.5 with an incremental of 1 mm. The data were transferred to a workstation for further processing. VE was tested for providing additional information in terms of location and degree of stenoses. Quality assurance was achieved by comparison to the corresponding bronchoscopy. Results: 24 stenoses were found in the bronchoscopy, 23 were found in the VE. There were no statistically significant differences between localization and degree of stenoses in the VE compared with the bronchoscopy. The readers underestimated the degree of stenoses in the axial CT-slices in 5-9 (reader 1-3) patients. An underestimation was noted in the MinlP in 8-11 patients (reader 1-3). The negative control group was identified in the axial CT-slices, the MinlP, and the VE. Patients were assessed using spiral CT (3 mm, 1 to 2:1 pitch). Two reviewers (one radiologist, one pneumonologist) analysed successively and independently axial CT images and one month later axial CT and VB images (Navigator, GEMS). In case of abnormal findings, they proposed the most Iikely diagnostic and rated their level of confidence. Results: They analysed 238 bronchial segments with 31 abnormalities demonstrated by fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Abnormal bronchial segments were identified with a mean sensitivity of 89% (axial images) and 92% (axial and VB images) (p > 0.5). A correct diagnostic of nature of bronchial abnormalities was proposed in 68% of cases using axial CT images and in 76% using axial CT and VB images (P =0.5). The pneumonolog ist feit more confident with VB images although it did not increase his yield. Conclusion: VB does not improve the performance of our reviewers for the detection and identification of benign bronchial abnormalities but VB increases the confidence in CT images of ehest physicians. Results: The use of routine thin slice ehest scan data of the EBT results in excellent image quality of the virtual endoscopy images. In all patients the bronchial tree was visible to at least 4th order bronchi. Moderate artifacts were seen due to cardiac motion in the central parts of the bronchial tree. Overall excellent correlation was seen between virtual and real bronchoscopy according to anatomy and pathology. Conclusion: The thin slice protocol used with the EBT scanner for routine ehest scans allows high-quality virtual bronchoscopy without additional scans and excellent visualisation of alterations of the tracheobronchial tree. The additional information was highly appreciated by the clinicians to plan endoscopic interventions and to shorten examination times of the bronchoscopy. Purpose: To study the effect of scan parameters (acquisition, reconstruction, and threshold setting) on VB simulations of the tracheobronchial lree . Methods and Materials: A cadaver specimen of lhe bronchial tree was scanned using combination of various collimation (1. 3. 5. 7 mm). pitch (1. 1.5, 2) . and reconstruction intervals (0.7. 2. 3. 5 mm). VB were produced using Navigator (GEMS). Three sites of interest (carlna, left main bronchus, right upper lobe bronchus) were displayed at 7 different threshold settings (from -250 to -850 by steps of 100 HU). Three reviewers evaluated independently the anatomy. the presence of stair steps artefacts, and the global quality of the VB on a four-Ievel scale. Results: All reviewers agreed on the choice of the optimal parameters (1 and 3 mm collimation, pitch <1.5, overlapping). The optimal threshold setting varied greatly regarding the site of displayed anatomy: -250 and -350 HU were optimal to display the right upper lobe bronchus while setting between -450 and -850 HU were optimal to display the carina and the left main bronchus. Inter observer agreement was good (kappa, 0.75). Conclusion: Obtaining an optimal quality for VB simulations requires selecting appropriate acquisition and reconstruction parameters and adapting threshold settings. 1314 Heart-motion related artefacts in virtual endoscopy T. Fleiter, R. Sokiranski, H.-J. Brambs; UfmlD Purpose: To evaluate the influence of heart-motion on the diagnostic image-quality of virtual bronchoscopy with Helical-CT. Methods and Materials: Helical-CT was performed on 30 patients with suspected lung-masses with 1.5 to 2.5 mm collimation. Virtual endoscopy was calculated based on these volume-data-sets using a commercial (Ornnipro, Eiscint) and a marching-cubes based software (Iris Explorer). A cadaver phantom of the human bronchial tree was scanned for the comparison of in vive and in vltro artefacts. The bronchial tree was traced on the axial images. The profile of the bronchial tree margins has been analysed within the axial and coronal reformatted images and the resulting virtual endoscopy to detect irregular partial-volume artefacts caused by motion during the helical scan. Examinations with artefacts caused by breathing or moving were excluded. Results: Artefacts caused by the heart-motion were detectable in all examinations. In one case heart-motions lead to suspected tumorimpression on the bifurcation-Ievel of the trachea. In all cases the diagnostic qualily especially of lhe lower and peripheral parts of the bronchial tree was reduced and by these motion-artefacts and Iimited the use of the virtual endoscopy. Conclusion: There is an increased potential for artefacts caused by heart-rnotlons for virtual endoscopy in more than 60%. Laparoscopy confirmed all endometriosic cysts (in 2 cases the cysts were idenlified thanks to MR imaging, because were located inside ovarian stroma) and 40 on 44 implants seen at MR (4 false positive = luteal cysts) while identified 9 implants more in different places (MR sensibility = 81.6%). Conclusion: MR, thanks to fat-saturation sequences, rectifies 25% of c1inical-sonographic diagnosis of endometriosis, avoiding useless surgery in 3 on 30 patients. Moreover MR can identify all endometriomas and the greatest part of endometriosic implants, making more easy laparoseopie approach. We suggest MR imaging in diagnosis and follow-up of endometriosis. Non-ionic X-ray Contrast media "Omnipaque-300" and "Ultravist-300" help us in the cases of the complicated diagnostics. yielded a better sensitivity (= 96.7%) than each method alone. The regional sensitivity for hypopharyngeal tumors (n =22) was 95.5%. In opposition to CT in 8 cases DCP was able to show superficial tumor spread within the hypopharynx more c1early. The results of the CT examinations led to a sensitivity of 87.5% and a specificity of 100%. In 74.7% CT provided a correct T-staging. Here Ihe analysis of the inter-observer variability provided satisfactory conformity (K =0.45) regarding a correct T-slag ing. The statistieal analysis of a tumor involvement of subregions showed that both DCP and CT presented with a lower sensitivity in the oropharynx and DCP also in the supraglottic region. Conclusion: DCP is (still) a useful screening method in the diagnosis of tumors. DCP is able to provide further information to DL in patients with restricted evaluation of DL. In case of superficial hypopharyngeal tumors the sensitivity of DCP is higher than of CT so here is another indication for DCP from the radiologists' point of view. Unlike CT DCP is not a reliable method for the preoperatively needed T-classification. To determine the potentlalities of dynamic CT and spiral CT with the bolus contrast enhancement in differential diagnostics of the neck tumors. Methods: Diagnostical procedures included: 1) dynamic CT conducted on "Somatom DR2"-40 ml 76% Urographin intravenously 3 mi/sec; 2) Spiral CT conducted on "Tornoscan SR7000"-100 ml Ultravist-300 intravenously 3 mI/sec, 5/4 mm. Arter ial phase-17", venous-60" . Materials: 31 patients with the neck tumors presented 6 cervieal cysts, 10 lipomas, 9 chemodectomas, 2 atypical paragangliomas, 4 neurinomas of different localization. Results: Cervical cyst were seen as a mass with the density of the fluid, clear even contours. Lipomas were noted as Iimited formations in different layers of the neck and identical to the tat tissue due to the density. Chemodectomas are distinguished by early (at the arler ial phase), uniform and strongly pronounced (100--120 HU) accumulation of the contrast medium (CM). Accumulation of the CM in neurinomas, located at the carotid arteries bifureation, is much slower, less pronounced (60--70 HU) and not even: spots and stripes of the contrasted vessels stand out against the slightly accumulating parenchyma. Atypieal paragangliomas were located lower than carotid arteries bifurcation, squeezing the vascular fascicle, accumulated the medium weil but still less than in carotid chemodectomas, uneven with the large area of necrosis in the centre. Cervical neurinomas were typically located at the site of intervertebral foramen or brachial plexus. Accumulation of the CM was not significant. Conclusion: Spiral CT in contrast to dynamic CT allows to reveal the attachment of carotid arleries into the pathological process and to specify the relations belween the tumor and neck vessels with the use of 3D. -NaCI flush volume enlargement caused bolus lengthening (appr. 55%). -Gd volume enlargement caused bolus lengthening (e.g. 150% from single to double dose level). -Increase of flow rate caused a decrease of BL and BAT (e.g. 41 %/43% from 0.5 to 1 ml/s) and an increase of S/N (122% from 0.5 to 1 ml/s). Conclusion: The bolus is physiologically diluted by the CM passage through heart and lung, blood distribution into proximally localized vessel branches and by the diffusion into interstitial tissue. The arterial bolus length obviously depends on the primarily defined l.v, injection parameters which should be adjusted to the CE MRA measurement sequence parameters. 14:10 1346 Contrast-enhanced 3D MR angiography: fixed versus weight-adjusted dose T.F. Hany, S. Wildermuth, M. Schmidt, J.F. Debatin; Zurich/CH Purpose: To evaluate the impact of a fixed contrast volume in low and high weight patients onto contrast bolus-shape and -duration, arterial SNR in the aorta and renal arteries, as weil as 3D MRA image quality. Methods and Materials: Eight volunteers, seperated into 4 'light' (55-60 kg) and 4 'heavy' subjects (90-97 kg) were studied twice following intravenous administration of 22.5 ml Gd-DTPA. SI-measurements were obtained from within the aorta over 50 sec (1.5 sec/image). On a second day, 3D MRA (AT =28 sec) was performed using the same volume and injection parameters. SNR in the aorta and central portion of the renal 14:30 1348 Evaluation of 3 blood pool agents for MRA in a low-field MR system: first experimental results K. Reither, F. Wacker, W. Ebert, G. Laub, K.-J. Wolf; Berlin/D Purpose: Comparison of 3 MR blood pool contrast agents for MRA in a low-field MR system. Methods and Materials: 6 rabbits were examined before and up to 45 min after i.v, administration of gadolinium dendrimer (Gadomer-17, 50 urnol Gd per kg b.w.) and two superparamagnetic iron oxide particles (SHU 555 A "Iarge", SHU 555 C "smalI", 50 urnol Fe per kg b.w.) with a T1-weighted 3D gradient echo sequence (TR 7.3 ms, TE 2.4 ms, FA 25°) in an open 0.2 Tesla system. The relative intravasal signal intensity course was measured in the aorta. A high-and low-field bolus-MRA with Gd-DPTA (200 umol Gd per kg b.w.) was carried out in all animals for comparison. Results: Maximum relative signal intensity change (mRSC) with 0.2 T was 455% for Gadomer-17 and 443 and 418% for the large and small superparamagnetic iron-oxide particles. The diagnostic window (>70% of the mRSC (472%) of Gd-DTPA) was up to 10 min for Gadomer-17, up to 21 min for the large, and up to 33 min for the small iron oxide partides. Conclusion: Adequate diagnostic contrast enhancement of the abdominal vessels over aperiod of >30 min was obtained only with small superparamagnetic iron partides in a low-field MR system. This enables improved MRA-image quality in low-field systems as weil as carrying out simple vascular MR-assisted interventions. Purpose: The purpose of the study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of Dotarem ® at 0.1 mmol/kg for the diagnosis of carotid artery stenosis by contrast-enhanced MRA in comparison to unenhanced MRA (TOF) , using X-ray angiography as gold standard. Methods and Materials: 43 patients suspected of carotid artery stenos is and scheduled to undergo a X-ray DSA were evaluated in a two-center c1inical trial. All patients underwent a classical unenhanced Purpose: To evaluate the efficacy of a new contrast agent with ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide part icles ; (PEG-Ferron ®, Nycomed AS) for 3D TOF MRA of per ipheral vessels and to demonstrate the potential of blood pool MR contrast med ia for 3D-TOF MRA of coronary arteries. Methods and Materials: Protocol 1: Coronal 3D TOF MRA images of the pelvis and lower limb circulalion of twelve dogs were acqu ired before and after administration of PEG-Ferron or Gd-DTPA-BMA. Dose ranging was performed with 3, 4 and 5 mg/kg PEG-Ferron with a 20°a nd 60°flip angle. Protocol 2: Gd-DTPA-Albumin enhanced axial and coronal 3D TOF MRA images of the coronary arteries were acquired . Results: The optimal dose and flip angle were 3 mg PEG-Ferron/kg and 60°respectively. Peg-Ferron provided clear demarcation of the major primary, secondary and tertiary vessels over aperiod of 45 min. Gd-DTPA-BMA provided less and shorter signal (-15 min.) enhancement than PEG-Ferron . Admin istration of Gd-DTPA-Albumin greatly enhanced major coronary arteries. Conclusion: The efficacy of Peg-Ferron for 3D TOF MRA of per ipheral vessels was demonstrated. The initial results show the feasibility of using blood pool contrast media to improve 3D TOF MRA of the coronary arteries. Purpose: To study temporal changes in signal intensity of the Iiver, focal liver lesions, spleen, and abdom inal vessels following Iv. injection of a bolus-injectable SPIO using a breathheld 3D-MRA sequence and to determine its impact on MRA of the upper abdomen. Methods and Materials: SH U 555 A (Schering AG, Berlln, Germany) was bolus-injected in 20 patients with focalliver lesions (12 metastases, 4 HCC , 3 hemangiomas, and 1 adenoma) through a cubital i.v.-llne at a dose of 10 urnol Fe/kg bodyweight at an injeclion rate of 3 ml/s. Patients were scanned (1.5 T Magnetom Vision) before and at multiple time points following contrast adm inistrat ion with Spiral-CT available for comparison. Postcontrast imaging started immediately follow ing bolus inject ion and was repeated at multiple time points (baseline, 30, 60 , 90, 120, 180,240,300,360, and 420 s) . The 3D-FISP-MRA sequence (TR 5.0 ms, TE 2.0 rns, FA 25°, matrix 140 x 256 , coronal 80 mm slab, 20 partitions) was obtained with an acquisition time of 15 S . Signal intensity (SI) values of vessels and parenchymal organs was obtained for quant itative analysis (Enhancement = [SI post -SI prel /SI pre x 100). Visibility of vessels was subjectively assessed by three readers . Results: None of the 20 palients reported any pain or discomfort following contrast injection . Vessel enhancement peaked in the aorta with 175% at 30 sand the portal vein with 150% at 60 s follow ing contrast injection and was prolonged to 420 s with 125% resp.100%. The liver and the spleen demonstrated a biphasic enhancement pattern . No additionallesions were detected and Spiral-CT was superior in contrasting vessels of the upper abdomen. Conclusion: This study proves that dynamic MRA with SH U 555 A is feasible and weil tolerated . Spiral-CF is still superior in contrasting vessels of the upper abdomen . 15:05 1352 5PIO-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography: a feasibility study SA Schmitz, 1. Albrecht, K.J. Wolf ; BerlinlD Purpose: The aim was to develop a magnelic resonance angiography (MRA ) technique which images the vasculature from the lungs to the calves during a single MR exam ination for assessing pulmonary embolism and deep venous thrombosis. Methods and Materials: Twelve patients were examined on a 1.5 Tesla imager using 3d-FISP sequences (TRfTE/FA, 5 ms/2 ms/25°) at the end and after a 30-minute drip infusion of 15 urnol Fe/kg of AMI-25 superparamagnetic iron oxide particles (SPIOs). Body array coils were placed one step after the other on the thorax , abdomen, pelvis, upper legs and knee/calf region. Two readers independently. class ified the images as insufficient, suffic ienl and good. Signal-to-noise ratios were determined for major arter ies and veins, and the pre-and postcontrast signal intensity values of the lung vascualture were compared. Results: Vascular anatomy was c1early visualized in all patient s. The image quality was c1assified as sufficient or good . A significant increase (p < 0.05) was found in the normalized signal intensity of lobar pulmonary arteries and veins from 10 ± 6 to 37 ± 13, and from 8 ± 5 to 22 ± 9 arbitrary units. Conclusion: SPIO-enhanced MRA allows display of arteries and veins from the lungs to the calves after infusion of a standard SPIO dose. Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic potential and possible benefit of gadobenate dimeglumine for 3D contrast MR angiography. Methods and Materials: Two Phase I studies were performed on healthy volunteers to assess the dose response characteristics of Gd-BOPTA (MultiHance®, Bracco SpA) for MR angiography. Furthermore, an intraindividual double-bl inded study was carried out to compare its properties with those of Gd-DTPA. Gd-BOPTA is currently undergoing investigation in Phase 11 studies of three vascular regions (carotid , abdom inal and pelvic arteries). Qua litative as weil as quantitative assessment by blinded readers has been performed . Results: Gd-BOPTA reveals a higher , more homogenous intravascular enhancement than Gd-DTPA. This aspect is especially prominent in small vessels. Quantitative analys is revealed significantly (p < 0.01) longer and higher peak enhancements than Gd-DTPA in intraindividua\ comparisons. Conclusion: The Phase I studies revealed a higher diagnostic efficacy of Gd-BOPTA for MR angiography than Gd-DTPA. Gd-BOPTA gives a higher and more homogenous vascular enhancement of longer peak durat ion. Objective: To compare the diagnostic value of two different doses of Gd-DOTA at substraction MRA of lower extremities in patients with symptomatic peripheral arterial occlusive disease, with x-ray angiography as the reference. Methods and Materials: Fourty patients were prospectively included in 2 different centers. Subtraction MRA consisted of coronal GRE acquisitions, before and after random administration of either 0.05 mmol/kg or 0.1 mmol/kg of Gd-DOTA injected twice: one for thighs, one for legs examination. In a prospective on-site then centralized blinded MRA data analysis, the number and location of stenoses >50% and occlusions were evaluated. Sensitivity, specificity and kappa test were used to evaluate MRA data obtained with each dose. Results: The location and extent of stenoses and/or occlusions on MRA and angiograms were weil correlated (Kappa, p < 0.5). There was no significant difference between the two doses despite a slightly higher specificity with the dose of 0.1 mmol/kg (89% vs 84%). The highest dose allowed better signal to noise ratio, and better collaterality visualization (68.8% scored good or excellent for 0.1 dose vs 40% for 0.05 dose). Conclusion: Gd-DOTA MRA at the dose of 0.1 mmol/kg is the best suited to assess the presence and severity of atherosclerotic lower limbs lesions. Purpose: To assess with MRI the frequency of wallerian degeneration of the pyramidal tract (WDPT) in hemiplegie patients recovering from stroke, and the relationship between WDPT and recovery. Methods and Materials: 20 hemiplegie patients with ischemic stroke in the territory of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) were examined with MRI at 1.5 T three times in 9 months during rehabilitation. All patients had SE T1, FSE T2, and FLAIR images. MR images were assessed for the ischemic lesions, and the presence of WDPT. WDPT was defined as well-defined band of hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images in the topographie distribution of the corticospinal tract, and as ipsilateral brain stem shrinkage at later stage. MRI results were compared with measurement of motor abilities of the patients. Good recovery was defined as the ability to perform fingers movements. Results: Ischemic lesions were in the deep MCA (14 cases), superficial MCA (5 cases), or both (1 case) territories. All patients had WDPT. Accordingly to literature, bright T2 signal intensity appeared 2 to 3 months after stroke. 6 patients had brain stem shrinkage. FLAIR images showed WDPT with a greater conspicuity than T1 and T2-weighted images. Conclusion: WDPT was a constant MR finding and should not be used as a predictive factor of the quality of motor recovery. Purpose: To demonstrate signal intensity changes of Wallerian degeneration (WD) in white matter tracts in various intracranial lesions and to assess its prognostic implications. Methods and Materials: 18 patients of acute stroke were studied prospectively. MRI and Functional disability of these patients was evaluated at presentation, 1 and 4 months duration using modified Barthel Index of activity of daily living (ADL). The neurological status at 4 months was graded as good recovery, ADL > 16; partial recovery, ADL 10 -15 and poor recovery, ADL < 9. Statistical analysis of data was done using student's t-test.szo MR scans of patients of various intracranial lesions were analysed retrospectively. Results: Prospective Study: -A total of 10/18 patients of stroke showed dynamic signal intensity changes in cortico-spinal tract, suggestive of WD at 1 and 4 months follow up. Their mean ADL score changed from 9.1 at 1 month to 11.4 at 4 months duration suggestive of moderate to severe disability after 4 months of stroke. The hematomas were created by injecting 0.1-1 ml of autologous blood into the brain of 13 rabbits. One additional rabbit only underwent brain puncture. MRI was performed before and, at determined intervals, after hematoma creation. The follow-up time was 3 h in one rabbit, 6 hours in eight rabbits and 9-12 days in five rabbits. Immediately after the last MRI, the brain was fixed with formalin. The images of the last MRI were compared to the fixed brain sections. Results: T2*-weighted gradient echo sequences revealed the intraparenchymal hematomas as hypointensities in all rabbits immediately after hematoma creation. The signal pattern remained very much the same during the follow-up. The sizes and shapes of the hematomas corresponded weil to the post-mortem findings. Leakage of blood into the liquor spaces was also demonstrated. GRASE images were less sensitive. Spin echo sequences were rather insensitive. FLAIR often revealed blood in liquor spaces but not in brain parenchyma. Conclusion: T2*-weighted gradient echo sequences seem to be capable to reveal small intracranial hemorrhages from hyperacute to subacute phase. Results: Involvement of basal ganglia was a frequent finding and always associated with an unfavorable prognosis (n =11). In the acute stage, cerebral edema was prevalent (n =4 of 4). In the early subacute stage, enhanced T1-weighted images revealed cortical laminar enhancement indicating necrosis (n =2 of 2 contrast enhanced studies). In the late subacute stage, unehanced T1-weighted images showed laminar lesions of the cerebral cortex and appearance of atrophie changes (n = 3 of 3). In chronic stage, cortical atrophy proceeded (n = 5 of 5) and periventricular lesions could be identified (n = 3 of 5). • Whole brain and ventricular system. All data were analysed by 2 independent neuro-radiologists and nuclear medicine specialists. Results: In MRI there were morphological and volumetrie findings: in the hippocampal-amygdala complex (80%), ventricular system (60%) and localised volumetrie findings in the premotor frontal lobe (40%). P~T findings included a high activity in both thalamus in those patients with a good therapeutic response to Clozapin. Conclusion: The multimodality analysis is an excellent tool in the diagnosis and monitoring of patient with schizophrenia, combining data from different imaging techniques. The use of new software tools is presented in this paper. L.H. Ros, Th. Helmberger, PR Ros; ZaragozalE, MunichlD, Boston, Although the pseudocyst is the most common cystic mass of the pancreas found at imaging studies, radiologists should be aware of the multiple disease processes that can manifest in a similar manner. This article reviews these other entities by category of the origin of the mass, including congenital, inflammatory, and neoplastic. Computed tomography, ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging studies are presented, and, although the considerable overlap of imaging features makes it generally impossible to render a specific diagnosis, combining the findings from these modalities is helpful in formulating a differential diagnosis. An understanding of the underlying pathologie changes in each entity aids the radiologist in evaluating these lesions. Each entity is discussed, with adefinition and a summary of the key microseopie and gross findings that determine its imaging characteristics. The imaging features are discussed with a pathologie correlation approach to emphasize the key differences that in many cases can help narrow the differential diagnosis. 1364 White matter hyperintensities on MR proton-density and T2-weighted images in scleroderma patients C. Losacco, F. Sardanelli, R.C. Parodi, P. Renzetti, A. Sulli, M. Cutolo; Purpose: To evaluate the brain status of scleroderma patients. Methods and Materials: We studied 14 female scleroderma patients (aged 24-74) with a disease duration of 1-12 years, without relevant systemic complication. All patients underwent brain MR examination at 1.5 T: SE PO-and T2-weighted sequence (TRITE 2500/20-80 ms); pixel 0.98 x 0.98 mm; 22 x 2 paraaxial 3-mm contiguous slices. An age-matched female control group (CG) of 14 clinically normal subjects underwent the same protoco!. White matter hyperintensities, were counted. Mann-Whitney test and Spearman rank correlation coefficient were used. Results: Patients: 170 hyperintensities = >2 mm in diameter (range 0-75, mean 12.1, median 4.5); CG: 13 (0-2, 0.9, 1, respectively), with a significant difference (p =.0113). A trend towards the correlation between number of hyperintensities and disease duration (p = .188) and patient's age (p =.083) was observed. Moreover, 208 <2 mm hyperintensities were found in patients (0-38, 14.9, 8, respectively) while only 31 were found in the CG (0-7, 2.0, 1, respectively), with significant difference (p =.0063). Conclusion: White matter hyperintensities are more frequent in scleroderma patients than in CG. These findings could be related to obIiterative microvascular processes due to the disease. In addition, this study supports the hypotesis of an early brain involvement in scleroderma patients. In daily practice, inflammatory and neoplastic diseases of the pancreas are common findings. In many cases, the patients history, clinical examination, and laboratory tests are indicating the presence and sometimes even the type of pancreatic disease. Therefore, the task for radiological imaging is to identify and characterize the potential pathological process. In displaying ongoing processes within and around the pancreatic gland, conventional plain films and oral contrast studies are of very Iimited use, while ultrasound, computed tomography, and increasingly magnetic resonance imaging are the methods of choice. In this lecture, we emphasize the radiologie-pathologie correlation of solid pancreatic lesions including ductal adenocarcinoma and its varlants, acinar cell carcinoma, solid pseudopapillary tumors, pancreatoblastoma, endocrine neoplasms, and other neoplasms (metastases, lymphoma), as weil as conditions mimicking a pancreatic tumor (chronic pancreatitis, pancreas divisum, pancreas annulare). By highligthing the underlying gross and histologie features of the different pathologies together with their imaging representations, a deeper understanding of the varying appearance of pancreatic lesions in the different imaging modalities will be provided. 1367 Molecular biology and imaging of the pathophysiology in osteoporosis J.E. Adams; ManchesterlUK Bones vary in shape (generally f1at and tubular) and are composed of two types of bone tissue: compact bone which forms the outer cortex of bones and trabecular or cancellous bone found mainly in vertebral bodies, the pelvis and ends of long bones. Trabecular bone is eight times more metabolically active than cortical bone. Oespite its hardness, bone remains a metabolically active tissue throughout Iife, being constantly resorbed and accreted by bone cells, the activity of which can be modified by many factors. Bone formation (osteoblastic activity) and bone resorption (osteoclastic activity) constitutes bone turnover, a process which takes place on bone surfaces and continues throughout life. Under normal circumstances osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity is "coupled" and constitutes the basal multicellular unit (BMU) of bone. If this process becomes "uncoupled" excessive osteoclastic resorption or defective osteoblastic function will result in a net loss of bone tissue (osteoporosis). Oefective osteoclastic function prevents normal resorption of bone which is essential to maintain bone health by a continual slow renewal throughout life. Oefective osteoclastic function in some diseases (e.g. osteopetrosis) can result in bone sclerosis and abnormal modelling on radiographs. Bone resorption by osteoclasts is a single stage process in which collagen and mineral are removed together. Bone formation is a two stage process; osteoblasts lay down osteoid, which subsequently becomes mineralised. Prerequisites for normal mineralisation are Vitamin 0 (1,25 [OH12 0 3 ) , normal levels of phosphorous and alkaline phosphatase and anormal pH. Oefects in the mineralisation process will result in rickets and osteomalacia, which may be evident on radiographs. Measurement of biochemical markers gives information on bone formation and resorption. High resolution MR and CT can give information on trabecular structure in vivo and in vitra. Bone densitometry provides information on bone mineral density (BMO) and rates of change in BMO different skeletal sites. Structural abnormalities visible on radiographs give evidence of abnormal osteoclastic function (sub-periostial erosions in hyperparathyraidism) and defective mineralisation. Quantitative Magnetic Resonance (QMR) have substantial potential to provide information about bone quality and structure beyond BMD. It is possible that a combination of information on bone elasticity, strength and density will provide a more sensitive tool for fraclure risk prediction than techniques that reflect bone density alone. It is the intent of this course to examine the current and future capabilities of QCT, QUS and QMR in the assessment of the architectural and densitometric properties of the bone tissue. Owing to the use of the spiral technology, CT provides information relative to the morphologic and hemodynamic patterns of focal liver lesions. The course will systematieally review the current role of spiral CT scanning for applications in the diagnosis of focal liver lesions. For each type of focal liver lesion, the key spiral CT application will be discussed in detail, with typical and atypical case illustrations. Specific emphasis will be placed on those foeal Iiver lesions for which spiral CT has documented advantages over standard CT, as weil as on the newer applications of multiple-phase spiral scanning. The role of spiral CT and its relationships to other imaging studies (L e., sonography and MR imaging) will be also addressed. Finally, pittfalls that may simulate actual focal liver lesions will be presented. Learning Objectives: (1) To understand the eurrent state-of-the-art techniques of spiral CT for diagnosing focal Iiver lesions, and more specifically of multiple phase studies. (2) To understand the specific advantages of spiral CT over conventional CT for the diagnosis of tocal Iiver lesion. (3) To recognize pseudolesions that may simulate actual foeal liver lesions. implications, and importance in diagnostic imaging of the liver. US is the initial examination performed in most patients c1inically suspected to have focal hepatic disease, as it enables a rapid, accurate, and noninvasive assessment of Iiver parenchyma. Moreover, US ls the imaging technique most frequently used when evaluating patients with chronie liver disease for early diagnosis of hepatocellular earcinoma or patients with extrahepatie malignaneies for detection of liver metastases. Therefore, in many cases, US will be the first examination to reveal a foealliver lesion. Unfortunately, while US findings can help eharaeterize focal liver lesions, there is enough variability and overlap in the US appearanee of benign and malignant Iiver tumors to make adefinite distinetion problematie. With recent advances in the Doppler US technology and the introduetion of eeho-enhancing agents, the potential for US to add information in the analysis of foealliver lesions is substantially improved. The most interesting results with eontrast-enhaneed Doppler US have been obtained in the assessment of tumor vaseularity in benign and malignant hepatocellular tumors. However, whether Doppler US studies will help to distinguish among focalliver lesions -thus reducing the need for more expensive imaging examinations -is still a matter of debate. This course will examine the eurrent status of Iiver US, highlighting technieal developments, diagnostie features in benign and malignant conditions, and role in different clinieal settings. RoomC 16:00-17:30 The accumulation of bone microdamage has been proposed as mechanism which impairs the mechanical properties of the tissue. It is a contributing factor to increased skeletal fracture risk and increasing agerelated fracture propensity. Microfractures result from the accumulation of unrepaired microdamage to the mineralized elements of bone from small loads applied to the tissue. Impaired repair of microfractures may contribute by compounding the weakening effects of reduced bone mass and compromising architectural properties. It begins at the atomic or molecular level and has manifestations through all levels of bone structure until lt manifests in large macrocracks which can cause tissue failure (bone fracture). The mechanical integrity can be significantly compromised even before substantial cracking ls observed at the macroscopic level. Changes in the molecular level can not directly be visualized by radiological methods, however, bone marrow edema, which regularly accompanies first changes, can be readily appreciated in MR sequences of the bone marrow. Changes in the architecture of the trabecular network (Le. reduced connectivity) can be appreciated by dedicated HR-CT scanners in-vitro at bone specimen with spatial resolutions of 60-100 um or in vive at the peripheral skeleton with spatial resolutions of 100-200 um, as an alternative method, standard MR systems with modified software can readily provide with resolutions of up to 78 x 78 x 300 um at the phalanges and 78 x 78 x 700 um at the distal radius and calcaneus. Those resolutions are already sufficient for the quantification of the properties of the trabecular network in 000-as weil as three dimensional applications. Chairperson: R.J ALFIDI (Cleveland, OH/USA) 1370 A. The U5 approach C. Bartolozzi, R. Lencioni; Pisal/ Despite the advancements of CT and MR imaging, US has continued to improve and to develop as weil as to have enormous applications, The evaluation of various aspects of ischemic heart disease is the main focus of magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in cardiology. Clinical indications for MR imaging in patients with ischemic heart disease include the diagnosis of complications after myocardial infarction, some niches for coronary artery imaging, the measurement of valvular heart diasease and the evaluation of regional and global ventricular function. New MR contrast media are helpful to assess coronary artery anatomy and myocardial perfusion. The combined evaluation of myocardial function and perfusion may be accomplished in a cost-effective way. A number of ischemic syndromes can be characterized by studying myocardial perfusion and function, both at rest and under stress conditions. Lowdose dobutamine stress testing can be applied in the MR environment to assess myocardial viability after myocardial infarction. High-dose dobutamine stress, on the other hand, is useful to assess the presence of underlying significant coronary artery disease, analogous to routinely applied echocardiographic approaches. However, MR imaging has potential advantages over echocardiography, because MR imaging provides a complete three-dimensional data set of the entire heart and the MR data are quantifiable in accurate and reliable fashion. Valvular stenoses and insuffiency is easily and accurately measured by MR flow mapping, which is unsurpassed with other imaging strategies. The routinely applied breath-hold fast gradient-echo sequences provide accurate and reproducible measures of regional and global ventricular function. Automated contour detection is now available to extract functional parameters, like the ejection fraction, in a time-efficient manner. The volumetrics based on MR-measurements are so accurate and reproducible that MR imaging ls now considered to be the new gold standard for functional evaluation of the left ventricle. In this review the MR techniques and current clinical indications for evaluating ischemic heart disease will be summarized. 1374 B. Present state of EBT R Rienmüller; Graz/A Electron beam CT technology is able to perform CT-data acquisition with a very short exposure time of 100 or 50 ms. Using this technology it is not only possible to evaluate coronary calieification qualitatively and as a calcium score quantitatively but also stenotic lesions in proximal 4-6 cm of the coronary arteries with a degree of accuracy comparable to coronary angiography. Additionally it is possible to determine quantitatively all left ventricular functional parameters (except of pressures) inclusively myocardial perfusion in ml/100 g/min. In patients with suspected or known coronary heart disease, ECG, echocardiography, scintigraphic methods and coronary angiography are used to prove or to exclude the disease. If positive at least following questions are of interest: 1. What is the hemodynamic effect of a coronary lesion? 2. What is the functional state of the colateral vessels? 3. What is the size of infarcted/ischemic myocardium? 4. Which parameters may additionally influence myocardial perfusion? 5. What may be the optimal treatment for the patient? Based on the results of more than one thousand patients studied by EBT the above mentioned questions will be evaluated and discussed using the evidence based diagnostic approach (as described by were examined employing a low field (0.5 T) MRI unit and a high field (1.5 T) one, using SE. and GRE sequences with eine Ioop reconstruction. Only in the last five cases FGRE breth-hold sequences with eine loop were used. MRI evaluation criteria: qualitative (fat substitution, kinesis) and quantitative (endocavitary diameters and ejection fraction) analyses were performed on the MR images. Results: The intraobserver concordance analysis was complete (100%) in the evaluation of endoventricular dimension, optimal (94%) in the kinesis analysis, good but slightly inferior (81%) in the evaluation of adipouse substitution. Similarly the interobserver concordance analysis was 92% in the dimensional evaluation, 90% in the kinesis analysis and 75% in the evaluation of adipous substitution. Conclusion: MRI ls an excellent technique in the evaluation of endoventricular dimension and kinesis; slightly inferior in the evaluation of adipous substitution which needs an optimal thecnical exam esecution. Complementary c1inico-strumental studies are thereofore, needed for a correct diagnosis in case of initial fatty myocardial infiltration as suggested by the Task Force. Purpose: To determine the utility of MRI in establishing the diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (RVD). Methods and Materials: Eighty-eight patients underwent cardiac MRI to evaluate ventricular arrhythmia. Clinical criteria for RVD were family history and characteristic findings on EKG, electrophysiology, and echocardiography. MRI studies were reviewed without knowledge of clinical data. MRI criteria for RVD were transmural fat, intramyocardial fat, or thinning of the right ventricular free wall. The outcome of patients diagnosed with RVD was assessed. Results: The diagnosis of RVD was established in 12 of 88 patients using clinical and MRI criteria. MRI in 2 of the 12 (17%) was technically suboptimal and non-diagnostic. The remaining 10 patients (83%) had transmural fat or intramyocardial fat on MRI. In 8 of 12 patients (67%), MRI was necessary to establish the diagnosis of RVD. Echocardiography was useful in diagnosis in only 2 patients. During an average followup period of 19 months after MRI, 3 patients had automatic defibrillators, and one underwent radiofrequency ablation. All 12 patients remain alive. Conclusion: MRI can be useful in the diagnosis of RVD and may be required to establish the diagnosis in a majority of patients with this condition. ( Results: As compared with 11 group, I group palients had more frequently such echocardiography pathologies as left ventricular hypertrophy {LVH}, LVH in combination with posterior wall hypertrophy, aorta and LV dilatation, decline of myocardium contractility, lower exereise tolerance and higher frequency of positive stress tests. There was a direct dependence between the duration of influence on the organizm and the increase of frequency of all abovementioned echopathologies. With the increase of the duration of the vibration, the exereise tolerance is significantly decreased: the increase of the positive stress tests, the decrease of the mean duration of stress tests. Neuro-imaging is able to show specifically which areas of the brain are involved in the performance of tasks. This was initially realized with radioactive tracers of cerebral blood flow then MRI has been recognized to have the capability to explore functional and activation changes in the brain. Initial experiments used contrast agent boluses. Then the signal modifications based on local variations of deoxyhemoglobin in red blood cells were evidenced during brain function and the term functional MRI (fMRI) was restricted to this situation. The direction of the researches became then twofold with fundamental works attempting to better characterize the origin of the signal and applied works coming from multidisciplinary groups adapting neuropsychological tests to MRI and comparing the results of several modalities of brain mapping. In this view two approaches again can be differenciated between purely cognitive research usually performed with various paradigm designs, at high magnetic fields for higher sensitivity and a more clinically oriented utilisation of fMRI directly deriving from the results of the previous one. The clinical use of fMRI benefitting from the large number of MRI centers opened throughout the world became very soon largely spread because some of the fMRI applications, mostly those identifying primary cortex areas were immediately possible to adapt on clinical imagers 1.5 tesla with conventional hardware. Therefore c1inical fMRI is now in the situation of a large multicenter evaluation both with gradient echo imaging on conventional systems or with clinical systems implemented with c1inically usable echo-planar imaging capabilities. Beyond other brain mapping modalities in vive (e.g., PET, SPET, MEG, NIRS), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) allows to acquire both, anatomical (e.g., grey/white matter contrast, vessel map, etc.) and functional information (e.g., on metabolism (via MRS), perfusion, diffusion, f1ow, oxygenation etc.) with the highest (combined) spatio-temporal resolution eurrently available. However, identifieation and separation of artifacts as weil as quantification of expected, l.e., stimulus correlated, and novel information on brain activity is important for both, new insights in neurosciences and future developements in (high resolution) functional MRI of the human brain. Here we present several examples where gross head motion or physiologie motion could be identified and separated by using fuzzy cluster analysis of fMRI time series. Furthermore, our experience with 20 and 30 fMRI (FLASH, EPI and spiral imaging at 1.5 and/or 3 Tesla) data analysis is summarized and several examples, including high resolution fMRI of the motor cortex, are discussed. Explorative signal processing in fMRI, based on fuzzy c1ustering systematically tested on synthetic fMRI data, represents a robust and powerful tool for (a) screening large fMRI data sets, (b) exctracting expected and novel functional activity of the human brain, and (c) obtaining improved reproducibility of fMRI results. 1386 Block design, perception profiles and event-related paradigms O. Oe Bihan; OrsaylF The main advantages which account for fMRl's increasing popularity to study normal and diseased brain function are its time resolution, a fine Düsseldorf/D spatial resolution, and the ability to acquire, within the same individual, repeated, multiple scans in a non-invasive manner. The basic design of most studies centers on comparison of baseline to an active condition. However, because of the dynamic capability of fMRI the task is often repeated several times, separated by periods of rest or control. This type of 'block-paradigm' design is more robust against motion artifacts. Furthermore, there is a gain in contrastnoise ratio, as many images can be averaged out. It remains that controlling the subject performance in the magnet is not easy. Most language studies are performed covertly to avoid motion artifacts. For perception related paradigms, subjects may continuously match their perception of a stimulus with a linear potentiometer connected to a computer. Reaction times mayaiso easily be monitored. More recently, the observation that fMRI could detect signal responses following single, brief stimuli has led the way to 'Event-Related' paradigms. With this approach, individual trials are performed and analyzed separately, allowing distinct event types to be randomly intermixed. Habituation and anticipation effects are greatly reduced and trials can be sorted according to task performance. Room F2 The first clinical applications of BOlD fMRI emerged slowly over the past few years. Continuously, new or improved applications are being developed in parallel with the technical improvements in fMRI acquisition and post processing techniques resulting in more powerful and sensitive methods to detect brain activation. As a consequence fMRI has now moved from the research lab to the clinic. A major cllnical application of fMRI is the presurgical evaluation of patients with brain lesions. The mapping of sensory-motor, auditory, visual and language regions shows that fMRI provides a risk estimate of a therapeutic intervention. Such mapping extends the surgical approach to lesions that have previously been considered inoperable, and contributes to a decrease in postsurgical morbidity. The good spatia! correlation of presurgical mapping with fMRI and invasive cortical mapping has been documented extensively, suggesting that fMRI might now replace the invasive mapping techniques. More recently, fMRI language dominance studies have shown to be a noninvasive alternative to Wada testing. Still preliminary, but very promising, are the localization of ictal activity in epilepsy and the evaluation of stroke deficits or recovery from stroke by fMRI. Cognitive tasks are being tested in normal volunteers and patients to unravel the underlying etiology of psychiatric diseases, such as schizophrenia, dyslexia, and emotional disorders. Studies ofthe influence of medication and related long-term effects belong to potential future applications. Clearly, we are only at the beginning of an immense field of clinical applications. However, the introduction of fMRI in the clinical environment requires an adapted approach. Methods are needed to monitor patient performance during the acquisition and paradigms need to be straightforward, as lengthy or difficult fMRI sessions may be difficult to sustain for infants or very ill patients. anterior descending and circumflex arteries. Change of CA diameter on 0.2 mm or more was taken as areaction of avesseI. with CA constriction on angiograms in 7 cases (SXlNNCA = 3/4 pts). The reactions of CA were followed: Purpose: Noninvasive determination of cavaI and pulmonary flow in cavopulmonary and atriopulmonary anastomoses after Fontan operation using Cine PC flow measurements. Methods and Materials: In 14 Patients with cavopulmonary (n = 9, age 11-24, mean 15 years) and atriopulmonary anastomoses (n =5, age 12-18 years, mean 14 years) Cine-PC flow measurements were performed in the Vv cavae above and below, in pulmonary arteries left and right to the anastomoses. Flow curves and amplitudes were analyzed and compared to healthy normals. Results: Flow in atriopulmonary anastomoses were more volatile and had an approximately two times higher amplitude in pulmonary arteries than cavopulmonary anastomoses (peak flow amplitude right/left: 4600/4100 ml/min vs 2100/2400 ml/min) and V. cava (peak flow amplitude above/below: 4600/19000 ml/min vs 2200/4900 ml/min). Conclusion: Cine-PC MR is a reliable tool for noninvasive flow measurements in patients after Fontan operation and is therefore able to monitor follow up of these patients. The valveless atrial contraction in atriopulmonary anastomoses leads to higher peak üow amplitudes than cavopulmonary anastomoses and should thus be more physiological. Given it noninvasivity and lack of ionizing radiation, in fact, it can be considered the best suited imaging procedure for detecting a variety of causes of infertility at four different anatomical sites. A. At the level of the uterus, US can demonstrate a large variety of dlseases, of the myometrial wall and/or the endometrium. lts diagnostic capabilities are greatly enhanced with the injection of saline within the endometrial cavity: this provides perfect delineation ot the cavlty itself and makes the differential diagnosis among the many possible congenital and acquired diseases altering lts contours easier. B. As regards tubal causes of infertility, US can detect lesions of the uterine cornua affecting patency and demostrate fluid collections within the tubes. Furthermore, at this level, injection of US contrast medium seems the best means to evaluate tubal patency. Impossibility to evaluate tubal morphology, however, is an important drawback of this technique. C. Peritoneal causes of infertility are difficult to evaluate with USo Adehesions are impossible to identify by this method, and only fluid collections from endometriosis can be recognized. D. On the contrary, US plays a quite important role in evaluating the ovary. It provides, in fact, an easy means to monitor follicular growth and confirm the occurrence of ovulation, and can help in the differential diagnosis among causes of anovulation. In addition, in patients undergoing ovarian stimulation, it has the capability to detect complications, such as the ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, to identify the best suited follicles for oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilization, and to guide needle insertion during the procedure. Furthermore, during ovulatory induction cycles, it can provide complete evaluation of the patient through monitoring of endometrial development, prediction of endometrial receptivity, and evaluation of the outcomes of assisted reproduction manoeuvers. 2. Therapeutic: in cases of proximal tubal obstruction, in agreement with the referring physician, a tubal recanalization should be attempted. Ideally it is an extension of the HSG and should take place in the same session, immediately after the diagnostic step, if the patient has preoperatively been given a prophyllactic antibiotic treatment. It can be achieved by the simple catheterization of the cavity and tubal ostium with selective injection of contrast (selective salpingography) or by a more complex interventional procedure using micro catheters and micro guidewires. Technically tubal catheterization is achieved in 90% of the cases, with 75% of the patients having at least one open tube after the procedure. Intra-uterine pregnancy rates range from 8% to 47% according to published series, extra-uterine pregnancy rates are 5%. In cases of infertility due to proximal tubal obstruction, tubal recanalization should be attempted prior to tubal microsurgery or IVF. after bolus injection of extracellular fluid space CAs may currently be the single most important component of an MR examination of the abdomen in a number of circumstances. Optimal dynamic scanning for the detection and characterization of Iiver lesions, and for further evaluation of the abdomen, depends on the use of a multisection spoiled gradient echo technique that allows one to perform MR imaging of the entire region of interest during a single suspended respiration. Images are obtained during four phases relative to the injection of CA: precontrast, arterial (pre-sinusoidal), portal (sinusoidal), and delayed (extracellular) phase. An overview of the kinds of abdominal malignancy that are best imaged during each of these phases will be presented. The current status of CAs for MR angiography will be reviewed, and an approach to a complete and accurate MR angiographic examination of abdominal vessels will be provided. An emphasis will also be placed on liver-specific CAs, including reticuloendothelial system-targeted iron oxide particles and magentopharmaceuticals which are excreted by means of the hepatobiliary route. The advantages and disadvantages of liver-specific CAs over current gadolinium chelates will be discussed, and practical imaging strategies for different c1inical situations will be provided. Initially, contrast agents were not considered necessary in MR imaging of the central nervous system, because of the inherently high tissue contrast of MR imaging. But soon, the availability of paramagnetic contrast agents, such as gadopentetate dimeglumine, resulted in further diagnostic improvement in many central nervous system abnormalities. The different types of MR contrast agents and their safety and tolerance will be briefly mentioned. The advantage of contrast enhanced imaging is the ability to demonstrate blood brain barrier abnormalities, thereby increasing the sensitivity of the diagnostic procedure. The following issues will be addressed: how should we administer an MR contrast agent?, how much do we need?, and, what is the optimal delay between the injection of the contrast agent and imaging? The most important question remains: when do we need a contrast agent? Guidelines are mandatory to avoid useless use of contrast agents because of the present situation of cost-containment health care. It is clear that the decision to obtain contrast enhanced images will depend on the clinical and/or the unenhanced MR findings. Based on our current guidelines for obtaining a contrast enhanced CT on one hand and on our long-standing experiences with MR imaging, we will attempt to define guidelines for contrast enhanced neuro MR imaging. Finally, the use of contrast agents in c1inical research conditions such as perfusion MR imaging and bone marrow imaging will be discussed. The use of CA has the potential to increase the sensitivity and specificity of abdominal MR by improving morphologie information and adding functional information. CAs can act as positive or negative enhancers, depending on their nature, concentration, and the imaging pulse sequence. The diagnostic effectiveness of the resulting MR examination is dependent on the type of the CA used, the way and dose in which the CA is administered, and the timing of the scans. In this course, a rational approach to delivery of CA that explains why, when, and how to deliver CA for abdominal MR imaging will be presented. Dynamic imaging 1402 Renal stents (part 1) H. Rousseau, F. Joffre, B. Janne d'Othee, D. Colombier, Ph. Otal; Toulouse/F Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty playa major role for the treatment of atheromatous lesions of the renal artery but the limitations of this technique, as residual stenoses and obstructive dissection, are weil known. In these cases renal artery stenting has proved to be of increasing value. Endoprostheses allow the treatment of more complex lesions considered until now as surgical, particularly in patients with renal vascular hypertension secondary to renal ostial lesions. The aim ofthis video-workshop, is to explain , with some selected cases, the technical aspects of simple and more complex renal stenting and angioplasty and the management of complications. Discuss ion will inelude technical aspects, anticoagulation, indications and results . Percutaneous transluminal renal angioplasty has proved to be safe and effective for renal revascularization for non-ostial stenoses, however, disappointing for osliallesions due to an aortic plaque . Therefore, there is interest of endoprostheses to eventually overcome the limitations of convent iona l balloon angioplasty. Palmaz endoprostheses were placed in our own study in a total 121 of hypertensive patients across 125 oslial renal artery lesions defined as stenoses located within 5 mm of the aortic lumen. Follow-up analyses (mean 31 months) ineluded blood pressure, serum creatinine, duplex sonography and intraarterial angiography. "Methods" will inelude a videotape covering all issues necessary for successful renal stenting. In our long-term prospective study initial technical success was achieved in all patients. Minor comp lications occurred in 4 percent, major complicat ions were not observed . Primary occlusion-free survival at 84 months was 80% . Restenosis >50% of the diameter occurred in 11 out of 125 arte ries (9%). Re-intervention resulted in secondary patency of 91 percent. Long-term normal ization of hypertension was achieved in 18 patients (15%) . Serum creat inine levels did not significantly change after successful stent implantation in patients with previously impaired renal function. Under "Conclusuions" all major studies dealing with renal artery stenting will be addressed in detail. In particular, the clinical aspect of improvement of renal tunction is going to be discussed based on the data published. Accurate renal artery stent placement is technically feasible without major complications or interference with subsequent surgical revascular ization . The favorable technical initial and long-term results may recommend primary stent placement as the treatment of choice for renovascular disease involving the ostia . 1404 Renal stents (part 3) Main indieations for renal artery stenting: recanalization of arterial ocelusion, ostlal stenosis, post-PTRA dissection, suboptimal outcome of PTRA , post-PTRA restenosis. Stent implantation teehnique: The stent is inserted using either an 8F guiding catheter to gain good back-up, or a 7F kink-resistant sheath. We usually get across the stenosis using a torque guidewire; pre-dilatation is performed and the stent implanted using a balloon catheter with a diameter about 1 mm bigger than the lumen of the artery to be dilated . Dur own experience: Overall , we have performed 381 PTRA procedures . We have been implanting stents roulinely for the past three years. From January 1996 to June 1998, we performed a total of 82 PTRA procedures. Of this number, 14 PTRA procedures involved renal transplants (with 3 stents implanted), 5 PTRA procedures were carried out in children. Of 63 procedures in "native" kidneys in adult patients , 8 were cases of elear FMD while atheromatous stenosis was involved in the remaining 55 kidneys whereby a tota l of 31 stents (56.4%) were implanted. The indicat ions for stent implantation included ostial stenos is (11 patients) , occlus ion recanalization (6 patients) , post-PTRA dissection (8 patients), restenos is (2 patients) , or residual stenosis (3 palients), and asymmetrical or ulcerated stenosis (2 patients) . Stent implantation was successful in all cases , with no major complication related to stent implantation. All stents implanted in the above period have been shown -by clinical and ultrasound examinations -to be patent. Im The operative treament of such stenotie or occlusive venous disease ls often diffieult and invalves major vascular surgery. Therefore intervenlional techniques have been introduced as both curative and palliative forms of treatment. Since most obstructions are caused by externa l compression or fibrotic changes wh ich do not respond weil to PTA alone, today angiogplasty practically always is backed-up by an endovascular stent. Patients with inflow obstructions of the superior or inferior V. cava are excellent indications for stenting since the majortiy of the patients will respond by rapid regression of the symptoms of inflow obstruction within hours. Clinical relief of symptoms can be expected in 70 to 100% of the subjects with malignant disease and in elose to 100% in benign obstructians. Lang-term secondary patenty in SVC and IVC stenting from malignant disease ranges from 86 to 100%, though the survival rarely lasts more than 2 years. Although there ls only limited data on lang-term patency for benign lesions this probably will prove to be above 90% . Provided a stenosis or ocelusion of the V. cava or a large vein can be passed using a guidewire . and pilote dilatation of the lesion with a balloon catheter allows enough expansion of the lesion to permit stent implantation, practically any malignant or benign venous obstruction may be stented . Generally a femoral apporach is employed for stenting but an internal jugular or brachial vein approach for lesions of the innominate vein and superior V. cava may be necessary. If significant thrombi proximal to the obstructions are found on phlebography loeal thrombolysis with Urokinase should be performed before stent placement to prevent pulmonary emboli and/or early reocclusion. Specific techn iques and more detailed results of our own experience in more than 70 patients will be discussed. Purpose: Report our experience with combined endovascular and surgical treatment of intracranial hematomas following middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysm rupture. Methods and Materials: We describe a group of seven patients (5 females and 2 males) ranging in age from 22 to 61 years that had intracranial hematomas following their hemorrages. Their Hunt and Hess grades on admision were grade V (2), IV (3) and 111 (2). Results: All seven patients were embolized with GDC and all the patients subsequentely went to surgery and the hematoma was surgically evacuated. No rebleeding occurred in any case during surgical procedure. The GDC occlusion was complete in 5 cases and incomplete in 2 patients that was c1ipped during sugical procedure (1 patient) or occluded later by a second embolization (1 patient). During course of embolization 1 aneurysm was perforated with subsequent clot enlargement and worsening of the c1inical condition. The outcome was good in 2, moderate disability in 2 severe disability in land death in 2 patients. Conclusion: Presurgical embolization of ruptured MCA aneurysms with large intracranial hematomas seems to be effective in protecting aneurysms and avoiding intraoperative rebleeding. Nevertheless, the decision to perform embolization or even diagnostic angiography is conditioned by the neurologie condition of the patient and neurovascular team, must always weight the need for early hematoma evacuation to control elevated ICP and mas compression effect against the desirability of defining the anatomy of the aneurysm angiographically and the posibility to perform a endovascular treatment. we evaluated the thinner Spinnaker® 1.5 F (165/20, n = 10). Ten Spinnaker® 1.5 F were injected using a mixture of EIL 1:2 and 1:3. Results: Using a mixture of EIL 1:1,9 out of 20 Spinnaker® 1.8 F (45%) ruptured distally at the tip of the microcatheter, each after injection no. 4-9. One Spinnaker® 1.8 F was distally occluded after the 5th injection. Using a mixture EIL 1:2, 4 of the 20 Spinnaker® 1.8 F (20%) ruptured distally, each after injection no. 6 (n =2), 7 (n = 1) and 8 (n = 1). With a mixture of EIL 1:3 all 10 Spinnaker® 1.8 F microcatheters could be injected without any problems. All 10 microcatheters of the thinner Spinnaker® 1.5 F ruptured. Conclusion: This in-vitro study showed that microcatheters can rupture when EthibloC® is used as embolie agent. In embolizations with the f1owguided Spinnaker® 1.8 F a mixture of Eil 1:3 should be used, or with a mixture EIL 1:1 or 1:2, no more than 4 injections should be performed. The microcatheter Spinnaker® 1.5 F is not suitable for embolizations using EthibloC®. Purpose: Prediction of the delay from application of contrast agent to enhancing the cerebral arteries is a insecurity in CT-angiography. 'Sure start' has been tested to optimize contrast enhancement of cerebral S316 arteries to make this method as effective as possible for the diagnosis of cerebrovascular imaging. Methods and Materials: 94 patients (46 women) with subarachnoid haemorrhage underwent CT-angiography. A region of interest (ROI), including both carotids for detecting increasing contrast enhancement, has been defined at the level of jaw angle. The CTA of the intracranial vessels starts with a fix delay 4.5 s after reaching a threshold for contrast enhancement in the predefined ROI. The amount of injected contrast medium has been measured and compared to the volume in "conventional CTA". After this, an analysis of MIP-and 3D-images has been performed regarding the branches of the Circle of Willis compared with DSA in the same patients. Results: Contrast enhancement enables to identify all vessels of the Circle of Willis and its branches as weil as 87 aneurysms. Arepetition due to low contrast enhancement was not necessary. Conclusion: "Sure start"-technique is a tool for determining the delay, regardless of individual factors influencing the contrast transfer. The used contrast volume is less than CTA without this method. Radiology, endoscopy and pathology form the triad for the morphologic diagnosis of colonic disease. These methods are complementary ; none of them should stand alone. Because adenomas almost always represent the primary stage in the development of colorectal eareinoma, diagnosis of polyps and appropriate therapy are of crueial importance in the prevention of colonie cancer. Colorectal carcinoma is a eommon tumor, which has a prognosis that had ehanged a little during the last years. Only early detection ean give hope to improving the prognosis. This course will cover polyps, including polyposis syndromes, colorectal carcinoma, secondary careinoma and the non-epithelial tumors. The c1assification of tumors and tumor-like changes of the colon according to the WHO, which is not universally accepted and has been modified often, whieh will be further discussed. The diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease is based on the contrast enema and supported by the patient's history, the abdominal examinations and endoscopy. Ulcerative colitls and Crohn's eolitis comprise 90% of all cases of chronic inflammatory bowel disease and are the most important eonsiderations in the differential diagnosis. Eaeh eondition is assoeiated with a rather specifie, but overlapping constellation of c1inical, pathologic, endoscopic and radiographic findings. The purpose of this review is to highlight the most efficient imaging exploratory techniques depicting shoulder instability, to describe its various~rms and to point out the findings which can simulate instability. In antenor recurrent dislocation, surgery is indicated and the procedure is essentially dependent upon the importance of glenoid rim lesions. In this case, a standard X-ray evaluation is usually sufficient. CTarthrography or MRI give more specific details as to the severity of the lesions, particularly soft tissues alterations, however these data do not alter standard therapeutic protoco/. In fixed posterior dislocations, CT-scan represents the most pertinent technique to evaluate the size of the humeral head defect and to determine the therapeutic followup. In sublle forms of instability, diagnosis or instability direction are not clearly assessed c1inically and standard X-rays evaluation is usually unremarkable. In this case, further exploration sueh as CT-arthrography, MR Imaging or MR-arthrography are recommanded to confirm the diagnosis of instability and to evaluate its direction. The technique of choiee is undoubtedly MR-arthrography. Atraumatic voluntary painless subluxati?ns associated with hyperlaxity of the shoulder do not require any speciüc exploratory method as the findings are generally limited to a capacious axillary pouch. By definition, wrist instabilities are conditions in which the individual carpal bones fail to maintain their normal anatomic position. If undiagnosed, wrist instability can lead to pain, dysfunction of the wrist, and osteoarthr itis. The purpose of this course is to demonstrate. how standard radiograms (whieh still are the key for initial work up) must be performed and how these radiograms should be analyzed systematically for getting correet diagnosis of different types of statie or dynamic wrist instabilities. New radiological concepts for a tailored approach of wrist instabilities will be exposed and the value of different imaging techniques sueh as MRI, Arthrography, CT for further detailed evaluation will be discussed. In Europe, one can expect a dramatic reduction of costs since active and passive means of proteetion have allowed to decrease by more than 50% the number of deaths and severe injuries related to motor vehiele accidents during the last decade. Air transportation, weil trained emergency medical teams and equipment also playa major role in the outcome of blunt trauma, particularly of the ehest. Our topic will focus on blunt trauma involving the pleura, the lungs, the thoraeie aorta and the aortic arch vessels. The increasing role of spiral computed tomography will be stressed particularly for a prompt detection of lesions of the thoracic aorta. The choice of the imaging modalities in abdominal trauma has to consider the mechanism of trauma as weil as the patient's condition. Four elinical conditions can be identified, according to their variable degree of severity. 1. Benign trauma, in which lesions involving the abdominal viscera should be ruled out by imaging: this task should be entrusted to sonography, because of cost-related considerations. 2. Severe but isolated trauma, occurring in a conscious and hemodynamicalily stable patient, in whom one abdominaliesion is suspected: in this condition sonoraphy plays abasie role, CT being limited to the dubious cases or to patients that are not adequately evaluated by USo 3. Severe trauma in a hemodynamically stable patient, who is either unconscious or in case of possible multi-organ involvement: in this situation, spiral CT should be the modality of choice because of its rapid acquisition and the global information that is obtained. 4. Severe trauma in a resuscitated patient in the emergency room, and who is hemodynamically unstable: in this critical condition spiral CT is the modality of choice, particularly if the CT suite is strategically located in order to allow to perform the examination within a very short time interval. Angiographic techniques have proved themselves to be lifesaving in patients with vascular trauma. In some instances such techniques are used as an adjunct to surgery but increasingly frequently a permanent cure can be achieved by arterial embolization without recourse to further operative intervention. The ocelusion of "non-vital" traumatised vessels is often relatively straight-forward although a selective embolization is important in order, firstly, to reduce the risk of rebleeding and secondly, to prevent adjacent tissue ischaemia and necrosis. Such procedures have been considerably aided by the routine use of co-axial catheters. Successful treatment using interventional radiological techniques of injuries to major vessels which cannot be permanently occluded ("vital" vessels) has proved to be much more difficult and in the past such cases were often managed by surgery with or without the use of a temporary intravascular occlusion balloon catheter, More recently, however, some of these injuries have been successfully managed by the use of intravascular stents. The different embolization techniques used for the treatment of "non-vital" and "vital" vessels will be separately discussed. Purpose: to evaluate the thickness of the patellar cartilage with "dedicated " low field MRI. Methods and Materials: 11 bovine patellae were submitted to MRI study using a "ded icated " system (Artoscan, Esaote, Italy). In all cases 2D GE, STIR and MTC images on axial plane were used . Four independent operators measured the thickness of the patellar cartilage "in vivo" on films and on monitor. Results: we found a good agreement among the measurements in vive (variability 43% to 47% intraobserver and 54% to 57% interobserver). Among the sequences, we found a good correlation between STIR and "in vivo" scores, while GE seemed to overest imate the thickness of cartilage. Conclusion: "dedicated" MRI system give a good deta il of the patella r articular cartilage. In part icular STIR sequences resulted very accurate, while MTC and GE offered goOO images but seemed less accurate in the evaluation of the cartilage thickness. In terms of c1inical data we found a significant relationship of DAS and MRI findings of synovial extension (p = 0.046), high significance between joint width and Larsen c1assification of conventional X-rays (p = 0.01) and between 00 and macroscopic synoviaI thickness (p = 0.019), fibrosis (p =0.002), bony alterations (p =0.017) and chondromalacia (p = 0.009)-furthermore for DAS and hyperemia (p = 0.004) and vascularity (p =0.003) which were also highly significantly associated in the early RA-group (p =0.016 each). Conclusion: There is a significant correlation for parameters of activity and chronicity between MRI and McA findings especially with regard to early changes in MCP-joints which are primarily involved in RA. MRI can be considered reliable in the detection of RA-pathology of finger joints in relation to McA showing high accuracy and sensitivity. MRI detection of early RA pathology and the minimally invasive standardized procedure of micro-arthroscopy of MCP joints may provide new access to synovitis monitoring and synovia I biopsy leading to an improved management of early diagnosis and therapy of RA in terms of outcome and prognosis. Purpose: To establish the role of Power Doppler ultrasound in patients with early manifestations of psoriaric arthritis. Methods and Materials: 20 patients with early psoriatic arthritis were examined with an 8 MHz and 13 MHz linear tranducer (Sequoia, Acuson). The degree of synovial proliferation in the joints of the hands and feet were evaluated. Also the presence of joint effusion and signs of tenosynovitis was estimated. The vascularity in the synovial tissue was quantified with Power Doppler and graded from 0 to 3+. The ultrasound findnings were correlated to the c1inical evaluation of the extent of joint affection and severity of the disease. This evaluation was done by a rheumatologist prior and independently from the ultrasound evaluation with recording of tender, swollen joints and tenosynovitis. Results: Power Doppler ultrasound graded the patients as having no signs of arthritis in 5 cases, mild arthritis in 7 and severe arthritis in 8. The coresponding c1inical findnings were 6.8 and 6. The ultrasound detected more arthritic manifestations in 13 patients. Conclusion: Power Doppler ultrasound is more sensitive than clinical estimation in the evaluation of the extent of early psoriatic arthritis. An optimal contrast was realized between cartilage and vascularized synovia, improving the detection of chondral defects. Conclusion: 3D SPGR fat suppressed acquisitions before administration of gadolinium provides a good discrimination between synovial fluid and hipertrophy, that is not always possibile with FSE tecnique. 3D SPGR Fat suppressed images after gadolinium are useful in assessing synoviaI vascularity, and in studying synovial-cartilage borderline. The tecnique provides an accurate and low invasive diagnostic tool in monitoring JRA of the knee.  Materials: Six consecutive patients of which five had inflammatory rheumatic synovitis, and one pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVN) of the knee. Methods: MR imaging just before, and 1 week and 3 years following arthroscopic synovectomy of the knee. Contrast-enhanced dynamic MRI: sagittal, single slice, T1-weighted gradient-echo pulse sequence, one image every 10 seconds for a total of 250 seconds. Signal intensity versus time curves were generated from two regions of interest (ROls) at predetermined sites of the synovium. At synovectomy, biopsies were obtained at the same sites. All patients were examined clinically and radiographically before synovectomy and at follow-up. The results of contrast-enhanced dynamic MRI of three normal volunteers were used for control. Results and Conclusion: All patients with rheumatic disease had a high rate of enhancement before synovectomy. Histology revealed in-f1ammatory rheumatic synovitis. The enhancement rate was decreased both at 1 week after synovectomy and at 3 years follow-up. The patient with PVN showed a slower enhancement rate before synovectomy than that of the patients with rheumatic disease; the enhancement was increased 1 week after synovectomy but had decreased to a level just above that of the normal controls at 3 years follow-up. The results suggest that dynamic MRI may indicate the degree of synoviaI inflammation and the effect of synovectomy. Purpose: To evaluate the diagnostic possibilities of MRI in the study of pigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS) of the the knee. Methods and Materials: Twenytwo patients clinically presenting knee pain and/or functional disability were submitted to MR evaluation. A standard examination of the knee was performed employing a "dedicated" 0.2T MR system (SE T1-w, SE T2-w and GE T2-w sequences on sagittal, axial and coronal scan planes; SE T1-w sequences after Gd-DTPA administration in 7 cases). MR-arthrography was performed in 3 cases. Arthroscopic and hystological controls were performed in all cases after MR examination. Results: A nodular formation in the posterior recesses of the knee (12 cases) and in the Hoffa's body (10 cases) was found on MRI. It showed a nonhomogeneous low signal intensity (SI) on SE T2-w sequences and an intermediate SI on T1-w ones, without a significative contrastenhancement. Arthroscopy demonstrated MR findings in 21 patients. The nodule W;:lS extrasynovial in 1 case: in this case surgery confirmed the presence of the intra-articular but extrasynovial lesion. Diagnosis of PVNS was histologically confirmed in all patients. Conclusion: MRI allows a good and detailed evaluation of the posterior recesses of the knee and demonstrates high diagnostic accuracy in the evaluation of PVNS giving significative information about the lesion characterization. Results: Differences of the thickness of the cartilage, the proliferation and vascularisation of the synovia in normal joints and in joints with arthritis were noticed. In joints with chronic swelling there was proliferation of the synovia with little or no vascularisation. In the acute state of RA there was proliferation of the synovia with high vascularisation. Conclusion: With the Multi-D-Array it is possible to get information about the activity of the RA in the metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints which allows aprevention from destruction of these joints by early therapeutical intervention. 1445 MRI in the diagnosis of inflammatory joint diseases A.v. Bryukhanov; BarnaullCIS Purpose: The definition of specific MR-symptoms of various inflammatory joint diseases. Methods and Materials: 350 patients with various inflammatory diseases of joints, including rheumatoid, tuberculous, septic and posttraumatic arthritis. MRI of joints was performed on "Gyroscan-T511" (0.5 T1). Results: MR-symptoms of arthrites included cartilage destruction, meniscal degeneration, joint effusion, synoviaI proliferation, bone erosions, bone marrow edema, subchondral fibrosis, osteophytes. Besides, there were revealed some characteristic MR-features of the various arthrites. The characteristic attributes of rheumatoid arthritis, included marked cartilage degeneration, bone erosions and massive early synovial proliferation with formation of massive fibrotic pannus. The features of septic arthritis included big amounts of joint fluid, synovial edema, periarticular soft-tissue edema, bone marrow edema, early destruction of articular cartilage and subchondral layer. In some cases of septic arthritis there were revealed foci of septic bone necrosis and periarticular purulent abscesses. The attributes of tuberculous arthrites included heterogenous joint fluid with low intensive cartilage fragments, multiple erosion of a subchondral layer, large subchondral cysts. Besides there were revealed periarticular tuberculous abscesses. Conclusion: MR-symptoms of inflammatory joint diseases are nonspecific, but some characteristic features of various forms of arthrites allow to suppose differential diagnosis. volunteers, whereas c1imbers demonstrated a distance of 0.15 (± 0.06) cm during extension and of 0.34 (± 0.10) cm in forced flexion. Synovial cysts in joint capsules and tendon sheaths were only found in c1imbers in thirty-seven cases (90%). Conclusion: We found a significant thickening of flexor tendon pulley system and a increased distance between phalanx and tendon in c1imbers compared to healthy volunteers. Therefore the dynamic US technique is a valuable adjunct to the c1inical examination in the diagnostic evaluation of "c1imber's finger". Purpose: To substantiate the feasibility of high resolution ultrasound (US) in the diagnostic evaluation of finger injury patterns in extreme rock climbers. Methods and Materials: Forty-one athletes with the c1inical diagnosis of "climber's finger" and twenty healthy volunteers underwent US examination using a 10.0 MHz probe (ATL, HDI 3000). The flexor tendon pulley system was measured at the level of the base of metacarpals during extended and forcibly f1exed position. We evaluated the distance between phalanx and tendon as a parameter of tendon-bowstringing. Results: The flexor tendon pulley system showed in healthy volunteers a thickness of 0.08 (± 0.03) cm compared to 0.20 (± 0.08) cm in curnoers. No distance was measured between phalanx and tendon in Purpose: to compare the diagnostic value of conventional radiography and HRCT in the diagnosis of vibration-related elbow joint disorders. Methods and Materials: 20 regions of ten workers exposed to vibration having elbow pain were involved in the study till now. Bidirectional Xray films and HRCT of the elbow joints were taken and the effectivity of visualization of the morphological disorders was compared and evaluated. Results: Even when plain film was negative, HRCT visualized small loose bodies in the joint space and also the dissection bed on the articular surface without degenerative changes of the joint. HRCT also detected soft tissue calcifications as residuum of inflammation. Osteochondritis dissecans cubiti due to vibration exposure is an occupational disease for recompensation by the law in Hungary. The correct diagnosis prevents the worker from further exposure and helps him to adequate therapy. Conclusion: Going on with this study we would like to determine the frequency of osteochondritis dissecans cubiti among vibration-exposed workers. The results will also have an impact on the prevention of the exposed population. The cross-sectional area of the MN was measured within the carpal tunnel and correlated with EMG. With EMG as gold-standard, sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values (PPV/NPV) for US were derived. The correlation coefficient (r) was determined using linear regress ion analys is. Results: There was excellent correlation between the cross-sectional area of the median nerve on US and EMG findings. Patients with normal EMG demonstrated normal MN size while those with severely abnormal EMG demonstrated markedly enlarged MN. Moderately enlarged MN was seen with moderately abnormal EMG. The ultrasound findings were c1early seen and reproducible . With respect to EMG , ultrasound revealed : Sensitivity =88%, Specificity =96%, PPV =97%, NPV =86% and r =0.83 (p < 0.0001). Conclusion: The high degree of correlat ion allows introduction of ultrasound as another diagnostic modal ity for the evaluation of carpal tunnel syndrome .  Purpose: The carpal tunnel syndrome ls the most frequent peripheral entrapement neuropathy, and carpal tunnel release the most common hand surgical procedure. The aim of our investigation is to assess the role of high resolution sonography (HRS) and Power Doppler (PD) methods in diagnosis and management of this disorder. Methods and Materials: Fifly procedures have been performed in 34 patients complaining of carpal tunnel sympthoms and in 10 healthy volunteers. We used high frequency linear array transducers (7-13 MHz) . We evaluated : 1-the carpal tunnel area . 2-the median nerve maximun diametre. 3-the presence of masses or tenosynov ities in the carpal tunnel. 4-the presence of PD signal in the median nerve. Results: PD signal was depicted in 7 sympthomatic cases and in none of the volunteers. This fact was related with Ihe entrapement state , In 3 cases dynamic evaluation demonstrated muscular carpal tunnel invasion. In two cases (one ganglion and one tenosinovythis) the PD findings changed the management of these patients. Conclusion: The detection of vascularity in median nerve is related to the entrapement syndrome. Dynamic exploration in this syndrome provides useful informalion specially in the ocupation-related carpal tunnel syndrome. Purpose: The refinement of US equipments has widen the diagnostic perspect ives on both nerve identification and analysis of subtle nerve abnormalities. This study describes the high-frequency US appearance of ulnar nerve lesions with MR correlation . Methods and Materials: Thirty-four patients with funclional deficit of the ulnar nerve at nerve conduction studies were evaluated with 10-15 MHz US transducers and color Dopp ler. In each study, the nerve was examined from the axilla through the wrist. MR correlation was performed in 10 cases. Results: US allowed detection of discrete nerve abnormalities in 24/34 cases . Lesions included n =9 compress ive syndromes due to entrapment at cubitaltunnel (67%), arcuate ligament (11%) and Guyon tunnel (22%), n =6 inflammatory changes in leprosy, n =2 traumas , n = 5 neurofibromas and n = 2 postoperative abnormalities. In compress ive syndromes, US reliably identified the nature of extrinsic lesion in 75% of cases , including prominent osteophyte (n =4), ganglion (n =1) and pseudoaneurysm (n =1). In acute inflammation, color Doppler detected intranervous hyperemia. This finding correlated with Gd-enhancement at MR. Conclusion: 10-13 MHz US can ident ify and characterize a variety of ulnar nerve abnormalities. By providing unique information on the entire course of the ulnar nerve, US has potential for major impact on treatment planning , especially in cases with atypical presentation. Purpose: This study was carr ied out to evaluate the information obtained when results from MRI before and after the introduction of mdc were compared in the study of post-traurnatic instability of the wrist, in order to estab ilish a correct diagnost ic-therapeutic protocol. Methods and Materials: From April to September '98 a cohor t of 53 patients (34 m -19 f) between 20 and 70, were examined . All subjects had post-traumatic instability of the wr ist. Low field MR (0.2 T) was used with a specific coil , section and sequences. Results: Twenty-six out of 53 when suspected TFC gave positive result , 19 of which were confirmed before the addition of mdc and 6 more, for a total of 25 after, one was false positive . Twenty-seven had either suspected dorsal or volar instability of the intercalated segment. Twenty of these were shown to have ligamentlesions causing instability without mdc. The remaining 7, after the addiction of mdc, were seen to have other lesions responsible for the instability. Conclusion: Dur experience has shown that the use of intra-art icular mdc arrows for a better definition of Iigment lesions that may go undetected using standard MRI, and is, therefore , able to provide further diagnostic information to improve therapy. Methods and Materials: In a prospective study 23 patients with clinically suspected wrist fractures and normal initial plain radiographs underwen t high resolution macroradiography and MR imaging shortly after trauma. Macroradiographs were taken with a microfocus tube using an anode of 0.03-0.3 mm providing a 4 x magnification of the wrist, which was obtained in 4 project ions. MR images were perform ed on a 1.0 T MR unit in coronal planes using T1-weighted SE, T2* -weighted 3D GE and Turbo-STIR sequences. 6 weeks follow-up radiographs were used to confirm the diagnosis of a primary occult wrist fracture. Results: Macroradiography depicted 5 fractures, MRI demonstrated 11 fractures . Using macroradiography, sensitivity for the detection of occu lt fractures of the wrist was 50% with a specificity of 100%, using MRI it was 100% with a specificily of 92%, respectively. Conclusion: MRI seems to be super ior to high resolution macrorad iography in the detect ion of occult wrist fractures and thus is recommended in the management of patients with clinically suspected scaphoid fractures not evident on inititial plain films . (Submitted by Internet) MRI of the knee (n = 15) and ankle joint (n = 15). The examined joints were plaeed in a MR-eompatible positioning deviee whieh allows standardized, reproducible imaging planes (maximum flexion of 40°). MR Imaging was performed with a 1.0T unit (T10NT; Phillips) using a surfaee eoil. For Real-Time Imaging Single Shot (SS) TSE and SS GRASE sequenees with a 256 Matrix; 25% rectangular FOV; and a f1ouroseopy rate of 2 images/sec were used. All examinations were analyzed independently by 2 experieneed radiologists with special regard to the following anatomie struetures: ligaments, tendons, hyaline eartilage, sinus tarsi and menisci, using a seoring system (1 =not visible; 2 =visible but not c1early defined; 3 =c1early defined). Results: Altough, both SS TSE and SS GRASE allowed reprodueible real time imaging of joint movement, SS TSE was superior in visualization and demareation of the anatomy in both joints (overall score: 2.7). The best visible struetures were the erueiate ligaments (average score: 2.9), menisei (2.8) and the peroneal tendon (2.7). Conclusion: ZOOM Imaging based on SS TSE in eombination with a MR-eompatible positioning deviee is a promising, reliable and reproducible teehnique for Real Time MR Imaging of aetive joint movement. 1456 Diagnosis of disrupted flexor tendons in the hand with high frequency ultrasound G. Bodner, M. Gabl, R. Zimmermann; Innsbruek/A Purpose: to evaluate aeeuraey of high frequeney Ultrasound (US) in deteeting eomplete disseetion of isolated superficial or deep flexor tendons. Methods and Materials: 14 patients (mean age 24, range 14-54), 12 male and 2 female were referred to US of having an isolated superfieial or deep flexor tendon disseetion after arecent eutting injury on the finger. Sonographie examinations were earried out with a short linear sean head on a HDI 5000 (Advaneed Teehnology Laboratories, Bothell). Evaluation of the tendon gliding was analyzed in passive and aetive flexion of the injured finger. The sonographie dedeeted position of the proximal stump was doeumented. US results were eompared with those of intraoperative findings. Results: All patients showed thinning of the flexor tendons and fluid inside the tendon sheath. 7 patients had a disseetion of the deep flexor tendon and 7 patients a eomplete disruption of the superficial flexor tendon. The proximal stump showed a hypoeehoie echotexture beeause of fiber shortening. With US the proximal stump was found in 10 patients distally of the retinaeulum flexorum, eonfirmed by surgery. In 2 eases the proximal stump was not deteeted, at surgery the stump was found proximal of the retinaeulum flexorum. Conclusion: High frequeney US is helpful in loeating the proximal stump in eompletely dissected flexor tendons. Sonographie eriteria for flexor disseetion are proposed. Purpose: To eompare a silicon f1at panel deteetor with eonventional radiography for the deteetion of ehest abnormalities. Methods and Materials: Eighty patients (34 women, 46 men; mean age, 63 years; range, 18-91 years) who underwent eomputed tomography of the ehest were examined with the new digital radiography system (DRS) based on a 43x43 em silicon f1at panel deteetor and with the eonventional sereen-film system (CSF) in routine c1inieal praetiee. Three radiologists analyzed the pa and lateral radiographs for the presenee of abnormal struetures and proposed diagnoses using· a five-Ievel rating seale of eonfidenee; eomputed tomography was used as the referenee standard. Seventeen of the eases were eompletely normal, whereas the remaining sixty-three eases demonstrated one or more eommon radiographie abnormalities. Diagnostie value was assessed using receiver operating eharaeteristie (ROC) eurves for eaeh abnormality. Results: The area under the ROC eurve for several abnormal struetures in different parts of the ehest showed no signifieant differenees. Conclusion: We eonelude that the new silicon f1at panel deteetor is equivalent to the eonventional screen-film system in diagnostie performance and ean replaee film radiographie systems to offer various advantages of digital systems. Purpose: The diagnostie quality of a newly developped digital radiography system (DRS) was eompared with a eonventional film sereen system (class 400) in routine ehest radiography. The diagnostie effeeieney of this new teehnique in visualization of various anatomie regions was evaluated aeeording to the German guidelines of teehnieal quality requirements. Methods and Materials: DRS is eomposed of a eaesiumjodide seintillator with a f1at panel sensor based on amorphous silicon in the size of 43 x. 43 em (pixel size 160 um), In 100 patients posteroanterior (pa) and lateral images were aequired with both the digital and the eonventional system. Three observers independantly analyzed the pa and lateral images with the ROC ranking method for 14 regions in the pa and 12 in the lateral view. The evaluation was repeated 2 weeks later in a different order and the images were rated a seeond time. Results: Digital image quality was signifieantly superior to that of eonventional ehest films in the mediastinum, hilum, soft tissues and ribs; better than or equal in the retroeardiae, and retrosternal region. It was equally rated for the azygoesophageal reeess, the thoraeie spine and the intrapulmonary structures. Conclusion: The new silicon sensor teehnology has a high signal-tonoise ratio, fulfills the teehnieal eriteria of spatial resolution in ehest imaging and is advantageous to the film sereen technique in eontrast resolution due to its high dynamie range. Visualization of anatomie struetures was better than or at least equal to that of film sereen images. DRS also offers diagnostie advantages in means of postproeessing. Purpose: To evaluate and eompare image quality on monitors for different digital systems used for ehest imaging . Methods and Materials: Soft-eopy report ing for three digital systems were evaluated: two storage phosphor systems, Fuji 9501 and Agfa ADC70, and the first generation of Imix, using a teehnique with an intensifying screen, opties and a CCD eamera. Fifty PA ehest images of volunteers were radiographed with each modality at a dose correspond ing to a 200-speed system . Modified European Quality Criteria were used to evaluate the visibility of ce ntral and peripherar ves sels. the carina, thoracie vertebrae, and pleural margin. The images were viewed by six radiologists on Siemens Simomed monitors and were evaluated individually and in pairs (using Visual Grading Analysis). Results: For all eriter ia, Fuji 9501 was significantly better than both ADC70 and Imix. ADClO was significantly better than Imix for all criter ia exeept the central vessels, for whieh no significant differenee was found . For Imix, the results from two consecutive improvements will be presented . Conelusion: The results indicate a eorrelation with the "degree of maturity" of the systems; the Fuji storage phosphor systems have been developed since the ear ly 80's whereas the Agfa and espee ially the Imix systems are substantially younger. Purpose: To evaluate if monitor reading of digital ehest x-rays in daily routine prolongs reading times eompared to hardeopy reading. Methods and Materials: 200 digital ehest radiographs of daily routine in two planes (100 eonsidered "normal " and 100 with pathologie findings) were evaluated by 4 radiologists at the alternator and at the workstation 8328 with a time interval of four weeks . Time für reading and postproeessing and for the handling of the images between two readings was measured separately. The evaluation was performed on an Ultra spare Sun workstation (SIEMENS, monitor brightness 250 cd/crrr': matrix 1024 x 1280 , software type VA31) and a DIN normed alternator. Results: Absolute reading time is dependent on the experiene e of the reader , the use of postprocessing and the familiarity with the software . . Coneerning all readers and images , there was no statistically significant differenee in the mean reading time for the workstation versus the alternator. The use of postpro eessing was dependent on the reader , ranging from 0% to about 32%. The mean time für switeh over at the workstation can be up to 50% less than the time spent on the handl ing of the films , dependent on the business of the workstation. Conelusion: Monitor read ing does not prolong the overall reading time of digital ehest x-rays. Purpose: to evaluate how soft copy reading of simulated pulmonary ehest lesions is influenced by mon itor resolution , ambient light and automatie optimization of monitor lum inanee. Methods and Materials: Four types of simulated lesions (nodules, Iines, mieronodules and patehy opacities) were superprojeeted over an antropomorphie ehest phantom . Lesion detection was assessed using soft copy reading under the follow ing four conditions: a) 2K monitor with subdued Iighting (referenee), b) 1K monitor without zoom function (subdued Iighting), e) 2K monitor without and d) with a sens itivity modulation to automatieally adjust the CRT luminanee to the inereased amount of ambient light for readings under day light eonditions . Read ing data were analysed aecording to ROC. Results: The deteetion of Iines was significantly inferior with the 1K monitor (Az = 0.54) as eompared to the 2K reference (0.66). Inerease of ambient light significantly deereased deteetion of micronodules (0.60 versus 0.74) and Iines (0.52 versus 0.66) . This could be eompensated by automatie lumineseenee adjustment for the mieronodules (0.77) but not for the lines (0.53). Conelusion: A 1K monitor without zoorn-function is insuffieient for digital ehest radiography. Inereased surrounding light signifieantly decreases deteetion of low eontrast structures. This may be mostly, yet not eompletely eompensated for by an automatie luminenee adaptation. (Submitted by Internet) 9:30 1463 Digital projeetlon ehest radiography -a eomparison between Images derived from storage phosphor and photoeonduetor systems D.L. Richardson, S. Barrow , P. ColIs; Neweastle-upon-TyneIUK Purpose: A eomparison between ehest images aequired by storage phosphor (Computed Radiography) and photo eonduetor-based (Direct Ray) teehnologies. Methods and Materials: 50 patients had two ehest radiographs performed under identical exposure conditlons , one using a Philips AC-3 Computed Radiography unit, one using a Sterling Direet Ray system but under otherwise identieal eonditions. 5 eonsultant radiologists assessed the 100 films produeed . A predesigned form was used to score images with part ieular referenee to the demonstration of ten specifie anato mieal areas from 1 (not visible) to 5 (exeellent visualisation). The ten areas used were the carina, eentral pulmonary vessels, peripheral pulmonary vessels, vessels below the dome of the diaphragm, horizontal fissure , eostophrenie angles, thoraeie spine through the heart, left paravertebral stripe, mediastinal lines or tubes , and bony detail in the lateral ribs. Results: See Table 1 . Conelusion: For eaeh aspeet of the radiographs eaeh of the radiolog ists scored the DR images higher than the CR. This suggests that DR is the better imaging modality for ehest radiography. Postoperative pulmonary function can be predicted accurately by quantitative helical CT with 3D reconstruction in patients undergoing lung resection. Purpose: To evaluate neural nets for detection and quantification of ground glass opacities (GGO) in comparison with visual assessment and a density mask. Methods and Materials: Based on single self-organizing neural nets a hybrid network was developed to detect GGO (amorphous increase in lung density, -750 to -300 HU). 99 HRCT studies of 84 patients with suspected lung disease associated with GGO were prospectively performed. The results of the network were compared with visual assessment and a corresponding density mask. Frequency, extent and causes of false positive or negative results were determined. Results: The network categorized 6.3% of lung as GGO (1.3% were only seen by the network, 5% also by the density mask). The density mask categorized 22% of lung as GGO. Thus, 17% of lung exhibited the defined density values but not the texture of GGO. Compared to the visual assessment the network had a sensitivity of 99%, a positive predictive value of 78% and a negative predictive value of 100%. All scans and all patients with GGO were detected by the neural network. False positive findings were caused by partial volumes. Conelusion: The hybrid network is sufficiently accurate and sensitive to be used as a prereading of HRCT scans for suspected GGO. It is superior to a density mask. or lobectomy (n = 28) was performed for managing lung cancer (n =26), tuberculosis (n =6), aspergillosis (n = 5), bronchiectasis (n = 5), and others (n =2). The lungs were reconstructed as a 3D model on a GE Windows Advantage Workstation using a threshold of -400 HU. Functional lung volume (VPRE) was measured with exdusion of lung volume less than -910 HU. After removing the lung region to be resected on the 3D model, predicted postoperative functional lung volume (VPOST) was measured. Predicted postoperative FEV1 and FVC were calculated by multiplying preoperative spirometry values by ratio of VPOSTNPRE. These values were compared with those obtained from postoperative spirometry and preoperative perfusion lung scan. Results: Predicted values from CT data correlated weil with those from postoperative spirometry (FEV1: r =.94, p < .001; FVC: r =.91, p < .001) and those calculated from perfusion lung scans (FEV1: r = .90, p < .001; FVC:r = .90, P < .001). 1. Cyst aspiration. Very rarely is this indicated nowadays except for very large cysts which are causing symptoms or central cysts which are interfering with calyceal drainage. 2. Renal biopsy. In patients with renal failure, renal biopsy is best performed by ultrasonologists taking a careful peripheral core of cortex. In the renal mass situation renal biopsy is only of use when there is the possibility of 2 diagnoses. The present of lymphoma elsewhere may lead one to biopsy a renal mass and if there are multiple renal masses, metastases may be presence rather than multiple renal cell carcinomata. 3. Needle nephrostomy. The technique of needle nephrostomy in the emergency situation to relieve obstruction or to divert urine from a fistula will be covered. 4. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy. The method of track dilatation and the siting of an ideal track for stone removal will be discussed. PCNL in the age of lithotripsy will would be covered. 5. Endopyelotomy. The treatment of pelviureteric junction obstruction by endopyelotomy will be covered with particularly reference to the angle of approach and the different methods of Iysing the pelviureteric junction. 6. Percutaneous resection of transitional cell carcinoma. Low grade TCC of the pelvicalyceal system can be treated in exactly the same way as low grade tumours in the bladder, by local resection. This treatment is supported by post operative brachytherapy to the track. 7. Removal of foreign bodies. fractured or migrated stents can be removed through percutaneous tracks using peel away sheaths and different grabbing tools. F. Joffre, Ph. Otal, H. Rousseau; ToulouselF Treatment of ureteral pathology is often difficult, due to anatomy of ureter, variety of diseases, frequency, risk of renal parenchymal damage and complications. Interventional radiology plays an important role, either in intrinsic or extrinsic pathology. The goal of this course will concern several points: 1) general technical points: access route to the upper urinary tract, technic of ureteric intubation 2) Indications: Antegrade ureteral intubation allows different possibilities: (1) Treatment of different kind of stenosis, malignant of benign, by balloon dilatation, polymeric or metallic stents or electro-incision. (2) Treatment of urinary fistulas by definitive or temporary ureteral occlusions. (3) Treatment of ureteral lithiasis. (4) Removal of foreign bodies. For every indications, whatever native or transplanted kidneys, will be develop the main technical possibilities and the efficiency. 3) The role of interventional radiology compared with retrograde access will be discuss, by insisting on multidisciplinary approach and usefulness of combined access. Room H during the hyperacute phase of experimental ischemia , decreased diffusion coeffic ient may be present in regions where perfusion is still preserved . This diffusion abnormality is probably still reversible at this stage. An increase in contrast-to-nolse ratio relative to blood oxygen level contrast functional imaging is experimentally achieved with dynamic measurements of regional changes in cerebral blood volume after injection of ultrasmall paramagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) particles. These are taken up by macrophages. They have been imaged experimen tally in a model of allergie encephalomyelitis and detected in immunoactive lesions which could be of interest in the early detection of active lesions. Several new contrast agents for MR imaging are now approved for market ing in particular in liver imaging , but others are to come, not only for the liver but with other organ-specificity Iike contrast agents directed to the Iymph nodes or the vascular system. The aim of this talk is to explain the principal physico chemical characteristics of these new MR agents (part icles , chelates , macromolecules), with an emphas is on their imaging enhancement properties (positive or negative) and biodistribution . Concern ing liver agents , a class ificalion is drawn which follows the ultrastructural anatomy of the Iiver. The principal enhancement characteristics of the particles (Endorem® Resov ist®) , the gadolinium chelates (Multihance®, Eovist®) and the manganese chelate (Teslascan®) ls presented . The mechanisms of Iymph circulation and Iymph node uptake of the particles (Sinerem *) is shown . The pharmacokinetics of macromolecular agents of various molecular weight is presented in view of the potential clinical applications for vascular or functional imag ing, like the quantification of perfusion and capillary permeability. This course will review the role of contrast agents in MR imaging (MRI) of the body with an emphasis on newer MR agents such as new extracellular markers, blood pool agents , and target-specific contrast agents . Results of dynamic imaging using these agents in combination with fast and ultrafast MR imaging techniques will be discussed and compared to results obtained with other Gd-based agents. Newer agents under development with biodistributions other than the class ical exl racellular fluid spac e will be described . These include agents for blood volume and perfusion imaging, as weil as superparamagnetic iron oxide compounds, and hepato biliary agents. Target-specific agents cons ist typically of a magnetically active core and target-specific carrie r molecules. These compounds can be targeted to receptor and immunospecific sites. Clinical applications of some new MR agents , as far as they are available for c1inical use will be discussed. We will describe how these agents can improve detection of cancer and tissue characterization . Furthermore, the use of contrast agents for improved vascular imaging and for imaging of the gastrintestinal tract will be discussed. New MR contrast agents are essenlia lly expected to provide a more funct ional aspect of the MR exploration in the central nervous system . It covers the assessment of the cerebral blood volume andlor perfusion with blood pool contrast agents or with magnetic susceptibility changes accompanying the first passage of paramagnetic bolus. Potential appllcations derive from the indications of other hemodynamic techniques such as PET and SPECT in the fietd in which the higher spatial resolut ion of MRI seems beneficia l. At the moment no routine clinical procedure is established but promising approaches interest cerebrovascular pathology, functional MRI of brain activation and multiple sclerosis . Indications: To supplement the spectrum of percutaneously applicable local thrombolysis therapy modalities in case of acute peripheral occlusive artery disease , several percutaneous mechan ical thrombectomy (PMT) techniques have been designed to clear intravascular thrombus . Due to the ability of rapid revascular isation , PMT has become accepted in certain clinical situations as an alternative or adjunctive therapy to surgical embolectomy. Technlque: PMT devices can be classified as folIows: aspiration thrombectomy, pull back thrombectomy, recirculation mechan ically thrombectomy, non-recirculation mechanically thrombectomy, and ultrasound assisted thrombolysis. This part will focus on recirculation devices using high-speed rotation (Amplatz Thrombectomy Device I") and to high-speed saline jets (Angiojet™, Hydrolysert", S.E.T.TM) to remove thrombus. Results: In vive comparative data and in vitro performance characteristics will be presented, with regard to procedure related complica tions (technicallimitation/failure, hemolysis . emboli rates) and in vive adjunclive lherapeutic rnodalities (PAT, fibrinolysis, surgery). Conclusions: The introduced mechan ical thrombectomy systems differ in design and price. The overall mortality rate of PMT is low (0%-3.9%). PAT and puli-back thrombectomy devices are inexpensive and easy to handle; they are weil suited to treat iatrogenically caused infrainguinal thromboembolism. Recirculat ion devices appear to have no limitations , except pelvic arteries, but they are expenive; they should be used to clear larger amounts of thrombus . Adjunctive therapy (fibrinolysis, PAT) is often necessary. 1472 Caval filters J.M. Neuerburg ; AachenlD Acute pulmonary embolism (PE) remains one of the most significant causes of morbidity and morta lity in hospitalized patients . Caval filters are the primary tool for providing mechan ical protect ion against PE. They are employed either to prevent a "first PE", which ls a subject of considerable debate, or more commonly to prevent recurrent PE under particular circumstances (absolute indications: recurrent PE despite adequate anticoagulalion, significant deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or a history of a PE without DVT in a patient with a contraindication to anticoagulation, a history of a life-threaten ing PE and free-f1oating i1eofemoral or cavaI thrombus, a history of a paradoxical embolus in a patient with DVT, a patient undergoing a pulmonary thromboembolectomy; relative indications: free-f1oating ileofemoral or caval thrombus in a patient who is a candidate for anticoagulation, DVT in a patient with a tumor in whom antieoagulation may need to be interrupted . pelvie surgery which may plaee the patient at high risk for PE). Most eommonly, cavaI filters are plaeed into the infrarenal portion of the IVC. Caval filters have been intended for a variety of applications ineluding those whieh are permanent and non-retrievable, permanent and retrievable, and temporary. Caval filters can provide life-saving proteetion against large emboli, but they do not provide absolute proteetion against emboli. They can even beeome a souree of PE, partieularly in patients with large IVC clots whieh propogate through the filter. Complieations of eaval filters inelude deployment in the wrong loeation, inadequate opening, aeute or late migration especially within large IVCs in whieh filters have been known to migrate up to the heart and pulmonary arteries , caval perforation, insertion site thrombosis, filter oeclusion, and filter stress fraeture. 1473 Mechanical thrombectomy (part 2) H.-J. Wagner; MarburglD Background: Limb-threatening isehemia due to aeute thrombotie or embolie oeclusions of lower limb arteries is an emergeney in vaseular medieine. Immediate revaseularization is mandatory for limb salvage. In recent years percutaneous transluminal thrombectomy techniques have been developed to replace traditional techniques of surgicai thromboembol ectomy. This part of the workshop will focus on the percutaneous aspiration or suction thrombectomy. Material and Methods: Percutaneous aspiration or suction thrombectomy is the oldest percutaneous thrombectomy technique. Developed in the early eighties it took considerable time until clinical application became a wide-spread technique. However, the material required is simply a large-bore non-tapered aspiration catheter (5-8 French) and a 50 cc syringe to achieve negative pressure for aspiration. The technique will be demonstrated on video. Results: Several trials have shown applicability and safety of the aspiration technique to remove thromboembolic occlusive material in over 90% of the cases. The technique is not restricted to fresh ciot, but enables removal of older, partially organized material, as weil as walladherent thrombus after detachment with additional tools like baskets and spirals. The techniques is effective in treatment of embolie occlusions of lower limb arleries and achieves long-term results comparable to those of the surgical technique. Complications are puncture-side bleeding, distal embolization and dissection. Conclusion: Percutaneous aspiration thrombectomy is a valuable tool in the minimal invasive management of acute lower Iimb ischemia. Advantages are the ease of technique, the rapid technique and the low costs. such as mitochondrial encephalomyopathies, e.g. MELAS-syndrome. Vasculopathies are uncommon in children but Moya-Moya disease may occur in older children. Trauma, particularly to the neck region, may initiate dissection of the brachio-cephalic vessels and is the cause of stroke in 20% of adolescents presenting with stroke symptoms. Intracerebral hemorrhage can clinically present as stroke. Arteriovenous malformations and dural sinus thrombosis should be suspected. The primary goal for imaging of stroke in children is distinguishing between hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke as further diagnostic strategies differ significantly. The secondary goal is to identify those causes in whieh available treatment options will influence the immediate or subsequent care for the child. However, the need for invasive diagnostic proeedures must be assessed in the context of potential treatment options. 1475 B. Temporal bone and para-nasal sinus diseases in children P. Anslow; OxfordlUK The ears and sinuses are so morphologically and physiologically different that this lecture has to be split into two quite distinet halves. Diagnostic imaging of the ears . The commonest single indication for surgery in the paedlatric population in England is for "glue" ear, where the normal ventilation of the middle ear cleft is replaced by tenacious secretion. This disorder and other complications of middle ear sepsis are ultimately determined by dysfunction in the eustachian tube ventilation of the middle ear. Whilst "glue" ear does not require imaging other complications of chronic dysfunetion such as keratoma and mastoid infection certainly do, and require high quality cross sectional imaging using MR and Cr. The anatomy and physiology of the middle and external ear will be described with illustrative examples of the most important pathologies. Despite modern antibiotic therapies, intracranial complications of both sinus and ear disease still occur and requires assessment of the ear and adjacent brain. Diagnostic imaging of the sinuses. Whilst sinus infection is common, imaging is rarely required in children. Occasionally neoplasms are discovered within the sinuses and require accurate delineation and staging. Such investigations are however relatively infrequent and this talk will not deal with the issue of sinus neoplasia but instead deal with congenital anomalies of the sinuses and face ineluding nasal dermoids, facial cletts and microsomias. Once again these ehildren require very high quality CT and MR imaging to accurately delineate the nature of the congenital anomaly and to provide the surgeon with the data for making a rational decision on the timing and nature of surgery. Cerebrovascular disease is uncommon in children. The incidence is believed to be around 2.5 cases per 100,000 population per year, excluding cerebrovascular disease during the perinatal period. The causes of ischemic stroke in children are varied and quite different from those in adults. The imaging strategy is therefore different in children. Despite aggressive investigation and modern imaging methods, the majority of children presenting with strake will not have an identifiable underlying cause. The most common known cause of stroke in children is congenital heart disease with right to lett shunt. Bacterial endocarditis and venous thrombosis can complicate congenital heart disease and playa etiological role in stroke. Other important causes include coagulanon oerects, hematological diseases and certa in metabolie syndromes 1476 Image compression, teleradiology and networking F.H. Barneveld Binkhuysen, K.J. Visseher; Amersfoort, LeeuwardenlNL Transfer rates for data become faster and faster! Why bother about cornpression? Data volumes on the other hand become larger and larger! will a satisfactorily transfer time over be achieved? Data compression makes transfer of data faster, archiving cheaper (dearchiving faster) and minimizes the networkload and therefore the performance. In this refresher course the basic network types and the influences of load on performance will be explained and the principles of datacompression will be explained and explored. The actual different techniques will be mentioned briefly and treated from the perspeetive of possible deteriorating effect on the image quality. Reversible or losless compression at reasonable (de) compression speeds gain a factor of 2 to 4 depending on the image content, Higher eompression rates are readily aehieved by various irreversible or lossy eompression teehniques. The name is misleading as so far as it foeusses on a very thiny part of the imaging ehain. The whole imaging ehain in radiology is irreversible and lossy. The important and real question is; are the eompressed images suitable for the diagnostie questions asked. The ... problem is that their is no eorrespondenee between various mathematieal measures of quality and the human pereeption. In a soeration diseussion between a physieist and a radiologist the main eoneerns, hopes, pittfalls and doubts of both professions will be used the review the studies done in this field. Teleradiology sounds Iike using the telegraph instead of the modern multimedia tools in eombination with IMACS. We have to redefine teleradiology.  The aim of our studies is the development and evaluation of computer algorithms that allow exact measurement of the intracranial liquor system from MR images. Methods and Materials: MR images with section thickness of 2 and 3 mm were acquired using a T2-weighted three-dimensional gradientecho MR sequence. Image analysis consisted of the following steps: Rough definition of the ROI, semiautomated segmentation on the basis of a modified watershed transformation, calculation of volume under consideration of partial volume effects. To evaluate reproducibility we investigated data from -several realistic phantoms of the ventricular system and -a volunteer who underwent measurements before and after sporting activity. Comparative measurements by different observers were done. Results: The developed algorithms have been combined into a computer application and are tested in c1inical environment. The image segmentation of the cerebral ventricular system allows quantitative volumetry as weil as 3D-visualization. Conclusion: The semiautomated computer application provides an exact quantitative measurement of the intracranial ventricular volumesnot only rough planimetric estimations. Using this method it is possible to determine minimal changes in ventricular volume. Erlangen/D Purpose: To investigate how intraoperative MRI can contribute to resection control in neurosurgery. Methods and Materials: We used a Magnetom Open (Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany) 0.2 Tesla scanner being located in our 'twin OR'. For intraoperative imaging a 3D-flash sequence (TR 16 ms, TE 7 ms) was used, allowing image update for neuronavigation. Results: Intraoperative MRI was performed in 129 patients (29 eases of suprasellar hormonally inactive pituitary adenomas, 43 gliomas, 6 ventricular tumors, 29 cases of epilepsy surgery and 22 other). The extent of resection could be evaluated intraoperatively in all cases, being especially helpful in low-grade glioma, ventricular tumors, and pituitary adenomas. It allowed in case of remaining tumor a second look, leading to complete removal. Furthermore it provided an update of image data for neuronavigation to compensate the effects of tumor removal and brain shift. Conclusion: The indications for intraoperative MRI are: 1. resection centrot in low-grade glioma, ventricular tumors, suprasellar hormonally inaclive piluilary adenomas, and in epilepsy surgery. 2. The need for update of neuronavigation to compensate the effects of tumor removal and brain shift. 3. Interventional procedures with therapy contral such as cryo-or laserablation. Purpose: To compare the diagnostic efficacy of single shot turbo spin eeho-sequence and single shot GRASE-sequence to that of conventional T2-weighted turbo spin echo-sequence (T2-TSE) in the imaging of brain disorders. Patients and Methods: 33 patients with high signal intensity lesions on T2-weighted images (n = 26) or intraceberal haemorrhage (n = 5) were examined on 1.0 T MR scanner with 23 mT/m gradient strength. The scan time for conventional T2-TSE-Sequence was 3 min 12 sec, the scan time for the single shot-T2-TSE-, and single shot-GRASEsequences was 11 sec, and 17 sec respectively. Images were reviewed by two radiologists. Lesion conspicuity, image quality, and artefacts were scored on a subjective basis. Lesion-to-brain-contrast and contrast-tonoise-ratios (CNR) were calculated by region of interest (ROI). Results: Supratentorial lesions were shown by both conventional T2-TSE and single shot-T2-TSE with similar conspicuity. The detectability of the generally smaller infratentoriallesions was significantly inferior on single shot-T2-TSE-, and single shot-GRASE-sequences. Physiologie ferritin as weil as pathologie hemosiderin depositions were slightly darker and thereby better visible on single shot-GRASE. Grey-white differentiation was better on conventional T2-TSE. Single shot-GRASE showed significantly more artefacts. Conclusion: Single shot TSE and Single shot GRASE imaging can be used for rapid imaging of the brain in those patients who are claustrophobie or not compliant, as weil as in children in whom anaesthesia is contraindicated. 9:00 1481 Fast brain imaging using the EPI-technique in brain tumour A. Ba-Ssalamah, S. Schick, N. Schibany, F. Vorbeck, S. Kreuzer, M. Breitenseher, H. Imhof, S. Trattnig; ViennalA Purpose: To compare the diagnostic efficacy of a newly developed T1-3D-EPI-sequence versus a conventional T1-3D-gradient echosequence in the evaluation of the brain tumours. Patients and Methods: Thirty patients with cerebra I tumours were examined on 1.0 T MR unit with 23 mT/m gradient strength. The total scan time for T1-3D-EPI-sequence was 2 min 12 sec, for conventional 3D-GE sequence it was 4 min 59 sec. Both sequences were performed after administration of contrast agent. The images were analysed by two radiologists. Image assessment criteria included lesion conspicuity, contrast between different types of normal tissue and image artefacts. In addition, signal-to-noise-, and contrast-to-noise-ratio was calculated. Results: Grey-white differentiation and C/N ratio of 3D-EPI were found to be inferior to conventional 3D-GE images, but the difference was not statistically significant. In the qualitative comparison, the lesion detection and conspicuity of 3D-EPI images and conventional 3D-GE images were similar, but the scanning time was reduced to 50%. Conclusion: With the 3D-EPI -technique a 50% scan time reduction could be achieved providing almost the similar image quality as in conventional 3D-GE, therefore we suggest the 3D-EPI-technique could replace the conventional 3D-GE-technique in the brain imaging 9:10 1482 Comparison of T1-weighted spin-echo and 3D-T1-weighted echo planar pulse sequences in imaging the brain at 1T A.H. Karantanas, K. Vasiou, E. Lavdas, N. Papanikolaou; LarissalGR Purpose: To evaluate the ability of T1 3D-EPI MR pulse sequence to provide comparable to T1-SE results in various diseases of the brain. Methods and Materials: Thirty-six patients (30-74 y) with various indications were included in the study. All examinations were performed with a 1T scanner with a maximum gradient strength of 15 mT/m. The SE sequence lasted 3 min 50 sand the 3D-EPI 59 s for 50 sections. The quantitative analysis included number of enhancing lesions, SNR and CNR in both sequences before and after iv administration of 0.1 mmol/kg gadopentetate dimeglumine. The percentage increase of enhancement was measured in each lasion of each sequence. The qualitative analysis included a) conspicuity of the lesions and b) presence of artifacts. Results: The T1-SE sequence showed better CNR of the lesions both before (p = 0.002) and after (p = 0.003) the administration of contrast. T1-SE was better compared to EPI (p =0.007) in SNR only after contrast administration. The percentage increase of enhancement was sirnilar for both sequences. The conspicuity of the lesions did not differ between the two sequences. The EPI sequence presented more artifacts (p = 0.007). Conclusion: 3D-T1-EPI sequence could not be used instead of T1-SE in routine imaging ofthe brain. EPI could be useful only in uncooperative patients. Purpose: To evaluate HAFs in AN related to hormonal parameters and disease duration. Methods and Materials: Eighteen AN females (27.7 ± 5.6 aged) with 8.2 ± 1.1 years of disease during the recovery phase and an agematched control group of healthy volunteers (CG) underwent 1.5-T brain MR: T1-SE sequence (TRITE = 630/14 ms); 24 coronal contiguous 2mm slices; pixel 0.982 mm; 6 excitations. The volumes of both right and left HAFs were calculated with manual contouring from the third ventricle to the Sylvian aqueduct. Blood sampies for insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) and body mass index (BMI) were obtained for patients and CG. Mann-Whitney test and Spearman Rank Correlation Coefficient were used. Results: Patients showed a significant reduction in both right (3.4 ± 0.1 mm3) and left (3.3 ± 0.6 mm3) HAF volume, if compared to CG (right: 4.5 ± 0.3 mm3; left: 4.3 ± 0.2 mm3) (p < .01). A positive correlation was found with the BMI (p = .017) and IGF1 (p = .002) measured at the admission; no significant correlation was found between the HAF volumes and present BMI, present IGF1, and disease duration. Conclusion: MR showed a significant atrophy of both HAFs in AN during the recovery phase. The correlation with the nutritional parameters at admission suggest its possible role in the AN pathogenesis. Purpose: Development and evaluation of self-organizing neural network segmentation techniques for multispectral MRI data of the human brain. Methods and Materials: 15 male volunteers (aged 24-32 years) were examined employing a standardized MR protocol (1.5 T system, T1w MP-RAGE, T2w/PDw SE, IR, anatomically correct registration). Segmentation was performed by: (i) Unsupervised Clustering (UC) by minimal free energy vector quantization, (ii) Supervised Classification (SC) by a neural network (3-layer feed-forward Generalized Radial-Basis-Functions (GRBF) perceptron). Results: Manual processing time was 3 +1-1 min for UC and 21 +1-11 min for SC. Computation time was 2.1 +1-0.3 h for UC and 2.2 +1-0.3 h for SC. Automatie segmentation was performed with respect to tissue c1asses gray/white matter and CSF. Evaluation of segmentation quality by a neuroradiologist on a 5-grade semiquantitative score (1 = excellent, 5 = insufficient) revealed 1.7 for SC and 2.0 for UC. The maximal ratio of voxels c1assified differently by UC and SC was 4%. Conclusion: Both UC and SC are powerful state-of-the-art techniques for automatie brain segmentation based on multispectral MR data. SC reveals slightly better segmentation results than UC, but requires more human processing time. We recommend neural networks as a precise, effective, and reliable approach to clinical brain segmentation. Purpose: Development of a method for fully-automatic segmentation of MRI data of the human brain by self-organized neural network (NN) elastic matching. Methods and Materials: 10 volunteers were examined employing a standardized MRI protocol (1.5 T system, T1w MP-RAGE, T2w/PDw SE, IR, anatomically correct registration). Fully-automatic segmentation was performed by a novel algorithm (A. Wismueller, H. Ritter, to be published in "Neural Networks"): the Deformable Feature Map (DM). Hereby, image data form a complex-shaped cluster in a 7-dimensional feature space (3 spatial, 4 gray value dimensions). By self-organized elastic deformation, this cluster is matched onto a corresponding cluster of a single maunally segmented reference data set. For evaluation, semi-automatic supervised NN segmentation was performed on the same data. Results: Segmentation was performed w.r.t. c1asses gray/white matter and CSF. Evaluation bya neuroradiologist on a 5-grade semiquantitative score (1 =excellent, 5 =insufficient) revealed 2.0 +1-0.3 for DM vs. 1.7 +/-0.2 for semi-automatic NN. The maximal ratio of voxels classified differently for DM and NN was 5.1 %. Conclusion: Conventional NN segmentation yields slightly better results, but requires human working power i.e, manual contour tracing of training data, interactive classification of pixel clusters, etc. We recommend neural networks as a precise, effective, and reliable approach to c1inical brain segmentation. Purpose: The CSF pulsation within the aqueduct depend not only on the cardiac cycle but also on respiration. In a volunteer study, we examined systematic changes of CSF pulsation in relation to the respiration. Methods and Materials: An echo planar imaging measurement technique was modified to allow the acquisition of 1024 succesive measurements of aselected slice. Additionally, the cardiac cycle and respiration was recorded. Signal courses were examined in 16 volunteers. Results: Two maxima were found in the avaraged signal course after sorting the data to the delay within the cardiac pulse wave. Using additional saturation pulses, the first maximum could be identified as caused by caudal directed flow while the flow during the second maximum was due to cranial directed f1ow. In 13 of 15 measurements differences in the signal course were found during expiration compared to inspiration phases. The analysis showed an increased caudal flow and a decreased cranial direct flow during expiration. Conclusion: The detection of different flow pattern in distinct respiration phases can be used for an improved characterization of flow alterations in patients with hydrocephalus and other intracranial pathology. (Submitted by Internet) morphology with clinical data may lead to a more specific diagnosis. The most common primary malignancies include adenocarcinoma, carcinoid tumor, lymphoma and leiomyosarcoma. Radiologically, adenocarcinomas may appear as annular narrowing, polypoid or ulcerated masses or a combination of these. Lymphomas and leiomyosarcomas are larger, usually nonobstructing, lesions leading to large ulcerations. Especially lymphoma may be multifocal, has a wide spectrum of features and is usually accompanied by Iymphadenopathy. Radiological findings of carcinoid tumor mirror the stage the pathological process has reached at the time of presentation and include filling defect(s) luminal narrowing, fixation, angulation or kinking of intestinal loops or a mesenteric mass with linear radiating strands. 1488 B. Non-neoplastic conditions of the small intestine Enteroclysis is proving to be the technique of choice for the barium examination of the small intestine. The morphological appearances of small intestinal disorders, similar to those seen on gross pathological examination, are c1early shown by the single-contrast Sellink entero-c1ysis method using a dilute barium suspension. Crohn's disease is the most common disorder that causes morphological changes in the intestine. Radiological signs of Crohn's disease include discrete ulcers, fissure ulcers, longitudinal ulcers, cobblestoning, sinuses, fistulae, distortion of the valvulae conniventes, asymmetry, inflammatory polyps and enlargement of the ileocaecal valve. Other disorders causing morphological changes in the intestine that are c1early shown by enteroclysis include tuberculosis, chronic radiation enteritis, ischaemia, ischaemic strictures, Meckel's diverticulum, systemic sclerosis, Whippies disease, intestinal Iymphangiectasia and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) enteritis. 10:30-12:00 Room B EIl 2122 Education and technologie advances final report is ready before the patient returns to his clinical department. Around 70% of all reports are already produced in this manner. With the number of patient admissions growing steadily, natural speech recognition has made an important contribution to enhancing the efficiency of the department. 1495 Medical training in X-ray anatomy as early as possible by PC-application in preclinical courses M. Grunewald, G. Bischoff, W.L. Neuhuber; Marburg, Erlangen-NürnberglD Purpose: To create a PC-based x-ray anatomy program for the preclinical integrated teaching of gross anatomy and radiology. We created the computer-program "X-RAY ANATOMY", that consists of conventional plane film x-ray, CT-images, MRI, angiography and ultrasound images. The illustrations are structured and diagnosed according to anatomical aspects and the anatomical structures listed in the legends may be highlighted inside the x-ray pictures. Selected pathological conditions are included to emphasise the c1inical significance. The PC-based program was developed as a supplement to the dissection course of gross anatomy. During this course the students can use the program, which is installed on a PC standing in the dissection room and includes in particular also the institute's roentgenograms available in the dissection room and matched with the dissection program. Results: The x-ray anatomy program has been evaluated by the students for the past two years. The feedback was positive. The program also offers the possibility for other anatomy departments to implement roentgenograms of their own collection. Thus the students at other institutions can use the program as a digital guide for the institute x-ray collection without the help of an assistant as weil. A PC-based x-ray anatomy program could be sufficiently implemented in preclinical courses of the medical training of students. The program was very weil accepted by the students and offers the possibility for others institutions to implement their own x-rays. 1496 Teaching radiology in an integrated curriculum -experience from the United Arab Emirates L. Ekelund; AI AinlUAE Purpose: To investigate the role of Diagnostic Radiology in the integrated curriculum for medical students in the United Arab Emirates University and the extent of radiology teaching involved. The amount of radiology teaching was assessed in all phases of undergraduate education. The medical students were interviewed with the help of a questionnaire regarding their views on the role of radiology in the medical education. Results: Radiology is represented in all phases of the 6-year programme, including 10 organ modules and 2 years of clinical rotation with a total of 229 teaching hours annually. This is in contrast to traditional curricula, where the teaching of radiology used to be concentrated to the medical-surgical year. The reason for this discrepancy is believed to be the fact that this Medical School is quite new and not trapped in long-standing traditions. The nature of the speciality makes it weil suited for teaching in a system of problem-based learning. Radiology provides a natural point for integration of attitudes, knowledge and skills and might weil be utilized more in medical education. 1497 Relationship between radiologists and clinicians: results from two surveys F. Stacul, S. Meduri, L. Dalla Palma; Triestell Purpose: To evaluate modalities, time comsuption, reasons and impact of contacts between radiologists and c1inicians in a medium size University Hospital. Methods and Materials: Two surveys were performed. 1) The staff radiologists (n = 20) were asked to collect data during 10 working 5336 days concerning number of contacts, their modalities (personal meetings, phone), time comsuption and reasons (organizational issues vs diagnostic problems); 2) The staff c1inicians (n = 174) of the hospital were asked to fill in a questionnaire concerning the same issues and moreover on the effects of consultations on diagnostic strategy and therapeutic decisions. Results: Each radiologist had a mean of 3.95 contacts per day with the clinicians (48.2% were personal meetings and 51.8% were telephone conversations). Each radiologist was involved for as long as 21.65 min. per day for dialogue with c1inicians. 54% of contacts were related to organizational issues and 46% to diagnostic problems. The consultations were reported the have helped correct the diagnostic strategy often or sometimes (84%), rarely or never (16%) and to have helped correct therapeutic decisions often or sometimes (67%), rarely or never (33%). Conclusion: Consultations between radiologists and clinicians are time consuming (roughly one whole time equivalent radiologist in our Department) but provide beneficial diagnostic and therapeutic impact. A. Vasilyev; MoscowlC/S Wide introduction of digital technologies (CT, MRI) in Russia has rendered if necessary to organize effective managment in radiology. An analysis of general radiological system has shown some specific features of radiological managment in Russia: -existence of radiological divisions fram one another in terms of equipment levels; -non availability in radiological divisions of machinery of different usage; -different levels of personnel's competence; -insufficiently high level of qualification of the heads of regional hospitals; -lack of unified interconnected training pragram for the leaders of all levels; -decreased attention from the public health were authorities to the needs of medical establishments; -a characteristic feature is lack of calculation of the examination cost or these calculations are not considered to be too important. At the same time, over the years some positive tendencies of radiological departments management have arisen: -young energetic leaders are coming to radiology, they are introducing modern principles of managment with great enthusiasm; -decentralized vertical structures and increasing horizontal connections (in particular, on the level of regions) that ensures purpose directed activity of personnel in radiological structures; -management aimed not at the process, but at ultimate results; -quick reaction both to positive and negative results of work in organising diagnostic process; -possibility to introduce up-to-date technologies. 1499 Postmortem fetal magnetic resonance imaging versus necropsy, an alternative? TAG.M. Huisman, J. Wisser, T. Stallmach, B. Marincek, Purpose: To evaluate if postmortem Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) can replace necropsy in aborted or stillborn fetuses. Methods and Materials: MRI was performed in 10 consecutive fetuses within 24 h of delivery. Severe malformation was diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound (US) and/or genetic work-up. Necrapsy served as gold standard. MRI was performed on a 1.5 T MR-Unit, T1 and T2-weighted sequences were acquired. Images were interpreted by two radiologists unaware of US-and necropsy-findings. The study was approved by the ethics committee, informed consent was obtained. Results: US, MRI and necrapsy all provided sufficient information either to initiate or confirm correct obstetric managemnt. MRI confirmed all US criteria responsible for termination of pregnancy, the additional necropsy data would not have changed the decisions made. MRI and US outperformed necropsy in cerebral pathology, MRI however is severely Iimitated in the evaluation of cardiac pathologies. Necropsy outperformed US and MRI in two infants with complex malformations. Conclusion: MRI pravides non-invasive access to information previously available only from necropsy and thus can be used to confirm prenatal US diagnosis if perinatal necropsy is refused by the parents. Necropsy remains the gold standard for genetic counselling as sampie tissue is provided for cytogenetic and ONA analysis. Conelusion: From our observations it is clear that enlarged Iymph nodes in the HOL is a frequent finding in patients with viral hepatitis. Ouring a routine scan the US findings alone could raise the suspicion of an inflammatory disorder of the liver in almost 80% of cases. I n our population this pilot study proved US to be a powerful diagnostic tool; larger trials however are needed to verify its efficacy in earlier stages of various disorders. 10:30-12:00 Combined radiographie and imaging procedures revealed peritoneal involvement (ascites) in 23 patients (35%), bowel involvement in 39 (59%), mass lesion in 13 (19%), Iymphadenopathy in 20 (30%) and organ involvement in 21 (32%). Conelusion: There was no single radiological method which provided all necessary information suggestive of abdominal tuberculosis. AIthough unequivocal diagnosis of abdominal tuberculosis can only be made by culture and histological findings, combined CT and ultrasound findings were the most important imaging tools in the diagnostic process of abdominal tuberculosis, while contrast studies helped to assess the extent of bowel disease, hence influencing the plans for surgery. . The aim of our study was to evaluate the incidence and clinical significance of the US identification of Iymph nodes in the HOL, of patients with viral hepatitis. Methods and Materials: 80 patients, 40 controls and 40 liver cirrosis patients with histologically confirmed hepatitis (27 HCV and 13 HBV) entered the study. Patients with rnaliqnancy or inflammatory disorders were excluded. All subjects underwent a routine scan by an ultrasonographer who did not know the diagnosis. The echogenicity of Iymph nodes was evaluated with respect to the liver parenchyma. A retrospective review of abdominal CT scans was then performed. Results: On US imaging Iymph nodes were found in 77.5% of patients with viral hepatitis (23 of the 27 patients with HCV and 8 of the 13 patients with HBV) while on CT imaging the incidence was 90% (25/25 with HCV and 11/13 HBV). In healthy subjects US imaging identified Iymph nodes in 17.5% of cases (7/40) while on CT imaging the incidence was 10% (4(40). 1502 Impact of CT investigations under emergeney eonditions Ch. Weber, P. Steiner, R. Maas, F. Jensen, E. Bücheler; Hamburg/D Purpose: Radiology departments have seen a continuous rise in the number of costly CT scans performed on emergency basis. Purpose of the study was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy and cost eftectiveness of such CT investigations. Methods and Materials: 600 emergency CTs (ehest n = 144, abdomen n =240, spine n =90, pelvis n =60, neck n =46, extremities n =10) were evaluated for indication, image quality and therapeutic consequences (operative, interventional, medical). CT results were compared with postoperative and discharge diagnoses. Results: The most common indications were acute abdomen (30%), vertebral fractures (20%), abscess localisation (16%), acute thoracal and abdominal trauma (9%), bleeding (7%), pulmonary emboli (5%), aneurysms (2%) and prolapsed discs (2%). The diagnostic quality of emergency CTs was identical to CT investigations performed under routine conditions. 32% of emergency CTs lead to surgical intervention: 17% within 36 h, 15% after more than 36 h following C'T, Immediate drainage of abscesses was performed in 4% of all CTs. 15% lead to an immediate change of therpeutic strategy. In 75% and 83% CT correlated with the postoperative respectively discharge diagnoses. Oiftering diagnoses were found in 25% respectively 17% of all cases. Conelusion: The diagnostic accuracy of emergency CT investigations as weil as the associated therapeutic conseqences underline the important role of CT for emergency patients. No single alternative diagnostic method ofters comparable results. The cost of emergency CT is outweighted by a timely and precise diagnosis which shortens the hospital stay. Purpose: It ls known that CT of the abdomen shows much more details ?f organ patholoqy in comparison to ultrasound. The intent of the study IS to exarnme how often a therapeutic change result after a CT of the abdomen in comparison to a ultrasound. Methods and Materials: Between a one year period a prospective study registred 100 multiple trauma patients in the ER who underwent first an ultrasound and then a C'T of the abdomen. The results and following therapeutic activities after each examination were recorded independently. Results: In 70% (70/100) anormal ultrasound was registred, in 65 (93%) patients no therapeutic relevant information resulted from a following CT, only in 5 (7%) cases a therapeutic change was necessary. 30% (30/100) of the patients had an abnormal ultrasound and in 70% (21/30) of them a CT showed additionallesions without therapeutic relevance. But in 30% (9/30) of them a fundamental change of the therapy (e.g. laparatomy) resulted after the C'T, Conelusion: In case of anormal US in multiple trauma patients a change of therapy based on a following abdomen CT is rare. To avoid delayed therapy it seems necessary to do an abdomen CT after ultrasound with abnormal or inadequate result. 1504 Endoseopie ultrasound: preliminary results and indieations M. Bellomi, C. Crosta, E. Oe Fiori, F. Facciolo; Milan/I Purpose: The aim of this study is to evaluate the results of the first 100 endoscopic ultrasound examinations (EUS) carried on in co-operation between radiologists and endoscopists in order to define the correct indications to the procedure. Methods and Materials: An EUB 525 Hitachi ultrasound device with a Pentax FC 36UX endoscope and a 5-7.5 MHz micro convex transducer (100 0 wide vision angle) , with Color and Power Doppler, was used. After endoscopic positioning of the probe at the required level, the examination proceeds according to the echographic reference marks , mainly identifying vascular structures . Results: EUS has been used to study GI wall in 61 cases (mainly tumors , 14 oesophageal, 12 gastr ic and 13 rectal) , pancreas in 21, perivisceral lesions in 14 (mainly perigastric) and to characterize focal hepatic (3) and adrenal (1) lesions in critical sites. In all cases of hepatic and pancreatic lesions EUS has contr ibuted in obtaining further US find ings, thus allowing the diagnos is of the nature of the lesion in 6 and increasing the diagnostic confidence in the other cases. The study of G.1. wall, allows to differentiate the mucosal or submucosal origin of the tumor , but shows a lower accuracy in defining the deep of the wall layers infiltration (72% of accuracy in T staging of rectal carcinoma) . Conclusion: EUS is proving to be a versatile technique and that may be used by radiologists as further investigalion technique when traditional transcutaneous US is unable to provide an adequate acoustic window. Convex transducer is less sensitive than linear higher frequency probes in identifying wall layers , but allows guidance of fine-needle aspiration. Purpose: To assess the diagnostic performance of CT arterial portography (CTAP), SPIO-enhanced-MR, and intraoperative ultrasound (IOUS) with regard to Iiver metastases of colorectal cancer in comparison to histopathology. Methods and Materials: Between 7/1995 and 8/1998 51 patients underwenl preoperalive ullrasound, CTAp, and SPIO -enhanced MR with EndoremR , as weil as IOUS in liver resect ion. Gold standard was histopathologic analysis of Iiver resect ion specimens . Results: IOUS was able to show all metastasis (sensitiv ity 100%), in one case Ihere was a false positive find ing consisting of a hemangioma (spec ificity 99.6%). In 6 cases susp icion of metastasic disease was ruled out. Sensitivity (specificity) of CT arterial portography 98% (53%) , of SPIO-enhanced MR 98% (96%), of preoperative ultrasound 64% (87%) . Conclusion: Intraoperative ultrasound is the best method for detection of liver metastasis and should be performed in planned Iiver resection. Preoperatively, SPIO-enhanced MR is superior to CTAP due to its higher specificil y. However, both methods have a very high sensitivily with respect to metastases. Ultrasound with its high specificity is useful in the postoperative phase as a screen ing method . with CTP (n =10) and/or MRP (n =8). Before CAPD, either 100 ml of nonionic contrast (for CTP) or 10 ml of gadodiamid (for MRP) were added to 1000 ml isotonic dialysate, which was instilled into the peritoneal cavity. After CAPD, CTP was performed as a helical scan (slice thickness: 10 mm, pitch: 1, increment: 8 mm). MRP was performed at a 1.5 T unit and included T1w FLASH (174/4.2) and T2w fatsat TSE (3000/138). All studies were carried out without IV centrast. Studies were reviewed for evidence of peritoneal leaks , hernias, unopacified fluid collections or adhesions. Results: Abnormalities were detected in 8 of 15 patients (53%) and included retroperitoneal leaks (3), peritoneal adhesions (2), inguinal hernia (1), and an open vaginal process (1) . Conclusion: The usefulness of CT peritoneography for evaluation of CAPD-related complications is discussed. The exhibit illustrates the exquisite tissue contrast and multi-planar imaging capability of MR peritoneography for assessment of complications located in the pelvis. 1507 Comparison of 51 and T2 calculations of the Iiver and the spleen in chronic hemodialysis patients receiving carnitine supplementation for renal anemia G. Heinz-Peer, P. Peloschek, J. Kletzmayer, K. Eibenberger, G. Lechner; Vienna/A Purpose: To evaluate the effect of carnitine supplementation on rh-EPO requirement in maintenance dialysis patients, and to investigate carnitine induced effects on iron-metabolism of the liver and spleen . Methods and Materials: A placebo controlled double blinded study was performed in 40 hemodialysis patients , 20 patients received L-carnitine Iv. after each dialysis session , and 20 patients received placebo (0.9% saline) . L-carnitine and placebo , respectively were administe red over aperiod of 8 months . MR studies were performed prior to carnitine substitution therapy, after 4 months and 8 months of carnitine administration. We performed T2-weighted fast spin echo sequences (TRITE = 3000/120) in the axial and coronal plane. T2-ralaxat ion times were evaluated from a mixed sequence (TRITE =1800/20, TRIRlIR = 1400/400) by using a special software (RLSQ) . Results: Patients responding to L-carnitine treatment had higher hemoglobin levels at study entry compared to non-responders. The difference was maintained throughout the study and responders achieved higher hemoglobin levels at the study end. Analysis of MR images showed a significant correlalion of T2 relaxation times of the Iiver and spleen at baseline measurements (0.746 /0.897). In addition, signal intensity values of the Iiver were comparable to signal intensity values of the spleen (0.768 vs. 0.62). Carn itine substitution led to a significant increase in SI of the spleen in 9/1 1 patients. T2-relaxation times of the Iiver and the spleen increased, however, the difference was not significant. Conclusion: Carnitine supplementation can reduce rh-EPO requirement in a subgroup of patienl s. Carnitine induced alterations in iron metabolism seem to be highest in the spleen, probably caused by an increased release of iron. Purpose: Quantitative evaluation of hepatic and splenic hemosiderosis in b-thalassem ic palients has been performed by calculating hepatic and splenic T2 relaxation times. The purpose of our study was to investigate the relation between the degree of splenic and hepatic iron overload in b-thalassemia. Splenic and hepat ic T2 values were also correlated with total iron stores as expressed by serum ferritin, and the age of the patients. Methods and Materials: Liver and spleen T2 relaxation times were calculated in 45 thalassem ic patients , aged 13-39 years (28 nonspleneclomized and 17 spleneclomized at least 3 years ago), on a 0.5T magnet, by means of a multiecho sequence (TR:2000ITE :12, in 20 symmetrically repeatable echoes) . Results: a) Hepatic T2 values were significantly lower than splenic T2 values in all 28 non-spleneclomized patients individually. b) Splenie T2 values were significantly correlated with the age of patients (r = 0.71), moderately correlated with hepatic T2 values (r = 0.38) but not correlated with serum ferritin (r '" 0 .20) . c) A elose correlation between hepatic T2 values and serum ferr itin was found both in splenectomized and non-splenectomized patienls (r =0.84 and r =0.87 respe ctively) , whereas no correlation was found between age and hepatic T2 values. Conclusion: Splenic hemosiderosis in b-thalassemia, seems to be heavier with preceeding age and does not reflect total iron stores . Hepatic hemosiderosis is not influenced by age or splenectomy but the total iron burden. Observations on MRI might be useful in elucidating iron kinetics. Purpose: Hillingdon Hospital, London, serves Heathrow, the world's busiest international airport. Passengers suspected of drug smuggling by 'bodypacking' are referred to Hillingdon Hospital, by drug enforcement officers, for plain AXR to detect concealed drug packages. The AXRs are performed on consenting individuals, under radiological supervision. Our seven year experience from November 1990 has been audited. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest series in the literature. Methods and Materials: 1010 consecutive studies were classified as positive, negative or indeterminate for drug packages. This data was then correlated with drug enforcement and hospital records. Films were reviewed for characteristic features. Results: 100 (10%) reports were positive and 859 (85%) were negative. Of the 51 (5%) indeterminate cases, 8 (16%) were found to be carrying drug packages. No false positive or false negative reports were found, although as a negative report generally resulted in release of the suspect, the true false negative rate ls unknown. Examples of characteristic signs, pitfalls and medical complications will be presented. Conclusion: With careful interpretation, the plain AXR provides a useful and simple tool for detecting internally concealed drug packages and associated complications. and only slightly inferior to DSA (1 overestimation and 1 underestimation). Conclusion: CE-MRA is a rapid, reliable method to evaluate patients with suspected carotid artery stenosis. A further advantage is the large field of view allowing evaluation of the aortic arch, origin of the supraaortic vessels and carotid arteries up to the intracranial portion. Purpose: To compare cardiac-gated TOF technique with GE one performed with bolus injection of contrast medium, in the study of carotid bifurcation. Methods and Materials: Forty carotid bifurcations affected by stenoocclusive disease were evaluated by 1.5 T unit MRI, echodoppler and digital subtraction angiography (DSA). Results: The GE technique performed after bolus injection of contrast medium showed in all cases a good correlation of diagnostic information with DSA in stenosis quantification and in evaluation of the plaque morphology. TOF technique was not diagnostically significant in 2 cases due to motion artifacts. In 4 cases of tight stenosis, the TOF technique did not show flow signal. Saturation phenomena did not allow evaluation of 2 cases of "coiling" with TOF technique. In 4 cases, overestimation of the stenosis was observed in TOF technique. TOF technique and DSA were overlapping in the evaluation of stenosis in 28 out of 40 cases. Conclusion: The GE technique performed with contrast medium injection, easy to perform and minimally invasive, proved to be more reliable than TOF technique in providing diagnostic information. In addition the GE technique can also be performed in case of scarcely co-operating patients, since it lasts only a few seconds. The almost constant overlapping with the venous system allows us to suggest the use of this technique not as areplacement of, but rather as a useful complement to the TOF technique. Methods and Materials: Forty-two MR angiograms in 19 patients were performed. The imaging protocol included phase contrast (30PC) and inflow techn iques (201) and MR tlow measurements. A signal void on 30PC and/or 201 was interpreted as a sign ificant stenosis (~50 %). Each MRA was followed by digital subtraction angiography. Results: At angiography 38 stenoses of~50% were found . Twentysix of them showed a signal void at MRA (sensitivity of MRA 68%). For stenoses of~60% (n =18) sensitivity was 83%. MRA showed 43 signal voids. The positive predictive value (PPV) of a void was 60% (26/43) . False positive voids were caused by high flow states or by complex anatomy. In the subgroup of shunts with a flow of less than 600 ml/m in (n = 13), convent ional angiography showed 14 sign ificant stenosis in twelve cases . One case had a 45% stenosis. MRA showed the presence of and the exact location of the underlying stenoses in all cases (sensitivity 100%). The PPV of a signal void increased to 93% (14/15) . Conclusion : MR angiography is a quick and non-invasive techn ique that provides functional and anatomic parameters of hemodialysis grafts. In malfunctioning grafts with flow <600 ml/min, MRA accurately shows the presence and location of the underlying stenoses.  Purpose: there are only few reports concerning the use of MRA in the evaluation of subclavian artery disease. The purpose of this study was to estabilish the accuracy of 3D enhanced MRA in the demosntration of subclavian artery disease. 5ubjects and Methods: our study group included 15 patients referred for suspected artery stenosis and 5 patients for vessel malformation. MRA results wre compared with ECO and conventional angiography findings whe n available. MR studies were performed with a 1.5 T system using body coil. A 3D SPGR acquisition was performed in the coronal plane (TRITE 6.4/1 .2 msec , FA 40°, NEX 1, matrix 128 x 512 , Th. 2.6/3 mm, FOV 38-40 cm). Gd-OTPA (40 ce) was injected using an automatic injector (rate 2 ce/sec) . Start dely was chosen indivudually. The MR angiograms and MIP part ial reconstruction were evaluaated by 2 radiologists. Results: MRA showed 6 stenotic atheromasic lesions of subclavian artery, 1 occlusion with subclavian steal, 1 arteritis, 1 functional stenosls, 2 kinkings , no pathological finding but suspected stenoses at CO-US in 4 cases, 2 aortic coartation with dilatin of proxinal tract of left subclavian and of mammarian arteries, 1 aneurysm and 2 artero-venous malformations. Angiography and/or ECO confirmed MRA findings. Purpose: Purpose of this study was to determine the possibility to use MR Angiography (MRA) in the assessment of patients with suspected thorac ic outlet syndrome. 5ubjects and Methods: 18 patients with suspected thora eie outlet syndrome were examined with a 1.5 T magnet (Siemens Vision Plus). In all cases a 3D T1 FISP sequence was acquired (TR: 5 ms, TE =2 ms, FA =30°, Matrix =192 x 512, TA =21 seconds) at rest, after a bolus injection of 20 ml of Gd-OTPA, twice for arterial and venous images , and then again twice, during hyperabduction of both upper extremities after a second 20 ml bolus of Gd-OTPA . In all cases presence and level of venous and/or arter ial compression, and degree of stenosis were evaluated. Results: In 6 patients an arterial compression was seen with MRA , and confirmed with arter iography. In 4 patients a venous compression was detected. In 8 patients no compression could be demonstrated with MRA. In 6 patients the cause of compression could also be demonstrated, while in 4 the diagnosis was only presumptive. The demonstration of presence and level of stenosis was correct in all cases . Conclusion: MRA is a valid technique for the assessment of thoracic outlet syndrome. Adynamie examination can be performed by acquiring images at rest and during hyperabduction. Results: CE-MRA displayed best the arterial anatomy of the wrist. Ca1iber variations as weil as segmental occlus ions of the deep palmar arch were optimal in patients with ulnar artery symptoms. Collateralisations over the superficial arch and its anastomoses could be c1earlyanalyzed, while pcPCMRA only part ially depicted these pathways. The more dista l digital arteries were bettet visualized by pcPCMRA. Probability of occlusions, suspected with CE-MRA, was more evident on pcPCMRA images. Conclusion: CE-MRA can be recommended in cases of suspected ocelusive disease of the hands as hypothenar hammer syndrome. Oue to ist dependance on a preselected flow velocity, pcPCMRA is not as reliable in cases of altered palmar vasculature. However it seems to be able to confirm alterat ions of the digital arteries suspected on CE-MRA. were performed with the surface coil after a warm-up procedure of the hand. The acquisition time ranged between 8 and 10 s to distinguish the arterial and venous phase. Time-resolved angiography was performed by 10 repetitive measurements of the 3d volume during injection of i.v. contrast agent (Gd-DTPA, 0.2 mmol/kg, 2.5 ml/s). Ten volunteers were examined with this technique Results: Time resolved angiography was performed in all examinations successfully, the arterial and venous phases were distinguishable. In all examinations the common palmar digital arteries and the whole palmar arterial arch could be clearly depicted. The mean visualization of the digital arteries was 60%. Conclusion: Time-resolved MRA is easy to handle, because no scantiming relative to the contrast agent bolus is required. It is a very fast examination and offers additional advantages due to temporal information. The c1inical value of this new technique must be prooved by further c1inical studies. Purpose: To assess the change in diagnostic confidence between first and follow up dynamic MR examination of the breast (MRM) when follow up was recommended. Methods and Materials: The reports of a total of 175 MRM in 77 patients (mean age 50 years; 36--76) with 98 follow up MRM were analyzed. The double breast MR examinations were performed at 1.5 or 1.0 T with 32 axial 4 mm slices or 64 coronal 2.5 mm slices. Before and after bolus administration of Gd-DTPA (0.16 mmol/kg) 6-7 repetitive studies were acquired within 9-10 minutes. The change in diagnostic confidence was retrospectively c1assified as folIows: controlled lesion vanished during follow up (category I); diagnostic confidence increases during follow up (11), more likely benign (1Ia), more likely malignant (lIb); no difference in diagnostic confidence (111). The reasons for MRM follow up were protocoled and the lesions morphologically classified. Results: In 98 follow up examinations, only two cases vanished (2%). In 77/98 cases a category Ila lesion was diagnosed, in 11 cases a category IIb lesion. Lesions in category Ilb underwent biopsy in 10/11 cases, and in one case long term follow up proved a completely regredient inflammatory change. In 8/11 suspicious findings (lIb) a malignant tumor was detected. In 8 cases (8%) there was no change in diagnostic confidence during follow up. The distribution of the lesions in categories was independent from lesion size. The percentage of Ilb lesions in patients with underlying malignant disease was 26%, otherwise 4%. The mean time interval between first and follow up MRM was 8 months for 1-lIb lesions, and 4 months for category 111. Conclusion: MRM follow up increases the diagnostic confidence, if the time interval is adequate (>6 months). A persistantly or increasingly suspicious finding warrants biopsy. Results: The udders of milch sheep contain physiological structures that resemble benign lesions on mammography. In addition, microcalcifications are present. Furthermore, the modelallows implantation of artificial lesions that are depicted by sonography and mammography. Unlike the glandular tissue, the fatty tissue was only partially visualized by sonography in 5 cases and not at all in 4 due to total reflection. Conclusion: Udders of milch sheep closely resemble the human breast and thus represent a feasible model for invistigating combined examination of the breast by mammography and automated ultrasound. cuneonavicular joints. Partial visualisation was observed for most of the ligaments of the intercuneiform joints, and the tarsometatarsal joints. Conclusion: High resolution MR imaging potentially can demonstrate the intertarsal ligaments of the midfoot. Purpose: Ta demonstrate the ligaments of the midfoot and the plantar plate using high resolution magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and to correlate the images with anatomic sections Methods and Materials: High resolution MR imaging was performed on 5 feet in specimens from cadavers obtaining T1 SE images by using a local gradient coil that produces 6G/cm 100A on all three axes. Best visualization on individual intertarsalligaments was evaluated for axial, sagittal and coronal planes. After imaging the specimens were frozen and cut into 2-mm-thick slices along the MR imaging planes and images were correlated with anatomie slices. Results: MR,imaging depicted the anatomy of the plantar foot structures. High resolution MR imaging allowed sufficient or good visualization of most ligaments of the talocalcaneonavicular joint, partial visualization of the ligaments of the calcaneonavicular joint, cubonavlcular joint and cuneocuboid joint; and good visualization for most of the ligaments of the calcaneocuboid joint, and the ligaments of the Purpose: Chronic pain of ankle is an important complication in athletic patients. The origin of this pain usually is an ankle sprain. One of causes of chronic pain is the antero-Iateral impingement syndrome (AllS) , and MRI bring us its morphologieal pieture. Methods and Materials: Eight patients with AllS have been studied with MRI before treatment, and all have been athroseopically cleaned removing a pseudomeniscal formation located in the antero-Iateral wall recess. The MRI exam was practiced obtaining views in all planes of the space. Results: Its systematic analysis allowed to define two types of discoveries: Thickening of the antero-Iateral wall recess (5), and free intrarticular fluid (7). The most frequent of these discoveries is non specific, but it can serve us to suspect that an active inflammatory process exists. Ta demonstrate capsular thickening in a retrospective valuation it outlines problems, but according to our experience the problems derive more than the used protocol that the procedure sensibility. In cases with wide exam or if it has been previously suspected always it has been possible to end up demonstrating the lesion.. The sagital periferical view is the more useful view to prove the AllS. Conclusion: Mri is able to prove some sugestive changes in cases of antero-Iateral impingment of ankle. Purpose: To demonstrate the benefit of a reversed oblique radiograph of the foot in patients with trauma of the ankle and the foot. Purpose: To investigate the MRI diagnostic capabilities in the coxa pedis syndrome in athletes due to posterior tibial tendon (PTT) pathological conditions. Methods and Materials: 30 athletes (9 marathon runners, 6 hurdlings, 6 sprinters, 5 height jumpers, 2 rugby players, 2 soccer players) with medial swelling and pain and progressive PTT dysfunction, underwent MRI evaluation. All patients were previously submitted to plain film and 7/30 underwent CT examination. MRI examination was performed employing a 0.2 T "dedicated" uni! and a 1.5 T superconductive one (SE T1-w, GE T2-w and Fat Sat TSE T2-w sequences on sagittal and oblique-axial scan planes; 3-4 mm slice thickness). Results: MRI showed a PTI pathology (23 cases: 9 tenosynovitis, 2 tendon tear and 12 insertional tendonitis; 2/12 athletes with tendonitis had abipartite navicular bone and 4/12 had an os tibiale), aspring ligament tear (1 case) and a talo-navicular chondropathy (6 cases). Surgery was performed in 8 cases (2 PTI tears and 6 tendonitis) and it confirmed MRI diagnosis. Conclusion: Tendonitis is the most common pathological condition affecting the PTI in athletes. MRI weil represents both the pathological involvement of PTI and the associated pathological conditions affecting the coxa pedis. In our experience MRI is the method of choice to evaluate the coxa pedis syndrome. Purpose: After initial non-surgical treatment about 70% of children with clubfeet will require surgical correction of residual foot deformities. Ta preoperatively assess these deformities correctly, especially of the forefoot, is many times difficult. The present study was undertaken with the aim to find out whether ultrasound (US) can be used to reveal displacement of the navicular and the cuboid which is seen in dubfeet with persistent forefoot adduction. Methods and Materials: Altogether 23 clubfeet in 19 children aged 1-9 months were examined pre-and postoperatively by US using three weil defined projections. A control group of 20 normal feet in 10 children were examined at birth and at the age of 6 months. Results: Preoperatively the navicular was severely displaced toward the medial mallealus in 14 out of 23 clubfeet, displaced plantarwards in one foot and the cuboid was elose to normal position in all feet. Conelusion: By US residual displacement of the navicular and the euboid ean be revealed, whieh might be impossible to assess correctly by elinical examination. We therefore recommend the use of US routinely prior to surgical correction of clubfoot deformities up to the age of 3 years. We have taken on a routine base a reversed oblique radiograph of the foot in 100 consecutive patients with a trauma of the ankle and foot between November 1996 and June 1997. Results: In this series, 29 fractures were found in 24 patients. Of these fractures, 10 were located in the fibula, 4 in the medial malleolus, 1 in the first and 1 in the fifth metatarsal, 1 in a distal phalanx of the great toe, 2 in the cuboid, 8 in the calcaneus and 2 in the talus, Of these 29 fractures, 10 were only detectable on a reversed oblique radiograph. Of these 10 fractures, 2 were avulsions of the distal fibula, 1 a cuboid fracture and 7 avulsions of the anterior calcaneus. Conclusion: If taken on a routine base, a reversed oblique incidence of the foot demonstrated 10 fractures in 100 patients, that would have been missed if only the routine incidences of PA and normal oblique incidence were taken. Especially in patients with a localized painful swelling on the lateral aspect of the dorsum of the foot, this incidence plays an important role to detect otherwise missed fractures. Purpose: The painful syndromes at the level of the backfoot are always responsible of an high grade of infirmity for the affected patient. In our studying we want to verify the possibilities offered by MRI in the evaluation of the calcanear region of the foot. We studied 52 patients (37 males and 15 females), sport trainees with algic syndrome localizzed at the level of the backfoot. In 11 patients the pain was related with a trauma. MRI examinations were perfomed with a low field (0.2 T) dedicated equipment to the study of limbs (ARTOSCAN Esaote Biomedica) using S.E. T1 and Turbo-T2, G.E. and STIR sequences. Results: 16 patients had a fluid collection at the level of the synovial bursae; 21 patients had a chronic or acute alteration at the level of the tendons, 7 patients presented an alteration localized at the level of the muskulo-aponeurotic structures with their insertion localized in front of the posterior process of the calcaneous. 3 patients presented bone or articular alterations, 5 patients had a focal inflammation that was responsible of an high grade of invalidation. Conclusion: In our experience MRI, due to its high spatial and contrast resolution gave an important contribution for a correct assessment of the alterations of the Achilleous-calcanear-plantar system of the foot. 1539 Degenerative lesions of Achilles tendon in patients on hemodialysis and in renal transplant patients F. Di Gregorio, F. Greco, A. Stranieri, A.M. Oe Gaetano, G. Nanni; Purpose: To verify the present reported high incidence of peritendinitis and tendinitis of Achilles tendon and to evaluate their different severity, frequency, type and evolution in renal transplant patients as compared to patients hemodialysis. Methods and Materials: From January to August 1998, 21 patients on hemodialysis from over one year and 33 renal transplant patients underwent ultrasound examination of the Achilles tendon. The study was performed with a TOSHIBA SONOLAYER SSA 250 A with a 7.5 MHz probe built-in wather path. Results: A higher incidence of degenerative tendinitis and peritendinitis was observed in renal transplant patients from over 5 years, whereas no signs of peritendinitis were present in patients on hemodialysis. An unusual sinding was the high incidence of retrocalcaneal bursitis, especially in renal transplant patients. It is important to note that tendon rupture never occurred, most likely due to the improved transplant management as weil as to the advances in medical therapy and physiotherapy for functional rehabilitation. Conclusion: Ultrasound (US) still represents the most accurate firstchoice diagnostic method for the study of tendon structure, the clinic evaluation and the follow-up of tendineous lesions. 1540 Quality of bone scan reports. Impact of guidance? A Finnish trial T. Lantto, A. Ahonen, E. Vanninen, J. Heikkinen; HelsinkilFIN The purpose of this study was to evaluate the level of bone scintigraphy (BS) reports in Finland and see if the quality of reports can be improved with guidance. The study consisted of two parts. In the first part, the basic level of reports was assessed by asking nuclear medicine departments of Finnish hospitals to send first five already reported BSs of the year 1996 to Labquality Ud, the Finnish organiser of external quality schemes. The BSs and reports were sent anonymously to three nuclear medicine experts who read the images and reports. They scored descriptive and interpretative part and the overall quality of the reports from 0 (very poor) to 3 (good) according to accepted criteria. The participants received feedback and recommendations how to improve the quality of reports. In the second part of the study, five abnormal bone scans including two white blood cell scans were sent to hospitals and asked to give their reports of the scans. The same three experts graded them according to accepted criteria from 0 (very poor) to 3 (good) and gave feedback of the quality of the reports. Fourteen nuclear medicine departments participated in the both parts of the study and their results are presented. On the first round when the hospitals read their own BSs the mean values were 2.14 ± 0.46 for overall quality, 2.23 ± 0.36 for descriptive part and 2.09 ± 0.51 for interpretative part. In 5 hospitals the average score of interpretative part and overall quality of reports was unsatisfactory low «2). On the second round when the cases were more complicated the mean scores did not differ markedly from the values of the first round. The mean scores were 2.13 ± 0.45 for the overall quality, 2.30 ± 0.45 for descriptive part, and 2.06 ± 0.41 for interpretative part. In 3 hospitals the overall quality was less than 2; in one of them the scores of both rounds were inadequate. In two hospitals the scores dropped more than 30% on the second round. As a conclusion, the quality of Finnish BSs reports is relative good. The quality can be improved by quiding because no drops in mean values were noted although on the first round the hospitals read familiar, often normal bone scans, but on the second round the cases were abnormal and complicated. A follow-up round is planned to arrange in near future. 1541 Can we see enough? A comparative study of film-screen versus digital radiographs in small lesions in rheumatoid arthritis E.J. van der Jagt, S. Hofman, B.M. Kraft, MA van Leeuwen; GroningenlNL Purpose: to evaluate the performance of digital radiography in the detection of early very small erosions in the hands and feet in rheumatoid arthritis. : 53 sets of screen-film and digital radiographs of the same hands and feet with very small and therefore questionable lesions (possible erosions and cysts) were scored independently two times by four investigators. The percentage of lesions found in exactly the same position for each investigator was calculated. Results: Intra-observer agreement between first and second reading in film-screen radiography was 64 to 76% (mean 67%), in digital radiographs 60 to 71% (mean 64%). Agreement between film-screen and digital radiographs ranged from 54 to 64% (mean 58%) in the first reading and from 56 to 66% (mean 62%) in the second reading. Overall agreement between both techniques between first and second reading ranged between 62 and 73% (mean 65%). Conclusion: Digital radiography of the hands and feet can be used in patients suspected of rheumatoid arthritis and in follow-up of those patients, because small and early erosions can be seen equally weil with the digital technique as compared with the conventional film-screen technique. or few Aspergillus nodules was effective, affording a rapid improvement of the lesions and allowing continuation of chemotherapy as scheduled, thereby reducing the risk of recurrences . Purpose: Pulmonary patholog ies remain a serious complication in patients with bone marrow transplantation (BMT) in aplasia. The diagnostic value of HR-CT for detect ion of infectious and non infectious lung infiltrations was verified. Methods and Materials: 50 patients (age : 18 y to 55 y) with BMT in aplasia, newJy developed fever of unknown origin and normaJ chest x-ray were prospective ly evaluated with regard to manifestation of lung infiltrations. High-resolution (HR) CT-findings were correlated to clinical (temperatu re, blood, microbiology, auscultat ion, bronchoscopy) and digital ehest x-ray findings . Results: 56% (n = 28) of patients deveJoped Jung infiltration in HR-CT, whereas clinical findings indicated infectious lung infiltrations in 34% (n =17; 11 x aspergillus, 6 x cytomegaly virus) and digital thorax x-rays indicated Jung infiltrations in 40%. On average increase of temperature and CRP elevation occured prior to positive findings in HR-CT and chest x-ray (3 d, 6 d, p < 0.01) . Antibiotics were changed according to HR-CT findings in 30% (n = 15), important additive information as pleural effusion, pneumothorax etc. were gained in 55% (n = 26). Conclusion: HR-CT depicts pulmonary pathologies on average 3 days earlier than digital ehest x-ray. Therefore, it should be considered a valuable diagnostic investigat ion for detection of lung infiltrat ions and pulmonary complications following BMT. HR-CT following BMT offers options for redefining therapeutical consid erations . 1552 High resolution thoraeie CT in children with primary humoral immunodeficiency A. Ba-Ssalamah, A. Boeck , Th. HeJbich, N. Schibany, F. Lomoschitz, Purpose: Our purpose was to study pulmonary pathologies in children with primary humoral immunodeficiency (PHI) as displayed by HRCT. Patients and Methods: In 11 male children with a mean age 13 ± 4 years and with a history of PHI, HRCT examinations were performed according to accepted guidel ines. Images were analysed by two radiologists . Severity, distribution , extent, and morpho logy of bronch ial and parenchymal abnormalities were determ ined. Radiolog ie findings were correlated with clinical data. Results: HRCT was normal in 3 patients (27%), and abnormal in 8 patients (73%). The most common abnormalities were bronchial wall thickening (6 patients, 60%), bronchiectasis (5 patients , 45%), parenchymal consolidations (5 patients , 45%), and ground glass opacities (5 patients , 45%) . Bronchial wall thickening was combined with bronchiectasis in 5 patients (45%) and ground glass opacities were associated with parenchymal consolidations in 5 patients (45%) . The mean severity score for abnormalities was 1.8 (of grade 0-4). Distribution was peripheral in 3 patients (27%), central in one patient (10%) and diffuse in 3 patients (27%). In 5 of 8 patients (65%) with abnormalities, disease was predom inantly basal. No significant correlation (p > 0.05) was seen between detailed radiological abnormalities and clinical duration of disease, annual frequency ot infections, or the IgA level. Conclusion: HRCT seems to reflect both chronic and acute stages of lung infection in children with PHI. Although this could suggest a potential role for HRCT in the clinical work-up of these patients , no significant correlations were seen between radiological findings and clinical data . Purpose: To compare the diagnost ic efficacy and costs of unenhanced spiral-CT and intravenous urography (IVU) in the management of patients with acute flank pain. Methods and Materials: Unenhanced spiral-CT and IVU were compared in 66 patients with acute flank pain followed by an IVU. The spiral-CT protocol was: 5-mm section thickness, 7.5-mm table feed and 3-mm increment. The analysis enta iled : (a) Morphology: presence of stone disease (yes-no), localization and size of calculi, periureteral and perirenal stranding, dilatation of the collecting system , and possible alternat ive diagnoses and (b) cost-effectiveness: direct and indirect costs . Results: Fifty-two patients had urolithiasis. The detection rate of renal and ureteric calculi was significantly higher with unenhanced spiral-CT than with IVU (100% vs 69% respectively) (p < 0.05). A specific sign of ureteric calcul i was the periureteral stranding (sens itivity 82% and specificity 100%, respectively). In 13 of 14 patients with acute flank pain without urolithias is alternative diagnoses could be made by spiraJ-CT. Spiral-CF was significantly more cost-effective than IVU in management. Concluslon: Unenhanced spiral-CT is faster, more effective and less expens ive than IVU in management of patients with acute flank pain. Additionally, it poses less risk and has the capability to allow alternative diagnoses. Therefore, unenhanced spiraJ-CT should be the first line modal ity in patients with acute flank pain. 1554 Spiral computerlzed tomography versus excretory urography for the evaluation of acute flank pain HAR. Talaat, K. Abulazayem ; JeddahlSA Purpose: To Evaluate the value of noncontrast enhanced spiral Computerized Tomography as areplacement for excretory urography in the management course of suspected renal colic . Methods and Materials: 60 Patients presenting to the emergency room with flank pain were evaluated by thin section (5 mm) noncontrast CT. All patients with and without ureteral obstruction were followed at the urology out patient clinic. Sens iliv ity, specificity and positive and negative predictive values for CT were determined, with passage, retrieval or identification of stone on aretrograde study considered the basic standard for diagnos is. Results: 53 patients had adequa te c1inical follow up to assess outcome accurately. Of 33 patients with ureteral obstruction on CT, 7 underwent endoscopic stone removal, while 26 were treated conservalively with stone passage documented in 23. Of the 27 patients without ureteral stones identified, 22 did not pass calcul i and CT provided adefinite diagnosis in 8. There was 1 false -negative study. The results yielded 98% sensitivity, 100% specificity, and 100% positive and 96% negative predictive values. Conclusion: Non contrast enhanc ed spiral CT was accurate and reliable diagnostic tool in detecling ureteral calculi in patients with flank pain. 10:50 1555 The value of helical CT in the diagnosis of symptomatic urolithiasis when initial imaging evaluation is inconclusive V. Katsiva, E. Kailidou, M. Chryssofos, S. Lafoyianni, M. Tibichrani; Purpose: Our goal was to determine the efficacy of CT in confirming or excluding ureteric stone disease, in patients with acute flank pain and inconclusive initial evaluation by U/S and plain films (KUB) Methods and Materials: Over an 10-month time period, consecutive 66 patients with clinically suspected renal colic and non confirmatory imaging evaluation (U/S and KUB film) were examined with non-contrast enhanced helical computed tomography (CT). Forty-two patients were proved to have ureteral stones based on stone recovery, pyelography, urologic intervention or clinical follow up. Twenty four patients were proved not to have ureteric stone disease based on diagnosed unrelated intra/extraurinary abnormalities or clinical follow up. Results: Ureteric stones were diagnosed in 40 cases with 4 false negative and 2 false positive results (sensitivity 90%, specificity 92%). Additional findings were observed in 37 patients with ureteric stones, including hydroureter (n =33), periureteric edema (n =13), hydronephrosis (n = 18), perinephric edema (n = 12) Conclusion: Unenhanced CT could be considered an accurate method in determining the presence of ureterolithiasis and in excluding ureteric obstruction, in patients with renal colic and equivocal initial imaging evaluation. Purpose: Evaluation of 3-D endoluminal sonography as diagnostic modality in lower ureteral pathologies. Methods and Materials: Between December 93 and Dezember 97, 36 consecutive patients with negative findings on IVP and still suspected ureteral obstruction were referred for transrectel or transvaginal endoultrasound. Patients mean age was 63 years and all of them presented clinically obvious symptoms such as colic pain and miction disturbances. Results: In 31 of 36 patients (86%) 3-D endosonography was diagnostic although previous IVP was negative. Reasons for ureteral obstructions were ureteral calculi in 23, urological tumours in 5 and rectal carcinoma in 2 cases. In one patient a gynecological tumour caused the symptomatology. In the remaining 5 patients CT/MRT or invasive retrograde ureterography/ureteroscopy had to be performed for final diagnosis. Conclusion: The use of 3-D endosonography prouves encouraging results as diagnostic imaging in distal ureteral pathologies. In case of negative findings on IVP it should be therefore preceed invasive diagnostic modalities or cost intensive imaging techniques. Objective: The purpose of this study was to determine the diagnostic value of diuretic duplex Doppler sonography in distinguishing between obstructive and non-obstructive hydronephrosis in children before and after administration of furosemide. Methods: We prospectively evaluated 28 kidneys (2 were solitary kidneys) in 15 patients with unilateral or bilateral neonatal hydronephrosis. All patients underwent diuretic renography and duplex Doppler sonography before and after administration of furosemide. Results: According to the half-time drainage patterns at diuretic renography, kidneys were classlfled as nonobstructed (13) and obstructed (15). At baseline, the mean RI values of nonobstructed and obstructed kidneys were not significantly different (0.66 and 0.64, respectively). Ten minutes after the injection of furosemide the mean RI of the nonobstructed and obstructed kidneys were 0.68 and 0.70, respectively. Increase in RIover the baseline 10 minutes after the diuretic injection was statistically significant (p < 0.00001) in the obstructed kidneys. Conclusion: The baseline RI value of 0.70 is not adefinite value for distinguishing obstructed from nonobstructed systems. Increase in RI at least 10% over the baseline seems to be a more reliable criterion especially when it is used in conjunction with diuretic renography. 1558 The clinical utility of single shot fast spin echo (SSFSE) urography in the evaluation of patients with hydroureteronephrosis or non-functioning kidney S. Phillips, N.J. Fenn, G. Brown, M.W. Bourne; Cardiff/UK Purpose: To evaluate MR urography using single shot fast spin echo (SSFSE) along with conventional T2 FSE MR in patients prior to antegrade or retrograde pyelography. Methods and Materials: Patients with a non functioning kidney or hydronephrosis undergoing retrograde or antegrade pyelography were evaluated by ssfse MR urography and T2 FSE MRI. Conventional imaging in all patients had failed to demonstrate a level or cause for obstruction. Thirty-eight patients were examined and the diagnostic value of ssfse MR urography with and without T2 FSE axial images was compared with antegrade or retrograde pyelography and the final diagnosis. Results: In 14 patients MRU alone was able to demonstrate the cause and level of obstruction, however there were 4 false positive diagnoses and 15 false negative diagnoses. With utilisation of the T2 FSE axial images the number of correct diagnoses increased to 29 with one false positive diagnosis. Conclusion: The analysis of ssfse alone has a low diagnostic yield, however with the combination of T2 FSE and MRU, the diagnostic accuracy compares favorably with diagnostic antegrade and retrograde pyelography. This can potentially lead to a reduction in the number of diagnostic pyelographic procedures with potential cost savings.  Purpose: Purpose of this study was to evaluate the possible role of MR Urography (MRU) in the evaluation of patients with acute renal obstruction and to compare it with sonography. Subjects and Methods: 34 patients with suspected acute renal obstruction were examined with MR Imaging using a 1.5 T magnet (Siemens Vision Plus). In all cases a 3D HASTE sequence was used (TR =11; TE =87; Matrix =128 x 256; TA =12 sec; FOV =263 x 300; No. Slices =6). A three-dimensional reconstruclion was obtained using a MIP algorithm. In all patients sonography was also performed within approximately 1 hour from the MR examination. Presence, level and cause of obstruction were considered. Results: Acute renal obstruction was present in 27 patients. MRU correctly allowed to determine the presence and level of obstruction in all cases. Sonography allowed to determinethe presence of obstruction in all cases, while the level of obstruction in 17 patients. MR imaging allowed to identify the cause of obstruction in 23 patients, while sonography in 13. Conclusion: MRU is an accurate technique in the determination of presence and level of obstruction, allowing to identify the pathology in many instances. A cost analysis should be performed to evaluate the possibility to extensively use MRU in patients with acute renal obstruction. GENITOURINARY EIl 2107b Pelvis: bladder, urethra, Iymph nodes Methods and Materials: A 40 patients with bilateral non-functioning kidneys; 28 with advanced hydronephrosis and 12 with polycystic renal disease were evatuated by Fast advanced spin echo (2 0 FastASE single thick slice breath hold technique) in both coronal and sagittal planes. The parameters used were. TE = 250 ms, TR = 4000 rns, T1 = 160 ms, Slice thickness 4-10 cm. Matrix 256 x 256 and FOV 30Q-400 mm. Results: This sequence take an aquestion time of 4 seconds. and a total examination time of 8-12 minutes for each patient. The pelvica-Iyceal systems, parenchymal cysts, ureters and urinary bladder were visualised in all cases. In the 28 cases of advanced hydronephrosis; the dilated calyces were few and communicating to each other with dilated pelvis. The site of obstruction either pelvi-ureteric 5 cases (17.9% %), distal ureteric 11 cases (39.3%) or in between 12 cases (43.8%) was detected in 100% of cases. Stones were detected in 12 cases. In the 12 cases of advanced polycystic disease the cysts were numerous and variable in size. No dilatation of pelvis or ureters with no signs of obstruction. Conclusion: MRU is a rapid and accurate method in differentiating polycystic renal disease from advanced hydronephrosis and detect site of obstruction in 100% of cases and can detect cause of obstruction. 1560 Clinical utility of diuretic-enhanced Gd-OTPA excretory MR urography in comparison to intravenous and retrograde pyelography C.CA Nolte-Ernsting, A Bücker, G. Adam, J.M. Neuerburg, P. Jung, G. Jakse, R.w. Günther; AachenlD Purpose: To investigate the value of diuretic-enhanced gadolinium (Gd)-OTPA excretory MR urography (OGMRU) in comparison to intravenous pyelography (IVP) and retrograde pyelography. Methods and Materials: In 140 urologie patients, OGMRU was performed using respiratory gated or breath-hold T1-weighted 3D gradientecho sequences after injection of first 5-10 mg furosemide and then, 30-60 sec later, 0.1 mmol/kg Gd-OTPA MR urograms were reviewed by 3 blinded radiologists, and subsequently compared with the standard radiographie examinations. Results: The precontrast low-dose furosemide injection led to a rapid and uniform Gd-distribution inside the collecting system, while simultaneously, endoluminal T2*-effects were minimized. In normal or moderately reduced kidney function, complete enhancement of the urinary tract was obtained within 5-20 minutes. OGMRU established the appropriate diagnosis in almost all cases. DGMRU was significantly superior to IVP in the visualization of the ureters, and comparable to retrograde pyelography. Oelineation of caliceal fornices and small intrarenal calculi by OGMRU was inferior to radiographic techniques, but did not degrade its overall diagnostic value. For optimal pelvicaliceal depiction, maximal motion artefact suppression was essential such as with respiratory gating or preferrably breath-hold acquisition. Conclusion: OGMRU offers an accurate alternative imaging modality to radiography in most urologic diseases. The major advantage of OGMRU is its exquisite depiction of the ureters which should reduce the need for invasive retrograde pyelography. Objective: To assess a low-dose Gd-OTPA MRU in depiction of the urinary system. Material and Methods: 94 patients suffering from various urinary system pathologies were examined. No external compression was used, no diuretic drugs were administered. The studies were performed on a 1.5 T-system (Magnetom Sp, Siemens) using the body coil. The study consisted of: -aseries of 10 breath-hold FLASH 20 sequences repeated every minute. After the first sequence an i.v, bolus of 0.01 mmol/kg bw. of Magnevist (Schering) was administered (1/10 of currently used dose). -a FISP 3D sequence showing enhanced urine in the urinary tracts; -a T2-weighted TSE sequence. The FISP and TSE images were reconstructed using an MIP algorithm. Results: Image quality and diagnostic value was satisfactory in all the FLASH studies, 84% of FISP studies and 77.7%% ofTSE studies. Both ureters were shown in 47.9% of successful TSE studies and in 63% of successful FISP studies, one ureter at least was shown in 64.6% of successful TSE studies and in 79.7% of successful FISP studies. Conclusion: The low-dose Gd-OTPA Magnetic Resonance Urography seems to be a reliable method of assessing of the urinary system. It shows better the ureters than a T2-weighted TSE MRU. Purpose: to determine the diagnostic performance of the virtual endoscopy (VE) in patients with abladder tumour in comparison with endoscopy, intravenous pyelograms (IVP), and axial CT-slices. Methods and Materials: 28 patients were scanned with a helical CT (slice thickness 2 mm, pitch 2). Either contrast medium or gas was given via abladder catheter. 28 patients were included as a negative control group. The VE was evaluated by three radiologists and the results compared with those of endoscopy, IVP and axial CT images. Low dose mAs settings were performed. Results: All tumours detected in endoscopy -ranged between 5 and 55 mm -were also seen in the VE. No statistically significant difference was evaluated between the results of VE and endoscopy, however, axial CT images and IVP's were statistically significantly inferior compared with the two methods. The application of gas in the bladder did not reveal wall defects in contrast to that of contrast medium (Sedimentation). Navigational aids were essential for the navigation inside the bladder. No interobserver variability was calculated. A five-fold dose reduction resulted in increasing noise, the VE showed comparable results to those of endoscopy. Conclusion: VE is a non-invasive method which is a sensitive tool for the detection of endoluminal bladder tumours in selected cases (patients's rejection of endoscopy, technical difficulties). Material and Methods: 39 patients with various abnormalities of the urinary tract were studied, inciuding 15 urinary bladder tumors, 6 pelvicaliceal tumors, 5 stone, 4 patients with enterocystoplasty, 3 patients with urine diversion in a Bricker tube, 1 patient with a papilary necrosis, 5 patients with benign prostatic hypertrophy. 4 additional patients had VE in normal urethra. Results: In all cases, post-injection slices were acquired using the following parameters: single helical scan, 1 s scan time, 3 mm slice thickness, pitch 1:1.5, reconstruction every 1 mm. VE was successfully realized in all case; all abnormalities were correctly visualized using this technique. VE does not demand any patient preparation or bladder catheterization; easy to process (average of 10 minutes per case) even in non distended urinary tract. All the filling defects were easy to identify (differenciation between tumor and stone demand the axial slices). Conclusion: VE is a valuable tool for imaging the lumen of all parts of the urinary tract. Comparison studies are in progress to assess the value of VE in follow-up of urinary bladder tumors treated by local immunotherapy. Purpose: To increase the diagnostic accuracy of MRI in the detection and in the loco-regional staging of bladder tumors by using Fluidattenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) sequences. Methods and Materials: 32 patients with bladder tumors detected by US underwent MRI using a 1.5 T superconductive unit (Gyroscan NT, Philips Medical System). We performed SE T1-weighted (TR: 500 ms, TE: 30 ms), TSE T2-weighted (TR: 2500 ms, TE: 120 ms, ETL: 40) and FLAIR sequences (TR: 6000 ms, TE: 150 rns, TI: 2000 ms, N.Ex.: 4; Acq. time: 7'30") on axial scans. The contrast to lesion ratio was evaluated in all sequences. All the patients underwent cystoscopy with biopsy and 14 had subsequent surgical procedures. Results: In comparison with other sequences, FLAIR sequence was more sensitive in the detection of bladder neoplasms. This sequence demonstrates the hyperintense signal of bladder neoplasms from the filled bladder lumen with no signal. The sensitivity in the identification of bladder neoplasms was 100% with FLAIR sequences, 92% with TSE T2-weighted sequences and 85% with SE T1-weighted sequences. FLAIR images and the other sequences allowed an improvement accuracy in the evaluation of the bladder wall infiltration. Conclusion: FLAIR sequences are more sensitive than others to demonstrate bladder neoplasms, especially small papillomas, and are useful in the staging of bladder tumors. Objective: Diabetic cystopathy is a severe complication of diabetes mellitus. Two stages of the disease are recognized: a) incipient, with loss of fullness sensation and residual urine only, and b) fully established, with residual urine, secondary infection, and loss of renal function. We evaluated the capability of US to identify early signs of this condition through analysis of bladder volume and residual urine. Methods and Materials: We assessed morning bladder volume and presence of postvoiding residual urine in 36 diabetics (18 m, 18 f; age range 18-47, mean 36) and in 10 age-matched controls. Results were correlated with duration of diabetes and presence and degree of associated autonomie neuropathy. Results: Bladder volume in diabetics (range 75-1334 ml) was significantly larger than in controls (range 85-756 ml). Fifteen had bladder larger than the upper value in controls. In these patients, there was significantly higher prevalence of postvoiding residual urine (46% vs 12%) and a significantly higher mean autonomie neuropathy score (2.36 vs 1.16). No corretanon was found with duration of diabetes. Conclusion: US can be used to identify larger morning bladder volume and higher prevalence of postvoiding residual urine in diabetics with autonomie neuropathy. Longitudinal studies are needed to demonstrate the capability of these simple measuremens to predict development of established diabetic cystopathy. 1567 MR evaluation of normal retroperitoneal and pelvic Iymph nodes S. Grubnie, S.J. Vinnicombe, A. Norman, J.E. Husband; SuttonlUK Purpose: To document conspicuity, size and number of normal retroperitoneal/pelvic Iymph nodes at MR compared with CT, and to determine the optimal MR sequence choice for their demonstration. Methods and Materials: Twelve patients who had previously been studied to determine normal node size criteria on CT by comparison of pre-and post-Iymphangiogram CT were examined (1) . All patients were on surveillance for stage I testicular tumour, with a minimum follow-up of four years. Three observers recorded blind the site, size and numbers of nodes in the retroperitoneum and pelvis in 11 sites. The results were compared with previous CT. Results: A total of 781 nodes in 12 patients were visible on the initial MR images and a further 44 nodes identified after comparison with the previous post-Iymphangiogram CT. Median short axis diameter (MSAD) values were less than 5 mm at all sites. A greater number of normal sized nodes were seen on MRI compared with CT. T1-weighted images were found to be the most useful for nodal evaluation. Purpose: To evaluate the accuracy of three-dimensional transrectal ultrasound to visualize injected polydimethylsiluxane (Macroplastique; Uroplasty, The Netherlands) implants. Methods and Materials: In 37 patients (2 female, 35 male) threedimensional transrectal ultrasound was performed before, during and after injections of polydimethylsiloxane implants for tratment of urinary stress incontienece. All patients suffered from postoperative, neurogenic or genuine stress incontinence. The ultrasound equipment used for this study consisted of a Combison 330 and a Voluson 3D multiplanar endorectal transducer (7.5 MHz) produced by Kretztechnik (Austria). Results: In 1 patient with posttraumatic incontinence the rhabdosphincter could not be identified. In all other patients the rhabdosphincter could be clearly seen. Defects or atrophies of the rhabdosphincter were present in all patients. After Macroplastique injection the depots presented as hyperechogenic structures. The correlation between the depots and the rhabdosphincter could be demonstrated very weil; especially the coronal plane provided exact information of the position of the Macroplastique depots. Treatment was successful in 73% of patients. Conclusion: Three-dimensional transrectal ultrasound is capable of providing sonographic pictures of the rhabdosphincter and Macroplastique depots in three planes simultaneously (sagittal, horizontal and coronal), whichallows for exact monitoring of therapy. Methods and Materials: 35 males (mean age of 47 (+1-8.7) with urethral strictures, confirmed by retrograde urethrography were studied. A Sonoline Elegra™, Siemens-US-machine equipped, with a 7.5 MHz linear probe was used. In real time mode a large composite longitudinal scan image was aquired by SieScape ™ technique, reveiling a picture of the total urethral extend and the stricture. Before the examination the urethra was filled with 10 cc Na Cl and compressed by using a penis-clamp. The urethra-strictures were gradually classified by the classification of Chiou R.K. et al. Results: All strictures were clearly identified, the length and caliber calculated and gradually staged. 18 patients had grade I, 11 patients grade 11, 5 grade 111, 1 grade IV. Conclusion: Sonography of the urethra enables the correct diagnosis and staging of strictures by means of the extended field of view technique. It could possibly safe patients from radiation by conventional technique and is an easy method. 1570 Age-related rhabdoshincter function in female urinary stress incontinence: assessment of intraurethral U5 A. Klauser, F. Frauscher, D. Koelle, G. Helweg, D. zur Nedden; Purpose: To assess dynamic intraurethral ultrasound (US) in diagnostic evaluation of the function of the rhabdosphincter in female patients with urinary stress incontinence in relation to patients's age. Methods and Materials: Sixty-two patients with clinically proven urinary stress incontinence were investigated by means of intraurethral US, using a 12.5 MHz endoluminal catheter (9F). The omega-shaped rhabdosphincter was visualized at rest and during voluntary contractions. Changes of muscle thickness and transducer-sphincter-distance were measured and considered as parameters of muscle function. The intraurethral US data were compared with standard urodynamic tests. Results: Transducer-sphincter-distance and sphincter muscle thickness showed a significant decrease with positive linear dependency on the patients age (p < 0.001). Patients with grade 111 urinary stress incontinence demonstrated complete loss of sphincter contractility. A negative correlation was revealed between urethral closure pressure and age of patient (p < 0.05, r 2 =0.41). Conclusion: We found an age-related decrease in rhabdosphincterfunction. Our results suggest that the rhabdosphincter constitutes a substantial component of the continence mechanism in female urinary stress incontinence. Unlike urethral pressure profiles, which can only reveal zones of higher intraluminal pressure, transurethral US is highly specific for measurement of the function of the rhabdosphincter.  Purpose: To provide real time rendered 3D data sets by EBCT for the assessment of muscular movement and organ displacement in women with prolapse of pelvic organs. Methods and Materials: Fifteen women were examined with an lmatron C-150XP Ultrafast CT Scanner, software version 12.34. In each patient 20 acquisitions were performed in the multislice fiow mode during strain. The sections were sorted by a selfmade program creating 20 data volumes consisting of the 8 slices of one 224 ms scan interval. Then the entire data volume was interpolated to 2 mm slice spacing to overcome the technically caused 4 mm gaps between the four double slices. The 20 data sets were volume rendered with identical rendering features (Silicon Graphics Onyx i-Station, Infinite Reality graphics board, modified VolRen volume renderer, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore). Results: A set of twenty 3D images for a 3D movie with a time resolution of 232 ms over a range of 7.6 cm in the z-axls was created. Conclusion: EBCT can provide dynamic 3D data sets of the pelvic floor in a unique time resolution. The acquired volume is limited to 7.6 cm in the z-axis, the limited spacial resolution seems to be sufficient for dynamic imaging. Purpose: To evaluate the results and complications of mechanical balloon thrombectomy (MBT) of hemodialysis fistulas. Methods and Materials: 41 MBT in 29 consecutive chronic hemodialysis patients (mean age 58 ± 19 years) with acute vascular access thrombosis were performed. There were 9 Brescia-Cimino and 20 PTFE grafts. After MBT, 2 patients were excluded because of type of underlying lesions. Angioplasty balloons were used to promote clot disruption and Fogarty type embolectomy was done using the same balloon. Underlying stenosis were dilated or stented. All patients received i.v, heparine for 24 hours. Routine perfusion lung scan was done inmediately before and 24 hours after the procedure in 15 patients. Results: Inmediate technical success rate was 100% (41 patients), detecting stenosis in all but one patient (96.5%). Primary patency rate was 30%, 22%, 11% at 6, 12 and 18 months. Acumulated patency rate was 48% at 6, 12 and 18 months. There was no symptomatic pulmonary embolism. Only one patient's lung scan showed minimal changes after procedure, without clinical significance. Conclusion: MBT is an effective and inexpensive treatment for acute dia lysis fistulas thrombosis without significant complications. Recomb inant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) has been used with excellent results in the therapy of lung embolism and myocardial infraction in the last years. Since thrombosis is the most common complication of arterio-venous hemodialysis fistulae (AVF) we used rt-PA to declot AVF with thrombosis. Seven patients in chronic hemodialysis treatment were included in the study. All patients had a Cimino-Brescia autologous AVF created 4 to 6 years ago thrombosed in the last 48 hours. The rt-PA was infused direclly into the AVF usually close to the anastomosis in 10 mg doses at one hour intervals to a maximum of 40 mg (mean dose 27.5 mg). Before the beginning of the treatment and before every infusion a fistulography has been performed to access the fistula 's patency. All patients presented bleeding at the puncture site after the removal of the catheter (controlled with compression) and one had bleeding at a remote site (gengives) . In five out of seven fistula we had complete thrombolysis with return of bruit and thrilI. These patients were able to be treated with hemodialysis the following day and continue to be dialysed through the access 6 to 10 months after therapy. The failure of the treatment in the two patients seem to be related to the delay between the discovery of the fistula 's occlusion and the start of the therapy. We conclude that rt-PA local infusion provides a useful means of preservation of AVF without major complicat ions. the system was explanted due to complications (1 infection , 2 paravasatlon , 1 ulcer, 1 leakage). 6 patients had minor complications: one twisted port was returned manually, one hematoma and one phlebit is were treated with dressing , one patient had a wound dehiscence and one occluded catheter returne d to patency after f1ushing the system with contrast material. Venous thrombos is or catheter dislocat ion did not occur. Conclusion: Fluoroscopie guided peripheral central-venous port implantation is a safe and easy procedure with a high success rate and a low complication rate which can be performed in an outpatient setting .  Purpose: Depending on the access site, central venous port systems for long-term venous access are commonly implanted surgically if the subclavian vein is chosen , or in some cases radiologically if a peripheral insert ion is planned . We descr ibe our technique and results on port implantation via the subclav ian vein under f1uoroscopic guidance . Methods and Materials: In 69 patients a port system was inserted percutaneously under ftuoroscopic guidance. The port pocket was created under local anaesthesia some centimetres below the clavicle. Results: Primary technical and clinical success was 100%, 4 ports failures occurred during chemotherapy (2 inflammations, 1 torqued port chamber , 1 catheter obstruction) . 6 minor complications were seen . The cumulat ive patency time was 6305 days, wh ich results in an overall complication rate of 1.5 per 1,DOD access days or D.6 access failures per 1,000 access days, respectively. Conclusion: Percutaneous port implantat ion is safe and easy to perform. The patient's benefit is a quick procedure performed under local anaesthes ia. The complication rate is similar to surgery. 1579 Superior vena cava stenting in malignant lung and mediastinal masses G. Cittadini jr., M. Cariati, PF. Curone, N. Gandolfo, G. OeCaro, C. Ferro; Genoa/l Purpose: to evaluate the results of superior vena cava stenting in treating superior vena cava syndrome secondary to malignancy. Methods and Materials: we evaluated 59 patients with superior vena cava syndrome due to lung tumours (51 cases), metastatic mediastinal masses (5 cases), lymphoma (1 patient) and mesothelioma (2 cases). Preliminary CT and bilateral venography were perfarmed to evaluate site and lenght of the lesion; in 9 patients selective thrombolysis with urokinase was performed due to thrombosis. 49 Gianturco-Rosch self-expendable stent 25-30 mm diameter were implanted with a transfemaral approach; 10 Wallstent (14 mm nominal diameter) were implanted via omeral, femoral or jugular vein. Heparinization was continued for 3 days, followed by oral anticoagulations for 1 week. Results: all the stent were successfully implanted with immediate relief of the symptoms; in one case a second procedure was necessary to overlap another Wallstent after 3 days. In 2 patients an overlap was performed after 2 months. Complications included pulmonary embolism and edema resolved with medical therapy. Conclusion: treatment of superior vena cava syndrome due to malignancy with metallic self-expandable stent is a safe and quick way to relief symptoms with few complications. Methods and Materials: Between August 1994 and July 1998, 46 CVA (Hickman 13.5F) were placed in the IVC via a direct translumbar approach in 46 patients (10 males, 36 females) with a mean age of 39.9 years (10-87 years). The indications were: chemotherapy administration (39), bone marrow transplantation (2) and hemodialisis (5). The reasons far placing the CVA in the IVC were: cosmetic (34), supradiaphragmatic venous thrombosis (10), previous catheter infection (2). Results: There were no immediate complications. The mean period of time the CVA was in place is 2.9 months (15 days-15 months), during which the function was excellent. The commonest late complication was infection (4 local, 6 bacteriemia). Others included: pain (2), ureteric fistula (1), symptomless partial IVC thrombosis (2), and catheter tip impaction (2). Oue to these complications it was necessary to remove 10 catheters and replace a further 2 Conclusion: Oirect translumbar catheterization of the IVC is a safe and effective way of placing a long term CVA with a reasonably low complication rate. The percutaneous therapy of varicocele is now widely accepted in the international literature as alternative and/or first choice approach compared to the surgery in both adult and paediatric varicocele. Our case history includes around 1.100 cases in 10 years of experience, treated percutaneously with both only sclerosis and combined scleroembolization, uslng quite exclusively embolizing tungsten spirals. Follow up data show a percentage of primary recovery of about 90% whereas in the recidivations, in the second sclerosing treatment, we obtained the recovery in 99% of the cases. In this work we have analysed the therapeutic effects of the endovascular sclerosis versus sclerotherapy with tungsten, platinum and steel spirals embolization comparing 2 sampies of 50 homogenous cases. The results show a substantial balance of primary success in the 2 therapies: 88.8% far the sclerosis; 89.4% far the scleroembolization. We think sclerotherapy, if applied according with all the necessary modalities, is fundamental far the definitive occlusion of the spermatic veins mostly in those frequent cases with complex anatomy with several collateral branches, which are the basis of eventual recidivations of percutaneous and traditional surgical treatments. Considering the higher cost of the embolizing spirals and the ethical problems present in the peadiatric patients, we believe that a more refined technique of sclerosing drug application, as example through the constant use of an overturnable radiological table to position the patient in anti-Trendelemburg with a contemporary extrinsic compression at the level of the exit of the spermatic funiculum, could determine a further improvement of the results , without the constant use of embolizing spirals, limiting their use to particular conditions. Purpose: Varicoceles are a major cause of male subfertility. In this study we summarize our experiences with the sclerotherapy of varicoceles and the follow up examinations. Patients and Methods: In aperiod of 59 months 113 men underwent color doppler (CCOS). In 82 men a varicocele (32 shunt-and 50 stoptypes) was diagnosed. 53 of them underwent a distal sclerotherapy with a coaxial catheter system. In all patients a spermiogram was done primarly and 3 months after the intervention. Results: In 42 men sclerotherapy was performed without complications. In 11 cases sclerotherapy was impossible because of anomalies of the veins (n = 9), vasospasms (n = 1) or vasovagal syndrome (n = 1). After slerotherapy CCOS showed an occlusion of the varicocele in 37 of the patients. An increase of the sperm density from 19.5 up to 24.1 millions/ml and also an increased motility (>20 min) from 14.3 up to 22% was noticed. Normal spermatozoas were described in 46.2% befare and in 50.1% after the sclerptherapy. In 9 cases a conception was noticed in the follow-up. Conclusion: Sclerotherapy of varicocele is a safe and easy to perform intervention and showed similar results tha surgery. Purpose: Pelvic varicosities are a less known pathologie condition in multiparous women. The majar symptoms are: low abdominal pain, dyspareunia or postcoi'tal ache, gluteal or thigh varices and emotional disturbanees. A retrospective study was undertaken to evaluate the results of transcatheter embolotherapy of pelvic varicosities. Methods and Materials: From february 1992 until february 1998, 38 embolisation procedures were performed, either with wirecoils or with a mixture of hystoacryl-lipiodol, in 38 patients with phlebographically diagnosed pelvic varicosities. These patients were traced back and submitted to a standardized questionnaire. The data of 25 patients were obtained in this way. Results: The initial success-ratio of the procedure was 80%. with a long-term benefit for mare than 56% of the patients. After embolisation there was a reduction in pain intensity, pain attacks occured less frequently and emotional disturbances were mentioned less often. Globally there was a mean reduction of complaints of 65.3% (Visual Analog Scale). Results were the same for the use of wirecoils or liquid sclerosing agents. Conclusion: Transcatheter embolotherapy is an effective way of treating pelvic varicosities, resulting in a great improvement of the quality of Iife for most of the patients. In experienced hands the procedure is Unit over aperiod of 14 years (1984) (1985) (1986) (1987) (1988) (1989) (1990) (1991) (1992) (1993) (1994) (1995) (1996) (1997) (1998) . 14 were males and 4 females and the ages ranged between 1 month and 11 months. Results: CT scans were normal in 4 palients. The CT "reversal sign" in keeping with global brain anoxia, was present in 7 patients (with sparing of cerebellum and basal ganglia). Diffuse edema with effacement of grey and white matter, were present in 4 patients -2 of them also had subarachnoid hemorrhage (this feature was not previously reported). Ischemic infarcts were observed in 3 patients -2 of them had multiple infarctions. One infant died. The follow-up CT performed in 8 children showed brain hemiotrophy, brain atrophy or multicystic encephalomalacia. Conclusion: This study emphasizes the high incidence of cerebral abnormalities in keeping with brain edema and ischemia in a new devastating illness of infancy. The followup cranial CT is important to predict the outcome of the survivors who clinically have neurological sequelae and psychomotor delay. Purpose: To evaluate the frequency of brain lesions in asymptomatic patients with milder hemoglobinopathies, and to identify patient at risk for stroke to be treated with Hydroxyurea or transfusional therapy. Methods and Materials: 92 asymptomatic patients affected by Thalassemia Intermedia (TI) and sickle-cell + beta Thalassemia (S/beta-Thai) underwent a whole-brain MR screening. Brain damage (BD) was considered as the association of ischemia and atrophy. Atrophy was graded on personal assessment, while ischemic lesions according to the size. BD grading was related to number of sickle cell crises per year, Hemoglobine (Hb) levels, sickling Hb levels, platelets count, sex and age, using Spearman's test. Results: 37% TI and 52% S/beta-Thal patients had clinically occult BD. BD grade was more severe in S/beta-Thal patients: 24% had small sized lesions, 16% had medium and 12% had very large lesion. BD was inversely correlated to Hb levels in TI patients, proving the disease to be related to chronic hypoxia. BD in S/beta-Thal patients were direclly related to the number of sickle cell crisis per year and inversely related to platelets count, according to microembolism. Conclusion: According to the high incidence of silent BD in patients with milder hemoglobinopathies, MRI screening should be mandatory for therapy planning. 1590 Non-accidental head injury -CT and MRI comparison SA Babar, A. Anbarasu, M. Chandramohan, H. Carty; Liverpool/UK Purpose: Non-accidental injury is a leading cause of head injury in an infant. The aim of this paper is to compare the role of CT and MR in diagnosis of NAI and to review the role of MR in acute presentation. Methods and Materials: We retrospectively studied 30 patients who presented in the period between 1995 to 1998 and had both CT and MRI.A comparison of the CT and MR findings was done to evaluate their efficacy in detection of intracranial bleed, parenchymal injuries and brain edema. Results: 12 patients had their CT done on the day of admission, 12 on the following day and the remaining 6 within seven days. The time gap between the CT and MRI ranged from 0 to 21 days (average 5 days). CT demonstrated acute subdural haematoma in 23 patients as compared to 22 on MRI. However CT detected 17 acute interhermispheric subdural haematoma while MR showed only 11. MRI was better in deteclion of cerebral convexity haematomata in 15 cases. Subarachnoid haemorrhage was seen on CT in 4 cases as compared to 2 on MR. Brain edema was seen in 10 cases on CT as compared to 3 on MR. Conclusion: In acute situation CT was found to be superior to MRI in demonstrating fractures, interhemispheric subdural, subarachnoid bleeding and brain edema. MRI was superior in acute/subacute cerebral convexity subdural, chronic subdural, white matter shear injuries and brain atrophy. Infarcts were equally weil seen on both. scans. In the past 2 years, helical CT has been performed. Technical consideration: i.v, contrast 2 mg/kg of nonionic contrast materials at 3 ml/sec; section thickness 2.5 mm with reconstruction increment 3; pitch 1; delay 40 sec. Additional delayed sections were also performed (60 sec). Coronal and sagittal reconstructions were carried out. Seven children underwent US and 1 patient had MRI. Results: Most of the children were hospitalized for otitls media or meningitis. Two children suffered from dehydration. One child had minor penetrating neck trauma; another had a rare eosinophilic syndrome, not previously referred to as a cause of CVT, 1 was in hemorrhagic shock and another suffered from Behcets disease. Unenhanced CT findings included cord sign in 2 patients, brain hemorrhage in 2, brain edema in 5. Enhanced CT showed empty delta sign in 9 patients, gyral enhancement in 5, cerebellar abscess in 1. The affected sinuses were: lateral sinus 9, sigmoid sinus 2, superior sagittal 5 and inferior sagittal 1. More than one sinus involvement was present in 7 patients. Pulmonary embolus was present in one child. In all the patients, US showed jugular vein thrombosis. In one young baby US demonstrated with high accuracy intracranial echogeneic filling defect in sagittal sinus. Conclusion: Helical CT, is highly sensitive in diagnosis of CVT vein. CT allows detection of other intracranial changes such as hemorrhage and edema or possible infectious intracranial or systemic complications. Purpose: LH are a weil known finding in infants at cranial sonography (CS). The pathomechanism and c1inical validity of LH remains controversial. The purpose of this prospective study was to evaluate the c1inical validity of incidentally found LH by grayscale and colorcoded Doppler sonography. Methods and Materials: During a 6 months period trasnsfontanellar CS with a standard 7.5 MHz transducer was performed in 126 infants in a routine screening program. Standard sections in coronal and sagittal planes were obtained. Results: LH were found in 18 (14%) out of 126 neonates. Pathomechanisms could be established in 13 infants (72%), however, remained unclear in 5 cases (28%). In those 5 infants LH presented as echogenie, linear, branching reflexes. Flow-signals along these reflexes indicated vascular origin. The clinical course and the neurological status of these 5 infants remained unremarkable. Conclusion: Cranial sonography in infants is a sensitive screening method for LH, which are usually indicative for perinatal infection, asphyxia, vasculopathy or genetic disorders. However, in several cases no pathomechanism is found and LH may resemble regular vascular structures. Thus, the c1inical validity of LH is not necessarily indicative for pahtology and can only be determined in combinalion with the c1inical aspect. Purpose: Children with severe periventricular leukomalacia usually present early in Iife as a result of significant motor disabilities. The relationship between visual impairment and established periventricular leukomalacia has been weil documented. We hypothesise that some children with mild cortical visual impairment and mild motor disabilities as a result of previously undiagnosed periventr icular leukomalacia may actually present with strabismus alone. Methods and Materials: Children under investigation for strabismus and visual impairment underwent cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans which revealed unsuspected periventricular leukomalacia. Full developmental and neurological assessments were also performed on each patient. Results: MRI scanning in this group of patients revealed unsuspected pathology in the form of periventricular leukomalacia and neurological assessments confirmed developmental delay permilling an accurate diagnosis. Conclusion: MRI scanning of the brain is a useful investigation in children with strab ismus and mild unexpla ined visual impa irment revealing previously unsuspected and undiagnosed pathology. Purpose: Cerebral activations during stimulation by different word reading tasks were studied by fMRI. The comparison of these activations was used to investigate differences in word prosess ing belween dyslex ic and normal read ing children. Methods and Materials: Eight right handed dyslexie boys (age range from 8-15) and eight matched (age , IQ, SES) norma l reading boys were exam ined in a 1.5T clinical scanner. A T2*-weighted FFE-sequence was used for measurements of three slices (TRfTE/a = 100/50/40°; slice thickeness = 10 mm; FOV =230 mm, matrix =256 x 256) . The Stimulation was perfomed by visual presentation of words , nonwords and lelterstrings. Words and nonwords have to be read silently. The fourth condition was a rhyming task. For postprocessing the SPM 96 was used . Results: Activat ions were found especi ally bilateral in the frontal corte x for the rhyming task vs. word reading , in the occipital lobe (fusiform gyrus) for word reading vs. nonword reading and in the left temporoparietal lobe as weil as in the left insula for nonword reading vs. letterstrings. Differences between dyslexies and contro ls were especially observed in contrasts with the rhyming condition. Conclusion: The observed differences of activation between dyslexics and normal reading children indicate differences in word processing. By using hierarchically structured tasks more detailed informations about impairments in the word reading process of dyslexics can be obtained . contrasVnoise ratios the data from the EBT investigation were compared to a similar examination on a spiral-CT. Results: The signal/noise ratio at the EBT was about 50%, con-trasVnoise 25% of that of the Spiral -CT. The absolute values of CBV was calculated to be 4.9 + 1.2 ml/100 9 (EBT) , CBF was 50.5 ml/100 g/min in normal contra lateral tissue. In 4 patients with proven infarcts on follow-up , the ischemic areas had a CBV ranging from 1.7 to 3.8 ml/100 g, CBF ranging from 9.4 to 24.5 ml/100 g/min. Conclusion: Using a bolus inject ion of contrast material , calculation of absolute CBV and CBF is feasable using EBT. The delineation of acute cereb ral ischemia is possible with EßT, however, the demarcation of ischem ic tissue is Iimited by image noise. Purpose: MR perfusion imaging , examin ing the first pass of a contrast agent bolus through the brain , has been used extensively in stroke patients. We studied a group of patients with carotid stenos is to investigate the value of the technique in assessing the compromised blood supply in these patients. Methods and Materials: 11 palients with carolid stenos is were scanned on a 1.5 T system (GE Signa) . For perfusion imaging , a 10 mm slice was imaged with a T2*-weighted sequence (TR 33/TE 23/ßip 15, 256 x 128, scan time 3 sees). 24-30 images were acquired sequentially after bolus injection of 15 ml GdDOTA. For analysis, images were transferred to an independent workstation. The signal intensity in cortical MCA branches and six arterial territories was measured using in-hause software (Displmage) . All regions were chosen to avoid old infarcts. Results: Results from the perfusion analys is could be divided into lwo broad groups: (a) patients showing a unilateral drop in MCA blood flow and an ipsilateral reduction in tissue blood volume , (b) those show ing a reduced MCA flow on one side with higher ipsilateral tissue blood volume in the MCA territory. The degree of carotid stenos is was compared with these results . In 3 cases the MR perfusion data correlated weil with the relative L-R stenosis, but in most patients there was poor agreement. A possible confounding factor was the presence of bilateral stenosis in several patients. Conclusion: There was no straightforward correlation between carotid stenosis, blood flow in MCA branches and cerebral tissue blood volume . This may reflect the complex interaction between bilateral disease, collateral pathways and autoregulatory vasodilatation. Further studies are needed. Purpose: A variety of evaluation parameters are being used to evaluate MR perfus ion studies. Beside of approxima tions to hemodynamic parameters as CBV, CBF and MIT, maximal signal reduction (MSR) and tlrne-to peak (TP) can be used to charac terize the signal time course . In our study, numerous parameters map were calculated and compared in respect to their difference in information content and image qual ity. Methods and Materials: 30 palients with different vascular diseaseases were examined at a 1.5 whole body system . An EPI sequence was used to acquire 3 selected slices. 96 repetitive measurements were performed . 11 different parameter maps were calculated on a pixel-bypixel base after temporal smooth ing, but without any spatial filtering . Mean values of all parameters in eight regions and all patients were calculated . Results: The differences between relat ive values of between MSR , CßV and CBF and other parameters were small compared to the variation of parameter values within the datasets. The lowest standard deviat ion of parameter values within the selected regions and therefore best image quality was obtained in MSR-and TP-maps. Conclusion: For the visual assessment of perfusion the use of MSR , SUM and CBF was nearly equivalent. Oue to their superior image quality, MSR and TP are suggested for the visualization of perfusional differences to obtain additional diagnostic information 10:55 1598 Regional relationships between BBB disruption, brain energy metabolism and cellular inflammatory responses following experimental traumatlc brain injury (TBI) G. Schneider, A. Mautes, A. Nacimiento , D. Wagner, B. Kramann; HomburglD Purpose: To evaluate the role of structural and functional changes, which amplify and exacerbate the primary brain lesions by correlating time course and spatial distribution. Methods and Materials: Exp. TBI was induced in rats with survival times between 12 hand 7d. MRI was performed on a 2.35 T Magnet applying T1w-and T2w-imaging as weil as caleulation of rCBV and rCBF after contrast media injection and postcontrast images for detection of BBB-breakdown. Brains were investigated histologically by computer ass isted bioluminescence imaging of ATP, glucose and lactate as weil as by immunhistochemistry for detection of microglia activation (marker OX42). Results: MRI showed decrease of rCBV and rCBF at the lesion site and decrease of rCBF contralaterally. T1w MRI demonstrated BBBdisrupt ion 1 hour after TBI up to 7d show ing a partial reversibility. In biolum inescence images energy metabolism impairement was observed as weil at the lesion site as to a lesser degree contra lateral. Positive OX42 microglia was demonstrated at the lesion site and in thalamic regions as weil as contralateral. Conclusion: The observed congruence of energy metabolism impairment , edema extension and BBB-breakdown suggests possible pathogenetic interactions between these changes. Microglia activation not restr icted to the lesion site may be triggered by energy metabolism impai rement. Purpose: To evaluate the utility of MR relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV) ma ps to measure regional hemodynam ie changes in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy and to compare MR-rCBV to PET results . Methods and Materials: Eight patients (26-78 years old, mean age 37) were exam ined on a 1.5 T MR-system, and by 18F-f1uorodesoxyglucose PET. MR-data were acquired by a grad ient echo sequence at 10. f1ip angle using a bolus of 0.2 mmol/kg bodyweight. Regional rCBV were measured by region of interest measurements. Results: Interictally reduced rCBV of the left hippocampus was predicted by rCBV maps in 5 of 8 interictal patients, confirmed by PET in all 5 patients. The mean ratios of regional cerebral blood volume were 1.67 (Ieft hippocampus/white matter) versus 1.97 (right hippocampus/white matter) (p < 0.05 , paired students t-test). Two patients had no side difference and one patient showed reduction on the right side , findings also confirmed by PET. Conclusion: Relative CBV demonstrated persistent local decrease of blood voume in temporal lobe epilepsy. Compared to PET the Mr-rCBV measurement had high aceuracy to detect the side local isation of temporal lobe epilepsia . (Submitted by Internet) 1600 The value of proton spectroscopy in a general hospital. Initial experience in 152 patients B.G. Ziedses des Piantes, K. Koster; Deventer/NL 
