2d6de201bde358129be8bc696aed3afab14e24c5
Postgraduate Course: Integrating Basic Science into Clinical Practice
Ji-Dong  Jia Beijing T Jake Liang Yu-Mei  Wen Shanghai   


The liver is a unique organ with respect to its extensive interactions with the immune system. Since the liver constantly encounters numerous antigens from the gut, it tends to skew immune properties to a state of immune tolerance. However, when the liver is infected, it induces adequate immune responses that are able to control and eliminate pathogens, e.g., hepatitis A virus. However, several pathogens, such as hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV), are well-adapted and capable to manipulate the hepatic immune properties to ensure their survival in the host, especially within the liver that causes chronic viral infection. The liver is anatomically divided into four lobes, in which each lobe is composed of hexagon-shaped lobules. A lobule itself is composed of a central vein (located at the middle of each lobule), radiating rows of liver cells (hepatocytes), and portal triads (branches of hepatic artery, hepatic portal vein, and bile duct) located at the perimeter of each lobule. Blood flows from portal triads to central veins via liver sinusoids, which are located between rows of hepatocytes. Liver sinusoids are composed of thin-walled endothelial cells (termed liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, LSECs) that do not form tight junctions and have clustered fenestrations, known as sieve plates [1] . LSECs and hepatocytes are separated by small space called the space of Disse (illustrated in Fig. 1 ). In the space of Disse, hepatic stellate cells (HSCs or Ito cells) are located. HSCs serve as the primary site for vitamin A's storage, the regulator of blood flow in liver sinusoids, and cells which can trans-differentiate into myofibroblasts in liver fibrosis [2] . Hepatocytes are polygon-shaped cells with a diameter around 30 lm that dominate the cell composition in the liver (70-80%) [3] . Physiologically, these cells perform the metabolic functions of the liver. In addition, hepatocytes also secrete bile, which is drained via bile ducts (also are interspersed in rows of hepatocytes) to the gallbladder and then secreted to the duodenum. The liver receives blood supply from two sources. The first is oxygenated blood from the hepatic artery and the second is deoxygenated blood from the hepatic portal vein, which is rich in food-derived antigens as well as in bacterial products and environmental toxins. These two blood supplies mix in the liver sinusoids that are bordered by fenestrated LSECs and lack a discrete basement membrane. In addition, the liver sinusoids have a slow blood flow due to large crosssectional areas. These characteristics maximize the exchange of molecules between lumen of the liver sinusoids and hepatocytes, allowing the liver to perform functions of digestion, detoxification, and synthesis of plasma proteins. Blood plasma and its contents are collected in the space of Disse and subsequently are drained out via lymphatic vessels to draining lymph nodes. In addition to its central metabolic role, the liver contributes to host defense by synthesizing complement components and clotting factors. In addition, the liver also has extensive interactions with the immune system, particularly with lymphocytes [2] . One plausible reason for these extensive interactions is that the liver consistently encounters several microbial antigens as well as harmless food antigens. While the liver has to activate the immune system towards pathogens that invade the liver, it also has to induce immune tolerance to numerous harmless antigens that are constantly encountered in physiological conditions. Indeed, the liver is recognized as a privileged immunological site, that tends to skew immune responses towards the state of immune tolerance [2] . Several lines of evidence support the notion that the liver is a site of immune tolerance. The best example is that allogeneic liver grafts, in contrast to other organ transplants, can survive without immunosuppression [4] . However, this unique property can be manipulated by malignancies and well-adapted pathogens. First, several malignancies that still express immunogenic antigens can evade immune surveillance when they have metastasized to the liver [5] . In accord with this finding, hepatocellular carcinoma lose the expression of CD95 (Fas), but express CD95L (Fas ligand), which in turn allows the hepatoma cells to evade immune surveillance by killing lymphocytes [6] . Second, despite the development of immune response, different pathogens of the liver tend to cause persistent infections, including HBV and HCV [7] . Taken together, these findings suggest that the healthy liver skews immune responses to the state of immune tolerance in the physiological condition. In the following section, we will briefly discuss immune properties in the liver and possible mechanisms used by the normal liver to skew responses of its immune properties to the state of immune tolerance. 2. Immune properties of the liver Human liver is endowed with numerous immune cells from both innate (Kupffer cells [KCs] , cd T cells, natural killer T [NKT] cells, and natural killer [NK] cells) and adaptive immunity (CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells) [8] . In addition, many intrahepatic cells can function as antigen presenting cells (APCs), including hepatic dendritic cells (myeloid dendritic cells [mDCs] , and plasmacytoid dendritic cells [pDCs]), KCs, LSECs, HSCs, and hepatocytes [3] . In addition, the liver can also recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) of invading pathogens through multiple pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), including cell surface and endosomal Toll-like receptors (TLRs), cytoplasmic nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors, and the RNA helicase family (e.g., retinoic acid inducible protein-I [RIG-I]) [9] . In the liver, PRRs are mainly expressed by innate immune cells and hepatic cells, including pDCs, mDCs, KCs, NKs, hepatocytes, LSECs, and HSCs [9] . 2.1 Innate immunity in the liver In a physiological condition, the liver skews responses of its innate immunity to a state of immune tolerance, due to the fact that the liver is constantly exposed to harmless microbial products from the enteric microflora [2] . One possible mechanism responsible for the modulation of intrahepatic innate immunity is via constant engagement of PRRs, particularly TLRs, with low levels of their ligands. This constant engagement in turn could downregulate the responsiveness of PRRs to their ligands [2] . Nonetheless, when pathogens, e.g., hepatitis A virus, infect the liver, proper stimulation of PRRs will culminate in the activation of transcription factors, such as nuclear factor (NF)-jB, activator protein 1 (AP-1), and interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) to induce expression of type I interferon (IFN-a and IFN-b), which in turn stimulate adequate immune responses to control and eliminate certain pathogens [9] . As has been mentioned, the liver contains numerous innate immune cells. Among these cells, NK and NKT cells are unusually enriched in the liver. Indeed, human intrahepatic lymphocytes contain about 30-50% NK (CD56+ CD3-) and 5-10% NKT (CD56+ CD3+) cells (Table 1 ) [10] , suggesting important roles of these cells for intrahepatic innate immune responses. Activation of NK cells are controlled by an equilibrium of signals from the stimulatory (e.g., NKG2D) and inhibitory (e.g., KIR) receptors [2] . Interestingly, intrahepatic NK cells are more activated than peripheral blood NK cells based on the expression of several activation markers (e.g., CD27, CD28, CD45RO, CD38, and CD69) [11] , probably due to continuous exposure to low amounts of NKG2D ligands in the liver [2] . NKT cells comprise of both canonical NKT cells expressing an invariant T cell receptor that recognize a complex of CD1d and a-galactosylceramide (a glycolipid antigen that is expressed in bacterial cell Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 walls) and non-canonical NKT cells that recognize other ligands (e.g., ligand for NKG2D) [2] . Similar to intrahepatic NK cells, intrahepatic NKT cells are also more activated than peripheral blood NKT cells [11] , probably due to continuous exposure to low amounts of intestinal bacterial cell wall components in the liver [2] . However, the upregulation of activation markers in intrahepatic NK and NKT cells does not coincide with any inflammation in the normal liver [11] . This suggests that continuous exposure to low amounts of their respective ligands in the normal liver might skew intrahepatic NK-and NKTcell responses to the state of immune tolerance [2] . It is interesting to note, however, that with proper stimulation (e.g., during infections), these innate immune cells would exhibit adequate immune responses [2] . There is a general agreement that the adaptive immune system is required to control and eliminate viral infections. In a first step, APCs need to be activated and to present viral antigen along with proper stimulatory molecules to naïve T lymphocytes. In the following section, we will focus on antigen presentation, in respect to HBV and HCV antigens, by hepatic DCs, hepatocytes, and LSECs. The DCs are professional APCs that link innate and adaptive immune responses [12] . As in other organs, the liver contains mDCs and pDCs, in which pDCs are more abundant than in lymphoid tissue [2] . The intrahepatic DCs can uptake HBV or HCV antigens via crosspresentation and thus present the antigens to T cells [13] . Whether the viral antigen presentation by intrahepatic DCs to naïve T cells occurs in the liver or regional lymph nodes or both places, is still elusive [13] . It is important to note that the lymphoid tissue-activated CD8+ T cells are functional and do not die prematurely [3] . This finding suggests that in order to achieve a proper stimulation of T cells and to induce adequate adaptive immune responses, antigen-acquired intrahepatic DCs might have to locate to draining lymph nodes and present the viral antigens there. This notion also implies that there can be a delay for a proper antigen presentation by DCs to T cells, especially since cross-presentation by DCs is assumed to be an inefficient process [14] . Another important question in chronic viral hepatitis is whether intrahepatic DCs are functional. Unfortunately, the current data is still inconclusive. In chronic HBV infection, DCs have been reported to be impaired in their immunogenic functions [15] , while another study reported the accumulation of mature and functional DCs in the liver [16] . A similar situation has also been observed in chronic HCV infection. While the activation of mDCs does not seem to be inhibited by HCV [17] , findings on HCV-mediated inhibition of pDCs are conflicting [17, 18] . Standardization on methods to isolate and culture DCs might help to solve these discrepancies in the future. Hepatocytes express MHC class I molecules which are polarized towards the basolateral surface [3] . However, the antigen presentation by MHC class I in normal hepatocytes is downregulated, due to a reduction of the machinery (TAP1, TAP2, tapasin, and proteasome subunit) required for peptide loading onto MHC class I molecules [19] . Nonetheless, via exposure to inflammatory cytokines (IFN-a or -c), the required machinery will be synthesized to promote presentation of foreign antigens [19] . Indeed, hepatocytes normally do not express MHC class II molecules, but during liver inflammation, IFN-c can induce MHC class II expression on hepatocytes [20] . Several in vitro studies have been performed to investigate whether hepatocytes can present antigen to and hence activate T lymphocytes. Indeed, it has been reported that hepatocytes are able to present antigens via MHC class I and class II to CD8+ T and CD4+ T cells, respectively, which in turn induce activation of T lymphocytes [21, 22] . Of note, these antigen-presenting and activating capacities of hepatocytes are similar to the ones of DCs [21, 22] . Intriguingly, however, hepatocyte-activated CD8+ T cells die faster compared to DC-activated CD8+ T cells, probably due to T-cell neglection [23] . These findings provide another clue how the liver can induce immune tolerance besides constant engagement of liver PRRs with their ligands. The important biological question is whether these in vitro findings of hepatocytes as APCs are similar to the in vivo situation. The availability of transgenic mouse models in which antigens are only presented by MHC class I of hepatocytes provides a valuable tool to address this important matter [3] . It is important to highlight that in vivo, intrahepatic CD8+ T cells are able to interact with hepatocytes, mainly via fenestrations of LSEC [1] , suggesting that intrahepatic CD8+ T cells constantly scan antigens presented by hepatocytes. In vivo studies have clearly shown that CD8+ T cells can be activated by hepatocytes and start to proliferate after 24 h [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] . In addition, hepatocyte-activated CD8+ T cells do not cause liver inflammation based on the serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level, in contrast to lymphoid tissue-activated CD8+ T cells that cause transient hepatitis [24] . Importantly, the immune tolerant nature of in vivo hepatocyte-activated CD8+ T cells is probably caused by accelerated cell death, due to an elevation of the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein Bim [3] . Clearly, the tendency of hepatocyte-activated CD8+ T cells to die prematurely could contribute to the persistence of HBV and HCV infections. In agreement with this notion, HBV-specific CD8+ T cells from chronic HBV patients can be rescued by inhibiting the Bim-mediated cell death [29] . It also has been shown that hepatocytes can present HCV antigens in vivo [30] , that might contribute to the high turnover of HCV-specific CD8+ T cells [31] . LSECs are strategically positioned in the liver sinusoids (illustrated in Fig. 1 ), allowing them to scavenge circulating antigens and subsequently to present these antigens to CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. Interestingly, LSECs are able to bind HBV and HCV particles, but not able to support the viral replication within the cells [32, 33] , suggesting that LSECs scavenge virus particles from blood circulation and thereafter release the particles to adjacent hepatocytes, the primary target cells for HBV and HCV infections. In turn, LSECs can bind soluble viral antigens released from adjacent infected hepatocytes and then cross-present these antigens to CD8+ and CD4+ T cells. In contrast to inefficient cross-presentation by DCs, cross-presentation by LSECs is a fast and efficient process [34] . In addition, LSECs do need to be activated prior antigen presentation due to their constitutive expression of CD54 and CD106, supporting their role as APCs in the liver [34] . However, the outcome of antigen presentation by LSECs to naïve CD8+ T cells is T-cell tolerance rather than T-cell response, based on impairment of IFN-c and IL-2 production and reduced ability to lyse target cells [34] . A possible mechanism to explain this unexpected outcome is upregulation of inhibitory PD-L1 (B7-H1), but not co-stimulatory CD80/CD86 molecules, on LSECs, after their cognate interaction with naïve CD8+ T cells [35] . Indeed, the phenotype of B7-H1 high CD80/CD86 low of LSECs is critical for Tcell tolerance, as B7-H1 deficient LSECs fail to induce immune tolerance [35] . Interestingly, LSECs also can suppress capability of hepatic DCs to induce CD8+ T-cell responses [36] . Specifically, after direct cell-cell contact, LSECs reduce expression levels of CD80/CD86 or IL-12 on hepatic DCs, thus inhibiting their costimulatory functions. Of note, LSECs can prime CD4+ T cells to become regulatory T cells [37] , further supporting roles of LSECs to induce a state of immune tolerance in the liver. Fig. 1 A schematic illustration of a liver sinusoid (adapted from [7] ). Each liver sinusoid is composed of liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) that have clustered fenestration. LSECs and hepatocytes are separated by a space of Disse. Blood flows into the liver sinusoid from hepatic artery and portal vein. Blood drains from the liver sinusoid into the central vein. Lymph fluids are collected in a space of Disse and are drains into draining lymph nodes Data on CD8+ and CD4+ T cells are obtained from [8] . Data on NK and NKT cells are obtained from [10] 2.3 Adaptive immunity in the liver There is an accumulation of several adaptive immune cells in the normal liver, especially CD8+ and CD4+ T cells (Table 1 ) [2] . Interestingly, this cellular accumulation has two unique characteristics. First, there are more CD8+ than CD4+ T cells in the liver, reversing the normal ratio of CD4+:CD8+ T cells [38] . This might imply that in the normal liver, there are less CD4+ T cells that could help CD8+ T cells to give adequate immune responses. Thus, this phenomenon could be one of several mechanisms used by the normal liver to induce a state of immune tolerance. Second, there is a high frequency of intrahepatic T cells with a phenotypic characteristic of apoptosis, especially during systemic T-cell activation and deletion [38] . Two models, at least, are proposed to explain this unique finding. In the first model, the apoptotic CD8+ and CD4+ T cells are passively accumulated in the liver (the ''graveyard'' hypothesis) [38] . However, this hypothesis is challenged by the finding that intrahepatic accumulation of T cells is unimpaired in Fas-deficient mice, in which a deficiency of systemic death signal reduces the numbers of apoptotic T cells [38] . In the second model, the liver actively traps activated T cells and subsequently induces T cells to be apoptotic (the ''killing field'' hypothesis) [38] . Interestingly, this model is in agreement with the finding of premature death of hepatocyte-activated CD8+ T cells compared to DC-activated CD8+ T cells [3] . Thus, this model can partly explain how the normal liver can skew adaptive immune responses to the state of immune tolerance. Similar to intrahepatic innate immune responses, however, with proper stimulations, the intrahepatic adaptive immune system can be activated to provide adequate immune responses [2] . The liver tends to skew immune responses to immune tolerance in the physiological condition. Continuous exposure to low amounts of antigens could modulate responses of intrahepatic innate immune system to the state of immune tolerance. Antigen presentations by hepatocytes and LSECs to T cells also tend to induce immune tolerance rather than immune response. Conversely, the immune tolerant state can also be caused by the ability of the liver to attract CD8+ and CD4+ T cells and to induce apoptosis on these cells. Nevertheless, with proper stimulations, e.g., during infections, immune systems in the liver will be activated and in turn provide adequate immune responses. 15 .  Liver injury and regeneration are two important processes that need to be critically regulated. There are predominant innate immune cells, including Kupffer cells, NK cells and NKT cells in the liver, playing critical roles in liver injury and regeneration via the innate recognitioninitiated immune response. Studies of NK and/or NKT cells in liver injury and regeneration are still in their early stages worldwide. Blood circulating from the intestines to the liver is rich in chemical toxins, food antigens and bacterial products. To effectively and quickly defend against these potentially ''dangerous'' materials without launching excessive immune responses, the liver relies on its strong innate immune system. In addition, the liver also plays an important role in controlling systemic innate immunity through the biosynthesis of numerous soluble pathogen-recognition receptors and complement components. So the liver is an organ with a predominant innate immunity, playing an important role not only in host defenses against invading microorganisms and tumor transformation, but also in liver injury and repair. Hepatic NK and NKT cells represent more than 50% of liver lymphocytes, e.g. 5-10 folds more, when compared with other immune organs, making the liver the largest innate immune organ [1] . In addition to the killing function of NK and NKT cells, cytokine-production by both cell types has become increasingly attractive to immunologists [2] . Since the liver is extensively recognized as an immunotolerant organ, the study of the regulatory function of hepatic NK and NKT cells should prove increasingly valuable. Innate immune receptors have been extensively described, among which, the discovery of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and NK cell receptors (NKRs) has been most exciting. TLRs, as the key sensors to environmental pathogen broadly recognize pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), while NKRs, as the sensors to intrinsic homeostasis, pan-specifically recognize the self-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) or MHC-like molecules on host cells. In most instances, TLRs and NKRs work in concert. When TLRs are activated by environmental pathogen, the cells may increase expression of ligands to be recognized by the activating receptors of NKRs (called ''induced-self'') or decrease expression of MHC, which is recognized by inhibitory receptors (called ''missing-self'') or intrinsic self-recognizing receptors, and produce a cascade of cytokines to recruit and activate the innate immune cells. NK or NKT cells will then traffic to the infected region and attack the pathogen-infected cells with their NKRs [3] . Since liver disease (especially HBV-related disease and hepatocellular carcinoma) is one of the most dangerous threats to humans, especially in China, the progress in innate immune recognition and liver immunology will make it possible to re-examine the cellular immune mechanism of liver disease. We speculate that innate immune cells are possibly involved in acute and chronic liver immune injury, induced by a variety of factors including virus, chemicals, nutrition or wounds, in which the regulatory NK and NKT cells play pivotal roles in cell-cell interaction, and that innate immune recognition by TLRs and NKRs is the key link to the innate immune response [4] . There are three primary populations of innate immune cells (Kupffer cells, NK cells, NKT cells) in the liver. TLR-4 ligand, LPS was used to trigger Kupffer cells, and Con A was used to trigger CD4 + T (mostly natural killer T cells, e.g. NKT cells), which is the basis for two fulminant hepatitis models, frequently employed since the early 1990s. However, the roles of natural killer (NK) cells in liver injury remain unknown. In 2004, we created an NK cell-mediated liver injury model by using polyinosinic: polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C), a TLR-3 ligand that mimics double-stranded RNA virus [5] . The results demonstrated that following Poly I:C injection, NK cell accumulation and activation occurred in the liver. Depletion of NK cells markedly attenuated Poly I:C-induced liver injury. Neutralization of endogenous Interleukin-12 produced by Kupffer cells abrogated the accumulation of NK cells in the liver and subsequent liver injury. These findings suggest that PolyI:C preferentially recruits and activates hepatic NK cells. The NK cells recruited into the liver were shown to be from the spleen [6] . In another study, we treated mice with D-GalN to sensitize the liver to the damage induced by poly I:C, and then a NK cell-mediated fulminant hepatitis was established [7] . The results showed that pre-depletion of NK cells could completely abolish the resulting liver injury. Injection of poly I:C/D-GalN into mice could also promote tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) production and surface retinoic acid early inducible-1 (Rae 1) protein expression by Kupffer cells, which then activated NK cells to produce interferon gamma (IFN-c) via NKG2D-Rae1 recognition. These results demonstrate that NK cell-derived IFN-c and Kupffer cell-derived TNFa synergistically mediated the severe liver injury. Moreover, Kupffer cell-derived IL-12 and IL-18 were also found to improve cross talk between NK cells and Kupffer cells. These results provide the first in vivo evidence that NKG2D/ligand interaction is involved in the synergic effects of NK cells and Kupffer cells on acute liver injury, and also provide a novel NK cell-mediated fulminant hepatitis model. In order to evaluate the effect of non-hepatotoxic Con A-activated NKT cells on hepatic NK cells, we pretreated mice with low dose of Con A and then stimulated with poly I:C in order to see the NK cellmediated hepatitis [8] . The results demonstrated that Con A pretreatment aggravated poly I:C-induced liver injury with elevation of serum transaminases, hepatic necrosis and serum IFN-c level. When the enhanced accumulation of activated NK cells into the liver, natural cytotoxicity and IFN-c production by hepatic NK cells were significantly augmented. Collectively, the aggravation of poly I:Cinduced hepatitis by Con A pretreatment may be due to the generation of more vigorous NK cells, which is dependent on the presence of NKT cells. This investigation will help to explain the synergistic effects of NK and NKT cells in liver inflammatory injury. Interestingly, if the mice were pretreated with a dose of poly I:C, sufficient to activate the NK cells, but not induce liver injury, the mice became less responsive to Con A stimulation by showing weaker liver injury [9] . The results demonstrated that Poly I:C pretreatment protected against T cell-mediated hepatitis, as evidenced by decreased mortality, hepatic necrosis, serum transaminase levels and inflammatory cytokines (IL-4, IFN-c). The protective effect of poly I:C was diminished in NK-depleted mice, which could be partially restored by adoptive transfer of NK cells. Administration of poly I:C caused NKT and T cell apoptosis via enhanced expression of Fas protein on these cells and expression of Fas ligand on NK cells. These findings suggest that activation of NK cells by poly I:C prevents Con A-induced T cell-hepatitis via downregulation of T/NKT cells and subsequent reduction of inflammatory cytokines. These experimental data describe an interactive loop between NK and NKT cells in which NKT cells positively regulate NK cells, while NK cells negatively regulate NKT cells. The interaction between Kupffer cells and NK cells, in addition to the interaction between NKT and NK cells, was also explored by using an acute liver immune injury model. Kupffer cells (KCs) are specialized macrophages and the largest tissue resident macrophage population in the body. Kupffer cells can be activated by various bacterial stimuli and produce IL-12 and other cytokines (TNF-a, IL-1b, IL-18, etc.), which are partly responsible for the activation of liver NK cells (IFNc production and cytotoxicity). The interaction between Kupffer cells and NKT cells was further explored [10] . In our study, we found that treatment with CpG-ODN could promote the accumulation and activation of murine hepatic CD4 + NKT cells with increased production of inflammatory cytokines, but exerted less of an effect on CD4 -NKT cells. The effect of CpG-ODN on liver NKT cells was absolutely dependent on kupffer cells and IL-12. The CpG-ODN pretreatment aggravated the liver injury in the Con A-induced hepatitis model. Our data therefore demonstrate that TLR-9 stimulation triggered the interaction between NKT cells and Kupffer cells, which led to the accumulation and activation of hepatic CD4 + NKT cells in the pathogenesis of human hepatitis. Moreover, liver injury, mediated by NKT cells was observed to be negatively regulated by regulatory T cells (Tregs) in our study [11] . Tregs play a central role in regulating tolerance and immunity by preventing the activation and expansion of auto-reactive T cells that lead to autoimmunity. As reported, Tregs were not detected in liver biopsy samples from healthy controls, but were present in liver specimens of patients with various liver diseases, the levels being lowest in PBC liver, intermediate in AIH liver, and highest in liver samples from patients with chronic hepatitis C. In our study, Con A treatment was associated with an increased number of Foxp3 + Tregs in liver but not in spleen. Moreover, increases in the expression levels of Foxp3, CTLA-4, glucocorticoid-induced TNF receptor, as well as S6 Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 the frequency of CD103 on Tregs after Con A injection were significantly higher in liver than in spleen. Depleting CD25 + cells aggravated liver injury, whereas adoptively transferring CD25 + cells or Tregs reduced liver injury in Con A-treated recipients. Con A treatment induced elevated serum levels and hepatic mononuclear mRNA expression of TGF-b, which were reduced by depletion of Tregs. In addition, anti-TGF-bmAbs blocked the suppressive function of Tregs from Con A-treated mice in vitro. Finally, mice expressing a dominant-negative form of TGF-b receptor II, whose T cells cannot respond to TGF-b, had a higher mortality rate and more severe liver injury than normal mice injected with the same dose of Con A. These results indicate that CD4 + CD25 + Tregs play an important role in limiting the liver injury in Con A-induced hepatitis via a TGF-bdependent mechanism. 4. Innate immune receptor-mediated liver injury in HBV-transgenic mice The interactions between NK cells, NKT cells, Kupffer cells and hepatocytes via innate immune receptors such as NKG2D or CD1d were investigated in HBV-transgenic mice. We examined the innate immunity of murine chronic HBsAg carriers and demonstrated that the number of hepatic NK cells was decreased, natural activation of hepatic NK cells was declined, and cytotoxicity of hepatic NK cells was attenuated, which might relate to the decreased expression of TRAIL in hepatic NK cells. Additionally, the response of hepatic NK cells to the specific stimulation of Poly (I:C) in murine chronic HBsAg carriers was changed. The increase in anti-tumor cytotoxic activity of intrahepatic activated NK cells was markedly impaired in transgenic mice. The transgenic mice used here had a high incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma, which might result from the relatively weak reactivity and impaired anti-tumor activity of NK cells in the liver [12] . Furthermore, significant liver injury was observed after stimulation with Poly I:C, demonstrating a hypersensitivity to Poly (I:C) of murine chronic HBsAg carriers, which might be related to rapidly accumulating NK cells in the liver. The innate immunopathogenesis responsible for the susceptibility to hepatocyte injury in chronic hepatitis B surface antigen carriers was then further examined. In our study, hepatitis B virus (HBV) transgenic mice (named HBs-Tg, a mimic of human healthy chronic HBsAg carriers) were intraperitoneally injected with Poly(I:C). The results demonstrated that HBs-B6 mice were over-sensitive to Poly I:C-induced liver injury, which was absolutely dependent on the presence of NK cells and IFN-c produced by intrahepatic NK cells. Much stronger IFN-c receptor expression was observed on hepatocytes from HBs-B6 mice, which was significantly enhanced by Poly(I:C) injection. Treatment with IFN-c in vitro triggered much higher activation of downstream signals (pSTAT1-IRF-1) in hepatocytes from HBs-B6 mice [13] . It was also found that a low dose of ConA, non-toxic when given to wild-type mice, induced severe liver injury in HBs-Tg mice, which was dependent on accumulated intrahepatic natural killer (NK) cells. The expression of NKG2D ligands (Rae-1 and Mult-1) in hepatocytes was markedly enhanced upon Con A stimulation in HBs-Tg mice, which greatly activated hepatic NK cells via NKG2D/Rae-1 or Mult-1 recognition. Interestingly, NK T cells were necessary for NK cell activation and work as positive helper cells by producing interferon-c and interleukin-4 in this process. Our findings demonstrate for the first time the critical role of NKG2D recognition of hepatocytes by NK cells in oversensitive liver injury in murine chronic HBsAg carriers [14] . The synthetic peptide mimicking the NKG2D ligand might block the liver injury by NKG2D recognition [15] , and this recognition might also occur between NK cells and hepatic stellate cells in the liver fibrosis model by killing activated stellate cells in an NKG2D-dependent and a tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-dependent manner [16] . How HBV infection affects the regeneration of hepatectomized or transplanted liver remains elusive. We report that partial hepatectomy (PHx)-induced liver regeneration was reduced in HBV transgenic (HBV-tg) mice, a model of human HBV infection. PHx markedly triggered natural killer T (NKT) cell accumulation in the hepatectomized livers of HBV-tg mice, simultaneously with enhanced IFN-c production and CD69 expression on hepatic NKT cells at the early stage of liver regeneration. The impairment of liver regeneration in HBV-tg mice was largely ameliorated by NKT cell depletion, but not by natural killer (NK) cell depletion. Blockage of CD1d-NKT cell interaction considerably alleviated NKT cell activation and their inhibitory effect on the regeneration of hepatocytes. Neutralization of IFN-c enhanced bromodeoxyuridine incorporation in HBV-tg mice after PHx, and IFN-c primarily induced hepatocyte cell cycle arrest. Adoptive transfer of NKT cells from a regenerating HBV-tg liver, but not from normal mice, could inhibit liver regeneration in recipient mice. In conclusion, activated NKT cells negatively regulate liver regeneration of HBV-tg mice in the PHx model [17] . The cross-talk between TLRs in Kupffer cells themselves was also observed. This study demonstrates that pretreatment with poly I:C significantly decreased the mortality and liver injury caused by injection of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in the presence of D-galactosamine (D-GalN) in C57BL/6 mice, a well-known form of Kupffer cell-mediated fulminant hepatitis. Depletion of natural killer, natural killer T, and T cells did not change the protective effect of poly I:C on LPS/D-GalN-induced liver injury in vivo, indicating the possibility that both poly I:C and LPS worked on Kupffer cells. Depletion of macrophages abolished LPS/D-GalN-induced fulminant hepatitis, which could be restored by adoptive transfer of macrophages but not by transfer of poly I:C-treated macrophages, further confirming the possibility. The results of this study indicate that treatment with poly I:C down-regulates the expression of the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) on macrophages and reduces the sensitivity of macrophages (Kupffer cells and peritoneal macrophages from C57BL/6 mice, or RAW264.7 cells) to LPS stimulation. Blockade of TLR3 with a TLR3 antibody abolished poly I:C down-regulation of TLR4 expression and LPS stimulation of TNF-a production in RAW264.7 cells. Taken together, our findings suggest that activation of TLR3 by its ligand, poly I:C, induces LPS tolerance by down-regulation of TLR4 expression on macrophages, causing Kupffer cells to lose their response to LPS stimulation in acute liver injury [18] . Innate cytokines including IL-1, IL-6, IL-12, IL-15, IL-18 , IFN a and chemokines such as CX3CL1 (fractalkine) play important roles in liver injury and regeneration. It was observed that some cytokines that induce autoimmune inflammation in other tissues or organs may exert anti-inflammatory effects in liver. For example, pretreatment with IL-15 prevented mice from Con A-induced mortality, elevation of serum transaminase, liver necrosis, and hepatocyte apoptosis. Depletion of NKT cells abolished Con A-induced liver injury, which could be restored by adoptive transfer of purified NKT cells but not by in vivo or in vitro IL-15-treated hepatic NKT cells. Furthermore, transfer of wild-type NKT cells to CD1d -/mice restored liver injury, whereas transfer of IL-15-treated NKT cells did not. IL-15 pretreatment decreased the production of NKT-derived IL-4, IL-5, and TNF-a, thereby resulting in less infiltration of eosinophils, which play a critical role in Con A-induced liver injury. In conclusion, IL-15 protects against Con A-induced liver injury via an NKT cell-dependent mechanism, by reducing their production of IL-4, IL-5, and infiltration of eosinophils. These findings suggest that IL-15 may be of therapeutic relevance in human autoimmune-related hepatitis [19] . Gene therapy using adenovirus vectors may induce acute liver injury. Tissue injury induced by an adenovirus is likely associated with elevated expression of the Cys-X3-Cys chemokine ligand 1 (CX3CL1)/fractalkine (FKN) protein at the site of inflammation. We induced acute liver injury in mice by a hydrodynamics-based injection of adenovirus vector, which was confirmed to be dependent on the presence of natural killer (NK) cells and NK-dependent IFN-c. When the transferred FKN gene was inserted into the adenoviral vector, the severity of liver injury increased, as well as an increase in CX3CR1-positive NK cell recruitment into the liver because of exogenous overproduction of FKN protein. Moreover, when production of endogenous FKN protein was silenced by insertion of a FKN-small interfering RNA into the adenoviral vector or was neutralized with an FKN-specific antibody, the acute severe liver injury induced by adenovirus was notably prevented with much lower hepatic NK cell infiltration and a significant reduction in the serum levels of IFN-c. Our findings suggest a strategy to prevent or alleviate adenoviral vector-induced acute liver injury by blocking FKN-CX(3)CR1 interaction in adenovirus vector-based gene therapy [20] . 6. Future remarks Viral hepatitis, induced primarily by the HBV and HCV, is a serious threat to human health worldwide. The interaction between immune cells and virus-infected host hepatocytes is considered to be the major mechanism. As the liver has a much higher content of innate lymphocytes, more attention should be paid to these cells. One successful approach to studying these cells is to establish practical animal models that focus on each unique innate lymphocyte population, allowing the actual function of each lymphocyte population to be more easily investigated. In addition, more attention should be paid to the HBV-or HCV-carrier mouse models, although every model has their own shortcomings. Transgenic mice containing the HBV full gene or partial gene may be used to study the tolerance of anti-virus immunity, but these mice do not replicate the natural infection of the virus, as mice may become ''too tolerant'' because of constant expression throughout fetal development. Hydradynamic injection of HBV plasmid into hepatocytes of the liver may be used to examine the immune response against the virus in adult mice, but this technique lacks the actual infection process. It is therefore urgently necessary to establish a real humanized mouse model with human hepatocytes and a human immune system, that will mimic both the natural infection of HBV or HCV and the human immune response against them. Innate receptor-mediated autoimmune attack has been increasingly considered to be critical for a variety of autoimmune diseases including multiple sclerosis, type I diabetes, Crohn's disease and systemic lupus erythematosus, as well as some acute inflammatory injuries such as fulminant hepatitis and respiratory syndrome. Moreover, the innate receptors are crucial to the initial the immune response against virus infection and tumor growth. Therefore, targeting the innate receptors to block the activation of the innate immune response, and the negative signal delivered by inhibitory innate receptors will be a potential approach to treat autoimmune injury or autoimmune diseases, and to improve the treatment of tumor or virus infection, respectively. References  The liver is a unique organ receiving blood from both the systemic circulation and the intestine leading to exposure of the liver to multiple foreign antigens and to microbial products derived from intestinal bacteria [1] . There are several unique populations of antigen presenting cells (APCs) in the liver and a high concentration of CD8+ T-cells, activated T-cells, NKT cells and NK cells [1, 2] . Immune responses to liver antigens often result in tolerance rather than activation. The adaptive immune response to hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, a non-cytopathic hepatotropic virus is critical for successful clearance of the virus as well as the establishment of liver disease. In chronic HBV infection the adaptive immune response is impaired as a result of multiple factors including a significant contribution from the tolerogenic liver environment. A. The adaptive immune response to chronic viral infections 1. Classification of CD4 and CD8 T-cells Both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells are critical for an effective response to foreign pathogens including chronic viral infections. T-cells can be classified into naïve and memory T-cells based on expression of diverse cell surface receptors. Naïve cells are defined by surface expression of the following molecules CD45RA+CD45RO-CCR7+CD28+. There are three main subsets of CD4+ T-cells. These include Th1 cells that produce IFN-c and Il-2; Th2 cells that produce IL-4, IL-5 and IL-10 and the recently described Th17 cells, a newly identified proinflammatory T-cell subset (reviewed in [3] ). Th17 cells can produce a range of cytokines including IL-17A, IL-17F, IL-21, IL-22, IL-6 and TNF-a, of which IL-17A is characterised as a major effector cytokine which can mobilise and activate neutrophils leading to inflammation [4] . Similar to CD4+ T-cells, CD8+ T-cells can also be classified according to surface markers, expression of chemokine receptors and function. Broadly, CD8+ T-cells can be divided into naïve and antigen experienced or memory cells. Memory T-cells are then classified into central memory, effector memory or transitional memory cells [3] . In the setting of chronic viral infections such as HIV, hepatitis C virus (HCV) and HBV, the antigen-specific T cell response is often ineffective and these cells are often considered to be ''exhausted'' [5, 6] . An excellent animal model of T cell exhaustion is the mouse model of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection [7, 8] . Studies in LCMV have demonstrated that the level of T cell exhaustion is progressive and related to viral load. Initially there is a loss of proliferative and cytolytic activity which is followed by sequential reduction of the abilities to produce cytokines such as IL-2, TNF-a and finally IFN a - [9] . Therefore the quality of T cell responses as measured by the production of multiple cytokines and/or activation and proliferation markers is important in the successful immune response against chronic viral infections [5, 10] . T cell ''exhaustion'' has also been associated with increased expression of the molecule PD-1 on the surface of CD4 + and CD8 + T cells. PD-1 was first characterised on thymic T cell lines and found to have increased expression following apoptosis signaling [11] . PD-1 belongs to the CD28 family and is expressed on T-cell and monocytes. PD-1 is recognized by two ligands: program death ligand-1 (PD-L1; B7-H1), expressed on most cell types including Kupffer cells in the liver and PD-L2 (B7-DC), expressed mainly on macrophages and DCs [12, 13] . Mice deficient in PD-L1 develop an immunoinflammatory hepatitis caused by CD8+ T-cells suggesting a key role for PD-L1 in regulating both CD8+ T-cell abundance and immunopathology in the liver [14] . In hepatitis C virus (HCV) and HIV-1 infection, expression of PD-1 on CD4 + and CD8 + T-cells is associated with suppression of effective antiviral T-cell function [15] . Furthermore, inhibition of the binding of PD-1 to its ligands leads to the restoration of virus-specific functional T-cells [13, 16, 17] . B. The adaptive immune response in the liver The liver is a unique immunological environment with a dual blood supply and distinct requirements for leukocyte recruitment and activation. Although hepatic immune tolerance prevents exuberant responses to food antigen, the liver can generate strong immune responses to infections, including some hepatitis viruses. In general, a vigorous intrahepatic immune response requires activation of T cells by activated dendritic cells (DCs) within secondary lymphoid tissues, whereas activation of T-cells within the liver by hepatocytes or endothelial cells results in tolerance [18] . This allows the liver to tolerate food antigens captured by endothelial cells and self-antigens on hepatocytes while responding appropriately to infections that cause inflammation and activation of DCs. The liver has multiple resident antigen presenting cells (APCs). These include Kupffer cells (KC), dendritic cells (DCs) and parenchymal cells such as sinusoid-lining endothelial cells, hepatocytes and stellate cells. Intrahepatic DCs include both myeloid DCs (mDC) and plasmacytoid DCs (pDC), with an abundance of pDC in liver (reviewed in [19] ). Most liver DCs reside as immature APCs that express low levels of surface MHC and costimulatory molecules (CD40, CD80, CD86) necessary for T-cell activation. These immature DCs are wellequipped for antigen capture, processing and loading onto MHC class II molecules for export to the cell surface but are poor stimulators of naïve T-cells. DC maturation is essential for the initiation of acquired immune reactivity. The relative abundance of plasmacytoid DCs in liver, may support the specific expansion of inhibitory T-cells such as forkhead box P3 (Foxp3)+ Treg cells [20] . There is an increased level of apoptosis of intrahepatic CD8+ T-cells [21] . There are two potential sources of intrahepatic antigen specific T-cells. Antigen-specific cells can be primed in lymphoid organs and migrate to the liver under the control of chemokines such as CXCL9 and CXCL10, the main ligands for CXCR3 or macrophage inflammatory protein 1a (MIP-1a), MIP-1b and RANTES (Regulated on Activation, Normal T Expressed and Secreted) the major ligands for CCR5 [22] . Alternatively, the liver can also act as a primary site of naïve T-cell activation [1, 18] . Most of the experimental evidence for direct priming from the liver comes from mouse models and it remains unknown whether intrahepatic priming of naïve cells occurs in chronic viral infections such as HCV or HBV. Certainly, direct priming of CD8+ T-cells in the liver may produce helpless or ''exhausted'' antigen-specific T-cells given the absence of activated CD4+ T-cells. C. The adaptive immune response to HBV Using the example of HBV infection, it is interesting to therefore compare and contrast the role of the circulating and intrahepatic HBV-specific T-cell response at 3 critical phases of HBV infectionacute infection, chronic infection and liver disease. A broad HBV-specific T-cell response is required for effective clearance of acute HBV infection. Animal data supports the concept that clearance of HBV DNA is largely mediated by antiviral cytokines produced by cells of both the innate and adaptive immune response. In particular, interferon (IFN)-c, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a and IFNa/b are believed to trigger several pathways leading to inhibition of viral replication without the direct destruction of infected cells [23] . Recent work in acute HBV infection in humans showed that there is an early induction of IL-10 rather than type I IFN and this is accompanied by a temporary attenuation of NK and T-cell responses [24] . a. CD4 + T-cells In acute HBV infection, HBV-specific CD4 + T-cells can be detected at the time of elevated HBV DNA (before the peak of liver damage) and persist long after recovery from HBV infection [25] . CD4 + T-cells are primarily detected against peptides c50-69, found in both HBcAg and HBeAg as well as other HBV gene products such as envelope and polymerase [25] [26] [27] . However, overall CD4 + T-cell responses (measured by either proliferation or production of antiviral cytokines) are more commonly detected to core than to other HBV proteins [25] [26] [27] . b. CD8 + T-cells Mature CD8 + T-cells are the main effector cells involved in HBV clearance. Depletion of CD8 + T-cells following acute HBV infection of chimpanzees led to persistence of HBV infection and demonstrated the importance of both cytolytic and non-cytolytic activity of HBV-specific CD8 + T-cells [28] . In human HBV infection, not all individuals who recover from acute HBV infection have elevated ALT levels or clinical symptoms, suggesting that non-lytic mechanisms such as those induced by IFN-c and TNF-a are used to clear acute HBV infection [29] . IFN-c is mainly produced by HBV-specific CD8 + T-cells but can also be produced by NK, NKT cells and HBV-specific Th1 CD4 + T-cells [30] . PD-1 expression on HBV-specific T-cells in individuals who clear acute HBV infection is initially elevated and then decreases with the concurrent increase of CD127 expression (marker of effector CD8 + T-cells) [31, 32] . The coordinated effect of cytokines, PD-1 expression and cytolytic activity (leading to the destruction of infected hepatocytes) allows for clearance of the virus without excessive liver damage [33] . In addition to detectable circulating CD8 + HBV-specific T-cells, studies using fine-needle aspiration of the liver have shown that CD8 + HBV-specific T-cells are compartmentalized in the liver. Activated HLA-A2-restricted CD8 + HBV-specific T-cells were detected in the liver during acute hepatitis and remained in high numbers three months following recovery [34] . In individuals with chronic HBV infection the HBV-specific CD4 + and CD8 + T-cell response is significantly diminished and functional responses are impaired as a result of multiple mechanisms [35] [36] [37] . a. Hyporesponsive CD4+ T-cells In chronic HBV infection, CD4 + T-cell are hyporesponsive to mitogen as well as HBV-specific stimulation [38] . This T-cell ''hyporesponsiveness'' may be a consequence of impaired function of HBV-infected DCs, which have reduced IFN-c, TNF-a and IL-12 production [39] . b. CD8+ T-cell exhaustion Some HBV-specific CD8 + T-cells in persistent HBV infection have been described as ''partially tolerant'' being unable to bind specific tetramers/HLA-restricted peptide complexes but are able to produce IFN-c, lyse and expand following stimulation [40] . HBV-specific CD8+ T-cells also have an ''exhausted'' phenotype and rarely produce IL-2 and TNF-a, produce low amounts of IFN-b and express high levels of PD-1 [37, 41, 42] . PD-L1 expression is elevated on PBMCs from individuals with chronic HBV infection and hepatic cell lines that persistently expressed HBV [43, 44] . In vitro treatment of both circulating and  intrahepatic CD8+ T-cells with anti-PD-L1 results in an increase in  both the number of HBV-specific T cells and the production IFN-c  and IL-2 [41, 42] . Therefore, increased expression of PD-1 could potentially be a mechanism to reduce liver damage in chronic HBV infection, but can also lead to exhaustion of CD8 + T-cell activity and hence persistence of chronic HBV infection. c. Altered cytokine production of intrahepatic T-cells HBV-specific CD8 + T-cells are found in the liver in the setting of chronic HBV infection but there is no evidence of preferential sequestration in the liver [35, 37] . However, the phenotype of intrahepatic T-cells differs to circulating T-cells. In chronic HBV infection, intrahepatic HBV-specific CD8+ T-cells are more likely to produce IL-10 than other cytokines which may minimize any intrahepatic inflammation [37] . d. Regulatory T-cells CD4 + CD25 + T-cells (regulatory T-cells) are also involved in the inhibition of pro-inflammatory responses in an attempt to reduce immune modulated damage [45] . Regulatory T-cell activity may limit clearance in chronic viral infections by suppressing proliferation of antigen-specific CD8 + T-cells or reducing production of antiviral cytokines such as IFN-c and TNF-a as shown in both HCV and HIV-1 infection [46, 47] . In chronic HBV infection the study of regulatory T-cells has been limited and some studies show an increase and others a decrease in CD4 + CD25 + T-cells in peripheral blood as compared to uninfected healthy controls [48, 49] . However, in in vitro assays, depletion of regulatory T-cells led to an increase in cytokine production even though this did not appear to be HBV-specific [48, 49] e. Impaired DC function Although there is no difference in absolute numbers of mDCs or pDCs in individuals with HBV infection when compared to uninfected controls, significant functional defects have been demonstrated in both subsets of DCs. Monocytes-derived DCs from HBV chronically infected individuals have a reduced ability to prime T-cells and produce IL-12 [39, 50] 3. Abnormal liver function or ''hepatic flare'' Following infection with HBV for approximately 20 years, most individuals move from an immunotolerant to immunoreactive phase, characterized by an increase or fluctuating levels of ALT. This is occasionally associated with loss of HBeAg and development of antibodies to HBeAg (anti-HBe). In this setting of a raised ALT, the number of HBV-specific T-cells, measured using HLA-A2 restricted epitopes and tetramers, is not significantly different from patients with a normal ALT [35] . a. Chemokines and T-cell recruitment to the liver Liver biopsies taken during a hepatic flare show infiltration of the lobules with both HBV-specific and non-specific T-cells [35, 51] . IFN-c increases the susceptibility of hepatocytes to TNFa-induced apoptosis and mediates recruitment of more macrophages and necroinflammatory cells. In addition, IFN-c inducible chemokines including macrophage inflammatory protein 1a (MIP-1a), MIP-1b and Regulated on Activation, Normal T Expressed and Secreted (RANTES) are upregulated. These chemokines are ligands for the chemokine co-receptor CCR5 which together with CXCL9 and CXCL10, the ligands for CXCR3, can recruit activated and effector memory T-cells to the liver [22] . In HBV transgenic mice, administration of antibodies against CXCL9 and CXCL10 reduces intrahepatic inflammation without a change in the non-cytopathic effects of IFN-c [52] . We recently demonstrated that elevated CXCL10 plays a role in hepatic flare following initiation of HBV-active highly active antiretroviral therapy in HIV-HBV coinfected patients [53] . Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 b. Intrahepatic CD8+ T-cells In the setting of chronic HBV infection and a raised ALT, all intrahepatic CD8+ T-cells, not just HBV-specific T-cells, have an  impaired functional response. These intrahepatic CD8+ T-cells have  impaired production of IL-2 and reduced TCR-dependent proliferation secondary to down regulation of the CD3-zeta chain-a unique consequence of low levels of arginine in the inflamed hepatic microenvironment [54] . c. Th17 pro-inflammatory cells Circulating and intra-hepatic HBV-specific CD4+ Th17 cells are also preferentially enriched in chronic HBV infection and may also play a role in liver inflammation [55] . These cells produce IL-17 which can activate mDCs and monocytes to produce pro-inflammatory cytokine driving liver disease progression [55] . 4. Anti-HBV therapy, viral clearance and the adaptive immune system A reduction in HBV DNA in natural infection appears to precede the detection of HBV-specific T-cell responses in both self-limiting acute infections and flares associated with HBeAg seroconversion in chronic HBV infection. Therefore, a reduction of HBV viral load by antiviral chemotherapy could potentially reduce ''anergy'' associated with persistent HBV infection. Pegylated-IFN and reverse transcriptase inhibitors such as nucleoside analogs (lamivudine, telbivudine and entecavir), and nucleotide analogs (tenofovir and adefovir are currently the main therapies used for treatment of chronic HBV infection. Following lamivudine treatment for chronic HBV infection, some authors have reported detection of functional HBV-specific CD4 + and CD8 + T-cells [27, 38, 56] . These HBV-specific T-cells can proliferate and produce IFN-c in response to HBV antigen stimulation. However, the detection of HBV-specific T-cells does not always lead to HBeAg seroconversion or viral clearance and appears to be transient [56, 57] . Following treatment of HIV-HBV co-infected individuals with HBV-active HAART, we observed no increase in HBV-specific CD8+ T-cells, despite successful suppression of HBV replication and reconstitution of CD4+ T-cells [58] . Combination treatment with pegylated-IFN and lamivudine leads to an increase in intrahepatic CD8 + T-cell infiltrates but the function of these cells has not been examined [59] . The liver is a unique immunological organ enriched with APCs and specific T-cell populations. The intrahepatic adaptive immune responses are important for effective clearance of hepatotropic viruses, but specifically following acute HBV and the response is impaired in chronic HBV infection. Dysfunctional intrahepatic CD8+ T-cells and recruitment of HBV-specific pro-inflammatory TH17 CD4+ T-cells are important for the pathogenesis of liver inflammation in chronic HBV infection. In order to develop novel and safe immunotherapeutic strategies, further work is needed to define the differences between the circulating and intrahepatic adaptive immune responses in the setting of chronic viral infections. References Chronic hepatitis B is a heterogeneous disease and patients chronically infected by HBV display strikingly different levels of HBV replication (from undetectable levels to 10 11 HBV-DNA copies/ml of serum) and often alternate periods of absence of liver inflammation and severe hepatitis [1] . These acute exacerbations of liver damage (called hepatic flares, HF) can occur spontaneously, be induced by IFN-a therapy or by the withdrawal of treatment with nucleoside analogues [2] . They are often preceded by high levels of HBV replication and by progressive accumulation of HBV antigens [3] and are characterized by an increase liver pathological activity (manifested as an increase in the level of ALT). The prevailing idea is that the hepatic flares are the result of a quantitative recovery of HBV-specific T cell response [2] . The rational of such scenario is solid since HBV is considered a fully noncythopatic virus and adoptive transfer of HBV-specific T cells in HBV-transgenic mice, trigger liver inflammatory [4] . However, there are scarce experimental evidences to support such a scenario, which are limited to data showing [5] an increment on CD4+ T cell proliferation against the whole HBcAg around the time of hepatic flares [5, 6] . In addition, such T cell profile could not be confirmed in other recent analysis where different assays (intracellular cytokine staining or HLA-tetramer quantification) were used to quantified HBV-specific CD4 and CD8+ T cell response (7) (8) (9) . Moreover, two other important points need to be taken in account: the first is that the frequency of circulating and intrahepatic HBV-specific CD8+ cells in patients with chronic HBV infection correlate with HBV control and not with liver damage [8] . Secondly, work in animal models has clearly shown that the bulk of liver damage is not directly cause by HBV-specific CD8+ cells, but is mainly caused by their ability to trigger a series of secondary events including hepatic granulocyte infiltration, chemokine production and subsequent recruitment of an inflammatory infiltrate composed of macrophages, NK cells and T cells [10, 11] . As a consequence, there is no direct correlation between HBV-specific CTL frequency and the extent of liver damage, and hepatic flares cannot be simply associated with an increment of the HBV-specific T cell response [12] . Hepatic flares after therapy withdrawal There are practical difficulties to study the immune pathogenetic events correlate with hepatic flares. Animal models of HBV infection (i.e. woodchucks-HBV transgenic mice) cannot be used since they do not spontaneously develop hepatic flares and human studies are often limited only to immune events that coincided and/or followed the hepatic flares. For these reasons, we have recently studied a small cohort of patients developing hepatic flares after therapy withdrawal, where the events that precede the increased liver pathology were analyzed in details [9] . Anti-viral therapy termination in chronic HBV patients is almost invariably linked with an immediate rebound of HBV replication, usually followed by HF (characterized by elevated ALT levels-3 times the upper limit of normal) 8-16 weeks later [13] . These sequential features permitted a precise (10-12 months-4 weeks intervals) analysis of virological and immunological events before and during HF (see example in Fig. 1 ). The first observation of this study was that the rebound of HBV replication following therapy withdrawal did not trigger any immunological events related to innate immune activation. Despite the fact that HBV replication increased by about 5-6 log in the 10-12 weeks before HF, pro-inflammatory cytokines like IL-1b, IL-6, TNF-a and the anti-viral cytokine IFN-alpha were consistently low (\5 pg/ml) or undetectable at all time points in every patient (Figs. 1, 2) . The absence of a classical pro-inflammatory cytokine pattern [14] after therapy interruption and the extended time period before the triggering of HF (12 weeks on average in all patients) are similar to the kinetics of acute HBV infection which is characterized by a long incubation time (8-12 weeks) before the onset of liver injury [15] associated with low/undetectable levels of innate cytokines [16, 17] . Such profile shows the peculiarity of HBV infection [18] since hepatic infection with other viruses like HCV, MCMV and adenovirus immediately trigger activation of IFN-a genes and a cascade of events characterized by instant high production of CCL-2, CCL-3, CXCL-9 and CXCL-10 [19, 20] . Although these data are derived from the reactivation of HBV replication (from 10 2-3 to 10 9 -10 10 ) and not from primary infection, the almost complete absence of signs of immune reactivation during the rebound of HBV replication is in agreement with the suggestion that HBV might escape intracellular innate immune recognition mechanisms (i.e. TLR3, 7 and 9) [18] . The only notable exception in the profile of immunological tolerance during the initial phase of HBV rebound that preceded hepatic flares was the detection of high values of CXCL-8 (IL-8) a neutrophil chemo-attractant capable of suppressing antiviral effect of type I IFN and influencing NK cell activation [21] (See example in Fig. 2 ). In accordance with these data, CXCL-8 has been shown to be elevated also prior to spontaneous HF, where it was proposed to synergize with IFN-a and activate NK cells [21] . However, here, high levels of CXCL-8 are temporally associated with a normality of ALT values, suggesting that IL-8 might perhaps predispose but not directly cause the hepatic flares. A second important observation from the longitudinal study of these patients is the clear involvement of CXCL-9/10 in HF ( Fig. 3) . High serum levels of CXCL-9 and CXCL-10 were temporally associated with HF in all patients studied. These findings were also confirmed in cross-sectional analysis of the serum of chronic HBV patients with not-therapy related hepatic flares [9] ( Fig. 4 ). CXCL-9 and CXCL-10 are potent chemo-attractants of activated T cells [22] and have been shown in several animal models to recruit antigen-specific and inflammatory T cells to the liver [10, 23] . Thus, the data obtained in patients with chronic hepatitis B are in agreement with the involvement of inflammatory infiltrate in viral hepatitis and extend the previous observation of increased CXCL-9/10 levels in flares detected in HCV [24, 25] and in HIV-HBV co-infected patients [26] . We then analyzed what immune components could be responsible for triggering CXCL-9/10 production in HF. In HBV transgenic mice, CXCL-9 and CXCL-10 are produced by hepatocytes and macrophages after adoptive transfer of HBV-specific CD8 T or NK cells activation [10, 27] . Thus, we first analyze whether HBV-specific T cell increase are associated with HF and CXCL-9/CXCL-10 increase. Sequentially collected PBMC were stimulated with mixtures of peptides covering the HBV proteome and tested for different functions (IFN-c production and expression of the de-granulation marker CD107a). Furthermore, since involvement of PD-1/PD-L1 interaction was suggested to inhibit the functional activation of T cells in chronic hepatitis B patients [28] , the experiments were also performed both in the presence or absence of anti-PD-L1 antibodies. Despite this extensive methodological approach, ex vivo HBV-specific T cell responses were undetectable in the four patients developing HF at every time point tested regardless of the presence/absence of anti-PD-L1 antibody. In contrast, an increased frequency of IFN-c+/CD107a+ HBV-specific CD8 T cells was detected only in the patient who did not developed HF and maintained a lower replication of HBV (\10 6 HBV-DNA copies/ml) (Fig. 3) . HBV-specific CD8 T cells were detected at different time points (18 weeks before and 4, 8, and 12 weeks after therapy interruption) consistent with the hypothesis that quantity of HBV-specific CD8 T cells correlate with viral control and not with liver damage [7] . Thus even though, circulatory environment does not represent the immunological events occurring within the liver, such data are clearly in contrast with the idea that single quantitative differences in virusspecific CD8 cells can trigger CXCL-9 and CXCL-10 production and explain the pathogenesis of hepatic flares. Similarly to the data related to HBV-specific T cells, analysis of the frequency of activated NK cells and of regulatory T cells failed to detect any fluctuations of their number in association with hepatic flares. Thus, the data of this work [9] did not show an increase of circulatory HBV-specific T cell response (as well as circulatory activated NKcells) with the presence of HF. On the contrary, an increased HBVspecific T cell response was detectable in the only patient that maintained a lower level of HBV-replication and did not develop HF following antiviral withdrawal. It is thus very likely that more complex processes are taking place within the liver during the phase of immune reactivation of HBV: the increase in IL-8 levels at the time of the increase in viraemia preceeding hepatic flares [9, 21] and an increase in IFN-a coinciding with the onset of the flare itself [9, 21] are indicative of a possible interaction between innate and adaptive mechanisms resulting in the recruitment of inflammatory cells mediated by IFN-gamma inducible chemokines (CXCl-9, CXCL-10). What is triggering hepatic flares? The presence (or the lack) of temporal correlations between different immunological parameters and hepatic flares do not clarify what is the cause of the triggering. A plausible hypothesis is that a threshold of HBV antigen expression could stimulate intra-hepatic innate mechanisms able to break the state of immunological ignorance of the HBV-specific T cells present in the liver. Several data have shown that a sudden increase of HBV-DNA and HBV antigens preceded the hepatic flares [3, 9, 21, 29] . Activation of innate immunity (Type I IFNs and NK cells) have been shown to be linked to an excessive production of HBV antigens [30, 31] . In addition, data in transgenic mice have demonstrated the ability of intrahepatic IFN-alpha production to break the immunological tolerance of intrahepatic Ag-specific T cell [23] . It is thus possible to hypothesize that an initial activation of innate immune mechanisms (mediated by pro-inflammatory cytokines or/ and NK cells) within the liver could alter HBV antigen presentation by hepatocytes and allow CTL recognition of HBV infected hepatocytes. Hepatocytes are constitutively expressing very low levels of HLAclass I [32] and are insufficient in Ag processing and presentation pathways, which is incremented by intrahepatic IFN-alpha or IFNgamma production [33] . CTL activation will trigger CXCL-9 and CXCL-10 production, which are necessary for the accumulation of inflammatory cells in the liver and are a constant findings in hepatitis reactivations in HBV, HIV-HBV and HCV infected patients [24, 26] . Nevertheless, despite the plausibility of this ''reductionist'' scenario, other components might play an important role. Changes in the liver microenvironment such as platelet activation can increase CTL-mediated liver damage [34] . Conversely, intrahepatic CD8+ T cell function can be modulated by expression of PD-L1 molecules on infected hepatocytes (35) (36) (37) which have been shown to be increased by and IFN-gamma and IFN-alpha production [38] . Intrahepatic CD8 T cell function may also be modulated by the nutrient microenvironment; increases in arginase activity accompanying hepatic flares may deprive local T cells of arginine and thereby bias their effector function towards a pro-inflammatory phenotype [39] . Furthermore, cytokines like CXCL-8 can upregulate TRAIL deathinducing receptors on hepatocytes, whilst a subsequent increase in IFN-a can induce TRAIL expression on NK cells. This may allow NK cells from patients undergoing flares to be able to directly kill hepatocytes through the TRAIL pathway [21] . It is, in summary, extremely difficult to predict the complex web of interactions between immune cells, hepatocyte environment and HBV replication that take place in the liver during the episodes of hepatic reactivation. Nevertheless, a better understanding of the role played by the different components of immune system in the different phase of HBV disease is necessary to design new treatments aiming to eradicate and not only suppress HBV infection. Hopefully, understanding that hepatic flares of chronic hepatitis B are not necessarily and invariably caused by an increment of HBV-specific T cell responses will start to remove the stigma associated with their role in HBV infection and facilitate the development of treatments aimed at boosting their antiviral capacity. References  • Toll-like receptors recognize invading viral pathogens • TLRs are expressed in hepatocytes and in immune cells • TLR activation results in Type I IFN and/or inflammatory cytokine induction • Hepatitis C virus interferes with TLR-induced antiviral immune defense HCV Infection and Immunity Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a single positive stranded Ribonucleic acid (RNA) that has the unique capability to cause chronic hepatitis infection in the majority of individuals exposed to it. It is generally believed that insufficient immune response to the initial HCV infection permits viral persistence and leads to chronic hepatitis that over decades results in progressive liver damage and hepatocellular cancer (Kamal 2008; Rustgi 2007; Bruno 2008). HCV infects hepatocytes where viral replication occurs that induces Type I interferon (IFN) production in hepatocytes Bode 2009 . Although hepatocytes produce Type I IFN, systemic antiviral immunity is mostly generated by cells of the immune system. A coordinated activation of innate and adaptive immunity that involves CD4 and CD8 T cell activation and virus-specific immune response is associated with clearance of acute infection while in chronic HCV infection broad spectrum abnormalities were found in the functions of innate [monocytes, myeloid and plasmacytoid dendritic cells, natural killer (NK) cell] and adaptive immunity (abnormal CD4 T cell function) necessary for successful HCV elimination ; Szabo 2005; Szabo 2008) (Fig. 1 ). Innate immunity represents the first line of defense against invading pathogens as these cells produce pro-and anti-inflammatory cytokines and antiviral proteins such as interferons in antiviral responses (Szabo 2006; Kanto 2007) . More important, many of the innate immune cell types play a central role in induction of antigen-specific T cell responses. The interaction between the HCV virus and the immune system during acute infection determines whether viral elimination or chronic infection will be the outcome of the battle between the HCV and the host immune system (Szabo 2008). A strong, multi-specific T lymphocyte response of both CD4+ and CD8+ cells produced early in infection is associated with viral clearance and disease resolution. In contrast, a narrowly focused and delayed immune response seems to lead to chronic infection (Chang 2001 (Fig. 2) . Investigation of TLR expression in HCV revealed significant changes in expression of several TLRs in the liver as well in peripheral immune cells (Riordan 2006; Sato 2007) . In treatment native patients with chronic HCV infection, blood monocytes and T cells expressed increased levels of TLR2,6,7,8,9 and 10 mRNA while TLR4 was upregulated only in T cells and TLR5 in monocytes (Dolganiuc 2006 ). Another study found significantly higher levels of TLR2, TLR3 and 6 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of individuals with chronic HCV infection (He 2006) . Furthermore, baseline expression of TLRs was different between responders and non-responders to therapy (He 2006) . Another study found that expression of TLRs 4, 7, and 8 in CD14+ cells of peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC)-which represent monocytes-was increased in patients and so were the levels of tumor necrosis factors (TNFalpha), IL-6 and IL-12 p35 in PBMCs (Sato 2007) . Increased expression of TLR2 and TLR4 in blood monocytes of patients with chronic HCV infection was observed irrespective of the HCV genotype or histological stage of the liver disease and expression of TLR2 but not TLR4 correlated with increases in serum TNFalpha increases and serum ALT levels (Riordan 2006). The role of TLR2 is further suggested by the observation from studies where a significant association was found between homozygous TLR2 polymorphism (TLR2 Arg753Gln), but not TLR4 polymorphism (Asp299Gly and Thr399Ile), and the primary outcome of liver disease (Eid 2007) . TLR3 Because TLR3 recognizes double stranded RNA, this receptor can alert the host of HCV virus during its replication when it undergoes a dsRNA form (Bode 2009 ). Ligand stimulation of TLR3 leads to recruitment of the adapter molecule, TRIF, to induce downstream signaling of I-kappaB kinase epsilon (IKKe), phosphorylation of IRF3 and induction of Type I IFNs (Barton 2007; Dunne 2005; Hertzog 2003; Kanto 2008) . This pathway, however, is disrupted by the HCV virus which interferes with host interferon induction in hepatocytes. It has been found that the NS3-4A serine protease of HCV blocks activation of IRF3 by causing degradation of the toll-like receptor adapter-inducing interferon-b (TRIF) adapter molecule in the TLR3 pathway . This is one of the several different strategies HCV uses to undermine host innate immune responses. TLR7/8 TLR7 and TLR8 recognize single stranded RNA and both use the MyD88 common TLR adapter for downstream activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3/7 resulting in pro-inflammatory cytokine and Type I IFN induction (Meylan 2006; Takeda 2005; Szabo 2008; Wietek 2003) . There are some cell-specific differences in TLR7 and TLR8 expression and related cytokine responses. TLR7 is abundant in plasmacytoid DCs and this cell-type responds to TLR7 stimulation with high levels of IFNalpha production via IRF7 activation (Meylan 2006 ; Takeda 2005; Szabo 2008). Monocytes, macrophages and myeloid dendritic cells express TLR8 and activation of TLR8 induces pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as IFNß (Meylan 2006 ; Takeda 2005; Szabo 2008). Both TLR7 and 8 are expressed in hepatocytes in the liver. It has recently been shown that hepatitis C single-stranded RNA induces innate immunity via TLR7 (Zhang 2009 ). HCV encodes G/U-rich ssRNA TLR7 ligands that activate innate immunity. HCV-derived osteopontins (OPN) activated IRF7 and NF-kappaB in Huh-7 cells and the polyuridine tract in the three prime untranslated region (3'UTR) of HCV induced IFN-alpha production (Zhang 2009 ). Similar to this finding, there was a baseline increase in IRF7 nuclear translocation in Huh7.5 cells expressing full-length HCV replicon but reduced TLR7 ligand-induced activation ). This was consistent with the finding of decreased TLR7 expression in hepatoma cells that harbored the full-length HCV replicon or were infected with the JFH-1 HCV virus and decreased TLR7 mRNA expression in the liver of patients with chronic HCV infection ). Downregulation of TLR7 mRNA and protein expression was mediated by a HCV-related decrease in the stability of the TLR7 mRNA ). These observations suggest that HCV can interfere with TLR7induced antiviral immune defense in hepatocytes. Several studies suggest that chronic HCV infection is associated with inflammatory cell activation, increased pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in the circulation and in the liver and recruitment of inflammatory cells to the liver (Reviewed in: Szabo 2008). There is also significant evidence that this is associated with increased expression of TLR2 and TLR4 in immune cells as well as in the liver in chronic HCV disease. While TLR2 is mostly known for recognition of lipopeptides from bacterial origin, virus-derived pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP) were also found to activate TLR2. We reported that HCV core and NS3 proteins can stimulate cell activation via TLR2 (Dolganiuc 2004) . Specifically, TLR2 dimerized with TLR6 or TLR1 in recognition of HCV core and NS3 proteins in monocytes and macrophages and resulted in downstream activation of IRAK-1, NF-kappaB and TNFalpha production (Dolganiuc 2004; ). Another study found that synthetic lipopeptides of HCV core protein activate TLR2 (Duesberg 2002) . These HCV-induced TLR2-mediated mechanisms contribute to the overall pro-inflammatory cascade activation in HCV infection. There is also evidence for TLR4 activation in chronic HCV infection which is associated with hyper-responsiveness to TLR4-mediated cell activation in monocytes in patients with chronic HCV infection (Dolganiuc 2004 ; Perrin-Cocon 2008). There is evidence for increased levels of circulating lipopolysaccharide in patients with chronic HCV infection which can provide ongoing activation of TLR4, the receptor for lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (Dolganiuc 2007) . We have shown that there is a loss of TLR tolerance in monocytes with HCV infection which contributes to the in vivo pro-inflammatory cascade activation in monocytes in these patients (Dolganiuc 2004) . Recently, the role of TLR4 was also suggested in HCV-related hepatocellular cancer development. It was shown that TLR4 activation results in increased hepatocyte-specific expression of Nanog in mice with transgenic expression of the HCV non-structural protein, NS5. HCV expression mediated synergistic liver damage and tumor formation by alcohol-induced endotoxemia (Machida 2009). These data suggested a TLR4-mediated synergistic effect of alcohol and HCV in induction of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in mice. In addition to TLRs, the intracellular DExD/H box RNA helicases are also important cytoplasmic sensors of virally derived RNA. The helicase receptors, retinoic-acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I; also called DDX58) and melanoma-differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5; also called Helicard) respond to double-stranded RNA with induction of antiviral type I IFN (Bowie 2007; Yoneyama 2007) . Although RIG-I and MDA5 seem to share structural and functional similarities, their recognition capacity of viral-derived RNA is distinct. RIG-I or MDA5 in recognition of ssRNA hepatotropic viruses, such as HCV, has relevance as the virus undergoes dsRNA phase during replication (Saito 2007). Interestingly, decreased expression levels of RIG-I and MDA5 were detected in Huh7 and Huh7.5 cells that are permissive to HCV replicons and in vitro infection with the replication efficient JFH1 and JFH/J6 HCV strains (Binder 2007) . RIG-I and MDA5 use their CARDs to signal downstream events via an adaptor named CARD adaptor inducing IFN-beta (Cardif), MAVS, IPS-1 or VISA (Kanto 2008; Horner 2009). IPS-1 is anchored with its C terminus to the outer mitochondrial membrane, while its N-terminal CARD domain interacts with both RIG-I and MDA5. Mitochondrial localization renders IPS-1 functional, since cytoplasmic of endoplasmic reticulum-bound IPS-1 no longer mediates downstream IRF and NF-kappaB activation (Seth 2005). After activation by dsRNA, the IPS-1 recruits signaling intermediates, such as IKKs (IKKalpha, beta, epsilon and TBK1) to activate NF-kappaB, TRAF3 and IRF transcription factors (Meylan 2006) . All these pathways induce production of type 1 IFNs; however the kinetics of the differential production of IFNalpha and IFNß upon RLH activation is yet to be defined. It has recently been demonstrated that RIG-I but not MDA5 efficiently binds to secondary structured HCV RNA to confer induction of IFNß expression (Sioud 2006). LGP2 is a functional negative regulator of host defense and it binds HCV (Sioud 2006 ). An analogous regulatory domain in LGP2 interacts with RIG-I to ablate selfassociation and signaling. Thus, RIG-I is a cytoplasmic sensor of HCV and it is governed by regulatory domain interactions that area shared with LGP2 as an on/off switch controlling innate defenses (Sioud 2006). Inhibition of RIG-I-dependent signaling to the IFN pathway has been found in HCV infection by the HCV NS3/4A protease activity (Johnson 2007; Abe 2007) . This inhibition was localized to upstream of the non-canonical IKK-related kinases IKKepsilon and TBK1, which phosphorylate IRF3, at the level of the TLR adapter proteins, TRIF/ICAM1 (Johnson 2007; Abe 2007) . These observations support the contention that HCV interferes with host pathways directed at viral elimination. Implications for Disease Progression and Viral Clearance Inflammation in the liver contributes to progressive liver damage and fibrosis. Thus, it is not unexpected that a positive correlation was found between increased TLR2 and TLR4 mRNA expression in PBMCs of HCV infected patients compared to controls (Shehata 2006) where TLR2 expression significantly correlated with the hepatic necroinflammatory activity while TLR4 correlated with fibrosis stage (Shehata 2006). Several single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were identified in the TLR4 loci that were associated with fibrosis risk in chronic HCV infection (Li 2009 ). In addition, HCV core and non-structural proteins (NS3-NS5) were found to activate stellate cells and induce a fibrogenic phenotype with increased production of TGF-beta, and procollagen-alpha (Bataller 2004) . Interactions between immune cells, non-parenchymal cells (NPC), and hepatocytes also have an impact on disease progression and HCV replication. It has recently been shown using in vitro mouse cells that TLR3 and TLR4-stimulated hepatic NPCs can suppress HCV replication through IFNß induction of ISGs in hepatocytes (Broering 2008) . The same group showed that TLR activated hepatic stellate cells are also potential regulators of HCV virus replication in hepatoma cells (Wang 2009 ). Therapeutic Implication of TLRs in HCV Infection Given the strong Type-I IFN-inducing effect of activation of TLR9 or TLR7/8, they represent attractive therapeutic targets in antiviral pharmacotherapy design. Indeed, several TLR9 agonists have been tested in vitro with promising potential in inducing robust IFNalpha production in HCV infection (Cooper 2008 ). However, early clinical trials were discontinued in humans with the CpG compound due to side effects. A TLR7 agonist, isatoribine, was also potent in induction of IFNalpha and it reduced plasma HCV concentrations in chronic HCV infection (Horsmans 2005) but the initial promise of this compound diminished after development of side effects in the human clinical trials. Recent studies suggest that CpG type TLR9 agonists are robust in induction of IFNalpha in plasmacytoid DCs while stimulation via TLR7 was less effective in patients with chronic HCV infection (Libri 2009). While the general concept of activating endogenous type I IFN induction via TLR stimulation remains to be vital and feasible, development of compounds that will have specificity without a negative side effect profile remains to be a challenge for drug discovery. • A nuclear factor (HNF4a) that regulates the replication and persistence of HBV • The replication of HBV down-regulated the expression level of Leptin receptor on hepatocytes • Expression of HBsAg induced extracellular secretion of cyclophilin A (CyPA) and its implication in pathogenesis Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is the prototype of Hepadnaviridae family, which replicates via an RNA intermediate. The genome of this virus is very small but compact, with only 3.2 Kb in size, and thus can encode very limited number of proteins. However, HBV is very successful in establishing replication and persistence in cells, enabling the virus to multiply rapidly within host cells and to spread among human populations In this regard, cellular components are crucial to support the successful replication process of the virus. On the other hand, HBV has to counteract the immune network in cells and host to ensure viral survival, replication and persistence. Therefore, in addition to analysis of viral mutations and host immune responses against HBV, interactions between host cells and HBV are another important field to decipher the natural history and pathogenesis of viral hepatitis B, and for developing new approaches to control this disease. Herein, three illustrations on virus-host cell interactions will be given: (1) a cellular nuclear factor that regulates virus replication and persistence; (2) HBV replication down regulates expression of cellular receptor; (3) expression of small S protein induced secretion of cellular protein. In the HBV genome, there are four overlapping open reading frames (ORFs) that are translated to make seven viral proteins, including a core protein, a reverse transcriptase (RT), three surface (envelope) proteins, and HBx, a multifunctional regulatory protein. Besides, there are several regulatory sequences, including the enhancers and promoters located in the viral genome. Host factors such as, NF-1, AP-1, NFKB and EF-C, which are present in extrahepatic tissues have been shown to react with Enhancer-I, while C/EBP and HNF-4 which are predominantly present in liver tissues were reported to react with Enhancer II, and promote the replication or persistence of HBV [1] . Liver tropism of HBV was assumed due to tissue-restricted expression of HBV receptors. However, in HBV transgenic mice, viral transcription and replication intermediates have been observed both in hepatocytes and kidney proximal tubules. Tang and McLachlan first showed that the nuclear hormone receptors, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and retinoid X receptor a (RXRa) or plus peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa) supported HBV replication in non-hepatic cells by controlling the 3.5 pregenomic RNA synthesis. Using an HBV replication system in nonheptoma cells, McLachlan et al. further demonstrated the liver specific nuclear hormone receptors are critical determinants for HBV tropism, as these transcription factors bind to the core promoter regulatory elements and governs the level of synthesis of 3.5kb RNA template [2] . By studying the regulation effects of different nuclear hormone receptors on wild-type virus and a naturally-occurring variant with A1764T and G 1766A double mutation, which was associated with sero conversion from HBeAg and anti-HBe positive, differentially regulation by different nuclear hormone receptors was observed in cell culture. The wildtype virus genome replicated to higher level in response to the expression of RXRa-PPARa hetero dimer, whereas the variant genome replicated to higher level in response to the ectopic expression of HNF-4. Results indicate that the replication competency of wild-type and variant viruses can be differentially regulated by nuclear hormone receptors, suggesting that antiviral immune response in the liver can select specific viral variants in which pregenomic RNA synthesis is preferentially responsive to certain nuclear hormone receptors [3] . Thus, changes in the physiology of hepatocytes during an immune response, and selection of specific virus variant by alteration in nuclear hormone receptor binding site are of importance when studying the pathogenesis of viral mutants. Recently To determine the role of the transcription factor HNF4a in HBV biosynthesis in vivo, HBV transgenic mice with mice carrying a floxed HNF4a (HNF4afl/ fl) allele and albumin Cre recombinase (lineage B6.Cg-Tg(Albcre)21Mgn/J, Jackson Laboratory) transgene (AlbCre) were bred to generate HBVAlbCreHNF4afl/fl transgenic mice. In these HBV replicating transgenic mice the level of HBV transcription and replication in early postnatal development correlated with the level of liver HNF4a expression. Conditional depletion of HNF4a in the liver resulted in the loss of HBV transcription and replication which indicated that this nuclear receptor is a major determinant of viral biosynthesis in vivo. Furthermore, in these mice, viral transcription, biosynthesis and antigen expression increased progressively after infection at birth, and thus was speculated that developmental regulation of HBV biosynthesis by HNF4a possibly contributed to persistent infection [4] . Although it is likely that HNF4a directly activates HBV transcription, the possibility of HNF4a controlled the expression of additional factors necessary for efficient viral transcription and replication in vivo cannot be ruled out. As the majority of HBV infections acquired in adolescence and early adulthood are successfully cleared by the host, while most HBV infections that occurred at birth resulted in chronic infection, the parallel increase in HNF4a expression and HBV biosynthesis levels observed during postnatal development suggested that neonatal HBV infection is associated with a slow developmentally regulated increase in viral transcription, replication and antigen expression, and thus may contribute to life long chronic infection [4] . Can one inhibit HNF4a without completely eliminating its essential cellular functions? The authors argued that newborn pups expressed enough HNF4a for viability but not enough to support HBV replication and if HNF4a Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 activity levels can be attenuated clinically to limit HBV biosynthesis while minimally affecting liver physiology, this might offer a novel therapeutic strategy to complement currently available antiviral drugs targeting therapy [4] . This very interesting study is a typical translational research, which started on deciphering liver-specific transcriptional factors, but ended in explaining some mechanisms of HBV persistence, and possible new therapeutic approaches. In a lineage of HBsAg positive transgenic mouse model and in a cell line transfected with a plasmid harboring the S gene of HBV, proteomic comparisons were conducted, compared to those of their counterparts. Down-regulated genes and proteins of enzymes associated with glucogenesis were noted in HBsAg positive cells and mice [5] . In addition, during the period of development in liver-specific conditional disruption of HNF4a of transgenic mice, two distinct phenotypes were described, namely, displayed reduced growth, altered glucose homeostasis and a postnatal lethal phenotype. Therefore, we chose to study HBV-host cell interactions in glucose metabolism. Leptin levels have been found elevated in chronic hepatitis C (CHC) compared to healthy adults, however, other studies reported lower leptin in CHC compared to controls [6, 7] . Recently, Zografos et al. studied the serum levels of leptin in samples from 63 chronic hepatitis B (CHB) and 42 hepatitis C patients treated with interferon-a [8] . Leptin levels before IFN-a administration were higher in CHB and CHC compared to healthy controls (P \ 0.004) and patients with diseases other than viral hepatitis (P = 0.0001). In CHB patients, there was a significant reduction of leptin during IFN-a treatment and lasted for up to six months after the end of treatment. This was followed by an increase in leptin levels reverting to pretreatment levels at 1.5 years after therapy terminated. The pattern of leptin alterations was similar in CHC patients where decrease in leptin was more pronounced at 6 months after the end of treatment. However, biochemical or virological response to treatment was not associated with leptin reduction in both groups. Serum leptin levels have been reported independently associated with severe fibrosis in patients with chronic viral hepatitis and represented a negative prognostic factor for virological response to lamivudine monotherapy in HBeAg negative CHB patients [9] . In a preliminary study comparing serum leptin levels among chronic hepatitis B patients and healthy adult controls, we found the results rather confusing. It was because serum leptin levels vary with body weight, intake of food, immune status, metabolic changes and genetic backgrounds, which were difficult to monitor and control. Therefore, we preferred to study the interactions between leptin and HBV in cell cultures. Leptin is a 16-kda nonglycosylated protein product of the OB gene which is an important multifunctional hormone/cytokine, secreted from adipocytes, linking nutritional status with neuroendocrine and immune functions [10] . Leptin has been found implicated in modification of insulin sensitivity in muscles and livers, regulation of carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, regulation of puberty and reproduction. Leptin plays profibrogenic role in the liver, and promotes hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) growth [11] . Leptin exerts its biological activities through the leptin receptors. There are four isoforms of lepin receptors in human, the longest isoform (OB-R L ) is responsible for fully functional signaling, while the shorter ones OB-R S ) have truncated cytoplasmic domains, are with reduced signal transduction effects [12] . Lower OB-R L and OB-R S expression have been reported on PBMCs of chronic hepatitis patients, but expression of OB-R L was significantly increased in hepatitis liver tissues. In a study of leptin receptors among HCC patients, high OB-R expression was seen in 53% of patients with HCC and was inversely correlated with vascular invasion (P = 0.037). These patients were shown with a better overall survival (P = 0.027), and expression levels of leptin receptors may have prognostic value in HCC patients [13] . A replicative clone containing 1.3 copies of HBV was used to transfect Huh-7 cells, and by transient transfection, the mRNA transcription level of long form leptin receptor (OB-R L ) was downregulated markedly in HBV replicating cells,,while no change was observed in the short form leptin receptor (OB-R S ) .This was observed in HBV clones both from HBV genotypes B, and C. By western blotting, the protein level of OB-R L was also decreased in HBV replicating cells. In contrast, expression of HBs or HBx protein without HBV replication did not affect the expression of OB-R L in cells. To explore whether or not antiviral treatment could revert the decrease of leptin receptor expression, HepG2.2.15 cells were treated with an antiviral drug adefovir, which resulted in increased transcription of OB-R L mRNA and expression of OB-R L protein, showing that by inhibiting HBV replication, the decreased OB-R L expression was reverted. It was presumed that due to the down-regulation of leptin receptor, more leptin would be needed to induce signal transduction pathways triggered by leptin. Different concentrations of leptin were added to HBV replicating cells, and when compared to that in control cells, higher concentration of leptin was necessary for leptin-induced down-stream phosphorylation of STAT3 in HBV replicating cells. Taken together, the down-regulation of OB-R L expression in HBV replicating cells could partly explain higher serum level of leptin in some chronic hepatitis B patients. Results also showed that antiviral therapy may benefit chronic hepatitis B patients via regulating the leptin receptors on hepatocytes. (paper under preparation). Three morphologically distinct forms of viral particles are present in the sera of HBV infected patients, namely the 22 nm diameter spherical particles, tubular particles, and 42 nm diameter virions. Strikingly, the subviral particles (spheres and tubules), containing only viral envelope glycoproteins and host-derived lipids, outnumber the virions by a factor of 1,000-to 10,000-folds. HBsAg has been proved extremely effective in inducing protective antibodies (anti-HBs), and thus has been used as the prophylactic vaccine. However, specific interactions between HBsAg and host intracellular factors have not been extensively studied. By comparative proteomic study, we have observed decreased CypA levels in hepatocytes of transgenic mice expressing HBsAg, with coexisting increased serum level of cyclophilin A (CyPA) [14] . To study the mechanisms involved, cells transfected with recombinant plasmids encoding the small or large S were separately used to transfect hepatoma cell lines. Only the small S (SHBs) induced secretion of CyPA. The increased extracellular secretion of CyPA was shown not due to nonspecific increased secretion of cellular proteins, as there was no increased secretion of HBeAg, alpha fetal protein or albumin. Furthermore, SHBs was pulled down by GST-CypA fusion protein, which indicates a direct binding between these two proteins. The direct interaction between CyPA and SHBs was also shown by confocal microscopy. To study the potential biological significance of CypA secretion, HA-SHBs plasmid (pcDNA plasmid harboring the S gene) and pcDNA3-HA control plasmid were injected respectively into C57BL/6J mice by hydrodynamic injections. Serum CypA increased dramatically in mice injected with HA-SHBs, compared to mice receiving the vector. Serum ALT levels were monitored to evaluate damage of liver functions. In SHBs expression mice group, ALT levels were significantly elevated compared to those of the control group. Liver tissues were serially sectioned and examined by both Hematoxylin Eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining with anti-HBsAg antibody. Co-existence of spotty necrosis foci and HBsAg positive hepatocytes were found in liver sections of HA-SHBs injected mice. HBsAg positive hepatocytes were surrounded by inflammatory cells in HA-SHBs injected mice, whereas neither HBsAg positive cells nor foci of inflammation were observed in the control mice. To determine whether this inflammatory effect was due to nonspecific responses to hydrodynamic injection and/or expression of a foreign protein, hydrodynamic injection using a VSV-G expression plasmid was employed as a control. Serum ALT levels remained normal and no inflammation foci were found in mice injected with VSV-G, expression plasmid. Therefore, the inflammatory response induced by SHBs expression in liver tissue was specific (paper submitted). CypA is a ubiquitously and abundantly expressed cellular protein belonging to the immunophilin family. It was originally identified as the receptor for immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine A (CsA) [15] , and was later considered an important cellular chaperone molecule. The CypA-CsA complex inhibits the protein phosphatase activity of calcineurin and subsequently inhibits signal transduction pathway for initiating T-lymphocyte activation [15] . CypA was recently found secreted from cells in response to oxidative stress and inflammatory stimulations [16] . The observations reported here collectively suggest that CypA secretion induced by SHBs might contribute to the pathogenesis of HBV infection and CyPA may serve as a new drug target for inhibition of HBsAg expression or secretion in hosts. Seng Gee Lim Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, National University Health System; Department of Medicine, Yong Yoo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore Drug induced Liver Injury (DILI) is defined as liver damage due to drugs, herbals or supplements, and constitutes about 10% of all adverse drug reactions. The spectrum of liver damage is wide, ranging from mild abnormalities to acute liver failure and liver fibrosis. It is a relatively uncommon event but can be catastrophic, particularly once jaundice occurs. The mechanisms of DILI are also multifold and complex, but there is increasing data that there is a genetic predisposition in drug handling that leads to liver injury in many cases. The most important aspect of DILI is the diagnosis, and due to the varied manifestations, there is no diagnostic marker. The most important diagnostic aspects are a high degree of suspicion followed by an exclusion of other types of liver disease, summarized as a scoring system, the most commonly used of which is the RUCAM scoring system. The mainstay of treatment is drug withdrawal of the offending agent. In mild-moderate cases, this is followed by eventual resolution of the liver damage but in severe cases, liver transplantation may be necessary. In the few surveys performed the incidence appears to be between 1 and 10 per 100,000 persons. There are only a few population-based databases. In the UK, a GP Research database was used to identify all patents from 1994 to 1999 for subjects presenting with a liver injury code after excluding all patients with a liver related diagnosis before enrolment. This Out of a total of 1,636,792 person-subjects, the crude incidence was 2.4 (95% CI 2-2.8) per 100,000 person years, but only cases severe enough to be hospitalized or referred to a consultant were selected [1] . The best population based survey was performed in Nievre, France where the captive population have to seek local healthcarealmost all the doctors participated in the study using a standard protocol following the International Consensus Meeting proposal [2] . The incidence of DILI was 14 per 100,000 population [3] . This study probably provides the most accurate incidence rate supporting the authors beliefs that liver adverse reactions were 16 times under-reported in France. Using similar criteria, a prospective population based study S22 Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 in Catalan, Spain found an incidence of 7.4 (95% CI 6.0-8.8) cases per 100,000 population [4] . In a population based study in central MA, USA, the incidence of DILI was surprisingly high at 40.6 cases per 100,000 persons [5] . The incidence of mild liver injury defined as ALT\3 x ULN is 01-10%, whilst for symptomatic liver disease it is 0.001-1% and for acute liver failure this is 0.0001-0.001%. In such studies the case fatality rate was between 7 and 12%. However, once acute liver failure occurs, the mortality rises to over 70% [6] . DILI is one of the more common causes of acute liver failure in the West [7] but seems to be less common cause of ALF in Asia [7] except in Singapore [8] . There is no data on the incidence of DILI in Asia but there are sporadic reports and case studies which indicate that this is a problem or uncertain magnitude. An additional problem in Asia is the widespread use of herbal and alternative medicines, the safety of which is poorly defined [9] . There have been a paucity of studies on drug induced liver injury in Asia, particularly with regards to incidence, and no population based studies. The majority of the published literature on drug induced liver injury in Asia come from Japan, China, Taiwan and India. A pubmed search using the keywords ''drug induced liver injury'' AND Asia, came up with 264 hits of which 59 were reports of specific drugs implicated in DILI, followed by reports of TB drug related hepatotoxicity (n = 31), then herbal therapy (n = 30), then hepatoprotectants (n = 26), followed by clinical presentations of DILi (n = 24), then studies on susceptibility to DILI (n = 12). It would seem likely that genetic differences between the West and the East would result in differing susceptibility and differing implicated drugs. Differing trends for DILI within Asia also exist. In India, the most common cause of DILI was TB drug induced hepatotoxicity whilst in China, Taiwan and Singapore, herbal treatments and TB drugs are the most common causes of DILI. However, good epidemiology studies are lacking particularly with the widespread use of herbal remedies which are largely unproven in efficacy. Herbal DILI represents a particular problem that is likely to be significantly under-reported in Asia and that still remains to be characterized [10] . Diagnosis remains a major problem as the normal causality scales may less useful. The most important factor is the temporal relationship between ingestion and onset of illness as well as the response to drug withdrawal, not to mention exclusion of other causes. The liver damage caused by herbs covers a wide range of pathology from acute hepatitis to veno-occlusive disease to liver fibrosis. The herbs implicated are also different in the West compared to the East. Western herbs implicated in liver injury include Black cohosh, Chaparral, Comfrey/pyrrolizidine alikaloids, Germnader, Mistletoe, Kava, Pennyroyal, Skullcap and valerian, whilst Chinese/ Japanese herbs include Chaso and Onshido, Jin Bu Huan, Ma-huang, Sho-saiko-to, and Shou-wa-pian [11] . Unfortunately, in the case of most herbal DILI, it may be impossible to identify the particular chemical that is causing the liver damage. Moreover, many herbal preparations may contain undeclared adulterants [10] , which could also contribute to liver damage. Potential Pathogenic Mechanisms of DILI Drug metabolism [reviewed by Pachkoria et al. [12] ] The liver is responsible for concentrating and metabolizing almost all the drugs introduced into the body. Drug handling first of all involves the entry of the compounds into the cells, after which, a variety of metabolizing enzymes process the compounds for excretion from the body, mainly by a process of biotransformation that turns them into water soluble compounds leading to a biliary excretion pathway or a renal clearance pathway. Each drug has a particular biotransformation pathway. It is thus conceivable that variations in drug handling result in variable levels of by-products. Phase I reactions are where polar groups are added to lipophilic molecules by oxidation, reduction or hydrolysis to make them water soluble. These reactions are dependent upon the cytochrome P450 superfamily which comprise over 50 different oxidases of which CYP1, 2, and 3 are the most important for metabolism of drugs and toxins. . Phase II reactions increases the hydrophilic characteristics of compounds that are insufficiently water soluble so that they can be excreted as non-toxic compounds. This process is usually conjugation with a polar group such as glucuronic acid, sulfate, acetate, glycine, glutathione or a methyl group. Phase III reactions results in anionic conjugates with glutathione, glucuronate, sulfate, or other negatively charged molecules that lead to drug detoxification. These then become substrates for the multidrug resistant protein (MRP) family of ATP-dependent transporters located in the bile canaliculi. They regulate bile formation and the excretion of xenobiotics. Drug metabolism and DILI [12] CYP2D6 polymorphisms have been implicated in antidepressant hepatotoxicity. CYP3A4 is responsible for biotransformation of 50% of commonly used drugs. CYP activity can be induced or decreased leading to differing levels of toxic metabolites. CYP3A4 has been implicated in flucloxaclllin-induced cholangiopathy, trioleandomycin induced cholestasis and troglitazone induced liver injury. It has also been implicated in severe hepatotoxicity due to interactions between amiodarone-simvastatin and raloxifene-fenofibrate. Enzymes implicate in hepatotoxicity are N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2), the glutathione M and T (GSMT and GSTT) and the thiopurine S-methiltransferase (TPMT). Slow N-acetylation has been implicated in hepatotoxicity due to sulfonamides, dihydralazine, and isoniazid. Sulphoxidation polymorphism has been implicated in chlorpromazine hepatotoxicity. The (MRP) family of ATP-dependent transporters are thought to be implicated in the cholestasis of sulindac, flucloxacillin and terbinafine. A list of genetic susceptibility alleles can be seen in Table 1 . Immune mediated injury may be generated by reactive metabolites that undergo covalent binding with cellular proteins resulting in haptenization. This can then trigger MHC class II and subsequently T cell activation or B cell antibody production. Intracellular stress can result in activation of the innate immune response and a resulting cytokine imbalance. HLA associations indicate an immune related cause (Table 1 ). Significant association was found between DRB1*1501-DRB5*0101-DQB1*0602 haplotype and cholestatic hepatitis related to amoxicillinclavulanate, and DRB1*0201-associated DRB1*0301, DRB1*0701 haplotype and cytotoxic hepatitis related to antituberculous therapy. Apoptosis is programmed cell death often initiated by specific stimuli such as DNA damage and cell death receptors, while necrosis is consequence of acute metabolic perturbation resulting in irreversible breakdown of plasma membrane barrier, mitochondrial death, and leakage of cytosolic compounds and reactive metabolites. Thus loss of membrane integrity is a key distinguishing feature of necrosis compared to apoptosis. Pathways of apoptosis and necrosis have both been well described. Acetaminophen injury is a powerful inducer of oxidative stress, DNA damage and apoptosis mediated by C-jun terminal kinase signal transduction pathway. Mitochondrial toxicity is another cause of apoptosis and drugs such as valproate have been implicated. • Intrinsic drug reactions are dose related and predictable eg acetaminophen • Idiosyncratic reactions are unpredictable and comprise: • Hypersensitivity reactions are immune mediated eg phenytoin, allopurinol-cause fever, rash, eosinophilia with a latency of 1-4 weeks, and in severe cases, Stephens-Johnson syndrome chlorpromazine • Metabolic-idiosyncratic are caused by aberrant metabolism of the drug in susceptible patients and occurs in only few patients taking the drug eg isoniazid, ketoconazole, diclofenac, dusulfiram, valproate, troglitazone and amiodarone hepatotoxicity Predisposing factors that increase susceptibility to drugs  • Female gender-a belief that women were more suspectible to DILI were not borne out in proposective studies [13] . • The elderly-there seems to be an association between older age and risk of DILI for specific drugs such as isoniazid and amoxicillin/clavulinic acid, and also an association between older age and cholestatic or mixed patterns of LFT [14] . • Children-have increased susceptibility to selected compounds particularly with valproate and erythromycin estolate. Reye's Syndrome is the unusual sensitivity to aspirin in children with viral infections. CNS agents are the most common cause of DILI in children and up to 20% of ALF is due to DILI (including acetominophen) [14] • HIV/AIDS-this population is generally considered a risk for DILI particularly for those on HAART, isoniazid, rifampicin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, TB drugs, and acetaminophen. The most important is the development of DILI after starting HAART which ranges from 1 to 18% [14] . • Chronic hepatitis B/C patients-the susceptibility to DILI is for specific drugs, particularly TB drugs, ibuprofen and methimazole [14] . • Obesity and NAFLD-concerns about statins and the risk of DILI have not been demonstrated in a number of studies [14] . • Liver disease-no evidence for increased risk of hepatotoxicity with statins but there is increased risk of hepatotoxicity with TB drugs and HIV patients with hepatitis B and C co-infection [15] . The clinical manifestations of drug induced liver injury are highly variable and cover a wide spectrum due to the multifold mechanism of liver damage. However, certain patterns of liver injury can be recognized, and can be classified into three groups (Tables 2) • Asymptomatic elevations of aminotransferases with normal or minimally elevated ALP-predominant hepatocellular damage. According to an international consensus panel on drug induced liver injury [17] , acute hepatocellular injury consists of ALT [2x ULN or ALT/ALP ratio C5. Several hundred compounds can cause such liver injury including herbal medicines. These can range from mild elevations to significantly elevated levels. Proposed ALT levels for cessation of suspected drug hepatotoxicity by the FDA [18] are: • Cholestatitic liver injury characterized by isolated rise in ALP C2x ULN or ALT/ALP ratio B 2 [17] . Two forms of cholestasis are described [19] : • Pure cholestasis-pruritus and jaundice without hypersensitivity manifestations, and is due to only a few drugs-sex steroid derivatives, cytarabine and azathioprine. • Acute cholestatic hepatitis-often associated with pain and hepatic tenderness, mimicking acute biliary obstruction or cholangitis, often accompanied by hypersensitivity reactions. • Mixed pattern of liver injury is defined as those in which the ALT/ ALP ratio is between 2 and 5, and is a frequent type of liver injury that often represents immunoallergic liver injury. • Acute or subacute liver failure. Recently an AASLD workshop defined this as coagulopathy (INR C 1.5) and encephalopathy within an illness timeframe of 24 weeks in patients who previously had no liver disease [6] . However, many patients may have impaired synthetic function short of developing overt liver failure, but the rate of progression can be quite rapid. • Part of systemic drug reaction eg sulfone syndrome, hypersensitivity reaction, serum sickness syndrome, Reye-like syndrome Prognosis and outcome Hepatocellular damage Transient elevations in transaminases even to high levels carry a good prognosis and normalize within 3 months. Elevated transaminases with increased total bilirubin or INR in symptoms of clinical hepatitis carry a poorer prognosis with mortality of 10-50%. Acute liver failure carries a mortality of 70-90% without liver transplantation with the exception of acetaminophen which has a mortality of 40%. Cholestatic liver injury [21] Jaundice usually resolves in about 4 weeks after cessation of drug, but LFTS can take months to resolve. In one study, some 25% of histopathologically proven DILI patients continued to have abnormal LFTs 5 years later. However, cholestatic DILI is usually associated with low mortality rates and seldom progresses to cirrhosis or ductopenia Hy's Law Hy Zimmerman observed that drug induced liver injury with ALT [3x ULN + serum bilirubin [2x ULN without biliary obstruction leads to mortality of C10% [22] . In a large Swedish study (DILI cases = 784) [23]  The diagnosis of DILI remains one of the most difficult aspects of this condition. Suspicion of a drug related adverse reaction must always be foremost when dealing with abnormal LFTs or acute liver failure. Patients may not be forthcoming with information about the drugs they are taking and health supplements and herbs may not be considered as drugs by patients, hence all orally taken herbs, supplements or medications must be elicited from patients. Principles of diagnosis are As the diagnosis of DILI is not simple an international consensus meeting was convened to streamline the criteria, known as the Council for International Organisation of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) score, which also became known as the Roussel Uclaf Causality Assessment Method (RUCAM) [2] . Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 S25 A number of other scoring systems have also been published but RUCAM remains the most widely accepted system, but is still problematic to use. The difficulties of diagnosing DILI and the need for a causality system was illustrated in a study of cases of reported hepatic adverse events by general practitioners and hospital doctors in the Northern Region of the UK [26] . Subsequent evaluation by the study team using RUCAM showed that 50% of cases were incorrectly assigned and were due to other causes. Excellent reviews of the different scoring systems have been performed by Assis et al. [20] and Tajiri et al. [27] . The other scoring system that was introduced to simplify the causality assessment was the Clinical Diagnostic Scale (CDS) also known as the Maria and Victorino (M&V) scale [28] , and more recently the Drug Induced Liver Injury Network (DILIN), in addition to the RUCAM score, utilized a scoring system based on a causality score of 1-5 (definite to unlikely), from three of their committee members [29] . RUCAM did not gain widespread use mainly because of the ambiguities of the scoring system such as those played by multiple drug therapy and the exclusion of non-drug aetiologies. It also relies on reports from previous reactions making new drugs and herbal therapies not applicable. Another problem is that evaluation by RUCAM scoring system relies on an expert hepatology opinion rather that non-experts. The CDS model used similar tools but also included extrahepatic manifestations. A comparison of the two models RUCAM had an overall better performance. However, both models are suboptimal due to the complexity and subjectivity and the lack of sufficient data [20] . Even when all data is available neither model can accurately predict the aetiology in each possible scenario of liver injury [20] , making expert opinion even more important. Furthermore, studies show that the interobserver coefficient is less than 50%, thus, new tools for causality assignment are necessary. DILIN have approached this using RUCAM and expert opinion, but this may make a rapid diagnosis even more difficult. The main management strategy is to diagnose DILI, in particular to ensure that other forms of liver disease are truly excluded which would otherwise lead to a delay in appropriate treatment. The positive diagnosis of DILI can be made on clinical grounds and as indicated would be better from an expert hepatology opinion, with or without the use of the RUCAM or CDS scoring system. Stopping drug therapy is not necessarily universal and the FDA guidelines for stopping therapy as discussed previously allow for generous raised levels of ALT before recommending cessation of drug. However, the presence of raised ALT and jaundice usually signifies more sinister prognosis and cessation of drug should be prompt. Overall, unless the drug is clearly essential for medical care, it would be prudent to stop therapy. As almost all cases resolve after stopping the drug, therapy is only necessary in the few cases that become chronic, or in those that develop acute or subacute liver failure. The use of steroids have been anecdotally reported with benefit in some cases of Stephens-Johnson syndrome, diclofenac, gold, halothane, methyldopa, minocycline, pemoline, piroxicam, propylthiouracil, and some sulfa-containing drugs [30] . In those that develop acute liver failure, steroids may be detrimental. Overall, there is insufficient evidence to support the use of steroids and the decision to use steroids should be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Specific therapy for valproate hepatotoxicity with intravenous L-carnitine confers a survival advantage of 48% compared to untreated patients who had only a 10% survival [31] . A meta-analysis indicated there was a paucity of good clinical trials for the use of N-acetylcysteine in the treatment of acetominophen hepatotoxicity [32] , although survival advantage was seen in 48% compared to only 20% in the control group with acetaminophen acute liver failure [33] . More recently N-acetylcysteine was shown to be effective in patients with non-acetaminiophen related liver failure, particularly those with DILI. However, survival advantage was only seen with those with early liver failure-having grade 1 and 2 encephalopathy [34] . The mainstay of therapy for acute liver failure due to DILI is liver transplantation. Future therapies may involve cytokines, inducers of transport and cofactors related to an understanding of the metabolism of specific drugs [35] . References  Portal Hypertension: Pathogenesis and New Approaches Portal hypertension is a frequent clinical syndrome, defined by a pathological increase in the portal venous pressure. When the portal pressure gradient (the difference between pressures in the portal and the inferior vena cava veins: normal value below 6 mmHg) increases above 10-12 mmHg, complications of portal hypertension can occur. These complications represent the cause of death and indication for liver transplantation in patients with cirrhosis. The portal pressure gradient is determined by the product of portal blood flow and the vascular resistance that opposes that flow. Ohm's law defines this relationship in the equation: DP = Q 3 R in which DP is the portal pressure gradient, Q is the flow within the portal venous system, and R is the vascular resistance of the portal venous system, which represents the sum of the resistance of the portal vein, the hepatic vascular bed, and of the portosystemic collaterals. It follows that portal pressure may be increased by an increase in portal blood flow, an increase in vascular resistance, or a combination of both [1, 2] . However, it is well established that in cirrhosis, the primary factor leading to portal hypertension is an increased resistance to portal blood flow. Later on, an increase in portal venous inflow will help to maintain and aggravate portal hypertension (Fig. 1 ). Increased vascular resistance to portal blood flow Increased resistance to portal blood flow may occur at any site within the portal venous system. Although much of the increase in intrahepatic resistance is the mechanical consequence of the architectural disturbances caused by the cirrhotic process, it is clear that on top of these alterations there is an active contraction of several elements in the liver that further contribute to increase resistance. It has been claimed that this dynamic and reversible component may represent up to 40% of the total increased intrahepatic vascular resistance in cirrhosis. Contractile elements influencing the hepatic vascular bed can be located at sinusoidal as well as extrasinusoidal levels and include vascular smooth muscle cells of the intrahepatic vasculature (i.e. small portal venules in portal areas), [3] activated hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) [4, 5] and hepatic myofibroblasts that may compress the regenerating nodules or venous shunts within the fibrous septa. An increased production of vasoconstrictors and an exaggerated response of the hepatic vascular bed to them, as well as an insufficient release of vasodilators together with an insufficient response to vasodilators of the hepatic vascular bed are the mechanisms implicated in the pathogenesis of the dynamic component of the increased intrahepatic resistance of the cirrhotic liver. Increased production/exaggerated response of the hepatic vascular bed to vasoconstrictors Different vasoconstrictive factors, that are detailed below, have been involved in the regulation of hepatic vascular tone in cirrhotic livers [6] Adrenergic agonists The alpha-adrenergic agonist norepinephrine, that is usually elevated in decompensated cirrhosis, has been shown to increase intrahepatic vascular resistance [7, 8] . This increase in resistance is completely blunted by the administration of a-adrenergic antagonists, such as prazosin. On the other hand, the administration of badrenergic agonists, such as isoproterenol, reduces intrahepatic vascular resistance in perfused cirrhotic liver. These data suggest that adrenergic receptors may be involved in the regulation of intrahepatic resistance in cirrhosis, and that a-adrenergic receptor blockers may decrease portal pressure in cirrhosis. In addition, the hepatic vascular bed of cirrhotic livers exhibits an exaggerated response to the a-adrenergic agonist methoxamine. It has been shown that the coupling of different agonists to its membrane Gcoupled receptors promote the release of arachidonic acid from the plasma membrane facilitating its metabolization to different vasoactive-derived metabolites, including prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), and leukotrienes [9, 10] Thromboxane Cyclooxygenase (COX) is the key enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway leading to PGs and TX from arachidonic acid [11] . COX-1 is constitutively expressed but it can also be stimulated by factors similar to those that stimulate the constitutive isoform of nitric oxide (NO) synthase (eNOs) [12, 13] . COX-2 can also be constitutively expressed in some tissues including the liver [14, 15] and the mesenteric vascular bed [16] . COX-2 is an inducible isoform of cyclooxygenase that, similarly to the inducible isoform of NO synthase, is usually expressed or over-expressed after stimulation with proinflammatory agents [17] . The hyperresponse of the hepatic vasculature of cirrhotic livers to the vasoconstrictor methoxamine is associated with an overproduction by the isoenzyme COX-1 of thromboxane A2 (TXA2). This hyperresponse is completely corrected by pretreating the livers either with non-selective COX blockers, with COX-1 selective blockers or with TXA2 antagonists. Thus, an increased production of TXA2 markedly enhances the vasoconstrictive response of the cirrhotic hepatic vascular bed to methoxamine [14] . Whether this effect is also shared by other vasoconstrictors has not been investigated. Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CT) are a group of highly potent vasoactive substances derived from the oxygenation and dehydration of arachidonic acid by 5-lipoxygenase [18, 19] that increases intrahepatic vascular resistance in normal and cirrhotic rat livers. However, this response is significantly greater in cirrhotic livers that in addition also have an increased expression of the 5-lipoxygenase mRNA and an increased production of CT. 5-lipoxygenase inhibition produces a marked reduction in portal pressure in cirrhotic livers, which suggests that 5-lipoxygenase-derived eicosanoids also contribute to the increased hepatic vascular resistance in cirrhosis [20] . Endothelins are a family of homologous 21-amino acid vasoactive peptides (ET-1, ET-2, and ET-3) that also modulate hepatic vascular tone in cirrhosis [6, 21] . The biologic properties of endothelins are mediated essentially by two major endothelin receptors, endothelin A (ET-A) and endothelin B (ET-B) receptors. The ET-A receptor shows a high affinity for ET-1, but not for ET-3, and mediates constriction; the ET-B receptor has equal affinity for ET-1 and ET-3. Activation of ET-B receptors located on the vascular smooth-muscle cells promotes vasoconstriction, whereas activation of ET-B receptors located on endothelial cells promotes vasodilation, which is mediated by enhanced NO and prostacyclin production by the endothelial cell. Patients with liver cirrhosis have increased circulating plasma levels of ET-1 and ET-3 [22] . ET-1 increases portal perfusion pressure by increasing intrahepatic resistance in normal and cirrhotic livers. While some experimental studies reported a slight reduction of portal pressure in cirrhotic animals after the administration of endothelin antagonists [23, 24] , this was not confirmed by other studies [25] . Therefore the role of endothelins increasing the vascular tone in cirrhosis remains unsettled. Angiotensin II Angiotensin II (A-II) is a powerful vasoconstrictor that increases hepatic resistance. Increased A-II is the result of the activation of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS), which is commonly observed in patients with cirrhosis. Activation of RAS may also be detrimental for portal hypertension as a result of increased liver fibrogenesis [26] , which may worsen the evolution of cirrhosis. All the above suggested that preventing the activation of RAS may have beneficial effects in decreasing portal pressure in cirrhosis. However, current evidence shows that, although A-II blockade may reduce portal pressure, it causes systemic hypotension what reduces its potential as a therapeutic strategy for portal hypertension [27] . Endogenous cannabinoids (or endocannabinoids) is a collective term describing a novel class of endogenous lipid ligands, including anandamide (arachidonyl ethanolamide). Anandamide has been reported to induce both vasodilatation and vasoconstriction depending on its concentration as well as the vascular territory being examined. Recent studies suggest that anandamide might be involved in the increased resistance of cirrhotic livers by promoting an increase production of TXA2 [28] . In normal conditions, the endothelium is able to generate vasodilator stimuli in response to increases in blood volume, blood pressure or vasoconstrictor agents, in an attempt to prevent or attenuate the concomitant increase in pressure. In several pathological conditions there is an impairment in this endothelium-dependent vasodilatation, which has been named as endothelial dysfunction [29, 30] . Endothelial dysfunction is considered one of the main pathological mechanisms involved in the increased vascular tone observed in several vascular disorders such as arterial hypertension [31] , diabetes [32] and hypercholesterolemia [33] , and has been attributed to a diminished NO bioavailability [29, 30] and to an increased production of endothelial derived contracting factors (EDCFs), such as PGH2/ TXA2 [34] , endothelin [35] or anion superoxide [36] . The hepatic vascular bed of cirrhotic livers also exhibits endothelial dysfunction [37] . Indeed, contrary to what happens in normal livers, the cirrhotic liver cannot accommodate the increased portal blood flow caused by the postprandial hyperemia, which determines an abrupt postprandial increase in portal pressure [38] . In addition, in experimental models of cirrhosis, endothelial dysfunction has been further characterized by showing that the cirrhotic liver exhibits an impaired response to the endothelium-dependent vasodilator acetylcholine [15, 37] . Endothelial dysfunction in cirrhosis has been attributed to reduced NO bioavailability and to increased vasoconstrictor COX-1 derived prostanoids. Reduced NO bioavailability within the cirrhotic liver NO is the natural ligand for soluble guanylate cyclase and is responsible for an increase in cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), the final agent responsible for the relaxation of the vascular wall through the extrusion of cytosolic Ca 2+ . Endothelial NO synthase (eNOS) is responsible for most of the vascular NO produced in a reaction where L-arginine is oxidized to L-citrulline and NO [39] . In cirrhotic liver, there is a reduced NO bioavailability that plays a major role increasing intrahepatic vascular resistance and thereby worsening portal hypertension. In accordance with this concept, the administration of nitrates (exogenous donors of NO) have been shown to decrease portal pressure. In addition, enhancement of the expression of NO synthase in liver cells, through the portal injection of adenovirus coupled with the gene encoding NO synthase, significantly reduces portal pressure [40] . More recently, strategies aimed at increasing NO release by enhancing intrahepatic eNOS activity, based on constitutively active Akt gene transfer [41] or by simvastatin administration [42] have opened new perspectives with potential therapeutic implications. Decreased NO production occurs despite a normal expression of eNOS mRNA and normal levels of eNOS protein [37, 43] and has been attributed, at least in part, to reduced eNOS activity caused by several posttranslational alterations in the regulation of the enzyme such as increased caveolin expression, or a defect of the essential cofactor of eNOS, tetrahydrobioterin [44, 45] . Like in other vascular disorders characterized by the presence of endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress has been implicated in the increased vascular tone that exhibit cirrhotic livers [46] . It is well known that superoxide is capable of reacting with NO -, leading to peroxynitrite (ONOO-) formation [47, 48] , with an ongoing decrease in NO bioavailability [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] . Reactive oxygen species (ROS) can also affect NO biology by its capacity to oxidize, and therefore inactivate, the NO synthase cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) [31] , leading to a situation that has been called eNOS uncoupling [54] [55] [56] , in which the NO synthases are incapable of transferring electrons to L-arginine and start using oxygen as a substrate leading to O 2formation instead of NO. It has been suggested that because of that antioxidant therapy may contribute to correct this abnormality [57] . Increased production of vasoconstrictor prostanoids Endothelial dysfunction was also shown to be associated with an increased production of TXA2 and completely prevented by selective COX-1 blockers and by TXA2 antagonists. These results suggest that an increased production of a COX-1 derived vasoconstrictor prostanoid probably TXA2, is, at least in part, responsible for endothelial dysfunction [15] . All these findings suggest that in cirrhotic livers there is an over-activation of the COX-1 pathway with an increased production of their vasoconstrictor-derived compounds. Hydrogen sulphyde (H2S) H 2 S is produced endogenously from desulphydration of cysteine by three different enzymes; cystathione-c-lyase (CSE), cystathionine-bsynthase (CBS), or 3-mercapto-sulphurtransferase [58] . Although NO and CO are the first two identified gasotransmitters, recently, different arguments have pointed out hydrogen sulphide (H 2 S) as the third gasotransmitter that can modulate vascular tone [59] . Indeed, it has been recently suggested that H 2 S regulates HSCs contraction and that a decreased expression of CSE in HSCs may be responsible for the increased intrahepatic resistance in rodent models of liver cirrhosis [60] . HSCs are unequivocally the main cells involved in the production of excessive ECM seen in liver fibrosis (Fig. 2) . As a result of injury, HSCs undergo ''activation'' or transdifferentiation, from a quiescent, vitamin A-storing cell to a myofibroblast-like cell, with several new phenotypic characteristics, such as enhanced cell migration and adhesion, increased proliferation, production of chemotactic substances capable of recruiting inflammatory cells as well as other HSCs, contractibility, loss of normal retinoid-storing capacity, increased rough endoplasmic reticulum, changes in cytoskeletal organization and cellular morphology and, most importantly, acquisition of fibrogenic capacity. In the present study we will be looking forward the pharmacological effect of different vasoactive agents on LSEC in an Endotoxin induced portal hypertensive rabbit model Increased splanchnic blood flow Development of a hyperdynamic splanchnic circulatory state is a major component of portal hypertension. The increase in blood flow in splanchnic organs draining into the portal vein, and the subsequent increase in portal venous inflow, aggravates and perpetuates the portal hypertensive syndrome, especially when portal-systemic collaterals are extensive [2] . The mechanisms underlying this splanchnic hyperemia are not fully understood, but it has been shown that it is associated with an overproduction of endogenous vasodilators and a decreased vascular reactivity to vasoconstrictors. Recent studies have demonstrated that an increased neovascularization in splanchnic organs, through a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)dependent angiogenic process, plays an important role in allowing such an increased splanchnic blood inflow, since suppression (blockade) of VEGF signalling markedly attenuates the increase in splanchnic blood flow, as well as the increased splanchnic vascularization observed in portal hypertensive animals [61, 62] . Interestingly, this VEGF-dependent angiogenesis also contributes significantly to the formation of portal-systemic collateral vessels in portal hypertensive animals, as described later on. Therefore, modulation of angiogenesis may represent a potential target in the treatment of portal hypertension. Increased production of circulating/local paracrine vasodilators. Excessive response to vasodilators/Resistance to endogenous vasoconstrictors Various evidence suggest that there is an interrelationship between different vasoactive systems, which are coupled to cause the splanchnic vasodilation. Furthermore, it appears that none of these vasoactive factors is the only factor responsible for the splanchnic vasodilation present in portal hypertension, which is likely to be multifactorial in origin. Many studies have demonstrated that plasma glucagons levels are elevated in patients with cirrhosis and experimental models of portal hypertension. Hyperglucagonemia results, in part, from a decreased hepatic clearance of glucagon, but more importantly from an increased secretion of glucagon by pancreatic a cells [63] . Glucagon may promote vasodilation by a dual mechanism: relaxing the vascular smooth muscle and decreasing its sensitivity to endogenous vasoconstrictors, such as norepinephrine, angiotensin II, and vasopressin [64, 65] . The role of glucagon in the splanchnic of portal hypertension provides a rationale for the use of somatostatin and its synthetic analogues to treat portal hypertension [66] . Endocannabinoids Recent data suggest a role for endocannabinoids in the hyperdynamic circulation of portal hypertension [67, 68] . Increased levels of endogenous cannabinoid anandamide have been found in the monocyte fraction of blood from cirrhotic humans and rats and an increased expression of the cannabinoid CB1 receptors was found in hepatic human endothelial cells [69] . In addition, CB1 receptor blockade reduced portal blood flow and pressure and increased arterial pressure in cirrhotic rats [69, 70] . The mechanism of action is not well understood. It has been suggested that it could be due, at least in part, to an increased NO production, mediated by the activation of endothelial CB1 receptors [69] . Recently, Moezi et al. have demonstrated that the role of anandamide in the pathogenesis of hyperdynamic circulation in cirrhosis are primarily mediated via stimulation of CB1 and VR1 receptor pathways [68] . Several other circulating vasodilators have been implicated in splanchnic vasodilatation. Bile acids are increased in portal hypertension and have vasodilator properties. However, the data in the literature are controversial, and the role of bile acids in the hyperdynamic circulation is not well defined [71, 72] . Likewise, the role of the capsaicin-calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) vasodilator pathway in the systemic and splanchnic vasodilatation of portal hypertension is controversial [73] . Other candidates, including neuropeptides, adenosine, endotoxin, and a variety of vasodilator gastrointestinal hormones, have also been studied. However, evidence is scarce for most of them. Most investigators now agree on that local paracrine/autocrine vasodilators, mainly nitric oxide (NO) (Fig. 3a, b) , but also carbon monoxide (CO) and prostacyclin, play a major role in the pathogenesis of the circulatory abnormalities associated with chronic portal hypertension.  Experimental studies using specific NO inhibitors have shown that NO is involved in the regulation of splanchnic and systemic hemodynamics in portal hypertensive and normal animals. The splanchnic vasoconstrictive effect caused by NO inhibitors is significantly greater in portal hypertensive than in control animals, which suggests that an excessive production of NO may be responsible, at least in part, for the vasodilatation observed in portal hypertension [74, 75] . In addition, an overproduction of NO has been clearly demonstrated in vitro in perfused mesenteric artery preparations from portal hypertensive rats [76] . The finding in patients with cirrhosis of increased serum and urinary concentrations of nitrite and nitrate, which are products of NO oxidation, also supports a role for NO in the genesis of the circulatory disturbances of portal hypertension [77] . The increased production of NO is due both to an increased expression and to an increased activity of eNOS [78, 79] . Factors likely to activate the constitutive eNOS include shear stress, circulating vasoactive factors (endothelin, angiotensin II, vasopressin, and norepinephrine) and overexpression of the angiogenic factor VEGF [61, 62] . In portal hypertensive animals NO overproduction by eNOS in the splanchnic circulation precedes the development of the hyperdynamic circulation [80] . The posttranslational regulation of eNOS in portal hypertension has been further evidenced by recent studies in the partial portal vein ligated model of portal hypertension, showing that upregulation of eNOS catalytic activity, rather than eNOS overexpression, is the initial event that induces NO overproduction in the splanchnic circulation. Indeed, eNOS phosphorylation by AKT seems to be the mechanism of the initial upregulation of eNOS activity and NO-mediated hyporesponsiveness to vasoconstrictors [81] . Later on, other mechanisms for an increased production of NO become important, including an enhanced signalling of the molecular chaperone heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) [82, 83] . Recent studies have shown an increased expression and activity of the inducible form of heme oxygenase (HO-1) in splanchnic tissues from portal hypertensive animals [84, 85] . In addition, the simultaneous inhibition of NO and HO has been shown to reverse completely the reduced vasoconstrictor response to potassium chloride of the mesenteric vascular bed [85] . Altogether, these data suggest that the splanchnic vasodilatation present in portal hypertension is likely to be multifactorial in origin, being promoted in part by an excessive release of NO, CO and other vasoactive-mediators. In addition, experimental studies suggest that when one of the vasoactive mediators is chronically inhibited, the enhancement of other vasoactive pathways may prevent the correction of splanchnic vasodilatation [86] . A growing body of recent evidence suggests that H 2 S is a potent vasodilator in aorta and mesenteric arteries [87] . Increased activity of CSE has been demonstrated in rats with liver injury due to carbon tetrachloride [88] . Recently, it has been postulated a role of H 2 S in the development of a hyperdynamic circulation in cirrhosis. This is based on the idea that endotoxaemia leads to increased NO synthesis and upregulation of the enzyme responsible for H 2 S production. Prostaglandins Several studies support a role for prostaglandins in the hyperdynamic circulation of portal hypertension [89] [90] [91] . Prostacyclin is an endogenous vasodilator produced by vascular endothelial cells. It causes vascular smooth muscle relaxation by activating adenylate cyclase and augmenting the intracellular level of cyclic adenosine monophosphate [92] . COX-1 and COX-2 are involved in the biosynthesis of prostacyclin [12, 17, 92] . It has been shown that patients with cirrhosis have increased systemic levels of prostacyclin [93] and prostacyclin has also been found to be increased in the portal vein [91] and aorta [16] of portal-hypertensive rats. In addition, the inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis by indomethacin reduces the hyperdynamic circulation and portal pressure in patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension [94] In addition to the increased portal pressure, recent studies have shown that formation of portal-systemic collateral vessels in portal hypertension is influenced by a VEGF-dependent angiogenic process, and can be markedly attenuated by interfering with the VEGF/VEGF receptor-2 signalling pathway (Fig. 4) [61, 62] . These studies have opened a new perspective in the understanding of the pathophysiology of portal hypertension, with potential clinical relevance, since indicate that manipulation of the VEGF may be of therapeutic value. The collateral circulation may carry as much as 90% of the blood entering the portal system. In this circumstance, the vascular resistance of these vessels becomes a major component of the overall resistance to portal blood flow, and therefore may be very important determining portal pressure. Also, although traditionally it has been thought that the hyperdynamic splanchnic circulatory state associated with portal hypertension was the consequence of active splanchnic vasodilatation, recent data suggests that the increased neovascularization in splanchnic organs is playing an important role allowing the increase in splanchnic blood inflow [62] . Receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors have also begun to receive greater attention as a potential therapy in the treatment of portal hypertension and cirrhosis. Indeed, in preclinical studies, a number of receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors, including imatinib and sunitinib, and now sorafenib, have been shown to improve portal hypertension [103, 104] . It has been proposed that a part of the mechanism of action of these agents may be through an antiangiogenic mechanism. Mejias et al. demonstrates a beneficial effect of the receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, sorafenib, on splanchnic, intrahepatic, and portocollateral circulations in cirrhotic rats with portal hypertension [103] . Indeed, the researchers observed a 25% reduction in portal pressure and a prominent improvement in liver injury, fibrosis, and angiogenesis. Evaluation of the potential efficacy of these drugs in cirrhosis will need a very careful approach. Optimal dosage to maintain efficacy and to what extent the chronic administration will be tolerable and safe needs clinical studies with the proper design and primary endpoints. A major aspect to take into account is that angiogenesis is a critical aspect of cirrhosis and cancer, but at the same time this is of paramount importance in several other pathophysiological processes needing indemnity of vessels. In that sense, one of the major complications of antiangiogenic therapy in patients with liver cancer has been variceal bleeding [105, 106]. There is a marked hepatic and mesenteric up-regulation of beta(3)adrenoreceptors in human cirrhosis and in two different animal models of cirrhosis. The beta ( does not appear to be a benefit of probiotic therapy for portal pressure reduction in patients with compensated or early decompensated cirrhosis. The reductions in endotoxin and aldosterone suggest possible beneficial effects of probiotics for this patient population. The clinical significance of the small but unexpected increase in TNF-alpha is unclear. Future studies are planned in patients with decompensated cirrhosis [137] . Increased plasma volume and hyperkinetic circulation Splanchnic vasodilatation is typically associated with peripheral vasodilatation and a systemic hyperkinetic syndrome, which is characterized by reduced arterial pressure and peripheral resistance and increased plasma volume and cardiac output. The pathophysiologic mechanisms involved in peripheral vasodilatation are similar to those previously described for splanchnic vasodilatation [2] . Peripheral vasodilatation plays a major role in the activation of endogenous neurohumoral systems that cause sodium retention and expansion of the plasma volume, followed by an increase in the cardiac index [102] . Expansion of the plasma volume is a necessary step to maintain an increased cardiac index, which in turn aggravates portal hypertension [102] . This provides the rationale for using a low-sodium diet and diuretics in the treatment of portal hypertension. A second approach in this context would be to induce adrenergic antagonism, either by means of an a 1 -adrenergic antagonist or a combined aand b-blocker. Prazosin, an a 1 -adrenergic antagonist, was shown to markedly reduce the IHVR in treated cirrhotic patients not only by a reduction in HVPG but also by an increase in hepatic blood flow [158] . However, the lack of liver selectivity resulted in a significant reduction in arterial pressure and systemic vascular resistance. This in turn led to a further activation of endogenous vasoactive systems, with plasma volume expansion, sodium retention and in some cases, accumulation of ascites [159] . These findings discouraged its use as monotherapy in the treatment of PHT. Interestingly enough, these adverse effects could be attenuated by the combined administration of prazosin with propranolol [159]. This latter approach showed even more effectiveness in reducing HVPG than the association of propranolol plus ISMN [160]. This drug combination therefore needs further assessment in randomized-controlled trials. Carvedilol combines non-selective b-blocking properties with a 1antagonistic properties. Other effects, although not fully defined, are calcium channel antagonism at high dosages and antioxidant effects [161] . Carvedilol is two-to fourfold more potent than propanolol in its b-blocking profile and has less a 1 -antagonist activity than prazosin [162] . Given this unique pharmacologic profile, the potential exists for carvedilol to reduce PHT by decreasing the IHVR via its a 1 -antagonist activity as well as by decreasing splanchnic hyperaemia through its non-selective b-blocking properties. Trials assessing the effect on portal pressure resulted in a mean reduction of HVPG of 16 , that the hyperdynamic circulation and splanchnic hyperaemia could be attenuated but without a decrease in portal pressure, suggesting that an increase of intrahepatic resistance was produced at the same time. The latter originates presumably from a further aggravation of the intrahepatic NO deficiency because of a generalized effect on NOS. Complications of PHT are responsible for disabling morbidity and mortality in patients with cirrhosis. Decreasing portal pressure has therefore become a major target in treating these patients. Currently, therapy will at least temporarily remain limited to the use of these bblockers because of the lack of valuable alternatives. The main concern of these drugs, however, is the fact that only half of the patients achieve the preset haemodynamic goals and the potential further impairment of liver function because of decrease in total hepatic flow. Therefore, expansion in the knowledge of the pathophysiology of PHT is urgently needed as this might provide new and useful strategies for the future. Currently, some of these new pharmacostrategies have already reached the clinic, and are being currently tested for efficacy and tolerance. The main drawback at present, however, is the lack of (hepato) selectivity, which is needed because of the paradoxal haemodynamic intra-and extrahepatic characteristics. The intriguing haemodynamic events which are noted in NCPF are variable wedged hepatic venous pressure (WHVP) reading. While the WHVP is found to be low in some suggesting a pre sinusoidal block, in others, it is elevated suggesting a post sinusoidal obstruction. Further, while the estimated hepatic blood flow is found to be reduced in all cases of cirrhosis and EHO, it is either normal or high in cases of NCPF. We have been successful in developing a rabbit model of non-cirrhotic portal hypertension with sustained PHT for 6 months. The model has been characterized by increase in portal pressure and Various etiological factors have been conjectured in the genesis of NCPF, but none could explain the hemodynamic abnormalities observed in this condition. There is also a controversy regarding the specific histological abnormality in the liver which is responsible for the portal hypertension. The etiological factors suspected to be responsible for causing NCPF are summarized below. Increased portal blood flow with secondary changes in the hepatic histology has been incremented as major factor for development of portal hypertension. Evidence in favor of this hypothesis are as follows: of increased splenic venous flow secondary to splenomegaly of an undetermined process contributing elevation of portal vein pressure in initial stage; in others possibly later, increased portal vascular resistance plays an important role. However, the hepatic blood flow is not found to be elevated in all cases of NCPF. Further, the finding of diffuse perisinusoidal collagenesis as observed in EM of live tissue and observation of elevated WHVP in many cases of NCPF lend to the view that this may not be the primary cause of portal hypertension in NCPF. Abdominal infection at birth or in early childhood has been alleged to play an important role [118] . Umbilical sepsis, bacterial infections, and diarrheal episodes in infancy and in early childhood are likely to lead to portal pyemia and pylephlebitis, which result in thrombosis, sclerosis, and obstruction of small-and medium-sized portal vein radicals [115, 117] . Although the investigators in India consider thrombosis to be the initial event, the Japanese clinicians believe thrombosis to be a result of portal sclerosis [116, 118] . 3. Exposure to trace metals and chemicals: Prolonged ingestion of arsenic in the drinking water has been incriminated in the causation of NCPF [123, 124] . In patients with chronic arsenic ingestion, the liver histology reveals periportal fibrosis and incomplete septal cirrhosis, with or without development of neovascularization within the expanded portal zones, suggestive of NCPF or IPH. A histologic picture that resembles NCPF has been observed following chronic exposure to vinyl chloride monomers, copper sulfate (vineyard sprayers), protracted treatment with methotrexate, hypervitaminosis A, and in recipients of renal allografts who received treatment with 6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine, and corticosteroids. In mice that were fed arsenic for a prolonged period, there was a 4 to 14 fold increase in hepatic hydroxyproline and hepatic collagen compared with control mice [125]; however, the features of NCPF or portal hypertension did not develop in any animal. These observations suggest that although arsenic ingestion could induce hepatic fibrogenesis, it cannot be incriminated directly in the causation of NCPF. Combination of systemic and direct portal antigen delivery should be evaluated further. There is some evidence to suggest a deranged immune response and reduced cell-mediated immunity in patients who have NCPF [126]; however, it is not clear whether these changes are the cause or the result of portal hypertension in NCPF. Autoimmune disorders frequently associated with IPH including systemic lupus erythematosus with positive LE cell phenomenon, progressive systemic sclerosis, chronic thyroiditis, mixed connective tissue disease, Raynaud' s phenomenon and scleroderma [127, 128] . Unlike NCPF patients in India, female IPH patients in Japan had 69.2% positive for anti-DNA antibodies [128], 24% for antinuclear antibodies, 21.5% for microsome antibodies, and 17.2% for thyroglobulin antibodies. Immunologic abnormalities have also been found in IPH patients such as autologous mixed lymphocyte reaction and deviated T-cell gene repertory. Such a high prevalence of associated autoimmune conditions has not been reported on the Indian subcontinent; however, familial aggregation and a high frequency of HLA-DR3 have been found in NCPF patients [129] . Evidence supporting this hypoteses in NCPF patients include: reduction in the suppressor/cytotoxic T lymphocytes, decrease T4/T8 lymphocyte ratio, reduction in the cell mediated status and poor autologous mixed lymphocyte reaction [126] . In experimental study, repeated injections of splenic extracts, Freud's adjuvant, and egg albumin have been reported to produce splenomegaly and histological changes similar to IPH in rabbit [130] . Injection of splenic extract in presensitized rabbit revealed development of NCPF-like symptoms, with splenomegaly and increase portal pressure in rabbit with negligible parenchyma injury [122]. 5. Obliterative venopathy affecting branches of portal vein: It appears that the primary lesion in this disease is collagenization in the perisinusoidal region and space of Disse. Obliterative venopathy may be secondary to portal hypertension produced by increased portal blood flow or immunological damage of endothelium of portal venules. Further, it fails to account for raised wedged hepatic venous pressure and elevated estimated hepatic blood flow as observed in some cases of NCPF. Unifying hypothesis: Although the role of infection and inflammation of the portal system is convincing, the etiopathogenesis of NCPF remains conjectural. Based on the available information, the authors had proposed a hypothesis for the development of NCPF and EHPVO. Both of these venous inflow tract diseases could develop in an individual who is genetically predisposed to thrombotic disorders, when infection or a prothrombotic event may precipitate thrombosis in the portal vein or its radicals. If it is a major thrombotic event that occurs at birth or at an early age in life, the main portal vein is likely to get occluded, which results in the development of EHPVO (Fig. 5) . In the event of repeated microthrombotic events, the small or medium branches of the portal vein are affected and NCPF develops and manifests in a young adult who has portal hypertension. It also is likely that recanalization of the major portal vein branches occurs in patients who have NCPF. Infection and endotoxemia are considered to be the major initiating events for the thrombosis. (2) Liver fibrosis is the accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, mainly collagen, which occurs in most types of chronic liver diseases. The main causes of liver fibrosis in industrialized countries include chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, alcohol abuse, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). The accumulation of ECM proteins distorts the hepatic architecture by forming a fibrous scar and the subsequent development of nodules of regenerating hepatocytes defines cirrhosis. Liver fibrosis is considered a model of the wound healing response to chronic liver injury. Hepatic stellate cells, formerly known as lipocytes, Ito cells or perisinusoidal cells, were identified as the main collagen-producing cells in the liver in the 1980s [1] . This cell type, first described by von Kupffer in 1876, undergoes a dramatic phenotypic activation in chronic liver diseases with the acquisition of fibrogenic properties. The molecular mechanisms leading to stellate cell activation and increased collagen synthesis in liver fibrosis have been investigated by using cultured stellate cells and experimental models of chronic liver injury in rodents [2, 3] . Besides stellate cells, portal myofibroblasts and cells of bone marrow origin have fibrogenic potential [4, 5] . Recently, the demonstration that even advanced liver injury is reversible has greatly stimulated researchers to identify antifibrotic therapies [6] . However, the most effective therapy to treat hepatic fibrosis to date is still to remove the causative agent [7] . A number of drugs are able to reduce the accumulation of scar tissue in experimental models of chronic liver injury. Renin-angiotensin system blockers and antioxidants are promising drugs, evidence-based therapies are not yet available [8] . Fig. 1 Structure of the different NOXs. Different homologues of NOX have been identified in different cells [9] . See text for details NOX Classic NOX is a multimeric enzyme found in neutrophils. The phagocytic NADPH oxidase (PHOX) contains a heterodimeric membrane-bound cytochrome p558 complex, which consists of NOX2 (gp91phox and p22phox) and three cytosolic subunits (p47phox, p67phox and Rac). Upon stimulation with agonists, the cytosolic subunits translocate to the membrane-bound cytochrome complex leading to enzymatic activity. Humans have five different NOX homologues, NOX1-NOX5. All NOX enzymes are able to catalyze the reduction of molecular oxygen to superoxide, but there are key differences in their activation, subunit composition, localization, and expression (see Fig. 1 ; Table 1 ) [9] . Ang II has been functionally linked to activating NOX1, NOX2 and NOX4 [10, 11] . Reactive oxidative species (ROS) derived from NOX serves as a signaling function by inducing specific biochemical changes in their molecular targets. H 2 O 2 oxidizes the thiol group of cysteines in proteins that will inhibit the activity of protein tyrosine phosphatase. Superoxide reacts with iron and sulfur in proteins that will inhibit aconitase activity or activate guanylate cyclase. There are two distinct phases of ROS reduction induced by Ang II. One is rapid and transit and is the result of the activation of NOX by Ang II. The second is delayed and sustained and results from the upregulation of different NOX subunits by Ang II. Rapid ROS reduction requires p47phox phosphorylation by protein kinase C with subsequent translocation to the membrane. Ang II activates NOX1, NOX2, and NOX4 and also activates the small G-protein Rac1. Identification of specific NOX proteins responsible for ROS production in a particular tissue or organ system has been limited by the availability of reliable antibodies. Instead, tissue localization has relied on the detection of mRNA but not protein. With the exception of the contribution of NOX2 to phagocyte-mediated antimicrobial activity, there are a few unambiguous functional assignments of both NOX proteins to specific tissues. We propose to use knockouts of NOX1, NOX2, NOX4 and p47phox to identify the functional components in the liver and the stellate cell in particular. The non-phagocytic oxidases are expressed at low levels in complex tissue compartments composed of multiple cell types and different NOX isoforms. In many cases, neither NOXO1 nor NOXA1 have been identified in tissues where the implicated NOX protein will require these co-factors for activity [12] . NOX activity in hepatic stellate cells contributes to fibrosis. If high levels of ROS from phagocytic cells such as Kupffer cells mainly protect the organism from external pathogens, a lower amount of ROS, mainly from non-phagocytic cells such as hepatic stellate cells, actively participates in the regulation of intracellular signaling [13, 14] . This interpretation led researchers to investigate the role of ROS in liver diseases and evaluate the potential role of NOX as a mediator of different agonists that induce liver fibrosis. Based on this hypothesis, we showed that stellate cells express components of NOX [13] Ang II-induced stellate cell activation is mediated by NOX activity, introducing for the first time a new role of non-phagocytic NOX in hepatic stellate cells. The importance of NOX and the role of this molecular complex during liver injury were recently confirmed by microarray analysis in human liver tissues. The gene expression pattern of liver samples obtained from patients with alcoholic hepatitis was characterized by a significant up-regulation of several components of NOX and related molecules. These findings clearly demonstrated that NOX is involved in the process of liver fibrosis, as stated from in vivo study in rodents and in humans as well, and is also significantly associated with human liver diseases such as alcoholic hepatitis [15, 16] . NOX mediates profibrogenic activity of Ang II in the liver. As shown previously in the kidney [17] , Ang II exerts its activity for the regulation of intracellular pathways using NOX as a mediator in HSCs [13, 18] . This result is consistent with older studies which demonstrated that inhibition of Ang II synthesis and/or the blockade of Ang II type 1 (AT1) receptors markedly attenuate inflammation and fibrosis in experimental models of chronic liver injury [19, 20, 21] . Based on these findings, we showed that the profibrogenic activity of Ang II in the liver [22] [23] [24] directly acts on stellate cells through the activation of the NOX complex and the subsequent production of ROS [13] . Several experiments demonstrate that Ang II is able to induce ROS production in activated human stellate cells. Dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFDA) fluorescence experiments show that Ang II (10-8 M) induces a marked increase in ROS formation in activated human stellate cells. Moreover, Ang II-induced ROS formation in stellate cells is significantly inhibited when stellate cells are treated with either the flavinoid inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium chloride (DPI) [25] or with the AT1 inhibitor, losartan [19] . Additional proof that human stellate cells express a functionally active form of NOX is provided by the analysis of the genetic expression of key Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 enzymatic components. Indeed, the mRNA for the cytoplasmic factor p47phox and the cell membrane proteins NOX2/gp91phox and NOX1 are detected at very low levels in quiescent stellate cells by real time RT-PCR, while they are highly expressed following stellate cell activation in culture and in cells freshly isolated from patients with liver fibrosis. 13 These data indicate that after stellate cells are activated in vivo, there is activation of NOX components. Furthermore, Ang II induces the phosphorylation of p47phox through AT1 receptors in activated stellate cells. Finally, Ang II induces the expression of heme oxygenase-1, a sensitive marker of cellular oxidative stress.26 This effect is inhibited by losartan or DPI, indicating that oxidative stress is due to AT1induced NOX activation. The p47phox component of NOX is increased in activated stellate cells. p47phox -/-mice have been widely used as a genetic model to study NOX inhibition both in phagocytic [27] [28] [29] and in non-phagocytic cells [13, [30] [31] [32] . In particular, Ang II leads to an increase of intracellular ROS in stellate cells isolated from wild type (WT) C57BL/6 mice, but not in p47phox -/-stellate cells. Also, Ang II used at a concentration of 10-8 M induces DNA synthesis and cell migration in WT stellate cells, as well as phosphorylation of ERK and c-Jun, while these effects are blunted in p47phox -/-stellate cells. Moreover, after 2 weeks of bile duct ligation (BDL), the degree of liver injury and fibrosis is attenuated in p47phox -/-mice. Thus, NOX represents a fundamental mediator in experimental liver fibrosis. Renin-Angiotensin system: The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) is a master regulator of human physiology that plays a key role in maintaining blood pressure homeostasis, as well as fluid and salt balance in mammals through coordinated effects on the heart, blood vessels and kidneys [33] . In the classic pathway of RAS, rennin cleaves the liver-derived precursor peptide angiotensinogen into the decapeptide Ang I. Ang I is further hydrolyzed into the octapeptide Ang II by the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), which represents the main effector peptide of the RAS (Fig. 2) . The discovery of ACE homologue ACE2 adds a new complexity to the RAS (Fig. 2) . ACE2 degrades Ang II to Ang [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] which exerts effects opposite to those of Ang II through its receptor Mas [34, 35] . Accordingly, ace2 knockout mice display elevated serum and tissue levels of Ang II [36] and develop spontaneous glomerulosclerosis with increased deposition of fibrillar collagen which can be prevented by treatment with an AT1 receptor antagonist [37] . Furthermore, ACE2 is upregulated in response to tissue injury and hypoxia [38, 39] . ACE2 has been shown to protect from severe acute lung failure [40] and diabetic kidney injury [41] and also prevent cardiac hypertrophy and myocardial fibrosis caused by Ang II infusion [42] . PDGF and Leptin induce NOX in stellate cells. PDGF, the most potent mitogen of stellate cells [43] , exerts its activity through the activation of NOX [14] . In particular, PDGF-induced increase in DNA synthesis of stellate cells is markedly reduced by pre-treatment with the anti-oxidant drug Mn-TBAP (100 nM/L), and also with two different inhibitors of the NOX complex, DPI (25 lM/L), and apocynin (100 lM/L). The experimental model of liver fibrosis induced in mice by DMN provides additional in vivo evidence for the role of NOX in liver fibrosis. The use of the NADPH inhibitor DPI or the antioxidant drug Mn-TBAP reduces collagen deposition and liver fibrosis in DMN-treated mice [14] . NOX is a crucial mediator of proliferative, fibrogenic, and inflammatory actions of leptin. Leptin-induced NOX acts downstream of JAK activation but is independent of STAT3. Our results, in conjunction with previous studies on Ang II and PDGF, place NOX in the center of the fibrogenic signaling response in stellate cells and demonstrate its potential role as a pharmacological target for antifibrotic therapies [44] . Apoptotic bodies activate NOX. In addition to receptor-mediated agonists, NOX may be activated in stellate cells by the engulfment of apoptotic bodies from dead hepatocytes leading to the up-regulation of collagen a1(I) in stellate cells [45] . Apoptosis is a common feature of chronic liver disease. The engulfment of apoptotic bodies not only acts on macrophages to stimulate production of TGFb1 [46, 47] , but also on stellate cells promoting their activation [45] . In support of this model, apoptotic bodies activate NOX in stellate cells, thereby upregulating stellate cell activation and fibrosis.48 Ingestion of apoptotic bodies by stellate cells increases ROS production in a NOXdependent manner. In fact, the increased production of ROS and collagen in response to apoptotic bodies is blocked by the NOX inhibitor DPI at the concentration of 10 lM. Although the interpretation of these experiments is limited by the non-specificity of a single pharmacological inhibitor, the results are again consistent with an important role of NOX in stellate cell activation. NOX components in hepatic stellate cells. Although NOX plays an important role in stellate cell activation, the exact structure of this complex is still unknown. All components and functionalities of PHOX are already well established, but the respective interactions between NOX components are still under investigation. Thus, the role of the different members of the NOX family in stellate cells is just starting to be investigated. The only well established component, which is recognized to play a central role in the activity of NOX in stellate cells is p47phox (as discussed above) [13] . Another integral component required for the activation of NOX is Rac1. Rac1 is a member of the Rho family of small GTPase proteins that regulates cell proliferation and dynamic reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton [49] . Recent evidence suggests that significant control of ROS signals are imparted by spatially-restricted production at intracellular sites where redox-regulated signaling occurs. For example, NOXs are recognized to spatially control the production of ROS during cell signaling [50, 51] . NOX proteins have been increasingly recognized as key elements of intracellular signaling. Several investigators demonstrated that inhibition of Rac1 or p47phox abrogates TNFa-induced H2O2 production and NF-jB activation. [52] [53] [54] Recently, NOX2 has been demonstrated to produce endosomal O2 required for TNFa induction of NF-jB in the breast cancer cell line MCF-7 [55] . Additionally, NOX1 has been associated with an ROS-producing endosome required for TNFa or IL-1b induction of vascular smooth muscle cells [56] The endosomal localization and topology of the NOX complex explains how NOX-generated ROS can function as intracellular signaling molecules, instead of secreting ROS into the extracellular space. In a separate area of research, dominant mutations in the gene encoding the ubiquitously expressed SOD1 are the most common known causes of inherited amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Mutant SOD1 genes G93A, G37R, and G85R expressed in transgenic mice produce a phenotype similar to ALS. Furthermore, a floxed transgenic mice with tissue-specific expression of SOD1G37R was used to demonstrate that mutant SOD1 expression in neurons, astrocytes (equivalent to stellate cells in the liver) and microglia (equivalent to Kupffer cells in the liver) contribute to the ALS phenotype. [57] [58] [59] Moreover, expression of mutant SOD1G37R in astrocytes induces NOX2 activity [60] . Our proposal will use these seminal results in order to directly assess the effect of these SOD1 mutations on NOX activity and topology in stellate cells and on hepatic fibrosis. contractility in Apelin gene-deficient mice associated with aging and pressure overload. Circ Res 2007;101(4):e32-e42 Peter Schirmacher Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany Predisposing conditions: In the vast majority of human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) a predisposing condition can be found. Most frequently chronic hepatitis B (HBV) and/or hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections are present. While in almost all cases of chronic Hepatitis C with HCC cirrhosis is present, it is not a prerequisite of HCC in chronic Hepatitis suggesting significant differences in molecular pathogenesis. On a global scale aflatoxin (especially aflatoxin B1) represents an important cofactor. Especially in highly industrialized countries chronic alcohol abuse and as recently demonstrated also nonalcoholic steatohepatitis represent important risk factors, although the individual risk is certainly much lower compared to chronic viral hepatitis. Furthermore several hereditary diseases that may lead to chronic liver damage, such as iron overload diseases, alpha 1 antitrypsin deficiency and some rarer diseases carry an increased risk of liver cancer. Only in less than 10% of the cases the cause remains obscure. This makes HCC a well suited tumor entity for considering primary or secondary preventive measures and the feasibility of preventing HCC has been shown by the famous Taiwan study of the WHO, it has demonstrated a significant drop of HCC frequency in children and adolescents due to large scale anti-HBV vaccination. In order to make further progress in HCC prevention the mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis due to the respective causes have to be understood in detail. There is little doubt that more global as well as etiology-specific mechanisms contribute to HCC development and potentially also to its progression. Global mechanisms: The vast majority of predisposing conditions result in chronic liver disease with persistent liver cell damage. Chronic necroinflammation of the liver causes four main potential protumorigenic changes: A. consistently increased cell turnover leads to increased replication and thus an increased mutation frequency. The majority of these mutations are either functionally irrelevant or are eliminated by repair mechanisms or indirectly by causing lethal defects. Nevertheless the frequency of hits in tumor relevant genes is increased. B. necroinflammation activates inflammatory signalling pathways in hepatocytes and there is now a significant body of evidence that these signalling pathways have also protumorigenic effects, as meanwhile demonstrated for the NFkB and IL-6 pathways. Especially the role of NFkB in liver carcinogenesis has been demonstrated well in several animal models. C. Changes in vascularisation may promote hepatocellular proliferation, as demonstrated in Focal Nodular Hyperplasia; thus it is a constant matter of debate, whether well demonstrated changes in vascularisation, that occur in cirrhosis (shunts, vascularisation of sinusoids, etc.) promote liver carcinogenesis by inducing at least focal hepatocellular proliferation. D. Cirrhosis leads to extensive quantitative and qualitative changes in extracellular matrix composition and consequently to changes in matrix-hepatocyte signalling e.g. via integrin receptors. Although it is extremely difficult to test and predict the consequences for HCC development, at least local tumor promoting effects cannot be excluded. In addition to these global ('non-specific') mechanisms, many different etiology-specific protumorigenic changes have been identified over the last decades: HBV: HBV exerts two main protumorigenic mechanisms: A. The HBV-genome codes for two transactivating factors, HBx and preS, which exert broad effects on a variety of cellular genes (e.g. MYC, AP-1, EGFR). B. Although HBV does not require genomic integration for its competent life cycle but clonally propagated, even multiple integrations of HBV DNA have been demonstrated in the overwhelming majority of HCC attributed to chronic HBV infection. These viral integrations already occur during chronic hepatitis in the absence of HCC thus representing a premalignant, initiating event; nevertheless, during tumor progression HBV-integrations may undergo extensive further rearrangement. Integration itself has several protumorigenic effects. Firstly, it has a general destabilising effect on the genome supporting further mutations. Secondly, integrated genomes may serve as a constant source for the above described viral transactivators, which may occur as wildtype, truncated, or fusion products. Thirdly, viral integrations have been shown to lead to constantly activated viral/cellular oncogene fusion genes or to contribute to inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (potentially also by hit-and-run mechanisms). Overall there is overwhelming evidence to explain the high oncogenic potential of chronic HBV-infection despite the absence of significant inflammation or cirrhosis. HCV: In contrast to HBV, HCV-derived sequences have not convincingly been demonstrated in human HCCs. Thus analysis of HCV-derived protumorigenic mechanisms has concentrated on potential transacting functions of viral proteins. The weakness of these approaches has been the use of heterologous model systems for which it is unknown whether they truly mimic the human in vivo situation. Using these approaches transactivating functions have been described for NS5A and HCV-core proteins on a broad variety of cellular proto-oncogenes. It is interesting to note, that HCVderived HCCs almost exclusively occur in patients with complete cirrhosis, which is on one hand arguing in favour of a weaker oncogenic potential of HCV compared to HBV, but also supports the notion that cirrhosis-derived mechanisms indeed support hepatocarcinogenesis. Aflatoxins: Aflatoxin B1 has been convincingly demonstrated as the cause of protumorigenic p53 mutations in codon 249. These mutations are frequent in HCCs from sub-Saharan Africa and southeast Asia but virtually absent in European cases and represented the first paradigm of molecular tumor epidemiology (food contamination by fungus). The mutation fits well the experimentally demonstrated mutagenic mechanism of aflatoxins; but it is not well established, why especially codon 249 of the p53 gene is selected, whether it represents the definitive hepatocarcinogenic mechanism of aflatoxins, and whether other genomic areas may also be affected. Iron-storage diseases: in iron storage diseases-similar to hepatitis C-HCCs are virtually absent in precirrhotic stages of the disease, while the HCC-risk is around 20-25% once the disease has reached the stage of cirrhosis. The oncogenic mechanisms are not well studied, but interest has focussed on radical formation that may have mutagenic effects; this mechanism may also contribute to HCC-development in other types of chronic inflammation, including NASH and ASH. None of the described mechanisms is likely to be sufficient to initiate or sustain fully competent malignant transformation. Further progression events, either of genomic or epigenetic nature, have to occur in order to complement the above described initiating mechanisms. The vast majority of HCCs display a chromosomal instability (CIN) phenotype, characterized by multiple chromosomal imbalances and translocations as demonstrated by conventional and array Comparative Genomic Hybridisation. All varieties of mutations may be present to a significant frequency such as gains (e.g. 1q, 8q), and losses (e.g. 4q), which frequently encompass large chromosomal segments or even whole chromosome arms. But also small deletions (e.g. ß-Catenin) and point mutations (e.g. p53) are well documented. It is well documented that even large genomic alterations may well occur before complete malignant transformations has taken place; for example gains of 1q have convincingly been demonstrated in premalignant Dysplastic Nodules. Nevertheless, the number of genomic imbalances in Dysplastic Nodules is low and the CIN-phenotype is limited to the transformed state. There is an increase in the number of genomic imbalances during malignant progression and by statistic means a rough scheme of early and late type genomic changes and the co-occurrence of several mutations can be derived; the functional basis of this observation is still unknown, although potential candidate genes have been identified for the most common genomic imbalances meanwhile. Interestingly, many of the common genomic imbalances in HCCs correlate with the underlying etiology, i.e. are more frequently observed for example in HBV-or NASH-induced cases. The reason for this observation is unknown: is it the specific mechanism of the pathogen, as demonstrated for aflatoxin-induced codon 249-mutations of the p53 gene, or is it clonal selection of oncogenic events that complement the specific oncogenic mechanisms derived from the etiological agent? Epigenetic changes Fixed epigenetic changes that may be responsible for hepatocarcinogenesis are much less understood, which is due to the fact that comprehensive technologies to study them have become available only recently and that the structure-function correlation is less understood compared to genomic alterations. It is clear that dramatic differences e.g. in the methylation status of the genome or histone acetylation exist between a normal hepatocyte and a HCC cell and that these difference have significant impact on gene transcription. The contribution of hypomethylation of certain G/C islands in the regulatory regions of proto-oncogenes to their overexpression is well established and hypermethylation may complement allelic loss in the inactivation of critical tumor suppressors, such as RB-1. Recently, comprehensive analyses of microRNAs have added another level of complexity. MicroRNAs are potent and broad posttranscriptional non-protein coding regulators of many tumor relevant genes. Most microRNAs become downregulated during tumorigenesis and for several cases of microRNAs dysregulation protumorigenic effects in HCC cells have already been shown Crucial pathways From recent deep sequencing approaches in other carcinoma types, such as colon and breast cancer, we have learned, that full blown carcinomas carry a surprisingly high number (possibly 50-100) of clonally propagated, potentially protumorigenic mutations and that more than expected cellular signalling pathways are altered. This has several important implications: targeted therapeutic approaches are unlikely to have significant functional and therapeutic effects in humans, as long as not several pathways are addressed simultaneously or different approaches are combined. It also adds the necessity to consider relevant tumor maintenance mechanisms and not only address 'driver' mechanisms. Many different mechanisms are well established in HCCs and can be addressed only shortly and selectively: Growth factors: Growth factors are multifunctional and exert several tumor-relevant effects (mitogenic, motogenic, angiogenic, antiapoptotic) in a partly overlapping manner. Although never studied in a comprehensive manner in an adequate collective, it is certainly correct to state, that at least one, probably several relevant growth factor signalling pathways are activated in every HCC. IGF-II is overexpressed in about 40% of HCCs, but downstream signal transducer IRS-1 is even more frequently active. The HGF/MET-pathway is induced in about half of the HCCs by constitutive activation of MET, and activation of the TGFalpha/EGF-pathway has been demonstrated at least at a comparable frequency. Finally activation of VEGF-signalling is frequent in HCCs and is probably responsible together with other proangiogenic growth factors, such as IGF-II, for tumor-neoangiogenesis, which has been shown to start already during late premalignant stages. Whether sinusoidal endothelial cells or portal vessels are the decisive targets is currently a matter of debate. Constitutive mutational activation of downstream growth factor signalling molecules, such as K-RAS have been described in a few cases but appear to be much rarer compared to other tumor types, such a colon cancer Wnt/wgl-pathway: activation of the wnt/wgl-pathway is present in at least 40% of HCCs, is in part due to mutations in the ß-catenin gene and to a lesser extent in the axin-1 and axin-2 genes, and leads to increased nuclear translocation of ß-catenin. The functional consequences are less well understood, since there appears to exist variability in the activation of downstream transcriptional targets. But constitutive activation of the wnt/wgl-pathway may offer one possible explanation for the frequent MYC and FOS activation in human HCCs Telomerase: the telomerase complex is active in most HCCs and is essential for tumor cells to maintain a more or less unlimited growth potential by avoiding critical telomere shortening. P53 and other tumor suppressors: p53 is inactivated in the majority of HCCs either by deletion or mutations or through interaction with p53inactivating factors, such as MDM2 or MDM4. In addition some of the p53 mutations even convert p53 into an active oncogene. The different tumor-suppressive effects of p53, e.g. on cell cycle or apoptosis, for example in cases of genomic stress are well studied and cannot be further elaborated. Also RB-1 appears to be inactivated frequently by genomic losses and epigenetic mechanisms. Furthermore HCC cells frequently obtain resistance to the antimitogenic effects of TGFß-signalling but may still be able to respond to its motogenic/proinvasive signalling. Prostaglandin pathway: The inducible cyclooxygenase 2 is overexpressed in most HCCs and its protumorigenic function is well established. Experimental and epidemiological data convincingly support the antineoplastic effect of COX-2 inhibition; the likely mechanism is reduced production of prostaglandins, especially PGE2. Inflammatory signalling pathways: as outlined above inflammatory signalling pathways, especially NFkB and IL-6 induced signalling have protumorigenic activity and are frequently activated in HCC cells, in part due to activation by extracellular ligands Protein folding: heat shock proteins (HSP) are responsible for correct folding of multiple proteins and are thus attractive targets for multifunctional inhibitory approaches. Some of the HSP, such as HSP70, are overexpressed in human HCCs. Inhibition of HSP90 has strong antitumorous effects. We are still far away from having a comprehensive picture of relevant protumorigenic mutations in human HCCs. Further progress can be expected from deep sequencing of larger numbers of human HCCs as initiated by the ICGC consortium. But similarly important will be comparable approaches to epigenetic analyses. In vivo screening for novel driver genes using adequate mouse model systems has become feasible and mouse-human comparison will point out syntenic correlates. Large scale expression analyses and high throughput functional analyses are required to validate these candidates and determine their relative impact. And finally, we have only marginally touched other relevant mechanisms such as protein degradation, protein folding, altered subcellular localisation, large non-coding RNAs, and the extent of in vivo regulation of tumor cells by exogenous stimuli. For many instances, such as in vitro analyses of viral oncogenic mechanisms, we will have to resort to better model systems that more closely relect the in vivo situation. Finally many other S46 Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 relevant aspects may be derived from studies in other tumor systems. But our knowledge about molecular human hepatocarcinogenesis has dramatically increased over the last decade and even more rapid progress can be expected. It will provide the basis for improved prevention, predictive diagnostics, and therapy. Acute Liver Failure: Concept and Definition Key points • The definition of acute liver failure is important because of its implications to the prognosis. Likewise, there are many causes of ALF and various definitions have been proposed. The common points of these definitions are the occurrence of encephalopathy during the course of acute liver failure in a patient without previously known liver disease and the spontaneous poor prognosis with a mortality rate of 85%. • Assessment of the prognosis of fulminant hepatitis is important to distinguish patients requiring liver transplantation from those whose will improve spontaneously. Prognosis depends on several factors including the gold standard King's College Hospital and Clichy's criteria. • During acute liver failure, two closely linked mechanisms are involved in cell death: necrosis and apoptosis. • In case of massive or submassive hepatocyte necrosis, in patients with initially healthy liver, there are mechanisms of regeneration. These mechanisms are complex and many pathways are involved like cytokines, growth factors, metabolical network. The definition of acute liver failure (ALF) is unclear in the minds of clinicians. This ambiguity is essentially a result of the different nomenclatures, proposed in the past, which are not used consistently by all groups. For O'Grady et al., the term ALF included patients with severe liver failure and hepatic encephalopathy; irrespective of the grade of encephalopathy, defined by Trey and Davidson [1, 2] . ALF can be subdivided into hyperacute, acute, and subacute depending on the interval between the onset of jaundice and hepatic encephalopathy (0-7, 8-28 days, 29-12 weeks, respectively). Each of these entities has a different prognosis, or a different survival rate (36, 7 , and 14%, respectively). In a study of patients with fulminant hepatitis (FH), the interval between jaundice onset and hepatic encephalopathy appeared to be an independent predictive factor of survival. For Bernuau et al., the concept of ALF extended to all patients with liver failure defined by a level of prothrombin or factor V \50%, and the terms FH or subfulminant hepatitis were reserved for patients with hepatic encephalopathy (defined by a jaundice-hepatic encephalopathy interval of\2 weeks and 2 weeks-3 months, respectively) [3, 4] . This classification has the advantage of alerting the clinician much earlier to the risk of progression of hepatitis towards aggravation and thus transplantation. The non-standardization of nomenclature requires the presence or absence of encephalopathy to be specified and clear definition of the terminology used in each study. In the majority of cases, but with several exceptions, the term ALF implies the absence of underlying chronic liver disease. Conversely, the designation acute on chronic liver failure is intended for patients with acute decompensation of chronic liver disease, irrespective of the cause of the chronic liver disease. This definition remains imprecise. However, it is essential to make this distinction due to the progressive nature of both diseases and the theoretical regenerative possibilities in the case of ALF in particular. Etiology of acute liver failure There are many causes of FH, which vary according to the geographic region. The most frequent causes worldwide include viral hepatitis [particularly hepatitis A (HAV) and B (HBV)], drug overdose (in particular paracetamol), idiosyncratic drug reactions, ingestion of toxins, and metabolic disorders. In addition to these known etiologies, a large proportion of cases of ALF are due to FH of indeterminate cause, despite systematic screening to detect rare viruses, drug-or toxin-induced liver failure, or other less common causes such as Wilson's disease, ischemic hepatitis, Budd-Chiari syndrome, Reye's syndrome, and malignancy. In a large survey of 1147 patients carried out in the USA between 1998 and 2008, the major etiologies of ALF were paracetamol overdose (46%), indeterminate cause (14%), drug-related ALF (11%), HBV (7%), other (7%), autoimmune hepatitis (5%), ischemic hepatitis (4%), HAV (3%), and Wilson's disease (2%). Paracetamol overdose is the leading cause of FH in the UK (60.9%). In a French survey of 500 patients with deterioration of liver function defined by a prothrombin index \50%, with or without encephalopathy, carried out between 1986 and 2006, the main causes of ALF were viral infection (31%), paracetamol overdose (20%), toxins or drugs other than paracetamol (18%), unknown (17%), and miscellaneous etiologies (14%) [5] . The causes of FH in patients undergoing liver transplantation can be determined from the European Liver Transplantation Registry. Thus, the most common causes between 1972 and 2007 were viral infection (HAV: 1%; HBV: 15%), paracetamol overdose (8%), drug-induced other than paracetamol (11%), indeterminate causes (48%), and other causes (17%) [6] . These etiologies have changed over the past 10 years. HBV represented around 50% of the causes of ALF until the early 1990s. Since then, there has been a decline in HBV FH in Europe. France has also seen a sharp decline in the number of cases of HBV-induced ALF in the past 10 years [5, 7] . Anti-HBV vaccination has probably contributed to this decrease. Paracetamol overdose is the main cause of ALF in both the UK (60.9%) and USA (46 %) [8, 9] . Recently, paracetamol overdose has also become a common cause of ALF in others countries of Europe [7, 8, 10, 11] . Intentional overdose-related ALF is more frequent in the UK than in North America. In the UK, ALF or fulminant hepatic failure is more often due to an intentional paracetamol overdose whereas in the USA paracetamol hepatotoxicity is usually secondary to an accidental overdose (ingestion of multiple doses of paracetamol for pain relief without suicidal intent). Assessment of the prognosis of FH is essential when making decisions on the requirement for and timing of liver transplantation. If liver transplantation is performed too early, it may be performed when it is not necessary, and if it is performed too late, there is an increased risk of the condition worsening (neurological, infectious) with a poor outcome. The prognosis of FH/ALF (with or without liver transplantation) depends on many factors (gender, age, cause of failure, hepatic, clinical and biological status on admission and at the peak of deterioration degree of hepatic encephalopathy, prothrombin time, factor V, INR, renal function, bilirubin level, arterial pH, phosphoremia), and many new markers could be incorporated into prognostic models. Age and etiology both correlate with survival, although age does not consistently correlate with outcome in different studies. In the study of Dhiman, the survival rate in patients [50-years of age was lower than in younger patients [12] . Mortality-related FH is greater in patients [40-years of age and in those \10-years-old [13] . However, although spontaneous survival was higher in patients 26-35-years of age in an American study, age did not seem to correlate with outcome (overall survival was unchanged with age: 63-77%) [14] . Survival of patients [65-years-old is lower (33%), but in this group there is less paracetamol intoxication and more co-morbidities [13] . The outcome of FH is significantly influenced by disease etiology [13] . In 315 patients studied from 1990-2001 by Brandsaeter et al., all listed for transplantation, spontaneous survival was highest in patients with HAV infection (43%, 3/7 patients), followed by paracetamol overdose (31%, 16/52), HBV infection (8%, 2/25), indeterminate origin (7%, 9/135), other drug-induced (0%) [15] . This good spontaneous prognosis without liver transplantation in patients with paracetamol overdose, HAV infection, liver shock, and pregnancyrelated ALF, was also reported in the USA with an overall short-term survival of C50% (68% for paracetamol overdose) [14] . In contrast, in this same study, patients with ALF due to indeterminate causes, drug-intoxication other than paracetamol, HBV infection, autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson's disease, and Budd-Chiari syndrome had a short-term transplant-free survival of \25% [14] . In another study, Shakil et al. observed a similar outcome according to cause: better outcome without transplantation in patients with paracetamol overdose (33%), poor outcome with only medical therapy in other etiologies (5-16%) [16] . The spontaneous prognosis is poor in patients with indeterminate cause-related FH (12% in 140 patients with indeterminate or seronegative ALF) [17] . Neurological status at admission and at the time of liver transplantation also influences survival. Grade of encephalopathy on admission (grade 3 and 4) appeared to be a significant independent variable of poor outcome [13] . Various prognostic criteria have been proposed by different centers. The King's College Hospital (KCH) criteria and Clichy/Villejuif criteria remain the most widely used prognostic criteria for ALF or FH worldwide [18] . KCH criteria are different in patients with paracetamol and non-paracetamol-related disease. These include clinical and biological criteria (age, interval between onset of jaundice and encephalopathy, bilirubin, prothrombin time, arterial pH, serum creatinine). The inclusion of other parameters such as arterial lactate has increased the sensitivity and specificity of this score [2] (Table 1) . Clichy/Villejuif criteria include grade 3 and 4 hepatic encephalopathy and factor V levels \20% in patients \30-years of age or \30% if [30-years of age. These criteria are widely used in Northern Europe. Other studies have shown that KCH criteria have good clinical applicability, with little variation in sensitivity and specificity [16] . Overall, fulfillment of KCH criteria is generally useful for predicting death but the absence of criteria does not predict survival. The use of selection criteria for transplantation in patients with FH is unsufficient. In fact, it is illusory to think that a single set of criteria is relevant to FH of any cause. For these reasons a specific score according to etiology has been proposed: non-paracetamol-induced ALF in KCH criteria), blood arterial lactate [2] , serum phosphate [19, 20] , a-fetoprotein [21] in paracetamol-induced ALF, prognostic factors for HAV infection-related FH [22] , prognostic scoring model for liver transplantation in patients with non-paracetamol-related ALF [23] , prognostic factors for Amanita phalloides poisoning [24, 25] , prognostic factors for autoimmune hepatitis [26] . Levels of serum Gcglobulin at admission, with a cutoff of 100 mg/L, could be predictive of poor outcome in patients with paracetamol-and non-paracetamolrelated FH, comparable to the KCH criteria [27] . The mainly others predictive factors of outcome were CD163 [28] , caspase [29] , BMI [30] , MELD score [12, 31] , APACHE II [32, 33] . For most of these, the sensitivity is too low to determine outcome, but the specificity is acceptable. The aim of these scores is to identify, early in the course of the disease, with high accuracy, not only patients who will die without transplantation but also patients who will survive with medical treatment. An ideal predictive factor must have a high positive (PVP) and negative predictive value (PVN), but most of the time the PPV and NPV are low; this means that they are more applicable for predicting death rather than spontaneous survival. Despite this determination to find earlier and better performing predictive factors, while retaining both good sensitivity and specificity, the most useful criteria for liver transplantation remain those defined 10 years ago by Bernuau and O'Grady. The new prognostic factors remain in the domain of research and are not available for use in daily practice. Furthermore, the link between the presence of ''good'' predictive factors for spontaneous improvement, and thus for hepatic regeneration, does not predict the interval necessary for this regeneration to occur. In other words, the patient could have a good chance of spontaneous recovery but may die before regeneration is sufficient to stop the progression of the disease. Physiopathology of cell death during acute liver failure During acute liver failure, two closely linked mechanisms are involved in cell death: necrosis and apoptosis [34] . During necrosis, adenosine triphosphate is depleted, the cell membrane swells, and cell lysis occurs. The release of cell contents leads to activation of inflammatory factors. Apoptosis is programmed cell death where the different cytoplasmic and nuclear components are dissociated and fragmented, without affecting the integrity of the cell membrane [35, 36] . The inflammatory reaction is minimized during apoptosis due to the activation of phagocytes that phagocytose the different cell components. Many factors are involved in the activation of cell death (hypoxia, drugs, alcohol, inflammation, biliary acids, toxic chemicals, TNF-a, FasL). These factors can trigger one of the two mechanisms of cell death, either necrosis or apoptosis. Briefly, the different sequences leading to cell death during necrosis are: [1] cellular swelling; [2] formation of blebs (small protrusions of the plasma membrane); [3] mitochondrial depolarization; [4] lysosomal breakdown; [5] bidirectional leakage of anionic fluorophores; [6] rapid ion changes; [7] accelerated bleb formation and swelling; [8] bleb rupture; and, finally, [9] irreversible breakdown of the plasma membrane permeability barrier. This leads to the collapse of electrical and ionic gradients across the plasma membrane, and leakage of cytosolic enzymes and metabolic intermediates [37, 38] . Apoptosis is initiated by the binding of ligands (TNF-a, FasL) to death receptors found on the surface of the cell containing Fas, TNF-R1, TRAIL-R1, TRAIL-R2. The other factors involved in apoptosis are: caspases, mitochondria, apoptosomes, Bcl2 family, ceramides [39] [40] [41] [42] .  The concept of auxiliary liver transplantation (ALT), and in particular the phenomenon of native liver regeneration after transplantation, is related to the clinical demonstration that an initially healthy liver (i.e. without underlying hepatopathology) can regenerate, even when it is the site of massive or submassive hepatocyte necrosis ([50%) [43, 44] (Fig. 1) . In contrast, the mechanisms of this regeneration and the delay between the occurrence of FH and regeneration of the native liver, allowing removal of the graft, are less clear. A European study demonstrated that 19 out of 30 patients (63%) undergoing ALT were alive after a period of 18 months [45] . In 13 of these patients (68%), the native liver had recovered its initial size. More recently, in the study of Quaglia et al., which included 38 living patients out of 49 who underwent ALT, the native liver had completely regenerated in 62.5% of them [46] . From this model of FH and ALT, it can be assumed that in certain favorable conditions (age, etiology), rapid proliferation of residual functional hepatocytes is the main mechanism of liver regeneration, leading to the formation of a functional hepatic mass that is satisfactory both quantitatively and architecturally. Liver regeneration after ALT depends on the cause of the hepatitis. Liver regeneration and therefore the possibility of stopping immunosuppressive treatment were greater in patients with FH due to paracetamol overdose (69%) than in patients with seronegative FH (37%). Regeneration of the native liver was also observed in two out of three patients who were transplanted for HAB FH, one of two patients transplanted for autoimmune FH, and in one patient transplanted for toxic FH (Amanita phalloides). The median ''hepatocyte proliferative rate'', calculated as the percentage of hepatocyte cells expressing antigen Ki67, was 27.4% (range, 3.1-69.4%) at time 0 in the native liver, and decreased rapidly 8 days post-ALT to a minimal level several months and years after ALT [45] . Several cell lines have been implicated in regeneration of the liver in response to hepatic damage (or lesion/s): numerous, unipotent, mature hepatocytes; liver progenitor cells localized in the Hering canal which are activated when hepatocyte loss is massive or is associated with inhibition of the proliferative or differentiating capabilities of hepatocytes. The differentiation of liver progenitor cells can proceed in several directions according to the type of cells ''damaged'': biliary line for the formation of ducts; formation of hepatocytes via intermediate hepatocytes [47] [48] [49] . Hepatocyte necrosis [50% is necessary to trigger the activation of liver progenitor cells. This activation is a sign of disease severity and takes place early (in the week following hepatitis). The development of intermediate hepatocytes suggests that the differentiation of liver progenitor cells into mature cells is slower and takes more than 1 week. A positive correlation exists between the percentage necrosis, hepatocyte proliferation, the number of progenitor cells, and the clinical parameters of liver failure [50] . In the study of Katoonizadeh, surviving patients had less hepatocyte loss, weaker activation of liver progenitor cells, and more mature hepatocyte cell activity compared to those who died or were transplanted. Physiopathology of liver regeneration in acute liver failure Our understanding of the mechanisms of liver regeneration comes from experimental models and models of hepatectomy. Liver regeneration involves three pathways: cytokines; growth factors; and the metabolic network. In reality these three pathways are interlinked [38, 51] (Fig. 2 ). Cytokines play a major role in the initiation of liver regeneration. At an early stage in regeneration, there is an important increase in TNF-a and IL-6 in the liver and serum [52] [53] [54] . These cytokines are activated when TNF-a binds to TNF-R1, which then activates NF-jB (nuclear factor-kappa B) in the non-parenchymatous cells (Kupffer cells) and STAT3 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 3) in hepatocytes [55, 56] . IL-6 binds to gp80 (a receptor also known as IL-6-R); the complex thus formed then binds to the receptor gp130 thereby activating the JAK/STAT system. In mice, it has been suggested that a large number of genes involved in early liver regeneration are IL-6 dependent. NF-jB is activated in hepatocytes and in non-parenchymatous cells and transmits an antiapoptotic, proliferative signal, and for innate immunity. STAT3 passes into the nucleus where it induces the transcription of several target genes involved in liver regeneration. One of the targets of STAT3 is the gene Socs3, which inhibits phosphorylation of STAT3 by a feedback mechanism [57] . Two other cytokines are involved in liver regeneration: stem cell factor (SCF) and oncostatin (OSM) which increase or modulate the action of IL-6. OSM and SCF can also activate STAT3 (Fig. 3 ). The hepatocytes in the basal state, in the normal liver, are in a state of quiescence and can be stimulated in a moderate way by in vivo mutagens such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-a, epidermal growth factor (EGF), and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). The role of the cytokine pathway is to promote liver regeneration, forcing the passage of hepatocytes in the cell cycle (G0 to G1) [58] [59] [60] . Progression of the cell cycle is driven by growth factors. HGF and EGF-receptor ligand (EGFR) play an important role in progression of the cell cycle during liver regeneration and increased levels of these have been found in the serum of children and adults with FH. Oval cells also participate in the process of liver regeneration. The growth factors that stimulate the proliferation of oval cells are the same as those that stimulate the replication of hepatocytes, such as TNF-R1 for example. C-KIT, HGF, acid fibroblast growth factor, TGF-a. Furthermore, oval cells are less sensitive to TGF-b, which is an inhibitory cytokine for liver growth. Finally, interferongamma associated with TNF-a and with lipopolysaccharide inhibits hepatocyte proliferation and simultaneously stimulates the replication of oval cells. In patients with FH, activation of oval cells requires at least 50% hepatocyte loss and a significant decrease in proliferation of remaining hepactocytes [61, 62] . 3. Metabolic pathways Amino acids are involved in hepatocyte proliferation through cyclin D1 expression. p70S6 kinase and 4E-BP1 are two important components of metabolic pathways leading to an increase in translation (increasing of activity of p70S6 kinase and decreasing of activity of 4E-BP1). These two factors would be downstream effectors of mTOR. The mTOR complex may regulate liver regeneration by modulating cell growth and proliferation in response to the energy demands of the remaining liver. In fact, these pathways are more complex and numbers others factors are involved. Artificial and bioartificial systems In ALF, artificial and bioartificial systems of hepatic support are indicated where a theoretical chance of liver regeneration exists. The objective is to treat the patients until liver function improves. Most studies have essentially aimed to treat these patients in order to stabilize or improve their clinical condition during the wait for liver transplantation, thus improving survival. Overall, in the two controlled, randomized studies conducted to date, one on BAL and the other on MARS, neither demonstrated any improvement in survival with or without liver transplantation [63, 64] while a neurological improvement has been noted [65] . In all cases, the limiting factor was the time between the onset of hepatitis and liver regeneration, and the number of treatments before liver transplantation. Other studies in this area are now required. revealed that the C-terminal portion of the molecule accounts for LKM-1 reactivity [7] . LKM-2 antibodies were discovered in tienilic acid induced hepatitis and are directed against CYP2C9 [8] . LKM-3 antibodies, first described in HDV infection by Crivelli et al. [9] detect UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs), which are phase II metabolizing enzymes [10] LKM-3 antibodies are also detectable in 10% of patients with AIH type 2 [11, 12] . Whether anti-CYP2D6 antibodies are only of diagnostic value or also play a role in the pathogenesis of AIH remains unclear. Of note, 5-10% of the population are CYP2D6 deficient and to date, AIH type 2 has never been described in CYP2D6 deficient individuals suggesting that the expression of CYP2D6 might be a conditio sine qua non for developing AIH type 2 [13] (Table 1) Human CYP enzymes are primarily membrane-associated proteins located either in the inner membrane of mitochondria or in the endoplasmatic reticulum of cells. One potential prerequisite for an immunepathogenic relevance is that the antigenic regions of CYP2D6 are exposed on the external hepatocellular membrane, where antibodies that induce an immune reaction can detect them. Interestingly, several studies indicate that CYP2D6 may have indeed access to the cell membrane via a vesicular transport route from the endoplasmatic reticulum [14] . Moreover, expression of CYP2D6 on the surface of hepatocytes was found by indirect immunofluorescence and confocal laser microscopy of isolated rat hepatocytes probed with LKM-1 positive sera from patients with chronic hepatitis C or AIH type 2 [15] . Interestingly, some studies indicate that antibodies directed against CYPs are able to inhibit the activity of the enzyme in vitro suggesting that these antibodies might have an additional biological significance [16, 17] , Two amino acids (Asp-301 and Glu-216), which are relevant for substrates and inhibitors, are located in proximity to the main epitopes on CYP2D6. Thus, it is possible that antibody-binding to those epitopes results in an interference with the enzyme's function [18] . Another option is an antibody-mediated conformational change of CYP2D6, which impairs its function. Recently, an animal model has been described demonstrating an autoimmune hepatitis targeting CYP2D6 in mice transgenic for human CYP2D6 and infected with adenovirus expressing human CYP2D6 [19] . CYPs in the Autoimmune Polyendocrine Syndrome Type 1 (APECED) Autoimmunity against organ specific CYP enzymes is also characteristic for the autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasisectodermal dystrophy syndrome (APECED or APS-1). APECED is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations of the autoimmune regulator type 1 (AIRE-1) gene localized on the long arm of chromosome [21] . Patients suffer from mucocutaneous candidiasis and autoimmune reactions against various organs, e.g. parathyroid, adrenals, ovaries and skin. Chronic hepatitis is one possible manifestation of the disease and affects 10-18% of the patients. Organ-specific antibodies detected in these patients are directed against CYP1A2, CYP2A6 as well as the steroidogenic CYPc21 (21-hydroxylase), CYPscc (side chain cleavage enzyme) and CYPc17 (17-hydroxylase) [20] [21] [22] [23] . While antibodies directed against CYPc17 and CYPscc correlate with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, the combination of the antibodies against CYPc21, CYPc17 and CYPscc is associated with adrenal insufficiency. The finding of antibodies directed to CYP1A2 and CYP2A6 specifically is made in patients with a liver affection. However, not only CYPs but many other antigens such as tryptophan hydroxylase and tyrosin may also be self targets in APECED [24] . Chronic hepatitis C is often associated with autoimmune phenomenons, including mixed cryoglobulinemia, membrano-proliferative glomerulonephritis, polyarthritis, porphyria cutanea tarda and Sjögren syndrome. Similar to AIH patients, sera of hepatitis C virus (HCV)infected patients are frequently positive for ANA, SMA and LKM. Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 LKM-1 antibodies are found in 5-10% of patients with chronic HCV infection. Additionally, anti-CYP2A6-antibodies are reported in LKM-1 positive patients with HCV [25] . LKM-1 antibodies in AIH-2 and HCV-infection do not react identically. While LKM-1 antibodies in AIH primarily recognize small linear epitopes of CYP2D6, HCVassociated LKM-1 antibodies are more heterogenous and detect mainly conformational epitopes of CYP2D6. However, some targetepitopes of LKM-1 antibodies in AIH-2 and HCV-infection overlap. For example, the sequence CYP2D6 193-212 was recognized by sera from 93% of patients with AIH-2 and 50% of patients with LKM-1 positive HCV-infection [17] . Kammer et al. found a striking homology between the HCV core 178-187 peptide and CYP2A6 and CYP2A7 [26] . Intriguingly, HCVinduced cytotoxic T-cells recognize these CYPs and lyse cells transfected with a plasmid coding for the whole CYP2A6 protein. However, they could not detect a reaction against CYP2A6 and CYP2A7 on B-cell level. The clinical relevance of these autoantibodies for HCV patients is so far not completely understood. LKM of low titres are usually regarded as an epi-phenomenon and only high antibody titres are considered to be a sign for a relevant autoimmune reaction. Nevertheless, it seems possible, that LKM-1 positive patients with a chronic hepatitis C develop hepatic flares under the antiviral therapy with interferon. This issue was further investigated in smaller studies with 6 or 7 LKM-1 positive HCV-infected patients, describing an exacerbation rate of 3/6 versus 1/7 [27, 28] . Recently, Ferri et al. tested a larger group of 26 LKM-1 positive patients. In this study the exacerbation rate was negligible and reversible after immunosuppressive therapy [29] . Given the central role of the liver in metabolizing xenobiotics, it is not surprising that drug related adverse effects often affect this organ. In contrast to the hepatitis caused by toxic effects of a drug or its metabolites, which is dose dependent and happens directly after exposure to the xenobiotic, an immune mediated drug-induced hepatitis develops after a lag of time and is dose-independent. It terminates after discontinuation of the treatment and reoccurs when the treatment is restarted. Degradation of xenobiotics can lead to covalent binding of the enzyme to reactive metabolites. Next, the covalent bound and potentially toxic metabolite can induce an activation of the immune system and the formation of antibodies against CYPs [20] . Tienilic acid, a uricosuric diuretic withdrawn from clinical use in 1980, is one example for immune mediated drug induced hepatitis. LKM-2 antibodies detecting CYP2C9, the major tielenic acid metabolizing enzyme, were identified as the associated antibodies. During the degradation process, reactive sulfoxide is formed and probably binds to CYP2C9, which then serves as a neoantigen [23] . Chronic therapy with dihydralazine can induce antibodies, which very specifically react against CYP1A2 [8, 30, 31] . These antibodies only react with liver membranes (LM), but do not stain kidney sections. Dihydralazine is metabolized via two pathways: one pathway is dependent of the N-acetyltransferase, the other one is an oxidative pathway, which is probably catalyzed by CYP1A2. The latter one contributes to formation of neoantigens, namely adducts with CYP1A2. These adducts may induce an immune response and LMantibody production. Dihydralazine mediated hepatitis is observed mostly in slow-acetylators, presumably because the second pathway is predominantly used. Halothane hepatitis is a rare but sometimes fatal complication of halothane anaesthesia. Studies in animals and humans have provided evidence for a complex multifactorial basis for halothane induced hepatotoxicity, Immunologic changes can be detected in a high percentage of cases of halothane hepatitis. A reductive and an oxidative pathway exist in the metabolism of halothan. The oxidative pathway leads to the formation of the highly reactive Trifluoroacetylchloride (TFA-chloride), which may cause formation of TFA protein adducts and an immune response by acting as neoantigens. The catalyzing enzyme is CYP2E1, which is in turn covalently modified by TFA chloride [32] . After use of anti-convulsants (Phenobarbital, Phenytoin, Carbamazepin) microsomal antibodies directed against rat CYP3A1 and CYP2C11 were isolated from sera of 6 out of 24 patients with hypersensitivity reactions. However, a human antigen could not be identified yet [33] . CYPs in Alcohol induced Liver Disease As only 10-20% of alcohol abusing patients develop liver disease, host factors may be important in alcohol induced liver disease. Again, adduct formation may play a role in the pathogenesis of the disease. Under chronic alcohol exposure, mice generate antibodies against acetaldehyde-protein adducts. Additionally, free hydroxyethyl radicals are generated in CYP2E1 dependent reactions. Clot et al. found that sera of patient with ASH react with hydroxyethylated proteins and acetaldeyde-modified proteins. Incubation of liver microsomes with ethanol resulted in formation of four hydroxyethyl radical-derived liver antigens. Antibodies of most patients with alcoholic cirrhosis bound a 52 kd protein, which was later identified as CYP2E1. The conclusion of this study was, that CYP2E1 leads to formation of hydroxyethhyl-adducts with CYP2E1 and 3 other proteins, recognized by the immune system and resulting in formation of antibodies [34] . Thus, both in immune mediated drug-induced hepatitis and in alcoholic liver disease adduct-formation seems to be a crucial mechanism for establishing immune reaction against the metabolizing enzymes. All the described forms of inflammatory liver diseases have in common, that specific antibodies directed against CYP enzymes are diagnostic markers. Interestingly, the same CYP may serve as an autoantigen in different diseases (Fig. 1) . i.e. anti-CYP2D6 antibodies can be found in AIH and HCV patients, anti-CYP1A2 antibodies in APS-1 and dihydralazine associated hepatitis, and anti-CYP2A6 antibodies in HCV and APS-1 (Table 1 ) [20] . However, different sequences may serve as target epitopes or, in case of anti-CYP1A2 in dihydralazine-and APECED mediated hepatitis, different ways of immunization may result in antibody induction. Role of molecular mimicry for induction of autoantibodies to CYP enzymes Beside adduct-formation as an immunization-step, other models have been proposed to explain the generation of auto-antibodies against self antigens such as CYPs. There is growing evidence suggesting that molecular mimicry act as a trigger for induction of liver specific autoantibodies. Molecular mimicry relies on the similarity of infectious agents with host antigens. Such similarity may lead to an inability of the host immune system to recognize the foreign antigen or it may lead to an autoreactive immune response at the level of antibodies or T cells. As mentioned above, sera of patients with different diseases can react to some extend with the same epitopes on CYPs as shown for CYP2D6 193-212 and HCV-and AIH-2-patients. Similarly, sequence homologies between HCV and the B cell epitope CYP2D6 254-271 as well as homologies between CYP2D6 and common viruses like herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV1), cytomegalie virus (CMV), Ebstein-Barr-Virus (EBV) and human adenovirus [23, 35] have been discovered. Furthermore, Ma et al. found that disease specific CD4+ T cells in HCV infected patients detect CYP2D6 313-332 , which in turn is homologuos to the sequence 794-801of HCV [36] . These observations lead to the suggestion, that molecular mimicry may play a role in the pathogenesis of AIH-2. According to the 'multiple hittheory', in genetically predisposed patients multiple contacts to viruses might induce a cross-reactive subset of T-cells and permit a loss of immunological self-tolerance. The role of molecular mimicry in autoimmune reactions against CYP2D6 was further analyzed in a recently developed mouse model for AIH type 2 [19] . In this model 'molecular mimicry' was compred to 'molecular identity' in response to infection with an adenovirus, expressing the human CYP2D6 (Ad-2D6) [37] . Either wildtype FVB mice, which express mouse CYP isoenzymes with a structural and sequential similarity to human CYP2D6 (molecular mimicry) or transgenic CYP2D6 mice, which express in addition the identically human CYP2D6 (molecular identity), were infected with Ad-2D6. Infection of FVB-mice led to a rapid development of persistent AIH with typical histological features like infiltration of mononuclear cells and severe fibrosis as well as the formation of CYP2D6 antibodies and CYP2D6-specific T-cells. In contrast, liver damage in the transgenic mice progressed significantly slower, less severe and was associated with lower antibody-titres. Furthermore, a significantly lower frequency (10-209) of CYP2D6 specific T cells was found in the transgenic mouse. The authors concluded that the threshold of specific T-cells rather than the antibody-titre is responsible for the severity of the disease [19] . In the histological picture of AIH the main feature is a mononuclear cell infiltrate, containing lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages. Immunohistochemical studies revealed a predominance of CD4+ T cells and a minority of CD8+ T cells [38] . CD4+ T lymphocytes play a major role in inflammation processes of autoimmune hepatitis. Studies with lymphocytes demonstrated proliferation of T-Helper-cells specifically in response to human recombinant CYP2D6 [39] . In studies analysing the proliferative response of mononuclear cells of patient sera after contact with CYP2D6 262-285 Löhr et al. found that 8 of 8 patients with AIH-2, 6 of 12 with AIH-1 and 4 out of 31 patients with chronic HCV-infection reacted with the antigen. After immunosuppressive treatment T cell response decreased [40] . Recent studies investigated T cell responses to peptides covering the whole CYP2D6 molecule. They demonstrated that multiple epitopes on CYP2D6 were detected by T-cells and that the production of cytokines was not uniform. The number of recognized epitopes as well as the quantity of cytokine production directly correlated with disease activity. The authors concluded that the T cell response to CYP2D6 is polyclonal, involves multiple effector cell types targeting different epitopes and is associated with hepatocyte damage [36] . There is growing evidence pointing to a crucial role of CD8+ autoreactive T cells for liver cell injury. CYP2D6 specific CD8+ T cells were shown to secret interferon-c and to be cytotoxic afer recognition of CYP2D6-epitopes. In this study, frequency, IFN-c production, and cytotoxicity of CYP2D6-specific CD8 T cells were higher at diagnosis than during treatment. Furthermore, intensity of CYP2D6specific CD8 T cell responses correlated with disease activity [41] . Recently, a HLA B8/DR3 dependent impairment of T regulatory cell (Tregs) number and function has been considered as a permissive factor leading to autoimmune reactions [42] . Tregs are CD4+ CD25+ cells representing 5-10% of all CD4+ T cells in healthy individuals [43] . They control the proliferation of autoreactive T cells by direct contact to the target cell and to a lesser extent by releasing cytokines. The number of Tregs inversely correlates with markers of the disease as LKM-antibody-titres. Remarkably, the number of Tregs increases after the administration of corticosteroids [44, 45] . Taken together autoimmune reactions against drug metabolizing enzymes are involved in several liver diseases of different origin, mainly seen in autoimmune hepatitis, viral hepatitis and hepatitis induced by xenobiotics. In genetically predisposed individuals, antigen-antibody reactions and mislead cellular immune responses apparently lead to persistent and perpetuating liver damage. The immune reaction against self might be triggered by repeated virusinfections via molecular mimicry. However, the prime mechanism for breakdown of self-tolerance remains unclear and have to be addressed in future studies. HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; LC1, anti-liver cytosol type 1 antibodies; LKM, anti-liver kidney microsomal antibodies; LTx, liver transplantation; SLA, anti-soluble liver antigen antibodies; ULN, upper limit of normal. • Standard treatment of autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is successful in up to 80% of patients with AIH, whereas about 20% of patients present with ''difficult-to-treat AIH'' for different reasons. • Patients not tolerating standard treatment form one subgroup of ''difficult-to-treat AIH''. The elderly patient with diabetes mellitus and osteoporosis as well as the patient with severe side effects of corticosteroid or azathioprine treatment may need alternative treatment strategies. New generation corticosteroids such as budesonide with less systemic side effects at therapeutic doses and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) represent therapeutic alternatives. • The pregnant patient with AIH apparently does not experience a maintenance treatment-related enhanced risk of complications for mother and fetus. Close monitoring of disease activity during and particularly short after pregnancy is mandatory to adequately treat flairs of AIH. • Patients not responding to standard treatment and at risk to develop cirrhosis and liver failure form the most challenging subgroup of ''difficult-to-treat AIH''. The calcineurin inhibitors, cyclosporine A and tacrolimus, have been successfully applied as potent alternative immunosuppressive strategies to induce remission and hinder disease progression in this patient group. Other medical approaches are experimental. • Patients with AIH undergoing liver transplantation (LTx) have a considerable risk to develop recurrence of AIH. AIH recurrence is often not responding to standard treatment and represents a therapeutic challenge for the hepatologist. Introduction Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is an inflammatory disease of the liver which occurs worldwide in adults and children with a female preponderance (B80%). Its pathogenesis is unresolved, but genetic as well as environmental factors play key roles in its development [1] . AIH is characterized biochemically and serologically by elevated serum transaminases, elevated serum IgG and the presence of autoantibodies (type 1: ANA, ASMA, anti-SLA/LP; type 2: LKM). The characteristic histopathological finding is an interface hepatitis with lymphoplasmacytic infiltration of portal areas, periportal lymphoplasmacytic parenchymal invasion and piecemeal necrosis. Various toxic (drugs!), infectious (HBV, HCV), and metabolic (nonalcoholic steatohepatitis, (NASH); Wilson's disease) liver diseases may show features similar to AIH and have to be excluded before a firm diagnosis of AIH can be made. Simplified criteria for the diagnosis of AIH have recently been proposed and validated [2] [3] [4] . About 40% of patients with AIH suffer from other autoimmune disorders such as autoimmune thyroiditis, rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis, diabetes mellitus, glomerulonephritis, vitiligo, alopecia, or nail dystrophies [5] . Early diagnosis and treatment of AIH is crucial to hinder progression to cirrhosis and decompensation of liver disease. Clinical presentation and natural course Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) may start with an acute, sometimes severe hepatitis in almost 50% of patients, but may also take a smouldering course remaining undetected for years before the diagnosis is made. This explains why about 30% of patients present with cirrhosis at the time of diagnosis. The 10-year survival without treatment has been roughly estimated as 10-30% [6] based on mainly retrospective data of heterogeneous patient cohorts from the past. These observations clearly show the need of adequate treatment from the time of clinical, serological and histological diagnosis of AIH when serum transaminases and IgG are elevated. The standard treatment of AIH is an immunosuppressive regimen including corticosteroids alone or corticosteroids in combination with azathioprine for a period of 2 years to lifelong. The therapeutic aim is complete remission with normalization of serum transaminases, serum IgG and histological features of inflammation. Complete remission can be reached in up to 75% after 2 years. Corticosteroid monotherapy is started with predniso(lo)ne, 60 mg daily, for a week followed by a dose reduction by 10 mg per week to 20 mg daily. Further tapering by 5 mg per week to 10 mg daily is possible as long as serum transaminases and IgG do not increase again under dose reduction. Maintenance therapy with 10 mg daily can be further tapered down during follow-up by steps of 2.5 mg when serum transaminases and IgG remain normal. Combination therapy with predniso(lo)ne 30-60 mg daily and azathioprine 50 mg daily can be initiated from the beginning or-as preferred by the author-after a 2-4 week period of prednisolone monotherapy in order to follow the initial pure corticosteroid response and to differentiate between potential corticosteroid-and azathioprine-induced gastrointestinal complaints. Corticosteroid tapering follows a course similar to the one mentioned for corticosteroid monotherapy. Long-term maintenance therapy can be performed with low doses of predniso(lo)ne and azathioprine [5] or with azathioprine only (1.5-2 mg/kg daily) [7] . Difficult-to-treat AIH The elderly patient AIH is a disease occurring at all ages. Patients aged 65 and older may present with relative contraindications against standard treatment more often than their younger fellow sufferers. Particularly osteoporosis and diabetes mellitus may put the patient under corticosteroid therapy at considerable risk for serious treatment-related complications. The elderly patient with AIH more often presents with cirrhosis than younger patients possibly due a smouldering course and failure to make an early diagnosis due to lack of symptoms [8] . However, the outcome of AIH in the elderly patient apparently does not differ from that in the younger patient [8] [9] [10] , in part possibly due to a better response to standard treatment than in younger patients [8] . Thus, AIH should be treated at all ages. The elderly may require alternative therapeutic strategies (see below) more often than the younger patient due to side effects of standard treatment, but not due to lack of treatment response. The female predominance in AIH often leads to the question whether a pregnancy poses an enhanced risk to both, the mother with AIH and her child. A recent retrospective study analysed the course of 44 pregnancies in 22 patients with AIH and found (i) adverse outcomes in 26% of pregnancies, in part associated with the presence of SLA/LP and Ro/SSA antibodies, (ii) a postpartum flare in 52% of pregnancies, and (iii) no difference in outcome between patients treated with or without azathioprine during pregnancy [11] . These retropective data may stimulate to closely monitor AIH patients during and particularly short after pregnancy, to continue azathioprine treatment during pregnancy when clinically needed, and to prospectively study the role of autoantibody profiles for the outcome of pregnancy in AIH. The patient not tolerating standard treatment Budesonide Budesonide is a corticosteroid with an about 15-to 20-fold higher receptor binding affinity than predniso(lo)ne, but a 90% hepatic first pass effect leading to significantly reduced systemic serum levels and reduced rates of corticosteroid-related side effects. Budesonide is contraindicated in cirrhosis with portal hypertension due to an enhanced risk for the development of portal vein thrombosis [12] . The so far largest randomized, placebo-controlled trial for the treatment of AIH in 207 non-cirrhotic patients with AIH compared standard treatment with prednisone (initial dose 40mg daily) + azathioprine with budesonide (initial dose 3 9 3 mg daily) + azathioprine and clearly showed more efficient induction of remission and a more favourable side effect profile of budesonide in comparison to prednisone. The study awaits final publication and data are available only in abstract form [13] . Thus, budesonide may become an alternative first-line treatment of non-cirrhotic AIH in the near future and may be particularly attractive for patients at high risk for corticosteroidrelated side effects. Mycophenolate Mofetil (MMF) MMF, an inhibitor of inosine monophosphate dehydrogenases, impairs purine synthesis mainly of rapidly proliferating cells such as T-and B-lymphocytes and, thereby, exerts immunosuppressive effects. Small case series during the last decade have reported successful treatment of AIH with MMF. However, the largest study so far, a recent retrospective analysis of 36 patients with AIH treated with MMF revealed disappointing results in that only 39% of patients under MMF treatment showed a complete response [14] . Interestingly, a subclass analysis revealed that those patients who had not responded to azathioprine also did not adequately respond to MMF. Thus, MMF may be a therapeutic option for those AIH patients not tolerating standard treatment rather than for those not responding to standard treatment. The patient not responding to standard treatment Standard treatment with corticosteroids and azathioprine induces complete clinical, biochemical and histological long-term remission in up to 80% of patients during long-term treatment. Alternative medications in non-responders include the calcineurin inhibitors, cyclosporine A and tacrolimus, the antimetabolites mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and cyclophosphamide, and the mTor inhibitor, rapamycin. Cyclosporine A The cyclic peptide cyclosporine A (CyA) derived from the fungus Trichoderma polysporum inhibits transcription of the interleukin 2 (IL2) gene by binding to cyclophilin and inhibiting calcineurin phosphatase activity [15] . Its wide use in transplantation medicine has stimulated its use in open-label trials for adults [16] and children [17] with AIH in part not responding to standard treatment. CyA (at doses of 4-5 mg/kg daily or with target trough levels of 200-250 ng/ml) was shown to effectively induce remission in a majority of patients. Maintenance treatment with CyA, however, is hampered by the well known risks of long-term CyA therapy including arterial hypertension, renal insufficiency, hyperlipidemia, hirsutism, infection, and malignancy. Thus, a two-step strategy in AIH patients not responding to standard treatment with (i) induction of remission with CyA and (ii) careful switch to standard treatment under close monitoring of disease activity has been proposed and in single cases successfully reported. Tacrolimus The macrolide antibiotic tacrolimus (FK506) produced by Streptomyces tsukubaensis is a more potent immunosuppressive agent than CyA. Like CyA, tacrolimus inhibits calcineurin and, thereby, IL2 transcription in T-cells after forming a complex with an immunophilin, here FK binding protein. Low-dose tacrolimus is effective in AIH [18] . In patients not responding to standard treatment, tacrolimus improved disease activity [19] and degree of fibrosis [20] (initial dose 1 mg twice daily; trough levels \6 ng/ml) and was reported to be effective alone or in combination with MMF in another cohort of patients not responding to or not tolerating standard treatment [21] . Thus, tacrolimus may be a valuable alternative to CyA in treatment of AIH in patients not responding to standard treatment. Cyclophosphamide Cyclophosphamide (1-1.5 mg/kg daily) was successfully used in combination with prednisolone in three patients not responding to standard treatment [22] . The risk of severe hematological side effects during long-term treatment argue against this experimental treatment option. Methotrexate The antimetabolite methotrexate (7.5 mg weekly) had a steroidsparing effect in a patient not responding to standard treatment [23] . The patient with accompanying immune-mediated cholangitis Overlap syndromes of AIH with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and AIH with primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) have been reported in 6-10% of patients with these immune-mediated disorders [24] . Overlap syndromes are ill-defined and still a matter of controversial discussion [25, 26] . Combined treatment of these disorders with ursodeoxycholic acid and an immunosuppressive regimen is proposed in actual guidelines [24] . Ursodeoxycholic acid The hydrophilic bile acid, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) is regarded as the standard therapy of PBC [24, 27] . UDCA does not act as an immunosuppressive agent, but has potent anticholestatic, antiapoptotic and antifibrotic activity in PBC [24] and exerts anticholestatic effects in numerous other cholestatic disorders including PSC [28] . UDCA has been tested in ''problematic'' AIH in addition to corticosteroids with disappointing results [29, 30] . In contrast to patients with definite AIH, patients with an overlap syndrome of AIH and PBC [31] and children and adolescents with an overlap syndrome of AIH and PSC [32] may benefit from combined treatment with UDCA and a standard immunosuppressive regimen. However, randomized, controlled studies are lacking. The patient with end stage AIH not responding to medical therapy Most AIH patients improve after start of immunosuppressive treatment and show stabilization of liver function during maintenance therapy. However, about 10% of patients reach the final stage of AIH with decompensated liver cirrhosis, ascites, bleeding esophageal varices, or hepatic encephalopathy due to late diagnosis, inadequate treatment or lack of treatment response. In these patients, liver transplantation (LTx) is the only therapeutic option. Outcome after LTx is very good in AIH with survival rates of 78-92% after 5 years, but recurrence of AIH may be observed in [20% of patients during long-term follow-up [33] [34] [35] . AIH recurrence after LTx carries the risk to not adequately respond to standard immunosuppressive therapy and represents a therapeutic challenge for the hepatologist as recurrent ''difficult-to-treat AIH'' (for experimental therapeutic approaches: see above). Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is an autoimmune liver disease which affects preferentially middle to old females with a peak incidence in the 40-60 years. Pathologically, the small intrahepatic bile ducts are selectively affected and the hepatocytes are also variably damaged. Along with the progressive bile-duct damage in PBC, almost all small intrahepatic small bile ducts disappear and chronic cholestasis, biliary fibrosis/cirrhosis and hepatic failure develop, eventulally. The term chronic non-suppurative destructive cholangitis (CNSDC) [1] more accurately describes the initial lesions. PBC and autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), another autoimmune liver disease, differ in their clinical, biochemical, serological and histological features and, in most instances, a diagnosis of PBC or AIH can be achieved using accepted criteria. In some cases of PBC, hepatitic features characterized by interface activities and lobular hepatitis are found, and serologically ANA and elevation of serum transaminases are noted. Such cases are called as overlapping syndrome or hepatitic form of PBC [2, 3] . Their clinicopathological features are now being studied worldwide. In this postgraduate course, clinicopathological features of classical PBC and of PBC-AIH overlapping syndrome are discussed, and the treatment for both conditions are also briefly reviewed. The onset is usually insidious in a majority of PBC cases, and the presenting features are usually pruritus and lethargy with increasing skin pigmentation and eventually cholestatic jaundice. The incidental finding of hepatomegaly, a raised alkaline phosphatase or of antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) in serum may result in the diagnosis of asymptomatic patients. The number of asymptomatic PBC is relatively increased, accounting for the apparent rise in incidence and prevalence of PBC. Some asymptomatic PBC remains as such, and they experience a normal life expectancy, although symptoms subsequently develop and PBC eventually progresses in most cases. Its natural history is presumed to be about 20 years, and the onset of jaundice means clinical deterioration. Death is usually due to progressive hepatic failure, frequently with bleeding esophageal varices. Liver transplantation remains the only treatment option in patients with advanced disease. PBC is not infrequently associated with other immunological diseases such as Sjögren syndrome, the CREST syndrome, and autoimmune thyroiditis. Liver function tests show a normal or mildly elevated bilirubin level at early stages, accompanied by a striking elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase. There is a moderate elevation of serum aminotransferase levels. Serum immunoglobulins of all three major classes may be raised, but markedly elevated IgM is most consistent and is a distinctive feature of PBC. The most helpful diagnostic test is the demonstration of AMA detectable in more than 95% of patients' sera. The major autoantigens which AMA recognize are now identified as components of the 2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase complex (2-OADC), an enzyme complex located on the inner mitochondrial membranes. AMA of more than 95% of PBC patients are strongly reactive with epitopes in the E2 components of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC-E2) and also with components of other 2-OADC. Occurrence of ANA of centromere type is also characteristic for PBC. In addition, autoantibodies against a 210 kD glycoprotein of the nuclear membrane (gp210) are characteristically detected in PBC, while their incidence is low compared to AMA [4] . Significance of AMAs and other autoantibodies in the long-term outcome of PBC remains elusive. The etiology of PBC remains enigmatic, although it is clearly related to a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Genetic factors are suggested by a familial predisposition and an increased prevalence of autoantibodies in relatives of PBC patients. Also, a high concordance rate of PBC in monozygotic twins has been described. The association of PBC with environmental factors such as microbes, drugs and chemicals has been suggested, and AMA formation as an early step in the pathogenesis of PBC has been assumed to be triggered by these environmental factors [5] . PBC is characterized by a breakdown in self tolerance of T and B cells to the conserved mitochondrial self antigen E2-component of 2-OADC, particularly a major self antigen PDC-E2, and then occurrence of autoreactive T and B cells against PDC-E2. The events provoking initial activation of AMA and PDC-E2-recognizing T-cells remain unknown; the hypothesis of molecular mimicry implies that foreign pathogens with homology to self-protein or modified selfprotein can break tolerance. PDC-E2 are intracellular enzymes highly conserved during evolution and there is cross-reactivity between AMA and subcellular constituents of microbes, in particular E. coli. At the early stages, the bile duct damages are main findings, while parenchymal damages leading to severe biliary fibrosis/cirrhosis predominate in later stages. In addition, parenchymal necroinflammatory changes such as interface and lobular hepatitis variably but frequently develop simultaneously, and ''primary cholangiohepatitis'' [7] has been proposed for an alternative name for PBC. The small intrahepatic bile duct, particularly the interlobular bile ducts, are initially affected and finally disappear from the liver (Fig. 1a, b) . These affected bile ducts are surrounded by many lympho-plasmacyes nd their epithelial cells are variably swollen with a vacuolated cytoplasm and an irregular luminal border, or show an eosinophilic shrunken appearance with pyknotic nuclei, reflecting apoptotic loss and senescence of BECs [8, 9] . These bile-duct lesions have been called CNSDC by Rubin et al. [1] or florid duct lesions. The majority of lymphocytes in the portal tracts are CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (Th1 subset). Autoreactive T cells, recognizing PDC-E2 component, may be involved in the pathogenesis of bile duct injuries in PBC. B cells are occasionally dense around the bile ducts. Plasma cells and eosinophils can be conspicuous in the early stages, and these bile-duct damage and portal inflammation are distributed heterogeneously within the liver. PBC patients exhibit aberrant HLA class II expression in addition to increased HLA class I expressions on injured BECs. The periductal presence of proinflammatory cytokines such as IFN-c may induce such HLA class I and II expression in BECs. The presence of arteries unaccompanied by ducts is used as a useful marker of bile-duct loss or ductopenia. Aggregates of epithelioid cells are common and well-defined noncaseating granulomas are characteristically seen in the early stages (Fig. 1a) . Epithelioid cell granulomas, particularly when they are intimately associated with damaged bile ducts, are a characteristic finding of PBC. Harada et al. [5] have identified several indigenous bacteria, and among them Propionibacterium acnes (P. acnes) DNA as a major clone in granulomas of PBC, suggesting that P. acnes and other enteric bacteria are involved in the pathogenesis of granuloma. The parenchymal changes are largely dividable into two types: necroinflammatory and chronic cholestatic changes. As for the former, single cell necrosis, acidophilic bodies, Kupffer-cell hyperplasia and sinusoidal infiltration with lymphocytes and pigment laden macrophages are found, though their degree is mild. In the early stage, the bile-duct injury and associated inflammation described above remain confined within the portal tract boundaries. The subsequent progression of the disease is characterized by an extension of the necroinflammatory process to the periportal parenchyma-interface activity. This may take either of or both of the following two different forms in variable combination [10] : 1. Lymphocytic interface activity resembles the lesion seen in AIH and suggests an extension to adjacent hepatocytes of the same immunological process as that affecting the duct system [10] . Lymphocytic interface activity is present in a substantial number of cases, generally early in conjunction with florid bile-duct damage and inflammation. In less than 10% of cases, it may be evident (Fig. 2 ) and be associated with clinical features of AIH (see below). 2. Biliary interface activity is superimposed or, as the duct loss advances, becomes the main feature. In common with other chronic cholestatic disorders, it results from the 'toxic' effect of hydrophobic bile acids and other retained bile products. There is cholate stasis and deposition of copper or copper associated protein granules (Fig.3 ) Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 [11] . Ductular reaction may be a striking feature, although the ductular elements often disappear in the advanced stages of the disease when pericellular fibrosis. Mallory bodies and intracellular or canalicular bile pigment dominate the picture at the interface. In most instances, PBC differs in the clinical, biochemical, serological and histological features from autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), another autoimmune liver disease, in which the hepatocytes are mainly affected by immunological processes. In about 10% of PBC cases the features of PBC and AIH coexist in various combinations in a single patient [2] , though in such cases, the fundamental characteristics or features of the patients were similar to those of patients with classical PBC [12] . ''PBC-AIH overlapping syndrome'' has been used to describe such cases [3, 11, 12] . The incidence of overlapping syndrome ranges from 5 to 15% of PBC patients, and varies at the usage of broader or narrower definitions [13] . For example, Chazouillere et al. [11] have proposed diagnostic criteria for PBC-AIH overlap syndrome, namely the presence in an individual patient of at least two out of three accepted features for PBC (positive AMA, florid bile-duct lesion on histology and raised alkaline phosphatase 9 5) and AIH (raised ALT levels 95, serum IgG levels 92 or a positive ASMA and moderate or severe lymphocytic interface activity on histology). Using these criteria, they found 9.2% of PBC patients having an overlap syndrome [11] . It must be stressed that the histological finding of PBC-like bile duct injury in an otherwise classical AIH [14] or of lymphocytic interface hepatitis in an otherwise classical PBC [10] is in itself not sufficient for a diagnosis of overlap. Recently, a simplified AIH scoring system has been proposed by the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group, and of 368 patients (318 females) with a definite diagnosis of PBC, 43 (12%) were diagnosed as probable PBC-AIH overlap with the revised criteria for AIH and 23 (6%) with the simplified scoring system for AIH [15] . The simplified AIH scoring system appears to be more specific in patients with PBC and could assist in clinical assessment. The new criteria scould be replaced the revised criteria for the diagnosis of PBC-AIH overlap syndrome [15] . Meanwhile, Lohse et al. [3] disclosed that all of overlap patients were primarily suffering from PBC as all of them had at least either bile duct destruction on histology or anti-M2 AMA, suggesting that these PBC patients because of their genetic susceptibility, evidenced by the AIH-characteristic histocompatibility leukocyte antigen (HLA) type B8, DR3, or DR4, developed a more hepatitic picture. They proposed that the name ''overlap syndrome'' be abandoned for ''PBC, hepatitic form'' [3] . Worse outcome is observed in PBC patients with overlap features [15] . The frequency of cirrhosis, portal hypertension, gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, ascites, and esophageal varices was significantly higher and more frequent liver-related death and liver transplantation in the overlap group at the time of follow-up in comparison with PBC patients without AIH featuers. Response to immunosuppressive therapy was usually excellent. If not detected early, superimposed AIH can result in rapid progression toward cirrhosis and liver failure in PBC patients [12] . Interestingly, a few patients with overt AIH who test positive for AMAs at initial presentation and are treated with corticosteroid therapy have shown no clinical or histologic evidence of PBC despite the continued detection of AMAs over a follow-up of up to 27 years [16] . In most of overlapping syndrome, both features of PBC and AIH are simultaneously found in a single patient. However, the consecutive occurrence of PBC-AIH, with flare-up of AIH, either spontaneously or during treatment with UDCA, has also been reported [3] . Interestingly, in two patients clinicopathological features of AIH occurred after transplantation for PBC [17] . In one series, AIH developed in 4% of PBC patients: PBC is followed by AIH [12] . Classical AIH evolving into a typical PBC has also been reported [18] . The treatment of choice is ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a hydrophilic bile acid which reduces the intrahepatic more hydrophobic bile salt concentration, and competitively inhibits their reabsorption in the gut, thereby reducing the overall bile acid pool size. UCDA may also exert immunological effects [19] , in particular UDCA therapy is associated with a reduction of HLA molecule expression within the liver [20] . Clinically, UCDA often improves or even normalizes serum levels of cholestatic enzymes [21] . Results of the studies assessing the beneficial effect of UCDA on liver histology diverge, a discrepancy which can be expected given the known sampling variation and the small number of paired biopsies reviewed in the various studies [22] . Bezafibrate retard which is a commonly used medication for hyperlipidemia, was found to lower liver enzyme levels, apparently through its action on MDR gene 3, a transport element of the ATP-dependent bile secretion system, and on PPAR-a [23] . These findings were maintained throughout follow-up. Combination therapy with bezafibrate and UDCA improves the biochemical profile of patients with PBC who respond only partially to UDCA. Immunosuppressive therapy has been disappointing in PBC [24] , although anecdotal cases and observations made after liver transplantation suggest that corticosteroids could be beneficial if administered before ductopenia is too advanced. Studies using combined UCDA/ steroid therapy are not large enough to appropriately evaluate the results [25] . The combination of corticosteroids and UCDA, and in some cases prednisone +/-azathioprine, may be required to achieved biochemical remission in patients with PBC-AIH overlap syndromes [12] . Ten patients of AIH-PBC overlap syndrome were given prednisone +/-azathioprine; short-term as well as sustained remissions were obtained in eight of these, while two had multiple relapses and eventually died 8 and 7 years after diagnosis of AIH [12] . However, whether steroid therapy is truly warranted in patients with PBC-AIH overlap syndrome remains controversial [26] . In time, the necroinflammatory and cholestatic process accompanied by fibrosis extends along the terminal distribution of the portal tracts leading to portal-portal bridging septa (Fig. 4) . Periseptal changes are usually continuous with, and similar to, the periportal changes. The biliary type fibrosis is dense, scar-like in the deeper portions of the septa, but oedematous at the periphery where it gives rise to a 'halo' effect ( Fig. 5) . Based on the histological observation of PBC liver, two representative mechanisms are assumed to involved in the progression of PBC. The first is characterized by extensive bile duct destruction, chronic cholestasis and biliary interface activity leading to fibrosis or cirrhosis of biliary pattern. The second is by lymphocytic interface activities leading to cirrhosis, the pattern of which resembles cirrhosis following AIH. However, there are also many cases between two typical progression and some cases change alternatively their predominant types along the clinical course. Macroscopically, the cirrhotic liver is of a larger size than that of post-hepatitic type cirrhosis following chronic viral hepatitis or AIH. The cirrhotic pattern is predominantly micronodular, of a regular appearance and there is variable bile staining. Rarely a shrunken, macronodular liver is observed. The histological changes may be difficult to distinguish from those of cirrhosis of other aetiology. PBC should be suspected, however, on the following features: (i) virtual absence of medium-and small-sized bile ducts; (ii) focal lymphocytic aggregates in portal areas; (iii) peripheral cholate stasis or cholestasis with Mallory bodies and copper deposition regularly highlighting the parenchymal limiting plates; (iv) a biliary or monolobular pattern of fibrosis; and (v) partial or focal preservation of the normal architecture. In a few instances the diagnostic bile-duct lesions may persist at the cirrhotic stage and granulomas may also be seen. Histological staging and grading of necroinflammatory acivities Classical histological stagings: In Scheuer's system, Stage 1 is characterized by florid duct lesions or CNSDC, and in stage 2, there is a characteristic proliferation of bile ductules. Stage 3 is characterized by fibrosis or scarring, and stage 4, by cirrhosis. In Ludwig's system, the histologic features used for the staging of chronic active hepatitis are applied to the staging of PBC: portal hepatitis (stage 1), interface hepatitis (stage 2), bridging necrosis or bridging fibrosis (stage 3), and cirrhosis (stage 4). While the classical systems appear simple and seem to be applicable, there are reports that histological changes are heterogeneous in a whole PBC liver and sampling errors occur in needle liver biopsies of PBC. Furthermore, the grading of necroinflammatory activities to reflect the autommune-mediated pathologenesis of PBC is not reflected in these staging systems. Since publication of the latest staging method, that of Ludwig et al. in 1978, much progress has been made in clinical areas, particularly in therapeutic fields such as ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). To overcome such shortages of the classical stagings, a novel system applicable to needle liver biopsies has been proposed [27, 28] . Novel system for histologic staging and grades of activities Staging: Three items (bile duct loss, cholestasis, and fibrosis) are chosen for staging. Cholesasis is evaluated by deposition of orcein-positive granules which are detectable in the relatively early stages of PBC, and become more severe with the progression of the disease. These three items are scored as follows. For bile duct loss (B), a score of 0 means interlobular bile ducts were present in all portal tracts. A score of 1 and 2 means that bile duct loss is evident in less than 1/3 and in 1/3 to 2/3 of portal tracts, respectively. A score of 3 indicates that bile ducts were absent in more than 2/3 portal tracts. For chronic cholestasis (C), a score of 0 means no deposition of orcein-poistive granules in periportal hepatocytes. A score of 1 indicates deposition in less than one third of periportal hepatocytes of at least one portal tract, and a score of 3, deposition in more than two thirds of periportal hepatocytes along the all portal tracts or fibrous septa. A score of 2 is that between 1 and 3. For fibrosis (F), a score of 0 means that there is almost no fibrosis or the fibrosis is confined to the portal tracts. A score of 1 means that the fibrosis extends beyond the portal area occasionally with incomplete fibrous septa, and a score of 2, that there is bridging fibrosis with variable lobular distortion and a score of 3, cirrhosis. Then, a total of three items was obtained: a total score of 0 is stage 1 (no or minimum progression), 1-3 is stage 2 (mild progression), 4-6 is stage 3 (moderate progression), and 7-9 is stage 4 (advanced progression Key points • The inherent cytotoxicity of bile plays a role in the etiology of cholestatic liver disease due to bile duct injury • Toxic and immunologic bile duct injury is a key factor in the etiology of primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, drug-induced cholestatic liver disease, graft-versus-host disease, ischemic type biliary lesions of the liver allograft and liver allograft rejection • Low-phospholipid associated cholelithiasis, due to mutations of the ABCB4/MDR3 gene, is an underestimated cause of liver disease • The role of ursodeoxycholic acid therapy in cholestatic liver disease is unclear: in primary biliary cirrhosis ursodeoxycholic acid therapy has been shown to increase liver transplantation-free survival, in primary sclerosing cholangitis high dose ursodeoxy cholic acid therapy is contra-indicated. Bile ducts are indispensable for normal liver function. Yet bile ducts are vulnerable since they are the conduits of bile that potentially is a toxic fluid and bile ducts are in contact with the hostile environment of the intestine. To withstand this potentially toxic environment cholangiocytes are equipped with a number of defense mechanisms that keep them alive but also can become the source of injury. Etiology of bile duct injury Bile is formed at the level of the hepatocellular canaliculi. This primary bile consists of bile acids in high concentrations, phospholipids mainly phosphatidylcholine, cholesterol, minerals and water. This mixture is highly toxic to cells. How cholangiocyte plasma membranes are protected against this toxicity is not completely understood. Sphingomyelin has a high resistance against the detergent action of bile acids [1] but a detailed study on the phospholipid composition of cholangiocyte plasma membranes could not be found in the literature. Cholangiocytes produce bicarbonate that as a weak base ionizes bile acids. This decreases their capability to enter and destroy membranes. Bicarbonate is produced by a chloride bicarbonate exchanger in the bile duct lumen-facing membranes of cholangiocytes. This exchanger mediates the secretion of bicarbonate and the absorption of chloride. For this exchanger to work properly, chloride has to be secreted into the bile duct lumen and this is mediated by the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator that is deficient in cystic fibrosis [2, 3] . Hence in cystic fibrosis, bicarbonate secretion is perturbed and this may be the cause of bile duct loss in this disease ( Table 1 ). The toxicity of bile acids in bile is to some extent neutralized by the presence of phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol. With phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol bile acids form mixed micelles that are less toxic to the surrounding biliary epithelium than bile acid monomers would be. A clear example of this is shown in patients with an ABCB4 deficiency. ABCB4 is a phosphatidylcholine flippase (transporter) in the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes. Patients in whom this transporter is lacking because of a mutation of the gene that encodes this protein show severe injury of the intrahepatic bile ducts. This phenomenon is key to the 'toxic bile concept [4] . This toxic injury leads to an increased permeability of the biliary tree with leakage of bile into the surrounding tissue, periductular inflammation and fibrosis and probably damage and thrombosis of the periductular capillary network. In children this disease is called progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 (PFIC type 3) [5] , in adults low-phospholipid associated cholelithiasis (LPAC) [6] . Cholelithiasis because bile without phospholipids becomes unstable and cholesterol precipitates in the bile ductules of the intrahepatic biliary tree. In adults this is a disease that is increasingly recognized and that can lead to vanishing bile duct syndrome (VBDS), rapidly progressive secondary biliary cirrhosis and portal hypertension. Drug induced liver injury, particularly drug induced cholestasis, represents another example of toxic damage to the biliary tree. The exact mechanism of most of the drugs that cause this is still not completely understood but formation of toxic bile through inhibition by the offending drug of hepatocanalicular transport proteins (ABCB11/BSEP, ABCC2/MRP2, ABCB4/ MDR3) may be the cause. Drugs that cause this include a number of antibiotics, phenothiazines and carbamazepine. Immediately after liver transplantation the recovery of hepatocanalicular transport proteins may be out of balance in the sense that bile in the first two weeks contains relatively more bile acids than phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol [7] . Thus the liver graft produces toxic bile and this may damage the intrahepatic bile ducts. This suggests that toxic bile in the first weeks after transplantation may contribute to the socalled 'ischemic type biliary lesions'. Ischemia may be secondary to toxic injury of the biliary tree. Since cholangiocytes are also highly immunocompetent cells that can produce cytokines and chemokines and have antigen presenting properties, immunological damage clearly represents an important mechanism of bile duct epithelial damage [8] . Damage to the smaller bile ducts as in primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and the larger bile ducts as in primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) most likely has an immunological background albeit that in PBC a combined etiology is possible since a deficiency of the chloride/bicarbonate exchanger has been reported in this disease [9] . The vulnerability of the biliary tree to immunological injury is clearly shown in graft versus host disease, a condition after bone marrow transplantation that can lead to severe damage of the small intrahepatic bile ducts up to the level of completely vanishing bile ducts. Veno-occlusive disease (VOD) is part of the spectrum of post bone marrow liver diseases. One may speculate that damage to the small intrahepatic bile ducts may lead to bile leakage and perhaps to thrombosis in the sinusoids of zone 3 of the liver acinus where VOD is mostly located. The biliary tree is also the seat of hepatic progenitor cells [10] . Hepatic progenitor cells are located in the canals of Hering that constitute the interface between hepatocytes and cholangiocytes. Bile flows through the canals of Hering before it reaches the biliary tree proper. Bile duct damage is almost always associated with bile duct proliferation which may be key to damage control and restoration of the bile ducts. However, most bile duct diseases also represent an increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma. Evidence indicates that hepatic progenitor cells may be the origin of cholangiocarcinoma and thus that damage of HPCs maybe the trigger for the development of cholangiocarcinoma [11] . Bile duct disease PBC and PSC are the most common liver disease in which bile duct injury is a prominent feature. PBC is characterized by damage of the small intrahepatic bile ducts by cytotoxic lymphocytes. Antimitochondrial antibodies (anti-M2, anti-pyruvate dehydrogenase complex) can be detected in these patients and form a diagnostic hallmark in this disease. Initially, but this phase may last years or even decades, patients only complain of fatigue and more or less pruritus, but later patients become jaundiced and get symptoms and signs of portal hypertension. A liver biopsy is usually necessary to make the diagnosis. Ursodeoxycholic acid is the only drug approved for the treatment of PBC. Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid may postpone the time of liver transplantation [12] . If transplantation can be prevented is difficult to prove in a disease with a highly variable course, in which a subgroup of patients has a normal life expectancy. PSC is a stricturing disease of the larger intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. The fibrotic strictures are distributed in an irregular pattern leaving spaces in between wherein the bile ducts can become dilated giving a characteristic pattern of beading of the bile ducts. Patients complain of fatigue and their quality of life is often severely affected by episodes of cholangitis. Eventually this disease leads to secondary biliary cirrhosis but a high risk for cholangiocarcinoma represents the major clinical problem in this disease. In seventy percent of patients PSC is associated with ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease of the colon. The use of ursodeoxycholic acid as therapy in this disease has become controversial since the Mayo Clinics trial in where it was shown that patients on high dose ursodeoxycholic acid showed less survival and more complications of portal hypertension than patients on placebo [13] . High dose ursodeoxycholic acid seems contra-indicated in this disease. Both PBC and PSC, but PBC more often than PSC, can lead to VBDS. This is a diagnosis made by the pathologist when in the portal triads the number of bile ducts starts to decrease and eventually disappear. IgG4-associated cholangitis is a disease with strong links to autoimmune pancreatitis [14] . This disease responds well to corticosteroid treatment. Overlap syndromes are diseases with autoimmune features as well as features of either PBC or PSC [15] . Graft versus host disease and liver allograft rejection are associated with inflammatory changes and apoptosis at the level of the intrahepatic biliary tree. Timely anti-rejection therapy can salvage the biliary ducts and prevent VBDS. If in a liver graft full-blown VBS has developed, re-transplantation is the only cure. Numerous drugs can cause VBDS with as most notable examples antibiotics (flucloxacillin, co-trimoxazol), phenothiazines, tricyclic Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 antidepressants, ajmaline and carbamazepine. Discontinuation of the suspected drug is the obvious therapy but it should be realized that VBDS may persist for many months after termination of drug therapy and even may be irreversible albeit that this is rare. Rifampicine is a drug that through its interaction with the nuclear hormone receptor PXR can induce MRP2. In theory that would help in the removal of the many drugs that are substrate to MRP2 and perhaps could also abbreviate the episode of drug-induced cholestasis. However, this theoretical argument is not supported by trials yet. Liver allograft rejection recipient ABO blood type to prevent hyperacute rejection. Rejection of the liver can be classified into three types ( Fig. 1) : Hyperacute, Acute Cellular or Chronic Ductopenic [1] . Hyperacute rejection is rare and is primarily observed with ABO incompatibility as might occur in a desperate situation in which such an allograft is used as a bridge to a second transplant in patient dying with acute liver failure. Acute cellular rejection, in contrast, is not infrequent, and is characterized by a triad of diagnostic features on liver biopsy. The histopathological triad includes lymphocytic and eosinophilic portal inflammatory infiltrates, lymphocytic cholangitis and endothelialitis. Chronic ductopenic rejection is now uncommon unless patients are non-compliant with immunosuppressive medications. It is characterized by a diagnostic histopathological triad including lymphocytic and eosinophilic portal inflammatory infiltrates, ductopenia ([50% loss of interlobular bile ducts) and obliterative vasculopathy (foam cell arteritis) of the medium to large caliber arteries and portal microvasculature. Advances in immunosuppression to prevent and treat acute cellular and chronic ductopenic rejection have steadily decreased the incidence of rejection and the loss of allografts due to irreversible rejection [2] . However, it is important to note that immunosuppression of patients after OLT remains partly art and partly science. This is due to fact that we lack biomarkers to detect the emergence of rejection and the degree of either alloimmune tolerance or alloimmune reactivity that dictates the capacity to reject the transplanted liver. In addition, the transplant surgeon and hepatologist must contend with the fact that histopathological features of rejection are poorly correlated with the type and degree of liver biochemical abnormalities or traditional trough or concentration maximum (Cmax) levels of immunosuppressive drugs. Thus, the liver biopsy remains an important diagnostic procedure in detection of rejection and its management [1, 2] . The advances in the development, testing and use of immunosuppressive drugs in liver transplant patients have stemmed from the identification of the mechanisms involved in innate and adaptive immunity. However, our current understanding of the complexity of the alloimmune reaction to a transplanted liver containing large numbers of donor leukocytes (passenger leukocytes) and activated tissue macrophages (Kupffer cells) remains incomplete. Numerous drugs have been developed that inhibit the adaptive immune response at specific steps, and recently it has become possible to prevent the endothelial transmigration required for activated T cells to leave the circulation and accumulate in tissues (Fig. 2) . For many drugs, the molecular mechanisms of action have also been defined. Adaptive immune response: a tale of three signals Cumulative knowledge indicates that the adaptive immune response can be viewed as a coordinated response generated by three distinct signals (Fig. 3) [2, 3] . Modern immunosuppressive agents primarily inhibit these three signals, prevent T cell proliferation, inhibit interactions between adhesion molecules and counter-receptors or opsonize T and/or B cells for cytolysis (Fig. 4) . Signal 1 (Antigen Activation of T Cells): Alloantigen activation of recipient T cells can occur in two distinct ways: the Direct and Indirect Pathways (Fig. 5) . The direct pathway involves the immediate recognition of donor peptide antigens expressed by donor HLA class II and class I molecules by circulating recipient CD4 and CD8 T cells. By definition, the recipient T cells were originally primed by antigens other than those of the allograft; thus, this direct recognition by and activation of recipient T cells represents a phenomenon of immediate cross recognition of alloantigen-allo-HLA complexes by recipient T cell receptors (TCR). The indirect pathway represents the classical paradigm of T cell activation by presentation of a foreign alloantigenic peptide antigen by the recipients HLA class II and class I molecules. Effective alloantigen processing and presentation is done by professional antigen presenting cells (APC, including dendritic cells, activated macrophages, B cells). This process requires adhesion between the antigen presenting cells and the T cell bearing an antigen-specific TCR (mediated by binding of adhesion molecules and their counter-receptors). Signal 1 (Fig. 3) is mediated by Ca ++dependent activation of calcineurin phosphatase, which catalyzes dephosphorylation of the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT). The dephosphorylated transcription factors migrate to the nucleus and promote transcription of essential mitogenic cytokines and growth factors (IL-2, IL-3, Il-4, TNFa, IFNc, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor [GM-CSF]). Signal I alone does not result in sufficient production of T cell mitogens, especially IL-2, to produce sufficient proliferation. The production of sufficient mitogenic IL-2 and other growth factors requires a costimulatory signal II. Signal 2: (Costimulation of Signal I Activated T Cells): Costimulation is required for the T cell that has been activated by signal I to produce sufficient IL-2 and other mitogenic growth factors to proliferate and mature. Costimulation is provided by signaling induced by the binding of a variety of ligands on the APC with receptors on the T cell (Fig. 6) . The most important pairs of ligands and receptors are: APC CD80/ CD86 (aka B7.1/B7.2) and T cell CD28 or CTLA4 and APC CD40 and T cell CD154 (aka CD40 Ligand, CD40L). Signal II represents a Ca 2+independent augmentation of the dephosphorylation of NFAT and other nuclear factors that results in increased transcription of mitogenic cytokines and growth factors (Fig. 4) . Adequate concentrations of IL-2 and other growth factors drive activated T cells to proliferate and differentiate into effector CD4 and CD8 T cells. Signal 3: (Clonal expansion of Activated T Cells): Signal III is generated primarily by the binding of IL-2 to IL-2 receptors (IL-2R; CD25) on the cell surface of activated CD4 and CD8 T cells. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays a central role in this signaling pathway that increases the translation of proteins and promotes cell cycle transition required for clonal T cell proliferation. Transendothelial leukocyte trafficking and costimulation in rejection Following clonal expansion of CD4 and CD8 T cells, differentiation and maturation of effector mechanisms, the T cells must migrate across the endothelia of the portal veins to infiltrate the portal tracts and mediate biliary injury characteristic of hepatic allograft rejection [2, 4] . Dendritic APCs that have ingested allograft antigens migrate from the liver to regional lymph nodes to present the processed peptide antigens to naïve T and B cells. Activated T cells then egress from the lymph node into the circulation. Tissue injury (e.g. reperfusion injury of the transplanted liver) results in the innate immune inflammation and production of chemokines that are taken up and displayed by endothelial cells. Activated T cells roll along the endothelial cell surface under the control of leukocyte selectin adhesion molecules. Firm adhesion occurs when specific chemokine receptors and integrin adhesion molecules on activated leukocytes bind to endothelial chemokines and adhesion molecules. Diapedesis of leukocytes through endothelial cell tight junctions and basement membranes allows the extravasated leukocytes to migrate toward the source of chemokines recognized by their chemokine receptors. The costimulatory T cell receptor CD154 (aka CD40L) induces endothelial cell expression of adhesion molecules E-selectin, ICAM-1 (CD54) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) that further promote transendothelial migration of leukocytes. Immunosuppressive drugs used in orthotopic liver transplantation: mechanisms of action As shown in Fig. 3 , multiple drugs and therapeutic antibodies are available that immunosuppress and/or immunomodulate adaptive alloimmune responses, and several agents act at more than one site. The availability of multiple therapeutic agents now permits the use of combination therapies to achieve optimal effects, while minimizing dose-dependent toxicities [2, 3] . The following section describes the drugs used in OLT. Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 Signal 1 Inhibition: Corticosteroids: Corticosteroids inhibit T cell activation by decreasing CD4 T cell secretion of IL-2, preventing concurrent secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-a by APC, upregulating immunosuppressive IL-10 and downregulating synthesis of interferon-c [2, 3, 5] . These multiple effects, mediated by nuclear steroid receptors, reduce the efficiency of antigen presentation and production of a proinflammatory milieu. Methylprednisolone is administered intravenously as primary immunosuppression during the OLT operation and during the perioperative period. Later patients are started on oral prednisone and the dose tapered to 20 mg daily. Prednisone is rapidly converted to prednisolone in the liver. Calcineurin Inhibitors: Both cyclosporine and tacrolimus inhibit signal I of T cell activation (Figs. 3, 4) by decreasing calcineurin phosphatase activity [2, 3] . Thus, both are referred to as calcineurin inhibitors. However, the mechanism of calcineurin phosphatase inhibition differs between the two drugs. Cyclosporine binds to cytoplasmic cyclophilin receptors and the complex inhibits of calcineurin phosphatase dephosphorylation of the nuclear factor of T cell activation (NFAT), the critical step necessary for NFAT migration into the nucleus and induction of gene transcription [2, 3] . In vitro, cyclosporine also induces expression of TGFb, a suppressor of T cell functions. Adverse events are dosedependent and include hypertension, nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity, hypercholesterolemia, and rarely lymphoproliferative disorders. Cyclosporine-induced production of TGFb by cholangiocytes has been postulated to promote ductopenia by inhibiting cholangiocyte regeneration and inducing senescence protein p21 observed in ductopenic rejection [6] . Tacrolimus (aka FK-506) also inhibits calcineurin phosphatase, but it does so by forming complexes with cytoplasmic FK-binding protein-12 (FKBP12) that in turn bind to calcineurin-calmodulin complexes that inhibit calcineurin phosphatase dephosphorylation of NFAT [2, 3] . Tacrolimus also promotes secretion TGFb, an immunosuppressant of effector T cell functions. In contrast to cyclosporine, tacrolimus does not induce cholangiocyte expression of senescence protein p21, which may help explain its superiority in preventing chronic ductopenic rejection [6] . In addition to inhibiting IL-2 secretion, tacrolimus also inhibits expression of the IL-2 and IL-7 receptors responsible for signal 3 of T cell activation. Most of tacrolimus' adverse events are identical to those of cyclosporine. However, tacrolimus is more frequently associated with diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis, gastrointestinal symptoms, bone marrow suppression and allergic reactions than cyclosporine. Signal 2 Inhibition: Multiple receptors transduce costimulatory signals ( Figure 3 ). The most effective are CD28, CD154 (aka CD40ligand, CD40L), CD11a (portion of LFA-1 heterodimer), CD2, CD137 and CD152 [3] . Therapeutic agents have been developed to inhibit each of these of the costimulatory receptors (Figs. 2, 4) . Inhibition of signal 2 at the time of OLT could theoretically induce polyclonal T cell tolerance through clonal anergy. Fusion Protein Inhibitors CTLA4-Ig Inhibitors: CD28 and cytotoxic T lymphocyte Ag-4 (CTLA4, aka CD152) are both costimulatory T cell receptors for the B7.1(CD80) and B7.2(CD86) ligands expressed on APCs [7] . In contrast to the activating costimulatory signal transduced by CD28, CTLA4 signaling is immunosuppressive. Abatacept: Abatacept, a fusion product of human CTLA-4 and the modified Fc portion of human IgG1, is FDA-approved for intravenous use in patients with refractory rheumatoid arthritis to competitively block CD80/CD86 binding to T cell CD28 [3, 8] . Unfortunately, abatacept was ineffective in preventing allograft rejection in nonhuman primate models. Belatacept: Belatacept (formerly LEA29Y) is a derivative of abatacept with amino acid substitutions that increase avidity of binding to CD80/CD86 on APCs [7] . In contrast to the inability of abatacept to prevent experimental allograft rejection, belatacept prevented rejection in non-human primates and was as effective as cyclosporine in the immunosuppression of patients undergoing renal transplantation [3, 9] . Adverse events were comparable in patients treated with either belatacept or cyclosporine. Alefacept: Alefacept is a humanized CD2 fusion protein with two mechanisms of action: 1. inhibition of costimulatory CD2 receptor signaling induced by CD48 expressed on APC and T cells and 2. induction of apoptosis of activated CD4 and CD8 memory subsets [3, 10] . Alefacept is FDA-approved for the treatment of psoriasis and also has been efficacious in lichen planus and cutaneous graft-vs-host disease (GVHD). Adverse events have included headache, nasopharyngitis, influenza-like symptoms, upper respiratory tract infection, pruritus, arthralgia, fatigue, nausea and increased aminotransferase levels. Sirolimus and Everolimus: Sirolimus (aka rapamycin) binds to cytosolic FKBP12 and the complexes inhibit mTOR signaling, reducing translation of proteins and disrupting the cell cycle transitions necessary for T cell mitosis [2, 3, 11] . Everolimus (aka RAD), a derivative of sirolimus with lesser affinity for FKBP12, is now being studied in clinical trials [10, 12] . Both sirolimus and everolimus block cell cycle G1 to S transitions by inhibiting the Ca ++ -independent activation of T cells by IL-2, IL-4, IL-6 and costimulatory effects of CD28 signaling. The fact that neither drug is nephrotoxic represents an important advantage over both cyclosporine and tacrolimus for chronic use. However, sirolimus cannot be used as initial immunosuppression because clinical trials identified an increased risk of hepatic arterial and venous thromboses and incisional hernias due to poor wound healing [13] . Sirolimus is most often used in OLT patients with calcineurin-inhibitor induced azotemia after complete healing of wounds and vascular anastamoses. Adverse events include headache, hypertension, edema, hyperlipidemia, asthenia, gastrointestinal symptoms, and arthralgia. Serious adverse events include infections, lymphoma, other malignancies, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. Since the effects of sirolimus on IL-2 signaling compliment the effects of cyclosporine and tacrolimus inhibition of IL-2 secretion, combination therapy with sirolimus and a calcineurin inhibitor can theoretically prevent all 3 signals of T cell activation. Monoclonal Anti-IL-2R (Anti-CD25) Antibodies: Daclizumab and Basiliximab are therapeutic mAbs against the alpha subunit of the IL-2R (CD25). Both were approved for induction therapy to prevent renal allograft rejection [2, 3, 14, 15] . Daclizumab is a humanized mAb, while basiliximab is a mouse chimeric mAb with increased risks of anaphylaxis when readministered to patients who have developed anti-mouse IgE [16] . Both mAbs effectively suppressed alloimmune T cell responses at the time of OLT. By blocking the IL-2R, these mAbs prevent IL-2 induced mitogenesis (Signal 3). Daclizumab was withdrawn from the market for financial reasons; thus, only basiliximab is currently available. Currently, it is rarely used for induction therapy in OLT. The net effects of signals 1, 2 and 3 are the clonal expansion of effector T cells. Thus, another strategy to prevent rejection is to directly inhibit the proliferation of T cells. In the early years of OLT, the combination of corticosteroids and azathioprine was the mainstay of immunosuppression until the advent of cyclosporine and later tacrolimus. Even after the introduction of cyclosporine, some programs in the 1980s and 1990s advocated a triple regimen of immunosuppression with corticosteroids, cyclosporine and azathioprine in an attempt to reduce the dose-dependent adverse effects of corticosteroid and cyclosporine. Since azathioprine has been abandoned as an antiproliferative agent in OLT, there is no longer concern about toxicity resulting from genetic variations of thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) in OLT patients. Mycophenolic Acid: Both mycophenolate mofetil and mycophenolic acid are approved for use in solid organ transplantation [2, 17] . Mycophenolate mofetil is a prodrug of mycophenolic acid, which is a non-competitive, reversible inhibitor of inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMDH), the rate-limiting enzyme required for de novo purine synthesis (Fig. 3) . T and B cell proliferation relies on de novo purine synthesis because of deficient purine salvage pathways. Thus, mycophenolic acid preferentially inhibits proliferation of lymphocytes compared to other replicating cell types. While the primary mechanism of action of mycophenolic acid is its antiproliferative effect, other immunosuppressive actions also contribute to its net effect on immunosuppression. These non-proliferative immunosuppressive effects include: 1. reduction of IL-2R, HLA-DR, transferrin receptors and chemokines required for signals 1 and 3 as well as leukocyte migration; 2. reduction of glycosylated adhesion molecules required for signal 1 and cytotoxic effector functions; and 3. reduction of T cell-independent B cell secretion of Ig. Mycophenolic acid has no effect on the secretion of proinflammatory IL-1b, IL-6 or TNFa by APCs, T cell secretion of IL-2, IL-4 and IL-13 or neutrophil superoxide or chemotaxis. Mycophenolic acid is most often combined with calcineurin inhibitors to prevent nephrotoxicity caused by the use of full doses of calcineurin inhibitors in OLT [18] . Common adverse events are dose-dependent and include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. Rare serious adverse events include neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, infections, lymphoma, other malignancies and gastrointestinal ulceration or perforation. Pyrimidine synthesis inhibition represents an additional target for antiproliferative drug development. Leflunomide [19] inhibits pyrimidine synthesis and also has additional immunosuppressive properties and antiviral activity against cytomegalovirus (CMV) [20] . Leflunomide: An active metabolite of leflunomide inhibits dihydroorotate dehydrogenase, which is the rate limiting enzyme for pyrimidine synthesis, and tyrosine dephosphorylation [19] . In addition, leflunomide also prevents transendothelial migration of peripheral blood mononuclear cells and, theoretically, could reduce the histopathological processes of portal inflammation, lymphocytic cholangitis and endothelialitis [1, 3, 21] . Leflunomide has been used in renal transplantation but not OLT. Serious adverse events, including vasculitis, hypertriglyceridemia, interstitial lung disease and hepatitis associated with a specific CYP2C9 allele, reduce enthusiasm for widespread use. Depletion of T cells has been used for 2 distinct purposes: 1. as induction therapy at the time of OLT to reduce the number of T cells available to respond to alloantigens and 2. destruction of activated T effector cells mediating steroid-refractory rejection. The use of induction therapy to deplete T cells is advocated by only a small number of OLT programs. Antisera Against Human T Cell Antigens: Antisera containing polyspecific antibodies against human T cell surface antigens, such as CD2, CD3, CD4 and CD8 [2, 3, 22, 23] have been used successfully to as induction therapy to prevent hepatic allograft rejection. Examples include antilymphocyte globulin (ALG) and antithymocyte globulin (ATG). However, the profound lymphopenia induced by complement-mediated lysis of opsonized T cells was often complicated by adverse events of fever, chills, rash, glomerulonephritis, serum sickness, anemia and thrombocytopenia. A review of the US transplantation database showed that only a minority of OLT programs use antisera for induction [24] . Murine Monoclonal Antibody Against CD3: The murine mAb OKT3 was used extensively in the past to deplete effector T cells in patients with significant steroid-refractory rejection [2, 25] . However, the immunogenicity of the mouse proteins limited its use to a single course, and its capacity to lyse virtually all T cells resulted in rare, unpredictable events of fatal cytokine-mediated collapse of the cardiovascularrespiratory systems. As a result, murine OKT3 is no longer used. Recombinant Humanized OKT3: Humanized OKT3 mAbs have been developed to prevent lethal cytokine-release syndrome and flash pulmonary edema caused by murine OKT3 and to avert host immune reactions against the mAb [3, 26] . Humanized OKT3 mAbs deplete CD3+ T cells from both blood and inflamed tissues and also generate T regulatory cells to inhibit subsequent indirect alloimmune responses [3] . Antibody binding to CD3 inhibits its functions without causing cytokine release and induces T cell apoptosis. Humanized OKT3 mAbs have not been approved for treatment of steroid-refractory rejection after OLT. Alemtuzumab: Alemtuzumab (Campath 1H) is a humanized mAb against CD52, a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored antigen expressed on the surface of all T and B cells, monocytes, dendritic cells, lymphomas and the male genital tract [27] . It has been successfully used as induction to prevent hepatic allograft rejection. However, prolonged, post-treatment lymphopenia predisposing to infection led to termination of a large trial of induction therapy in OLT. Adverse events include chills, fevers, nausea, vomiting, hypotension, urticaria, fatigue, dyspnea, pruritus and depression. Serious adverse events included cardiac events, pancytopenia, seizures, pancreatitis and liver failure. Hepatic allograft rejection requires the transendothelial migration of allo-activated leukocytes into the portal tracts to mediate destructive lymphocytic cholangitis and arteritis. Intense transendothelial leukocyte migration during acute cellular rejection is the cause of the histopathological observation of endothelialitis of the portal vein [1, 3] . While inhibition of the mechanisms of transendothelial migration involving chemokines, chemokine receptors, adhesion molecules and integrins could prevent rejection, no studies have been performed in OLT patients. However, several agents could be studied. Leflunomide: As noted above, one of the effects of leflunomide is inhibition of leukocyte transendothelial migration [21] . Other effects include antiproliferatiion, and regulation of the production of cytokines and metalloproteinases [19] . Efalizumab: Transendothelial migration of leukocytes requires that activated leukocytes become anchored to the endothelial cell surface as the result of strong adhesion between leukocyte LFA-1 (CD11a/ CD18) and endothelial cell ICAM-1 (CD54). Efalizumab, a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody against the CD11a moiety of LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18) was approved for the infusion treatment of psoriasis. However, in 2009 it was voluntarily withdrawn because of reports of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Fingolimod: Fingolimod (formerly FTY720) is an oral investigational agent that prevents circulation and transendothelial migration of activated T cells by sequestering them within lymphoid tissues and the thymus [3, 28] . A metabolite of fingolimod is a potent agonist of sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), which downregulates lymphocytic S1P required for lymphocyte egress into the circulation. S1P also mediates migration of mature dendritic cells, and, thus, fingolimod also blocks dendritic cell migration. The multiple consequences of fingolimod include reduced dendritic cell function, lymphocyte apoptosis, inhibition of transendothelial migration and activation of S68 Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 tissue-infiltrating lymphocytes, and inhibition of germinal centers resulting in suppression of humoral immunity. In contrast, clonal T cell activation, proliferation, or differentiation of effector functions are unaltered. Fingolimod was successfully tested with cyclosporine in renal transplantation [29] , but current trials have focused exclusively on multiple sclerosis [28] . Adverse events included bradycardia, lymphopenia, infections and a recent report of hemorrhaging focal encephalitis [28, 30] . Natalizumab: Natalizumab is an intravenously administered humanized mAb against a4b1 integrin, which can prevent transendothelial leukocyte migration caused by the binding of leukocyte a4b1 integrin (also known as Very Late Antigen-4 or VLA-4) to VCAM-1 on activated endothelial cells [3, 31] . Although natalizumab was efficacious in early therapeutic trials of relapsing multiple sclerosis and Crohn's disease, clinical trials were initially suspended because of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. The risk of natalizumab toxicity has been deemed acceptable for its primary indications but appears to be unacceptable for the treatment or prevention of rejection after OLT. Inhibition of Chemokines and Chemokine Receptors: Chemokines generated by activated leukocytes and/or cytokine-stimulated epithelial cells are taken up by activated endothelial cells and concentrated in cell-surface pilli [3, 32] . They act in concert with leukocyte integrins and adhesion molecules to promote the transendothelial migration of activated leukocytes that express the corresponding chemokine receptors. Once leukoctyes migrate from the circulation into tissues, they are activated by and migrate toward the sources of chemokine production. Thus, chemokines dictate the composition, quantity and functions of portal inflammatory cells. Broad-spectrum chemokine inhibitors capable of blocking leukocyte migration mediated by a variety of chemokine receptors is now feasible, and antagonists of chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR3, CCR5, CXCR1, CXCR2, CXCR3 and CXCR4 have been developed. CCR5 Inhibition: In the future, 2 promising approaches exist for clinical trials in patients to prevent allograft rejection. In theory, if alloantigen-activated T cells do not migrate into tissues of the allograft along chemokine gradients that further activate their effector functions, they could undergo apoptosis, deleting multiple alloreactive T cell clones. Were sufficient clones eliminated, the host could essentially become tolerant of the allograft. Maraviroc: Maraviroc is a FDA-approved, selective, slowly reversible, orally-administered antagonist of the interaction between human CCR5 and HIV-1 gp120 that prevents entry of HIV into CD4 T cells [33] . Such antagonism could also modulate the recognition of CC5 ligand (CCL5, also known as RANTES for Regulated on Activation Normal T Cell Expressed). CCL5 is a dominant chemokine that mediates the chemoattraction of T cells, eosinophils and basophils. In addition, it induces proliferation and activation of natural killer cells. No clinical trials have been conducted to prevent rejection. RANTES Analogues: Analogues of CCL5 generated by N-terminal modifications of CCL5 prevented binding of chemokine receptors CCR1, CCR3 and CCR5 with multiple chemokines (CCL5/RANTES, CCL3/MIP-1a, CCL4/MIP-1b, CCL8/MCP-2, CCL7/MCP-3, CCL13/MCP-4, CCL11/eotaxin, CCL24/eotaxin-2, CCL26/eotaxin-3 and CCL15/lkn-1). These inhibitory analogues include the methionyl variant of CCL5/RANTES (Met-RANTES) [34] , the rationally designed variant of Met-RANTES, aminooxypentaine (AOP)-RAN-TES [35] and its potent derivative, PSC-RANTES [36] . Met-RANTES is an antagonist for all 3 CCR receptors, while AOP-RANTES antagonizes CCR1 and CCR3. Paradoxically, AOP-RAN-TES is an agonist for CCR5, but the agonist effect ultimately inhibits CCR5 actions by sequestering CCR5 intracellularly. These inhibitors have been effective in experimental models of tissue and organ inflammation but have not been studied in human diseases or transplantation [3] . CXCR3 Inhibition: Th1 cells infiltrating allografts express the CXC chemokine receptor CXCR3, which binds 3 interferon-inducible chemokine receptor ligands: CXCL9 (Mig), CXCL10 (IP-10) and CXCL11 (ITAC). These chemokines are secreted by leukocytes and epithelial cells in sites of inflammation. Inhibition of CXC3 using mAbs prevented both inflammatory infiltration and bronchiolitis obliterans in an animal model of lung transplantation [37] . The small molecule CXCR3 antagonist, NBI-74330, prevented peritonitis and attenuated atherosclerotic plaque formation in a murine model [38] . Thus, CXCR3 inhibition represents a future target for drug development in transplantation. CXCR6 Inhibition: CXCR6, expressed by cytotoxic CD8 T cells, was found to play an important role in the chemotaxis of CD8 T cells into the liver in a model of GVHD [39] , suggesting that it might prove to be a future target for inhibition in hepatic allograft rejection. . The goals of immunosuppression following OLT have evolved with our understanding of the adverse consequences of over-immunosuppression and the availability of multiple immunosuppressive drugs and biologicals that permit combination therapy [2, 3, 10] . Table 1 summarizes the modern goals of immunosuppression to prevent rejection after OLT. The most common standard regimens are corticosteroids combined with either cyclosporine or tacrolimus. The corticosteroid of choice during the anahepatic phase of the operation and immediately after OLT is intravenous methylprednisolone, beginning with doses of 1000 mg. After OLT, a tapering regimen of intravenous methylprednisolone is used until the patient can take oral prednisone at a dose of 20 mg/d. Following OLT, either cyclosporine or tacrolimus are initiated by nasogastric tube or orally every 12 hours. Cyclosporine can also be administered intravenously at a dose that is 30% of the oral dose. Doses of each are adjusted on the basis of trough blood concentrations determined before the morning dose and the level of serum creatinine. The target levels for cyclosporine trough levels early after OLT range from 200-250 ng/mL but after 1 year immunosuppression is often well maintained with trough levels of 80-120 ng/mL [2] . In adults cyclosporine blood levels 2 hours after an oral dose (Concentration 2 hour or C2) exhibited a higher correlation with drug exposure than trough levels, but this is infrequently used to monitor therapy [40] . Tacrolimus can only be used orally, and its bioavailability ranges from 5-67% [2] . A systematic review and a meta-analysis of 16 published, randomized, controlled trials comparing tacrolimus and cyclosporine regimens showed that tacrolimus was superior for graft and patient survival and prevention of acute cellular rejection and steroid-resistant rejection [41, 42] . The incidence of post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) was similar for tacrolimus and cyclosporine. New onset diabetes mellitus, however, was more common with tacrolimus. These reports estimate that treatment of 100 patients with tacrolimus instead of cyclosporine would prevent rejection in 9 patients, prevent steroid-resistant rejection in 7, graft loss in 5 and death in 2. However, tacrolimus treatment would induce diabetes in an extra 4 patients after OLT. As a result of the evidence, tacrolimus is preferred over cyclosporine by 90% of OLT programs in the USA. The target levels for tacrolimus in the early post-transplant phase are 10-15 ng/mL, but after 6 months trough levels of 5-10 ng/mL are often sufficient. It is important to note that the concentration maximum of a morning dose is higher than that of the identical dose taken 12 hours later in the day. Thus, if different doses are to be given, it is wise to take the higher dose in the evening, rather than in the morning to minimize vasoconstriction and nephrotoxicity. Regardless of whether cyclosporine or tacrolimus are used for immunosuppression, the need for individualization of the dose is the most important principle in the use of calcineurin inhibitors. For some patients, target trough levels represent excessive immunosuppression, while for others the same levels may be inadequate. Excessive levels for any given individual can be recognized by the development of azotemia, which should prompt dose reduction. Most programs reduce or discontinue prednisone but do so after highly variable durations of treatment. Generally, prednisone is discontinued in approximately 50% of patients by the end of the first year and in approximately 67% by the end of 2 years. Thus, the majority of patients are treated with a calcineurin inhibitor (primarily tacrolimus) as monotherapy by year 2. Patients on either combination therapy with low dose prednisone and calcineurin inhibitor or monotherapy with a calcineurin inhibitor are at risk for cardiovascular and renal complications caused by obesity, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia and progressive renal insufficiency. Thus, the goal is to minimize the doses of prednisone or calcineurin inhibitor used for maintenance therapy in each individual. While steroid-free immunosuppression, in which steroids are administered only during the anahepatic phase of the operation, is feasible, a metaanalysis showed only a modest benefit [43] . Steroid-free regimens reduce the incidence and severity of diabetes, hypertension and hyperlipidemia; however, they also incidence of acute cellular rejection. In most OLT programs, steroids are either tapered to a low maintenance dose (5-7.5 mg/day) or slowly tapered and discontinued. The addition of mycophenolic acid or an addition of or switch to sirolimus is usually dictated by the need for intensified immunosuppression to prevent or treat rejection or the need prevent progressive nephrotoxicity caused by calcineurin inhibitors. Mycophenolic acid therapy allows reduction of the calcineurin inhibitor dose to levels that minimize nephrotoxicity. Addition of or switching to sirolimus can be used to avoid progressive nephrotoxicity if initiated before significant renal insufficiency develops. However, as noted above, sirolimus should not be used until operative wounds and arterial and venous allograft anastomoses have fully healed to prevent incisional hernias and hepatic arterial thrombosis. The levels of sirolimus required to prevent rejection have not been determined for individual patients. When sirolimus is used without a calcineurin inhibitor, target trough levels are 5-15 ng/mL. Sirolimus can be combined with cyclosporine or with tacrolimus. Even though both sirolimus and tacrolimus bind to FKBP12 (see above) they act synergistically, rather than competitively on mTOR [2] . When sirolimus is combined with cyclosporine or tacrolimus, the target trough levels are 4-10 ng/mL. It is important to consider the addition of mycophenolic acid or sirolimus to a calcineurin inhibitor or switching from a calcineurin inhibitor to sirolimus before chronic renal insufficiency develops (see below). Thus, it is imperative to monitor creatinine and BUN frequently to detect calcineurin-induced nephrotoxicity and modify immunosuppression to prevent progression to chronic renal failure. Drug interactions that change the metabolism of cyclosporine, tacrolimus and sirolimus Cyclosporine, tacrolimus and sirolimus are metabolized by cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Thus, the concentration maximums, area under the curves and trough levels associated with both efficacy and risks for drug-induced toxicities can be altered by the use of concurrent medications that decrease or increase CYP3A4 activity. Table 2 describes the common drugs that can either decrease or increase immunosuppressive drug levels. It is important to note that grapefruit or grapefruit juice can also increase the levels and should be avoided. The most important advice to patients is to have their physicians either call the transplant program or explicitly check for drug interactions before prescribing medications. Complications representing significant risks for cardiovascular events and chronic renal failure (CRF) are caused primarily by immunosuppressive drugs after OLT. They represent the greatest challenge in balancing the need to prevent acute and chronic rejection with that of minimizing morbidity and mortality associated with their use. In addition, the magnitude of their impact vs. low rates of rejection indicates that the doses of immunosuppression used after OLT exceed those required to prevent rejection. Thus, the prevention of complications represents one of the primary rationales for individualization of immunosuppression. Hypertension, Diabetes Mellitus, Hypercholesterolemia and Obesity These complications represent, in part, adverse effects of corticosteroids and calcineurin inhibitors. Their prevalences after OLT are: hypertension 40-80%; diabetes mellitus 20-33%; hypercholesterolemia 10-66%; and obesity 40-45%. Individually and collectively they are significant risk factors for cardiovascular and renal disease. Table 2 identifies multiple medications used to treat these conditions that can alter the metabolism of the calcineurin inhibitors and sirolimus. Thus, it is prudent to select therapies from those proven to be compatible with the immunosuppression regimen and to individualize immunosuppression to ameliorate these complications. Chronic renal failure (CRF) caused by calcineurin inhibitors is a major problem after OLT (as well as transplantation of other solid organs) and has been magnified by liver allocation based on the MELD score, which favors inclusion of patients with higher pretransplant creatinine levels [44, 45] . In a long-term study [44] , CRF occurred in 29% of patients 12 years after OLT and significantly increased mortality after transplantation (RR = 4.55, p \ 0.001). Strategies that decrease the risk of CRF include addition of mycophenolic acid or sirolimus to permit lowering of the calcineurin inhibitor dose or switching from tacrolimus or cyclosporine to a regimen of sirolimus monotherapy or combined therapy with sirolimus and mycophenolic acid. It is important to note that switching to sirolimus after development of significant renal dysfunction or overt CRF does not improve renal function [46] . Thus, sirolimus must be initiated before renal insufficiency becomes irreversible. HCV Infection: Progression to cirrhosis with recurrent HCV infection is correlated with the occurrence of acute cellular rejection, the S70 Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 number of rejection episodes and the use of murine OKT3 for treatment of steroid-refractory rejection [47] . Thus, prevention of rejection episodes is the primary goal. Since steroids stimulate HCV replication, many centers have attempted either a steroid-free regimen or a rapid taper and withdrawal of steroids. A meta-analysis of steroid-free regimens showed that no individual study reached statistical significance but the pooled data showed a modest benefit in preventing severe HCV recurrence [43] . A meta-analysis comparing the impact of tacrolimus vs. cyclosporine in randomized, controlled trials assessing the outcomes of recurrent HCV infections showed no significant differences in graft or patient survival, incidence of fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis or the incidence of rejection [48] . In the absence of clear evidence that one of the calcineurin inhibitors is superior for patients with recurrent HCV infection, most OLT programs use tacrolimus because of its significant advantage in prevention of acute cellular rejection, steroid-resistant rejection, graft loss and mortality. Because steroids stimulate HCV replication, most OLT programs taper the dose of prednisone and ultimately discontinue it in patients with recurrent HCV infection. However, tapering and discontinuation must not be done too rapidly [49] . When tapering prednisone, it is also unwise to concurrently reduce doses of either calcineurin inhibitors or sirolimus, since abrupt reductions in overall immunosuppression may precipitate acute cellular rejection [49] . If acute cellular rejection occurs, most centers do not use bolus methyprednisolone because of its capacity to stimulate HCV replication. Instead, rejection is treated by increasing the doses of the calcineurin inhibitor or sirolimus and/or adding mycophenolic acid to the regimen. HBV Infection: The use of prophylactic hepatitis B immunoglobulin and nucleoside/tide analogues to inhibit HBV replication has virtually eliminated recurrent HBV as a problem for graft and patient survivals after OLT [50] . Steroids directly stimulate HBV replication, but the prophylactic strategies are sufficient to overcome this effect. Thus, no changes in standard immunosuppressive regimens are required for patients transplanted for HBV infection. Autoimmune Liver Diseases: Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) recur in approximately 25% of patients after OLT [51] . In patients with AIH, the most successful therapy has been reintroduction of steroids; thus, most centers now taper such patients to a low maintenance dose of prednisone and avoid discontinuation. No prospective trials, however, have documented the benefit of this strategy. In patients with PBC, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA, dose= 13-15 mg/kg/d) has often been added to their medical regimens. UDCA is primarily cytoprotective of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes from damage caused by toxic bile acids but is also weakly immunosuppressive, immunomodulatory, and anti-apoptotic [52] . In patients with PSC, UDCA is also often added to the medication regimen at doses of 10-15 mg/kg/d. There are no randomized, controlled studies indicating that UDCA is efficacious for treatment of recurrent PBC or PSC. Adverse events associated with UDCA are extremely infrequent but include abdominal pain, dyspepsia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness, symptoms of upper respiratory illness and alopecia. Long-term use also causes weight gain in PBC. Serious adverse events of leukopenia and anaphylaxis have been reported rarely. Hepatocellular Carcinoma: Sirolimus has been proposed for immunosuppression in patients transplanted with HCC because of its antiproliferative effects. A recent single center experience supports this hypothesis [53] , but multicenter trials have not been performed. Advances in the development of immunosuppressive drugs and biologicals have resulted in regimens of immunosuppression that have significantly reduced allograft loss due to chronic, ductopenic rejection after OLT. Unfortunately, many OLT recipients continue to receive amounts of immunosuppressive drugs that exceed those required to prevent allograft rejection. As a result, too many patients experience preventable cardiovascular and renal complications. The prevention of these complications is now one of the primary goals of immunosuppression after OLT. To achieve the modern goals of immunosuppression, the drugs and their doses must be individualized for transplant recipients. Table 1 Modern goals of immunosuppression after orthotopic liver transplantation Key Points: • Hepatocyte transplantation is a potential alternative treatment for acute or chronic liver failure, inherited liver disease and liverbased metabolic diseases. • The clinical application of hepatocyte transplantation could serve as a bridge to orthotopic liver transplantation or curative therapy, or as a basis for gene therapy or stem cell therapy. • Advantages of hepatocyte transplantation include a minimally invasive procedure, less morbidity, one donor to multiple recipients, much lower cost than whole organ transplantation, and feasibility of repeated treatment and subsequent application of other therapeutic modalities. • The main obstacles for the widespread use of hepatocyte transplantation are limited cell sources, unpredictable outcome, insufficient data for effectiveness, lack of long-term donor repopulation, and high cost of establishing a cell isolation laboratory. • Future research will focus on expanded cell sources for transplantation, improved techniques of cell isolation, storage and functional preservation, mechanisms of rejection and optimization of immunosuppressant, and more translational studies for the effectiveness of each disease entity. Rationale of using isolated hepatocyte in treating liver diseases Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) has been the only cure for various human liver diseases, including end-stage liver failure and inherited liver and metabolic diseases. However, due to limited donor numbers, many patients have died while awaiting liver transplantation. In severely ill patients and young children, OLT is a high-risk surgical procedure and with potentially more complications. Cell therapies using adult hepatocytes, stem cells, or liver progenitor cells have been evaluated as an alternative treatment for liver diseases. Of all the cell sources, adult hepatocytes are the mostly readily available, requiring the least manipulation, of the lowest ethical concern, and the safest cell source [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . Hepatocyte transplantation is advantageous because it is a non-surgical procedure and is characterized by less morbidity and lower medical costs, approximately 10% of OLT. One donor could contribute to multiple recipients [6] . With improved cryopreservation technique, stored hepatocytes can be used in patients in urgent need. The lower risk of overt rejection than OLT and the minimally invasive procedure, which retains the original hepatobiliary anatomy, contribute to the feasibility of repeated cell treatment and subsequent application of other therapeutic modalities. The overall diminished risk of cell therapy leads to the possibility of intervention at an earlier stage of disease before severe complications occur. However, the wide application of hepatocyte transplantation as a standard treatment has not been achieved, mostly due to the shortage of usable primary human hepatocytes. The major limitations of hepatocyte transplantation are the cell source, extent of cell repopulation, and duration of the therapeutic effect. Research directed to improved techniques of cell isolation, in vitro cell expansion, cryopreservation, and modification of recipient injury with adjuvant drugs, cytokines, or irradiation is now underway [7] [8] [9] . Diseases potentially treatable by using hepatocyte transplantation The diseases potentially treatable by hepatocyte transplantation are acute or chronic hepatic failure, liver-based metabolic diseases, and inherited liver diseases [1] [2] [3] . Hepatocyte transplantation as an adjunctive therapy after radical therapy for liver cancers has been also been proposed. Acute liver failure is characterized by an extensive degree of hepatocyte damage with impaired regeneration of the remaining hepatocytes, leading to life-threatening hepatic insufficiency and mortality. However, this risky situation may be favorable towards transplanted hepatocytes, including proliferation stimuli and selective growth advantage of donor hepatocytes [10] . Hepatocyte transplantation in acute liver failure has several advantages: a lower procedure risk than OLT, which could be applied in critically ill patients, and the readily available cryopreserved hepatocytes in patients with an urgent need when suitable liver donors are not readily available. In light of the possible recovery of the regeneration capacity from the recipient's own liver, hepatocyte transplantation could serve as a bridge and reduce the need for whole organ donation. For patients of alcoholic liver diseases who have less chance for OLT, hepatocyte transplantation could be potentially lifesaving. Hepatocyte transplantation has been applied for inherited liver diseases, including inborn errors of metabolism causing liver or nonliver related complications, and genetic disorders that lead to chronic liver injuries [3] [4] [5] . These diseases may or may not have overt liver dysfunction and are characterized by highly variable degrees of liver damage. The transplanted hepatocytes could theoretically replace the metabolically aberrant host hepatocytes and restore the deficient metabolic functions or decrease the degree of the liver injuries. In many cases, the recipient hepatocytes still retain self-renewal activity, so the degrees of recipient injury and growth stimuli for donor hepatocytes are highly variable. But lower numbers of hepatocytes may be required to correct the metabolic dysfunction in liver-based metabolic diseases. It is desirable that treatment be initiated early before complications, such as neurological deterioration or developmental delay. For chronic liver diseases other than genetic or metabolic diseases, hepatocyte transplantation has more difficulties because cirrhosis of the liver may prevent the transplanted hepatocytes from entering the liver plates. On the other hand, due to the non-emergent nature of chronic liver diseases and the less critical conditions in these patients, hepatocyte transplantation or other cell therapies can be applied before end-stage liver failure occur. Autologous or allogeneic hepatocyte transplantation has been used in cases with chronic hepatitis or Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 with liver cirrhosis; these treatments were well tolerated, with improvement in several clinical parameters [1, 4] . Transplanted hepatocytes into healthy livers could not proliferate to a significant extent or replace the recipient hepatocytes. However, when the native livers are damaged chemically, surgically, genetically, or by other treatments, the transplanted healthy hepatocytes could proliferate extensively in the host liver. It has been shown that donor cell repopulation in a recipient liver is based on three key factors: sufficient recipient liver damage, stimuli for donor cell proliferation, and inhibition of recipient hepatocyte proliferation [2, [9] [10] [11] . Experimental hepatocyte transplantations using isolated hepatocytes or other cell types injected into the splenic pulps or portal veins have been studied in various animal models, including genetically modified mice/rats and animals receiving partial hepatectomies, hepatotoxic chemicals, damaged by radiation or ischemic injuries. The extraordinary capacity of transplanted adult hepatocytes has been demonstrated in fah knockout mice, a mouse model of tyrosinemia, where the donor cells can divide over 80 times without diminishing their replication potentials [12] . The list of genetic-modified mice used for cell transplantation is growing, included DPPIV deficient mice/rat, Gunn rat, factor VIIdeficient mice, mice models for progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis, Wilsons's disease, and maple syrup urine disease, etc. (Table 1 ) [13] [14] [15] . Chemical toxins or antibodies were used to induce acute or acute-on-chronic liver injuries in animals, such as anti-Fas Jo2 antibody-induced apoptosis model, carbon tetrachloride, acetaminophen, or D-galactosamine treated mice [10, 16, 17] . In most models, preconditioning treatments are required, such as Retrosine, AAF, Monocrotaline, or irradiations, for inhibiting recipient hepatocyte proliferation [2, 11, 18] . Human hepatocyte transplantation has been attempted for more than 10 years but has not been widely applied as a routine treatment, mainly due to donor hepatocytes shortage. Freshly-isolated or cryopreserved human hepatocytes have been used in the clinical studies including acute liver failure, chronic liver failure, and liver-based metabolic diseases (Table 2 ). In general, hepatocyte transplantation is well-tolerated with minimal complications. No major adverse reactions in the long-term follow-up were reported [1, 3, 7] . In patients with acute hepatic failure, hepatocyte transplantation has been associated with improvement in terms of hepatic encephalopathy, serum ammonia and bilirubin levels [4] . But the effect on the overall outcome was no conclusive. The effects of hepatocyte transplantation in liver-based metabolic diseases are more obvious. Patients with Crigler-Najjar syndrome I receiving transplanted hepatocytes had resulted in 50% reduction in bilirubin levels and need of phototherapy [18] . In patients with ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency, the serum ammonia levels and neurological status improved after hepatocyte transplantation [3, 20] . Because the experiences of hepatocytes transplantation in one disease could not be applied to other diseases, due to disease-specific liver injury pattern, different parameters of clinical effect, and goals of treatment for each disorder, more clinical studies are required to confirm the effectiveness of hepatocyte transplantation and to expand indications. The hepatocyte numbers used for transplantation ranged from 10 7 to 10 10 per treatment course. Because the human adult liver consisted of approximately 175 9 10 9 hepatoyctes, the transplanted hepatocytes correspond to 1-5% of total liver mass. Repeated hepatocyte transplantation was often used in human cases to increase the total transplanted cell mass. In many cases transplanted hepatocytes gradually disappear after 6 months, possibly because of cellular rejection, or absent of donor growth advantage over recipient hepatocyte regenerations. In this regard hepatocyte transplantation has been used in many patients as bridge to OLT. The most commonly used delivery method for hepatocyte transplantation in humans is infusions through portal vein or inferior mesenteric vein catheters, which allow for multiple injections. However, the transient increase of portal vein pressure and the small chance of pulmonary thrombi are potential fatal complications. A low rate of infusion and avoidance of hepatocytes clumps are crucial. Alternatively, intrasplenic artery injection or direct injection into splenic pulps has been suggested. However, arterial infusion resulted in a significant amount of hepatocyte loss in the arterial beds. Infusion through the umbilical vein for newborn babies is also applicable. In cases of portal hypertension or cirrhosis, the delivery of hepatocytes via the portal system and for hepatocyte proliferation in the liver parenchyma are more difficult, due to a hepatofugal portal flow and increased barriers of extracellular matrix that blocking the incorporation and proliferation of hepatocytes in the hepatic plates. For the purpose of clinical usage, hepatocyte isolation, storage, and purification should be performed following Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) criteria to ensure safety and quality of cells, and to avoid transmission of infectious pathogens. The transplanted cells should be ABO compatible with recipient blood type. Immunosuppressant was required after allogeneic hepatocyte transplantation. In most cases the immunosuppression regimen came from experiences in OLT. Currently tacrolimus and prednisolone are the mainstay immunosuppressants used. However, because of the difficulties in tracking the transplanted donor cells, and the lack of information about the mechanisms of cellular rejection after hepatocyte transplantation, the immunological reaction and optimal immunosuppressant regimen are still under investigation. Donor hepatocytes marking and tracing in the recipient liver have been difficult in human studies, except for in genetic liver diseases, for which a specific protein or enzyme could be identified. Alternatively, there had been reports using autologous hepatocyte transplantation used in treating cirrhotic patients. Autologous genetically modified hepatocytes are also proposed to be potentially feasible in genetic liver diseases. In this case the need for immunosuppressant could be avoided. Long-term donor cell repopulation is desired especially in genetic disorders. Sustained engraftment and functional activity of transplanted heaptocytes up to 12 months of follow-up was reported in a case of argininosucicnate lyase deficiency, with metabolic control and psychomotor catch-up [21] . More experiences in the long-term follow-up of patients receiving hepatocyte transplantation are needed. The dynamics and mechanisms of transplanted hepatocytes repopulation have been studied in experimental models of hepatocyte transplantation. Two important steps of hepatocyte transplantations determine the success of hepatocyte repopulation, involving engraftment and proliferation. Within seconds and hours, the hepatoyctes entered the portal venous system and trapped in the sinusoids of portal radicals. This causes transient portal hypertension and ischemic responses that lead to sinusoidal dilatation and transient loss of endothelial integrity, by release of various cytokines, e.g. vascular endothelial growth factor and hepatocyte growth factor, allowing the hepatocytes to migrate into the hepatic plates. Kupffer cell activation is noted in this stage to clear many of the transplanted cells. By 3-7 days, the hepatocyte could be engrafted in the liver parenchyma and start to proliferate [16, 23] . After entering into the hepatic plates, competition of the proliferative activity of donor and recipient hepatocytes determined the success of donor repopulation [24] . Proliferation of donor hepatocytes was noticed from weeks to several months, depending on the extent and type of liver injury. Stimuli for hepatocyte growth in this stage were found to be involving cytokines and growth factors release, hepatic stellate cell activation, and extracellular matrix remodeling. Ischemia-reperfusion, partial hepatectomy, radiation, and thyroid hormones have also been shown to promote donor cell proliferation [2, 18] . Practical Problems to be Solved and Future Prospective At present, the limited cell source for hepatocyte transplantations is still the main problem. Because of the highly successful and predictable outcome of whole liver transplantation, only hepatocytes from livers unsuitable for whole-liver transplantation, or resected liver for reduced-size OLT were used for hepatocyte transplantation. Expanded sources of transplantable cells, including frozen isolated heptocytes and fetal hepatoblast are been studied with promising results [7, 24] . In-vitro expansion of hepatocytes, stem cells, genetically modified autologous hepatocytes, non-parenchymal cells, and immortalized hepatoctyes are also been investigated actively as sources for cell transplantation [2, 8] . For clinical purposes, standardized laboratory procedures assuring the quality and safety of isolation and storage of hepatocytes used for transplantation should be established, according to the guidance of GMP and local regulatory rules. The establishment and maintenance of the laboratory requires a high cost. The mechanisms of host immune responses, detection of rejections to transplanted cells, and the dosages for immunosuppression are not clearly understood. Better marking of donor cells, knowledge of donor cell kinetics after transplantation, as well as donor-recipient interactions are of great importance in improving the results of hepatocyte transplantation. It is also anticipated that long-term engraftment of transplanted hepatocytes in humans will be achieved. For acquired liver diseases, such as acute liver failure, this may not be problematic because as long as the native liver regains its regeneration capacity, renewal of injured liver by recipient hepatocytes would lead to a favorable outcome. For genetic or metabolic liver diseases, long-term repopulation of transplanted hepatocytes is desired as a curative therapy. Because of the highly variable results of hepatocyte transplantatio in each specific disease model and in different disease stages, more studies are needed for determining the effectiveness of hepatocyte transplantation. In conclusion, the future prospective of hepatocyte transplantation or cell-based therapy for liver diseases will be to bridge to OLTs and to serve as a curative therapy for inherited or acquired liver diseases or liver-based metabolic diseases, as an adjunctive therapy for massive surgical resections, or as a vehicle for gene therapy. Optimization of cell isolation and storage, the determination of the best usage of potentially applicable livers and hepatocytes, expanded sources of cells, and more translational studies will highly facilitate the knowledge and clinical application of hepatocyte transplantation in the treatment of liver diseases. PFIC progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis, iMSUD intermediate maple syrup urine disease, OTC orninthine transcarbaxylase deficiency Liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer in men and the eighth in women worldwide. More than 80% of these cases occur in developing countries, with China alone accounting for over 55% of the total. Among primary liver cancers occurring worldwide, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) represents the major histologic type and likely accounts for 70-85% of cases(Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society, 2007). The incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma is increasing worldwide, with the second highest increase in overall death rates. The incidence and mortality rates for HCC are virtually identical because majority patients are diagnosed at a stage in which the cancer is too far advanced to be cured, and most treatments are effective in few patients undergoing therapy. Thus, there is tremendous opportunity to improve the outcome for people with cancer by enhancing detection and treatment approaches. Biomarkers will be instrumental in making that transition. An tumour marker, also called biomarker, is a substance produced by a tumour or by the host, detectable in biological fluids or tissues and useful to differentiate neoplastic from non-neoplastic disease. The usefulness of a biomarker lies in its ability to provide early indication of disease or the progression of the disease. Biomarkers should be easy to detect, measurable across populations, and amenable to use in one or more of the following settings: detection at an early stage; identification of high-risk individuals; early detection of recurrence; or as intermediate endpoints in chemoprevention. Hepatocarcinogenesis is a multistep process, slowly unfolding on a background of chronic liver disease including chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis, which are regarded as preneoplastic stages. Because HCC frequently develops in the background of liver cirrhosis, it is difficult to differentiate early HCC from dysplastic nodules or regenerating nodules in advanced liver cirrhosis by imaging such as CT or MRI. In established cirrhosis, surveillance to detect early HCC is recommended to decrease tumour-related deaths. Since the long-term prognosis of patients with advanced HCC remains very poor, it is imperative to identify and develop confirmative biomarkers for the early detection of HCC. Considerable progress has been made in the molecular classification of some cancers, such as hematological malignancies and breast cancer. As a result of lacking ideal biomarkers, molecular classification of HCC is not available, and determining appropriate therapy for HCC is still largely empirical and lacking well-defined molecular targets, and few medicines have been shown to be effective in majority of the patients. Considerable efforts have been devoted to establishing classification and prognostic models for HCC by using clinical information and pathological classification to provide information at diagnosis on both survival and treatment options. Although much progress has been made, many issues still remain unresolved. HCC is highly resistant to conventional chemotherapy. Immunotherapy is also useless to prevent recurrences after surgical resection or percutaneous ablation since HCC is a poorly immunogenic neoplasm. On the other hand HCC is rarely amenable to radiotherapy. All these features make advanced HCC a very difficult tumor to treat. However, with the accumulation in the knowledge of tumor biology, and the remarkable success of identification of biomarkers with therapeutical potential in other tumors has opened promising avenues for HCC therapy. In HCC multiple molecular alterations ensure the incessant growth of the neoplastic cells. It is likely that HCC could easily develop resistance to compounds that hit a single molecule, because the blockade of a specific target can be overcome by other molecular abnormalities. Drugs designed to block different markers in several pathways (promiscuous drugs such as multiple kinase inhibitors) or combination of different targeted therapies might however attain success in the control of liver cancer. Recently, clinically useful tumor markers for HCC diagnosis have included alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), a fucosylated variant of the AFP (AFP-L3), Glypican-3 (GPC3), des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin (DCP) etc.. Among them, AFP and AFP-L3 tests were approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in USA and the GPC3 and DCP test is currently under review. AFP was discovered by Bergstrand and Czar using paper electrophoresis of human foetus serum proteins in 1956. Subsequently, in 1963, AFP was found in adults during carcinogenesis. After that most of the studies concerning AFP focused on its relationship with tumor, especially HCC. Serum AFP level has gradually become the most utilized surveillance biomarker for HCC worldwide since FDA approval in 1980s. Despite the close relationship between AFP and HCC, and sensitivity and specificity for this assay range from 40 to 65% and 76 to 96%, respectively, when different cut off values were used. It was suggested the best cut-off for AFP ranged from 16 to 20 lg/l. The specificity and sensitivity at this level were 90 and 60%, respectively. That means some 40% of all HCC would be missed at this threshold. More cases can be identified with lower cut-of value, but this was at the expense of the amount of false positives. If a higher cut-off was used, fewer cases were detected. Sensitivity decreased from 65 towards 47% when a cut-off of respectively 20 lg/l or 50 lg/l was used. To date, one of the most widely accepted criteria of HCC diagnosis is that the concomitant finding of two imaging techniques, showing a nodule larger than 2 cm with arterial hypervascularisation, or by one positive imaging technique, showing hypervascularisation associated with AFP concentration higher than 400 lg/L. Despite of the widely use of AFP as a surveillance biomarker for HCC worldwide, recent systematic reviews of the literature show that the quality of evidence supporting the use of AFP as a diagnostic and screening test for HCC is limited. Eighty percent of the cases of small HCC showed no increased serum AFP concentration. Sensitivity of AFP even decreased from 52% towards 25% when tumour diameter is respectively [3 cm and \3 cm, suggesting a correlation between serum AFP concentration and tumour size. Additionally, serum AFP has been detected in viral hepatitis, as well as in 25.6% of cases of liver cirrhosis and 18.8% of benign diffuse liver disease (with serum AFP concentrations up to 9 ng/ml in 10% of all patients). The percentage of hepatitis patients with elevated AFP is in the range of 10-43% in chronic HCV, 15-51% in chronic HBV, and 33% in acute hepatitis B infection. Patients with underlying liver cirrhosis have a higher prevalence of AFP elevation versus non-cirrhotic for all types of diseases. Lastly, a subset of embryonic cancers (embryonic carcinomas, yolk sac tumours and hepatoblastoma) and HCC show AFP re-expression during tumour development at levels much higher than 10 ng/ml in 90-95 and 80-95% of cases, respectively. Although serum AFP concentration is not the ideal marker for effectively detecting HCC, this method is still used as diagnostic or screening test for HCC. Unfortunately, this is also due to the lack of better alternatives. Promising results are obtained from the glycoforms of AFP. The binding capacity of AFP towards LCA lectin results in three different glycoforms with different diagnostic function: AFP-L1, AFP-L2 and AFP-L3. AFP-L3 binds strongly to LCA via an additional a1-6 fucose residue attached at the reducing terminus of N-acetylglucosamine; this is in contrast to the L1 isoform. AFP-L3 is the major glycoform in serum of HCC patients and a marker for biologic malignancy of HCC. Currently, the cut-off for the fucosylation index or AFP-L3% is set at [10% of total serum AFP. AFP-L3 seems to be more specific for HCC than total AFP, with a specificity of [95%, and its detected presence can serve to identify patients whom need increased monitoring for the development of HCC in high risk populations (i.e. chronic hepatitis B & C and/or liver cirrhosis). AFP-L3 could detect the presence of HCC in cirrhotic patients earlier than when using imaging techniques, with a lead time of 9-12 months. The most promising markers in preclinical exploratory studies are glypican-3. Glypican-3 (GPC3) belongs to the glypican family of Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored heparansulphate proteoglycans (HSPGs) that are found in species ranging from Drosophila to vertebrates. Since HGF and HB-EGF require membrane bound HSPGs as a coreceptor for their signalling, the presence of glypican may regulate the growth behaviour of HCC. Glypican-3 is differentially expressed in HCC compared with the normal liver and that it may serve as a tumour marker in this malignancy. In this respect, Gpc3 behaves as an oncofetal gene, in that it is expressed in the fetal liver, normally silent in the adult liver, and reactivated in cancer. Overexpression of GPC3 in HCC has been reported by our group and several other laboratories. Capurro M and colleagues detected glypican-3 expression in liver by using immunohistochemistry in 0 of 22 patients with cirrhosis without dysplasia or HCC, 1 of 5 patients with cirrhosis with high-grade dysplasia, and 21 of 29 patients with HCC. In a subsequent study by Hippo et al., NH2-terminal portion (soluble GPC3, sGPC3) is cleaved between Arg358 and Ser359 of GPC3 and that sGPC3 can be specifically detected in the sera of patients with HCC. The sensitivity and specificity of sGPC3 for the diagnosis of HCC (cutoff value, 2.0 ng/ml) were 51 and 90%, respectively, whereas those of AFP measured in parallel (cutoff value, 20 ng/ml) were 55 and 90%, respectively. AFP and sGPC3 were not correlated (r=0.13), and combination measurement of both markers markedly improved sensitivity to 72%. Moreover, regarding the early detection of HCC in liver cirrhosis, frequency of GPC3 mRNA overexpression was significantly higher than that of elevated serum level and mRNA level of AFP in small HCC. For tumors \3cm, glypican-3 expression was detected in 11 of 11 (100%) patients, and AFP in only 2 of 9 patients. Using enzyme-linked immunoassay, glypican-3 was detected in serum from 18 of 34 patients with HCC (53%) and only 1 of 20 patients with cirrhosis (5%). Recently, Di Tommaso et al. showed that immunostaining for GPC3 was very helpful in distinguishing early and grade-1 HCC from dysplastic nodules arising in cirrhosis, suggesting GPC3 as a tissue marker for the early detection of HCC. These results suggest the possibility of GPC3 as a biomarker for HCC, but more large-scale confirmative studies are required in the future. Another attractive aspect of GPC3 is that the membrane- Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 anchored portion is a potential target for antibody therapy. In this context, diagnosis with serum sGPC3 is useful not only in early detection of HCC but also for future identification of patients with high sGPC3 levels for tailor-made HCC therapy. Des-gamma carboxyprothrombin (DCP), also known as protein induced by vitamin K absence/antagonist-II (PIVKA-II), is an abnormal form of the coagulation protein, prothrombin. Normally, the prothrombin precursor undergoes post-translational carboxylation (addition of a carboxylic acid group) by gamma-glutamyl carboxylase in the liver prior to secretion into plasma. DCP/PIVKA-II may be detected in people with deficiency of vitamin K (due to poor nutrition or malabsorption) and in those taking warfarin or other medication that inhibits the action of vitamin K. Liebman HA first described the use of DCP as a marker of HCC in 1984. It was present in 91% of HCC patients, while not being detectable in other liver diseases. The DCP level did not change with the administration of vitamin K, suggesting a defect in gamma-carboxylation activity rather than vitamin K deficiency, and it was thought that Des-gamma carboxyprothrombin arises from an acquired defect in the posttranslational carboxylation of the prothrombin precursor in malignant hepatocytes, A number of subsequent studies have since confirmed this phenomenon. Studies showed an improved sensitivity of DCP over AFP, while it is controversial. In several case-controlled studies, serum DCP was found to have a sensitivity of 53-89%, a specificity of 86% to 99%, and a diagnostic accuracy of 59-84% in differentiating patients with or without HCC. These studies suggest that DCP is more sensitive in the diagnosis of HCC than AFP, but a range of DCP and AFP cutoff values were used in these studies, which may leads to different conclusion. Two studies in Italian patients using DCP cutoff values of 40 and 90 mAU/mL found that DCP was not superior to AFP. The authors recommended a combination of DCP and AFP for the diagnosis of HCC. However, recent reports by Marrero et al. in US patients with HCV-related HCC and by Wang et al. in Taiwanese patients with HBV-or HCV-related liver disease suggest that DCP may be competitive with AFP. As a result of these studies, DCP has been included in a list of HCC candidate markers that are currently being evaluated by many centers, and additional multicenter studies are needed to determine the role of DCP in the diagnosis of HCC. Other potential single biomarkers for diagnosis of HCC were also identified include Golgi phosphoprotein 2 (GOLPH2/GP73), insulinlike growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and human HGF, but these markers have been evaluated in only 1-2 studies each, and results need to be confirmed. HCC is a heterogenous and complex diseases, and it is unlikely that a single biomarker will detect all the HCC patients with high specificity and sensitivity. Single biomarker, for example AFP, has obvious limitations in diagnosis of HCC. Instead, panels of biomarkers seem to be a promising alternative for the use in clinical laboratories, such as AFP, AFP-L3 and DCP. The performance advantages of panels have been confirmed in several recent publications. One factor that should be considered when designing a panel of biomarkers is to choose biomarkers that reflect changes in independent pathways. If several biomarkers come from the same or associated pathways, factors contributing to their increase or decrease in cancer are likely to be the same and, thus, their combined usage is unlikely to be more informative than when they are used individually. The carcinogenesis and development of HCC could not be decided by a single factor but rather by interactions of multiple genes, proteins and miRNAs in biological pathways. Large scale profiling technologies, including comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), array-based CGH, microarray, 2D electrophoresis (2DE), mass spectrometry (MS) and other proteomic analysis methods have been used to detect change of different molecules with regard to chromosomal imbalance and genetic instability, epigenetic alteration, and gene expression. Integrating different omics data is being increasingly regarded as a key approach in early detection and diagnosis of HCC. Recently, a variety of HCC-associated molecular signatures have been detected of great value in surveilance of hepatocellular carcinoma. Gene expression profiling revealed more gene sets than single marker associated with HCC. Paradis, V. assessed the level of expression of 219 genes with a real-time reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction approach. A molecular index including a 13-gene set (including TERT, TOP2A, and PDGFR A) was proposed an efficient tool both for identification of overt HCC as well as minute lesions (cirrhotic macronodules). Jia et al. used the microarray technique to determine the expression profiles of 218 HCC specimens from patients with either high or low serum AFP. Five candidate genes (i.e., GPC3, PEG10, MDK, SERPINI1, and QP-C) were validated in 50 AFP-normal and 8 AFP-positive HCC specimens and 36 cirrhotic noncancerous hepatic specimens by quantitative real-time PCR. They showed that a combined score of these five genes can accurately classify noncancerous hepatic tissues (100%) and HCC (71%). According to molecular data based on gene transcriptional profiles, Llovet, J. M. and colleagues found that twelve genes were significantly, differentially expressed in early HCCs compared with dysplastic nodules ([2-fold change; area under the receiver operating characteristic curve C0.8): this genes are TERT, GPC3, gankyrin, survivin, TOP2A, LYVE1, Ecadherin, IGFBP3, PDGFRA, TGFA, cyclin D1, and HGF. Furthermore, a 3-gene set including GPC3 (18-fold increase in HCC, P= .01), LYVE1 (12-fold decrease in HCC, P= .0001), and survivin (2.2-fold increase in HCC, P= .02) was identified by Logistic regression analysis, which allow a reliable diagnosis of early HCC with a discriminative accuracy of 94%. The validity of the gene signature was confirmed in a prospective testing set. Kittaka, N. analysed HCC tissue samples by DNA microarray, and identified abberant expression of key members linked to the important signalling pathways, including osteopontin (SPP1), GPC3, annexin 2 (ANXA2), S100A10 and vimentin (VIM). Proteins are the cellular components performing and regulating most biological functions and, therefore, the systematic analysis of the whole proteinic complement of cells is needed to provide a functional meaning to the information provided by genome-wide gene expression studies. Proteomics is the large-scale study of total proteins, particularly their structures and functions at a given time and conditions in biological system. The characterization of peptides in serum is a promising strategy for biomarker discovery. Radoslav Goldman developed a method for identification of peptides in the enriched lowmolecular weight (LMW) fraction of serum based on matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry (MS). They describe the application of this method to the detection of HCC in a cohort of cases and controls recruited from the Egyptian population, and identified a set of six discriminatory peptide peaks in the sera of HCC patients and controls that could potentially be used for diagnosis of HCC. The marker candidates are independently predictive of HCC with areas under the receiver operating characteristic (AuROC) curve ranging from 63-93%. A combination of the six markers improves prediction accuracy to 100% sensitivity, 91% specificity and 98% AuROC curve in an independent test set of 50 patients. Biomedical scientists have long sought to identify biomarkers to diagnose HCC at an early, curable stage and to select the optimal therapy for individual patients. The ideal biomarker for cancer would have applications in determining predisposition, early detection, assessment of prognosis, and drug response. It would be an additional advantage if the biomarker could also serve as a target for drug development. Recently, there have been many reports of novel biomarkers for HCC. When searching PubMed with a combination of the key words ''hepatocellular carcinoma'' and ''biomarkers,'' 3259 reports were identified in 1995-2008. In recent decades, knowledge about the basic biology and biochemical pathways underlying cancers has increased tremendously, but translation of that knowledge to more effective screening tools, patient care and better outcomes remains a challenge. Technological advances in systematic biology that enable examination of many potential biomarkers have fueled renewed interest in and optimism for developing biomarkers, and it is believed that ideal biomarkers can and will be used to improve HCC screening and early detection, to improve the drug development process, and to enhance the effectiveness and safety of cancer care by allowing physicians to tailor treatment for individual patients-an approach known as ''individualized medicine''. In principle, biomarkers should improve patient outcomes by ensuring that each patient is diagnosed at the curable stage and receives the drugs that are most likely to be effective for his or her particular tumor, thereby enhancing the drug response rate and limiting toxicity. In addition to improving the effectiveness of therapy, biomarkers have the potential to improve the cost-effectiveness of treatment, both by avoiding the use of costly therapies to which a cancer will not respond and by avoiding the need to manage associated side effects of such treatments. actually classical recirculating cells with a preferred immigration to lymphoid organs [35] . Therefore, we will mainly focus our discussion on CD8? and CD4? T cells during HBV or HCV infection. Studies on HBV-or HCV-infected patients strongly indicate that broad and strong CD4? and CD8? T-cell responses are coinciding with spontaneous recovery, in contrast to narrow and weak T-cell responses that are coinciding with persistent viral infections [1, 36] . By performing the in vivo depletion experiments of either CD4? or CD8? T cells in HBV-or HCV-infected chimpanzees, we and others have confirmed the causal relationship between T-cell responses with clearance of HBV [37, 38] and HCV [39, 40] . Specifically, it was shown that virus-specific CD8? T cells are the principal effector cells for controlling viral replication, while virus-specific CD4? T cells are crucial for providing help to promote and to sustain optimal antiviral responses of virus-specific CD8? T cells. Since T cells are capable to exert cytolytic and cytokine-mediated non-cytolytic effector functions, an important biological question is whether both effector functions are required to mediate viral clearance. In HBV infection, two important studies by using HBV transgenic mice [41] and HBV-infected chimpanzees [42] clearly show that hepatocyte destruction is not required for antiviral efficacy. Interestingly, these findings are in agreement with results obtained in acutely HBV-infected humans showing that maximal reduction of viral level occurred before significant liver injury [43] . Indeed, IFN-c and TNF-a secreted by HBV-specific CD8? T cells mediate the central role of non-cytolytic effector functions to eliminate the virus [41] (illustrated in Fig. 1 ). Of note, high levels of hepatocyte-presented HBV antigen are required for the induction of virus-specific CD8? T cells to produce IFN-c and TNF-a [44] . In HCV infection, several studies have reported findings that support the potential contribution of cytokine-mediated non-cytolytic effector functions to the viral clearance. We and others have reported that in acutely infected chimpanzees, HCV clearance can occur in the absence of elevated serum alanine aminotransferase level with only minimal histologic evidence of liver cell injury, but with detectable IFN-c messenger RNA in the liver [12] [13] [14] . In addition, in acutely infected humans, HCV-specific CD8? T cells switch their antiviral functions from killing to IFN-c productions that coincides precisely with a 5-log decrease in viremia [45] . However, the absence of an appropriate small animal model for HCV infection has obstructed immunological studies to confirm the causal relationship between cytokine-mediated noncytolytic effector functions and HCV clearance. In order to overcome this limitation, we have developed a novel in vitro immunological model based on the human hepatoma Huh7 subgenomic replicon system [46] [47] [48] which was stably transduced with the MHC class I allele human leukocyte antigen A2 (HLA-A2) gene and its epitope sequence was matched to the sequence targeted by an HLA-A2-restricted HCV NS5B 2594-2602 -specific CD8? T-cell clone established in our laboratory. Luciferase activity was then measured to quantitate HCV RNA replication (illustrated in Fig. 2 ) [49] . By using this novel immunological model, we found that IFN-c, but not TNF-a, secreted by HCVspecific CD8? T cells indeed contributes to non-cytolytic-mediated viral clearance [49] . We also found that the perforin/granzyme Bmediated pathway plays a dominant role in HCV-specific CD8? T-cellmediated cytolysis in our model, that is, however, not required for antiviral efficacy, supporting the central role of IFN-c-mediated noncytolytic effector functions for controlling HCV replication (manuscript in preparation; illustrated in Fig. 3 ). It is important to point out that during HBV or HCV infection, CD8? T cells are implicated as both the mediators of viral clearance and the principal effectors of liver damage [50] . In the presence of efficient virus-specific CD8? T-cell responses, inhibition of viral replication can occur without significant liver injury. In contrast, when viral replication can no be controlled, the inadequate virus-specific CD8? T-cell responses might contribute to liver injury, either directly using their cytotoxic potentials or via the induction of non-virus-specific T dependent, but is independent of IL-10 and TGF-b [64] . In addition, we also observed a subset population of HCV-specific FoxP3? CD8? regulatory T cells that have a reduced proliferative capacity and display a cell-cell contact-dependent suppressive activity [65] , indicating a role of CD8? regulatory T cells in viral hepatitis. Of note, the intrahepatic presence of IL-10-producing HCV-specific CD8? regulatory T cells has been reported, suggesting IL-10 could mediate suppression on HCV-specific CD8? effector T cells [66] . We also would like to discuss a possible role of IL-17-producing T cells in HBV or HCV infection [67, 68] . Originally, IL-17-producing T cells have been implicated as a mediator in autoimmune diseases as well as a protector against fungal or microbial infection [67] . Interestingly, a study with chronic infection of Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus in mice revealed that IL-17-producing CD4? T (Th17) cells inhibit function of cytotoxic T cells, thus enhancing viral persistence [69] . This finding suggests that IL-17-producing T cells might also have a role in chronic hepatitis B or C. Indeed, in chronic hepatitis B patients, Th17 cells are enriched in the livers and are correlated with the progression of liver disease [70] . In contrast, in chronically HCV-infected patients, we have not observed the positive correlation between IL-17-producing-CD8? T cells with the progression of liver disease (manuscript submitted). Further studies are required in order to elucidate functions of IL-17-producing T cells in chronic viral hepatitis. The liver tends to skew immune responses to immune tolerance in the physiological condition. HBV and HCV are able to escape the intrahepatic immune response and cause viral persistence. HBV is able to evade from the intrahepatic innate immunity by not alerting the infected cells, thus acting as a ''stealth virus''. In contrast, HCV still can establish a persistent infection, despite the induction of type I IFN in the infected cells, indicating either HCV is either resistant to the antiviral effect of type I IFN or it actually utilizes products of type I IFN-stimulated genes for its survival. Both viruses, however, can be controlled by adaptive immune responses, especially by virus-specific CD8? T cells, as long as they are functional (e.g., produce IFN-c and accumulate in the infected liver). Importantly, several mechanisms can contribute to the failure of the adaptive immune responses, including viral escape mutations and T-cell dysfunction caused by suppressive actions of regulatory T cells or immunosuppressive cytokines, upregulation of inhibitory receptors, or lack of CD4? Tcell help. [41, 71] . HBV-specific CD8? T cells secrete IFN-c and TNF-a for mediating antiviral efficacy in HBV transgenic mice. HBV-specific CD8? T cells use both perforin-and Fas ligand-mediated pathways for cell killing in HBV transgenic mice, which is, however, not required for antiviral efficacy Fig. 2 A schematic illustration of an in vitro novel model for studying CD8? T-cell-mediated immune responses to HCV. This novel immunological model is based on the Huh7 replicon system which was stably transduced with the HLA-A2 gene and its epitope sequence was matched to the sequence targeted by an HLA-A2restricted NS5B 2594-2602 -specific CD8 ? T-cell clone established in our laboratory (termed as Huh7 A2 HCV EM cells) [49] . This model S84 Hepatol Int (2010) 4 (Suppl 1):S1-S85 allows us to study endogenous presentation of an HCV-specific epitope presented by MHC class I. Luciferase activity was then measured to quantitate CD8? T-cell-mediated inhibition of HCV RNA replication. The figure is a courtesy from Dr. Volker Lohmann Fig. 3 Dominant role of non-cytolytic effector functions in mediating inhibition of HCV replication [49] . HCV-specific CD8? T cells primarily use IFN-c, but not TNF-a, for mediating antiviral efficacy in our novel immunological model, Huh7 A2 HCV EM cells. The perforin/ granzyme B-mediated pathway mediates cytolysis in direct co-culture between HCV-specific CD8? T cells and Huh7 A2 HCV EM cells, that is, however, not required for antiviral efficacy Fig. 4 Mechanisms of T-cell failure in chronic hepatitis B and C. Two main mechanisms can be attributed to the inability of virusspecific CD8? T cells to control HBV or HCV replication in chronically infected patients, i.e., viral escape mutations (HLAdependent) and T-cell dysfunction. Several mechanisms can contribute to T-cell dysfunction, including lack of CD4? T-cell help, inhibition by regulatory CD4? and CD8? T cells, inhibition by immunosuppressive cytokines (e.g., IL-10), and activation of inhibitory receptors (e.g., PD-1) on CD8? T cells 
