329d85e95de166647258db0b1932689f0b90be22
2. Madden DR, Swiatecka-Urban A
A ; Abuarish J W Hanrahan D R Madden ;  Chavez M   ;  Al Ayyoubi S   ;  Cihil K M  ;  Pellegrini ;  Swiatecka-Urban A   F  Liu ;  Carney D   ;  Sachin C   ;  Lee ;  Lonkar P   ;  Nichols ;  Picarella ;  Ting ;  Webb ;  Wensley ;  Yeager ;  Bridges R J  ;  Penarasgado ;  Lacerda ;  Bordwell ;  Vu F  Peters ;  Mijnders ;  Andrews ;  Van Der Plas ;  Conrath K   ;  Braakman I   ;  Kleizen B   S J Bose ;  Liu J   ;  Cai Z   ;  Bot A G  ;  Bijvelds M J  ;  De Jonge H   ;  Sheppard D N  C P Sabusap ;  Fu L   ;  Mcnicholas-Bevensee C M  ;  Wang W   ;  Chung ;  Wen ;  Mazur ;  Kirk ;  Collawn J F  ;  Hong J S  ;  Sorscher E J  S  Chin ;  Yang ;  Molinski ;  Ramjeesingh ;  Eckford ;  Bear C E  I L Urbatsch ;  Zhou Q   ;  Hildebrandt E   ;  Dai ;  An ;  Ding ;  Macon K J  ;  Riordan J R  ;  Delucas L J  ;  Brouillette ;  Kappes J C  L  He ;  Aleksandrov ;  Jensen T   ;  Sigoillot ;  Kousouros ;  Cui ;  Overtus ;  Grodecka ;  Laeremans ;  Pardon ;  Steyaert ;  Govaerts D M Cholon ;  Chaudhry I G  ;  Quinney N   ;  Boyles ;  Mellnik ;  Gentzsch S  Krishnamurthy ;  Locke ;  Li X   ;  Yan W X  ;  Ran F A  ;  Zhang F   ;  Zabner ;  Mccray Y  Cheng ;  Singh A K  ;  Tse 

University of North 
Autophagy is a physiological process that helps maintain cellular homeostasis by degrading dysfunctional cellular components, such as misfolded proteins or foreign pathogens, and converting them into useful building blocks, such as amino acids, nucleic acids and lipids. In CF with the F508del mutation, the defective CFTR has previously been shown to induce an upregulation in transglutaminase activity. This enzyme, in turn, drives the crosslinking and the subsequent disabling of Beclin-1, a key protein that is needed for autophagy activation. Once autophagy is impaired, there is a corresponding increase in p62. Since p62 has been shown to regulate the aggresome formation, its accumulation effectively traps the F508del-CFTR in the ER and prevents its trafficking to the cell surface. An effective autophagy activator, should, in theory, reverse this sequence of events and allow more of the misfolded CFTR to reach the cell surface. To direct the restoration of autophagy, a fatty acid cysteamine conjugate 6w G551D CFTR 3D STRUCTURE DETERMINED BY CRYO-ELECTRON MICROSCOPY Ford, B.; Collins, R.F.; Meng, X. Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom Introduction: CFTR/ABCC7 is a member of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of proteins. Unusually for this family, CFTR operates as an ion channel, rather than a transporter. ABC transporters are thought to operate as pumps by undergoing major structural changes which move the transported allocrite from an inwardly-exposed to outwardly-exposed location within the transmembrane domains (TMDs). This alternating access-type mechanism is coupled to the binding of ATP which triggers the dimerisation of the nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) followed by ATP Second-site substitutions that rescue F508del-CFTR folding also thermally stabilize the wild-type human CFTR NBD1 domain. Combinations of single substitutions acted additively and yielded NBD1 constructs with highly increased thermostability of that domain (results are presented in another poster [Yang et al.]). In the present study, the effects of these NBD1-stabilizing substitutions on the folding and trafficking of full-length wild-type CFTR in a mammalian expression system, and their effects on the monodispersity and thermostability of detergent-purified CFTR, were investigated. Recombinant CFTR proteins containing different combinations of the second-site substitutions were overexpressed in the stable mammalian cell system developed in our lab (Hildebrandt E, et al. Mol Biotechnol. 2015;57:391-405). These CFTR proteins contained a His-affinity purification tag, and extracellular FLAG epitope and enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) tags to facilitate fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). FACS analyses of anti-FLAG antibody binding to the extracellular FLAG tag indicated significantly increased levels of cell surface expression of NBD1-stabilizers over that of wild-type CFTR. The CFTR proteins were purified using a protocol optimized in our labs (Hildebrandt E, et al. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;1838:2825. Fluorescence size exclusion chromatography (FSEC) of the purified proteins indicated improved monodispersity of the NBD1-stabilized CFTR protein. Thermal stability of these constructs in detergent solution, as indicated by the unfolding temperature (T m ), was determined by directly monitoring the protein's intrinsic fluorescence or by the fluorescence of an extrinsic dye (SYPRO-orange) as a function of temperature. Unfolding occurred over a broad temperature range between 45-75 o C which is consistent with the sequential unfolding of several CFTR domains. Most NBD1-stabilizing substitutions also increased the T m of full-length CFTR, and a positive correlation was observed between their respective unfolding temperatures (T m   ) . Still, a low-temperature transition in the fluorescence signal at ~10-20 o C is apparent in some data and if this represents an unfolding event in the protein, it may suggest that additional domains besides NBD1 need to be stabilized to further optimize CFTR stability. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) research has made advances in developing therapeutics that modulate the CFTR protein, thereby correcting CFTR defects at the molecular level. Western blot analyses and chloride secretion studies using primary human bronchial epithelial cultures were considered the gold standard for measuring CFTR rescue. However, we observed discrepancies when comparing biochemical formation of mature CFTR with measurements of chloride and bicarbonate secretion in cultures with rescued mutant CFTR. Objective: To apply an advanced spherical culture model that mimics ion and fluid movement of airway epithelia for measuring CFTR responses to pharmaceutical agents, and to compare these results with biochemical and functional data of planar cultures. Methods: Cultures from CF patients with various rare CFTR mutations were treated with pharmaceuticals and CFTR rescue was assessed by 1) Western blot analyses to examine CFTR expression and maturation, 2) Ussing chamber measurements in KBR or chloride-free conditions to analyze secretion of chloride and bicarbonate, and 3) swelling of 3D airway spheroid cultures, reflecting CFTR-mediated ion and fluid transport. Results: Rare CFTR mutations have varying responses to CFTR modulators. Comparison of biochemical and functional assays indicated that augmented levels of mature CFTR did not necessarily correspond with an increase in CFTR function. In cultures from CF patients expressing P67L, S1251N, G178R, R117H, or R347P mutations, maximal levels of CFTR function in Ussing chambers were obtained when treated with VX-809 plus a low dose of VX-770, while levels of mature CFTR protein varied for each mutant. Although these functional assays measure chloride secretion, CFTR also secretes bicarbonate. Rescue of bicarbonate secretion by P67L, S1251N, and G551D was strongly enhanced by VX-770 in combination with VX-809, and maximum bicarbonate secretion by the G178R mutant was obtained using VX-809 combined with a high concentration of VX-770. Thus, for certain mutations, CFTR modulators displayed different effects on chloride versus bicarbonate secretion. To determine which results are physiologically relevant, we used airway spheroids to conduct fluid 2016 Cystic Fibrosis Conference 198 transport assays. Airway spheroids from CF patients expressing G551D/ F508del or S1251N/F508del showed an increase in swelling due to CFTR activity in response to VX-770. Airway spheroids from CF patients homozygous for F508del/F508del were not significantly rescued by treatment with VX-809. These results accurately correspond with the outcomes of CF patients receiving these therapies in the clinic, thus demonstrating that airway spheroids can be used as a precise preclinical model for identifying therapeutics specifically tailored for each CF patient. Conclusions: Our data clearly indicate that neither the amount of mature protein nor chloride secretion can accurately predict rescue of rare CFTR mutations by pharmaceutical treatment. Spheroid swelling assays offer a superior outcome measure for precise pharmacological rescue of CFTR in CF patients. Bhatt, P.; Bailey, V.; Dasgupta, A.; Chin, J.; An, W.; Bresilla, C.; Kwok, I.; Cole, B.M.; Fitzpatrick, R.; Krouse, M.E. Flatley Discovery Lab, Charlestown, MA, USA Background: More than 2000 CFTR mutations have been identified. Many of these mutations result in loss of Cltransport. This loss can be due to reduction in quantity or function of CFTR channels. Therapeutic intervention with small molecule modulators, including correctors and potentiators restores Cltransport activity to F508del CFTR and potentially many other mutations. Method: FDL-initiated testing of 4 distinct sets of modulators, classified by possible mechanism of action, on various CF-causing mutations expressed in FRT cells, including three corrector sets (CS1-3) and one potentiator set (PS1). All 4 sets increase Clcurrent as single agents or in combination, as measured in the Ussing chamber or equivalent current assay, in F508del CFhBE cells. So far we have compared the effect of these modulators on class 2 (N1303K, G85E-V470, R560T, E92K, F508del) and class 4 (R117H) mutations in electrophysiology and Western blot assays in stable cell lines kindly provided by UAB and the CFF. The mRNA levels for these non-stop mutations are equivalent. Correctors were added 24 hours prior to the experiment and the responses were measured as increases in Clcurrent after stimulating with forskolin and a potentiator. Fold(x) increase over baseline, i.e. DMSO-treated uncorrected cells are reported. Results: CS1 has a range of effects in the tested mutations. CS1 had the largest effect on E92K, almost 100x increase in Clcurrent. CS1 also increased Clcurrent in N1303K (2.5x), and R117H (1.9x). CS2 increased F508del (3.6x), N1303K (3x), R117H (1.6x), and E92K (3.3x). Both CS1 (1.9x) and CS2 (1.6x) produced an increase in R117H cells alone but CS1 + CS2 did not produce an additional increase. CS3 had no effect on any of the mutations tested except F508del (1.2x). However, when CS3 was used in combination with CS1 in E92K, it showed a 1.9x increase in response over CS1 alone. The PS1 response (percent increase produced by acute addition of PS1 compared to the forskolin steady state) ranged from 210% (F508del) to 0% (R560T). We have also measured the uncorrected CFTR protein expression using Western blot assays. All mutations have a visible band B, with E92K and R560T having the lightest bands and N1303K having the darkest band B. Band C is not visible for any mutation except for a very light band C for F508del and R117H. This is in agreement with the electrophysiology data where R117H and F508del gave the largest forskolin response in uncorrected cells. Summary: All 4 modulator sets increase the Clcurrent in F508del CFhBE cells. CS1 modulators had a larger [relative] effect on E92K. R560T had the smallest uncorrected Clcurrent increase, did not increase with any modulator set alone or in combination, and no inhibitor response was seen, suggesting there was no mature CFTR present. In N1303K, all 4 modulators increased Clcurrent, however the uncorrected Clcurrent was very low and, after correction, was 4-fold less than F508del uncorrected current. Conclusion: These results show that the in vitro effect of different CFTR modulators on F508del CFTR correlate poorly with the effect on other mutations, including other class 2 mutations. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a tightly regulated anion channel which mediates cAMP-stimulated salt and fluid secretion and enables efficient mucociliary clearance in the airways. Most CF is caused by the deletion of phenylalanine at position 508 which disrupts the folding, trafficking, gating and surface stability of the mutant. CFTR interactions with other proteins have been studied extensively and it is thought to form protein complexes that localize and stabilize it at the cell surface. Membrane lipids may also play a role in these processes but have received much less attention. We recently showed that wt-CFTR forms sub-resolution clusters that are homogeneously distributed on the plasma membrane of primary human airway epithelial cells. Our studies of CFTR protein dynamics revealed two dynamically distinct populations. One population exhibited small spatial scale transport dynamics and confinement that was dependent on membrane cholesterol suggestive of its localization in lipid rafts. A second population of CFTR molecules had larger spatial scale dynamics indicating CFTR lateral mobility outside the rafts. To better understand the importance of CFTR clustering for its membrane expression and stability and its possible role in CF, we have now compared the aggregation state and lateral mobility of wt-CFTR with F508del-CFTR rescued by treating cells with VX-809. The distribution of wt-and F508del-CFTR was studied in primary human bronchial epithelial cells using spatial image correlation spectroscopy (ICS). CFTR dynamics were studied using a modified version of k-space image correlation spectroscopy (kICS). To quantify the fraction of wt-CFTR and F508del-CFTR within cholesterol-rich membrane microdomains, and their mobility, transport and partitioning dynamics of these populations were compared under control conditions and following chronic treatment with VX-809 or in combination with the potentiator VX-770. ICS analysis showed that the aggregation state of wt-CFTR is much higher than F508del-CFTR despite treatments with the corrector or in combination with the potentiator. kICS analysis revealed that F508del-CFTR partitions into lipid rafts under control conditions, but the confinement is significantly weaker and a smaller fraction of the population displays confinement when compared with wt-CFTR. VX-809 correction does not restore the normal confined fraction or confined dynamics of F508del-CFTR, neither does the additional potentiation with VX-770, confirming that these treatments do not correct F508del-CFTR membrane behavior. The results show a clear dependence of CFTR distribution and dynamics on cholesterol and suggest that the reduction in F508del-CFTR confinement could be due to an alteration in its interaction with cholesterol which is not restored by CFTR modulators. Supported by The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Pellegrini, M. 1 ; Swiatecka-Urban, A. 2 1. Geisel School of Medicine/Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA; 2. Dept. of Cell Biology, U. Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Of the numerous CFTR mutations affecting biosynthetic processing, gating and stability at the plasma membrane, ΔF508-CFTR is the most prevalent among patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and exhibits a combination of all three defects. The FDA has recently approved a combination therapy (VX-809 and VX-770; Orkambi ® ) that benefits CF patients homozygous for ΔF508 (ΔFEV 1 ~3%). However, it does not yield a significant improvement for heterozygous patients. VX-809 is a corrector that addresses the folding defect, and VX-770 is a potentiator that increases net ion-channel activity. Our laboratory focuses on the development of stabilizers, a class of modulators that increase the half-life of CFTR by blocking its internalization and degradation. A number of endocytic adaptors have been shown to modulate CFTR internalization including Disabled-2 (Dab2) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) . siRNA-mediated knockdown of Dab2 increases plasma membrane abundance of CFTR, highlighting Dab2 as a potential therapeutic target, and the Dab Homology (DH) domain of Dab2 is necessary and sufficient for Dab2 to co-assemble in complex with CFTR. Furthermore, a peptide sequence derived from an endogenous partner of the Dab2-DH domain, the amyloid precursor protein (APP), increased abundance of WT-CFTR in the plasma membrane in human bronchial epithelial cells (CFBE41o-), confirming the DH domain as a molecular target for stabilizer-based therapies (1, 2) . However, the affinity of the APP decamer was low (K D = 20 μM), and peptide bioavailability can be limiting. To identify small-molecule inhibitors, we used array screens to engineer peptides with 200-fold higher affinity for the DH domain (K D = 100 nM). We then screened a compound library for inhibitors of the Dab2-DH peptide-binding pocket, and identified multiple hits with single micromolar affinities. Hits were validated using pulldown inhibition. Testing of cytotoxicity demonstrates biocompatibility to concentrations as high as 100 mM, suggesting a potential therapeutic window. We measured short-circuit currents (Isc) across polarized monolayers of CF bronchial epithelial cells treated with VX-809 and VX-770 alone or in combination with Dab2-DH inhibitors. The three-way combination with Dab2 inhibitors yielded an Isc increase nearly double (70-95%) that seen with VX-809 and VX-770. Our data demonstrate the potential of CFTR stabilizers to increase functional rescue of CFTR. The assay has now been re-validated in 1536-well format suitable for a large-scale high-throughput screening campaign. Finally, crystallographic and NMR structural analyses of Dab2-DH:ligand complexes show the site of inhibitor binding and provide a basis for rational design of more potent inhibitors. References: (CAT-5571) was synthesized by first covalently linking cysteamine to the omega-3 fatty acid DHA. The sulfhydryl group was then converted into a functionalized disulfide moiety in order to enhance cellular penetration, plasma stability and oral bioavailability. This linking methodology takes advantage of intracellular enzymes to enable the release of two biologically active components (i.e., cysteamine and DHA) inside cells at the same time and in equimolar concentrations. This process allows the simultaneous inhibition of transglutaminase 2 and the upregulation of AMPK to take place and enable a more effective restoration of Beclin-1 and autophagy. In cultured primary homozygous F508del hBE cells, the fatty acid cysteamine conjugate CAT-5571 synergistically activated autophagy at concentrations as low as 0.3 μM. This level of activity was observed only with the covalent conjugate and could not be replicated by administering the individual components either individually or in combination, even at much higher concentrations. Once autophagy had been restored in these primary CF hBE cells, an increase in the trafficking of the F508del-CFTR was observed, as noted by an increase in the CFTR band C. When CAT-5571 was used in combination with the corrector VX-809 and the potentiator VX-770, it showed an additive effect, as measured by the increase of chloride conductance in a functional assay using cultured primary homozygous F508del hBE cells. CAT-5571 is orally bioavailable in the mouse, rat and dog, with drug-like attributes. It represents a potential new therapeutic for the treatment of CF with the F508del mutation.  The current therapeutic strategy to repair cystic fibrosis-causing defects in the chloride channel CFTR is to develop novel and better correctors (to improve folding) and potentiators (to improve function). Galapagos identified a novel potentiator GLPG1837 that is potent in improving channel activity of temperature-rescued CFTR-F508del as well as CFTR-G551D. Compared to ivacaftor, GLPG1837 does not compromise drug-corrected CFTR-F508del (Peters F, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015; 50(S41) :210). GLPG1837 is currently in a Phase 2 study to evaluate safety, tolerability and efficacy in S1251N and G551D CF patients. Using a radiolabeling pulse-chase approach in combination with protease susceptibility we track folding and assembly of each CFTR domain with time, and determine when and where correctors and potentiators work on the newly synthesized protein. Using newly developed antibodies against the membrane-spanning domains of CFTR (TMDs) we investigated mode of action of the clinical drug ivacaftor and found that this potentiator changed protease resistance of TMD1 during late stages of CFTR folding. Ivacaftor mimics the conformational effect that nucleotide-binding domain NBD2 has on TMD1 through the second intracellular loop ICL2 during CFTR folding. These effects occur already during CFTR folding in the early secretory pathway, in apparent contrast to ivacaftor modulating CFTR function at the cell surface. Since the efficacy of GLPG1837 on dysfunctional channel CFTR-G551D is greater compared to ivacaftor, we expect to observe the largest difference between GLPG1837 and ivacaftor on this mutant. We therefore pulse-labeled both wild-type and CFTR-G551D in the absence or presence of GLPG1837, chased for 2 h or not (0 h), and determined protease susceptibility of all 5 CFTR domains. The GLPG1837 potentiator had no effect on the late folding events in TMD1 that were changed by ivacaftor, demonstrating that this novel potentiator modulates CFTR through a different mode of action. We are testing additional proteases on all CFTR domains to identify possible mild effects of GLPG1837 on CFTR conformation. These results will provide new and important insights on the impact of potentiators on CFTR's structure and function. Bose, S.J. 1 ; Liu, J. 1 ; Cai, Z. 1 ; Bot, A.G. 2 ; Bijvelds, M.J. 2 ; de Jonge, H. 2 ; Sheppard, D.N. 1 1. School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom; 2. Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands Species differences in CFTR activity have implications both in the development of animal models for cystic fibrosis (CF) and for understanding the mechanism of action of CFTR modulators. In the present study, single-channel patch-clamp recordings were used to identify differences in the responses of human and mouse wild-type (WT) and F508del-CFTR to ivacaftor Kalydeco) . Excised inside-out membrane patches from cells expressing recombinant CFTR were clamped at -50 mV and used to record single-channel current amplitude (i) and open probability (P o ) at 37°C with a Clconcentration gradient (intracellular [Cl -], 147 mM; extracellular [Cl -], 10 mM). The processing defect of F508del was first corrected by incubating cells at 27°C or using 3 μM lumacaftor (VX-809) at 37°C for 24 hours prior to experiments. Recordings were made following activation of CFTR with 1 mM ATP and 75 nM PKA. The effects of ivacaftor were tested at concentrations from 10 nM to 10 μM. Data are shown as means ± SEM and were analysed using Student's t-test or one-way ANOVA. All constructs tested exhibited ATP-and PKA-dependent Clcurrents characteristic of CFTR. For human WT-CFTR, i = -0.69 ± 0.01 pA and P o = 0.34 ± 0.02 (n = 8 -12). Human F508del-CFTR showed a decrease in both i (-0.55 ± 0.02 pA) and P o (0.09 ± 0.01) compared to WT (n = 10 -15; P < 0.05). As previously reported, mouse WT-CFTR exhibited a highly active sub-conductance (O 1 ) with brief openings to a fully open state (O 2 ) (i = -0.38 ± 0.14 pA, P o = 0.04 ± 0.01; n = 3). However, unlike human F508del-CFTR, the activity of mouse F508del-CFTR did not differ from that of mouse WT-CFTR (O 2 : i = -0.36 ± 0.01 pA, P o = 0.06 ± 0.01; n = 7, P > 0.05 vs WT). Furthermore, while the activity of low temperaturecorrected human F508del-CFTR deactivated within 5 minutes following an increase in temperature to 37°C, mouse F508del was thermally stable and remained fully active beyond 10 minutes at 37°C. Ivacaftor potentiated human F508del-CFTR corrected by either low temperature or lumacaftor, eg, 10 μM ivacaftor increased the P o of temperature-corrected F508del-CFTR from 0.09 ± 0.02 to 0.28 ± 0.05 (n = 5 -6, P < 0.05). However no effect on the P o of O 1 or O 2 for mouse WT (n = 3) or F508del-CFTR was observed in response to ivacaftor following either low temperature or lumacaftor correction (n = 5 -7). Our results demonstrate that F508del does not produce the same functional changes in mouse CFTR as observed for human CFTR. As F508del disrupts NBD1 -ICL4 interactions, our data suggest that structural differences in mouse CFTR compared to human CFTR might stabilise this interface and prevent F508del-induced thermal instability. Our data also show that the single-channel activity of mouse CFTR is not potentiated by ivacaftor over a range of concentrations, providing rationale for the use of human-mouse CFTR chimeras to investigate the binding site of ivacaftor. Supported by CF Trust; SJB is the recipient of a studentship from the UK Medical Research Council. hydrolysis and dissociation of the two NBDs, returning the transporter to its starting status (with the TMDs in the inward-facing conformation). For CFTR, ATP binding appears to be required to open the channel (after a prior phosphorylation event) whilst ATP hydrolysis has been associated with channel closure. The disease-causing missense mutation, G551D, appears to greatly reduce the open probability of the channel. Results: The structure of the purified G551D mutant version of CFTR has been determined by cryo-electron microscopy of single particles in a detergent micelle and the data have been collected on a Krios microscope equipped with a direct detector camera and a phase plate. The structure in the absence of ATP will be presented. Biophysical data will also be presented that show that the purified protein in a detergent micelle has a spatial distribution of cysteine residues that is consistent with current homology models. The data also imply that G551D-CFTR is more stable than the wild-type protein. The structure will be compared with other ABC proteins where high-resolution structures are available and also with the density map of CFTR obtained previously from two-dimensional crystals (Rosenberg MF, et al. J Biol Chem. 2012; 286:42647-54) . In the absence of ATP, the transmembrane domains of G551D-CFTR show an outwardfacing configuration, with a deep and wide central channel that is closed on the cytoplasmic side of the TMDs by the intracytoplasmic loops. The NBDs are in a closed dimeric configuration, but density for ATP cannot be observed. Density for the extracellular loops is weak, implying that these regions of the protein are relatively mobile, or disordered in the outward-facing conformation. Regions of density around the NBDs and not accounted for by homologous ABC transporters such as Sav1866 is probably due to the regulatory region (R-region) which must be phosphorylated before channel opening can happen. The new structure for CFTR may provide new insights that will allow structure-directed design of therapeutics for the targeted treatment of CF-causing mutations. In this study, we evaluated P67L CFTR, a mutation associated with pancreatic sufficiency and present in a comparatively small cystic fibrosis patient population (curated by CFTR2 (www.CFTR2.org)). Historically, P67L has been designated a class IV conductance abnormality (i.e., malformed ion pore). In contrast, our studies demonstrate P67L disrupts CFTR protein maturation, prompts misfolding, causes gating defects, and exhibits conductance very similar to wild-type. We also show that P67L CFTR is robustly rescued by lumacaftor or ivacaftor, both in cell lines and primary airway epithelia, although unresponsive to low-temperature correction. To further elucidate the impact of this mutation during protein biogenesis, second-site suppressors R555K or R1070W were introduced in concert with P67L. These experiments, together with pronounced lumacaftor correction and absence of 27° C rescue, suggest a model in which P67L is necessary for proper formation of the NBD1/cytosolic loop interface and/ or stability of TMD1. Our findings (and those of others) therefore suggest the importance of clinical studies to test pharmacologic correction in CF subjects carrying the P67L defect. We note that lumacaftor rescue of P67L CFTR might not have been anticipated based on previous CFTR class IV assignment. For rare (ultra-orphan) CFTR mutations such as P67L, access to novel therapeutics is often constrained by difficulty arranging phase III clinical trials, and restrictions on off-label use when drug cost is prohibitive. Analysis of low prevalence cystic fibrosis alleles offers a means for assessing barriers to "personalized" medicine, and engaging the best available mechanistic knowledge towards treating patients with rare forms of the disease. (Funded by CFF and NIH.)  Chin, S. 1, 2 ; Yang, D. 1 ; Molinski, S. 1, 2 ; Ramjeesingh, M. 1 ; Eckford, P. 1 ; Bear, C.E. 1, 2, 3 1. Molecular Function and Structure, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2. Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 3. Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is an unique anion channel of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily. CFTR consists of two nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs), two membrane-spanning domains (MSDs) and a regulatory (R) domain. CFTR also has alpha-helical extensions and intracellular loops (ICLs) which couple the NBDs and MSDs via "coupling helices." The regulation of CFTR channel activity involves protein kinase A (PKA) phosphorylation at the R domain. However, little is known of the effect of phosphorylation on the intramolecular interactions relating to CFTR channel activation. Previous studies of a similar ABC transporter, BtuCD, have shown that intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence can detect urea-sensitive changes in the coupling between the MSDs and NBDs of full-length BtuCD. Interestingly, we have found that urea-sensitive changes of CFTR were similar to studies of BtuCD and were modified upon PKA phosphorylation. Tryptophan quenching of CFTR was also modified by PKA phosphorylation and suggests this modifies an electrostatic environment of CFTR. Based on CFTR homology models, the ICL:NBD interface has many tryptophans, such as W401 at NBD1, and has a phosphorylation site at Serine-422 which may provide an electrostatic environment. Our biophysical studies then led us to propose that phosphorylation may modify the coupling of ICLs and NBD1 which may be essential for CFTR channel activation. In order to specifically study those interfaces, cysteine crosslinking studies in HEK293 cells were employed using a short membrane-permeable cysteine crosslinker on a CFTR mutant lacking its native cysteine residues (cys-less) with two cysteines engineered at the interfaces of interest. We did not detect any cysteine crosslinking at the ICL1:NBD1 interface with either R170C/W401C or R170C/E476C cys-less WT CFTR. However, we did detect a shift in SDS-PAGE gel migration of all single-and double-cysteine mutants which suggests that these cysteines may be accessible to crosslinker modification. We were able to detect a specific intramolecular interaction at the ICL4:NBD1 interface with V510C/A1067C cys-less WT CFTR. However, we were unable to detect any changes at the ICL4:NBD1 interface upon PKA phosphorylation. These results were similar to previous studies by He L, et al. (J Biol Chem. 2008; 283(39) :26383-90) which suggest either that the coupling helices of ICL1 and ICL4 are stably interacting with NBD1 regardless of phosphorylation status or that subtle changes in the affinity of this interaction cannot be detected by chemical crosslinking. Consistent with the latter suggestion, our initial studies of disease-causing mutations in the coupling helices of ICL1 and ICL4 show that they exhibit a defect in phosphorylation-dependent channel activation. Together, biophysical studies of reconstituted fulllength CFTR protein and cell-based studies of coupling mutants support the hypothesis that such coupling interfaces play a key role in the intramolecular signaling required for CFTR channel regulation. Authors acknowledge support from CF Canada, CIHR and NSERC. A major defect caused by the most common CF-causing mutation F508del is the decreased thermal stability of NBD1 where F508 is located, and consequently of the full-length F508del CFTR. Second-site mutations that thermally stabilize NBD1 not only promote the maturation and thermal stability of F508del CFTR but also that of wild-type CFTR, and these strategies have been used to increase the expression and maturation levels of CFTR for its purification and structural studies. Although progress has been made in the purification of more thermally stable CFTR, further improvement is still required to enable high resolution structural analyses. Current methods of monitoring CFTR thermal stability using the most informative biophysical methods such as differential scanning calorimetry require relatively large amounts of purified proteins at high concentrations. In this study, using an engineered cys-less CFTR, we developed a maleimide fluorophore (DyLight800) binding assay to monitor changes with temperature of a single introduced cysteine using membranes from CFTR-expressing cells. Using this method, we found that second-site mutations in NBD1 and ATP binding increased the peak labeling temperature of 524C. We also found that nanobodies specific to NBD1 altered the temperature-dependent labeling of 524C in cys-less CFTR, corresponding to their effect on the thermal stability of isolated NBD1. Thus rapid screening of constructs was enabled prior to purification. To then follow the thermal unfolding of improved constructs with a biophysical assay (intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence), small amount of proteins were purified and scanned by nano-differential scanning fluorimetry (Nano-DSF) using a Prometheus NT.48 (NanoTemper Technologies). Using this instrument, we were able to determine the melting temperature (Tm) of full-length CFTR and isolated NBD1 with a concentration as low as 0.1 mg/mL protein and 10 μL sample size. Second-site mutations increased the Tm of full-length CFTR as well as isolated NBD1, as previously determined using other techniques. In addition, nanobodies that bind to and thermally stabilize NBD1 increased the Tm of full-length CFTR. Knowledge gained from this study will enable us to develop strategies to further thermally stabilize CFTR. (Supported by the NIH and CFF.) Gene therapy holds promise for cystic fibrosis using approaches including gene addition or gene editing. Gene editing tools such as CRISPR/Cas9 offer the possibility of modifying the CFTR locus, and correction could persist if progenitor cells were modified. DNA double-strand breaks can be introduced using CRISPR/Cas9 to either modify a specific locus by introducing insertions or deletions (indels) from repair by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or to enhance homology-directed repair (HDR) and obtain precise gene corrections by homologous recombination. We are investigating both strategies to evaluate repair of representative classes of CFTR mutations. An intron mutation in the CFTR, 3849+10Kb C>T, creates a novel splicing donor site 10 kb into intron 22-23. This mutation, therefore, is a candidate for disruption by NHEJ. In contrast, the deletion mutation in the exon 11 of CFTR, F508del, needs a repair template, in addition to CRISPR/Cas9 editing, to make precise replacement of the mutation with the correct wild-type sequence. Here, we utilize single or dual Staphylococcus pyogenes (Sp) Cas9-and/or Staphylococcus aureus (Sa) Cas9-specific single guide RNAs introduced by non-viral or viral delivery to remove and or replace the deleterious mutation and effect repair by NHEJ or HDR. We screened 8 pairs of single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) (targeting indel 22-23) and 10 single sgRNAs (targeting exon 11) to identify those that most efficiently introduced double-strand breaks at these 2 regions of the gene. We next tested the efficacy of different delivery vectors by assessing the nature of indels, the indel efficiency, Cas9 expression, vector genome copy numbers, vector persistence and HDR efficiency in cell lines and primary airway epithelial cells. Our results demonstrate that both SpCas9 and SaCas9 genome editing can disrupt mutation and/or induce correction by HDR at different regions of CFTR locus. Cheng, Y. 1,3 ; Singh, A.K. 2 ; Tse, C. 2 ; Bridges, R.J. 1 1. Physiology and Biophysics, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL, USA; 2. AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, USA; 3. Present address: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics, Lexington, MA, USA Splice site mutations account for 12% of the over 2000 CFTR gene mutations identified in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. The c.1766+1G→A splice site mutation is one of the 16 most common CFTR mutations worldwide. In the CFTR2 global database, ~0.6% of patients with CF have at least one c.1766+1G→A allele. However, the structural and functional defects of CFTR caused by this splice site mutation at the donor site of intron 13 remains unclear. In addition, the effects of F508del CFTR modulators on this CFTR splice site mutant are still unknown. To characterize c.1766+1G→A CFTR and explore potential therapeutic strategies, we studied heterologous primary hBE cells with the F508del and c.1766+1G→A CFTR mutations (patient code: CFBr002). RT-PCR analysis indicated that this splice site mutation causes CFTR exon13 skipping (87bp), which results in a deletion of 29 amino acids from Arg560 to Ser589 in CFTR. This missing segment is located at NBD1 domain and contains the Walker B motif in the ATP binding site 1. These results are consistent with early reports by Strong, T.V. et al. (Hum Mutat, 1992; 1:380-7) . Moreover, F508del and c.1766+1G→A CFTR genes in this heterozygous donor encoded Met470 and Val470, respectively. Equivalent TECC current studies indicated there were no effects of forskolin and F508del potentiators on these heterozygous primary hBE cells in the absence of F508del-CFTR correctors. Compared to homozygous F508del-CFTR primary hBE (patient code: CFFT028H), combined F508del correctors and potentiators have lower efficacy in CFBr002, suggesting that c.1766+1G→A CFTR has impaired chloride channel function. To further investigate this splice site mutant, c.1766+1G→A CFTR was cloned into an expression vector, pcDNA3.1(+), and transfected into immortalized hBE (CFBE), FRT and HEK293 cells and stable cell lines expressing the c.1766+1G→A were established. Western blot analyses revealed only a weak Band B in the three c.1766+1G→A stable cell lines compared to WT-CFTR expressing cells, suggesting the splice site mutant causes impaired biogenesis and maturation defects. Common F508del CFTR correctors (C7 (PTC124), C17, C18) and a series of AbbVie compounds (such as AC1, AC2a, AC2b, and AC2c) significantly increased c.1766+1G→A Band B, but did not produce Band C individually. However, a combination of two compounds, such as AC1/AC2c and C18/AC2c, resulted in the production of Band C in CFBEs, suggesting that these compounds work together to promote c.1766+1G→A CFTR maturation. The rescued band C protein could not be activated by forskolin or forskolin plus several different F508del-CFTR potentiators, including VX-770, PG-01, and Genistein, implying c.1766+1G→A channel function is also defective. In conclusion, the c.1766+1G→A CFTR splice site mutation results in multiple defects including protein biogenesis, maturation and channel function. Illek, B. 1 ; Zlock, L. 2 ; Boecking, C. 2 ; Green, B. 1 ; Lefebvre, E. 1 ; Bates, M. 1 ; McGarry, M.E. 3 ; Nielson, D.W. 3 ; Finkbeiner, W.E. 2 1. Research Institute, UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland, Oakland, CA, USA; 2. Pathology, UCSF, San Francisco, CA, USA; 3. Pediatrics, UCSF, San Francisco, CA, USA Relevant cell culture models that recapitulate the functional properties of patient-specific CFTR mutations are critical for personalized medicine approaches in cystic fibrosis (CF). Particularly valuable are functional cell models that can be propagated but conserve their ability to grow as well-differentiated airway epithelia for personalized chloride transport measurements. Thirteen CF subjects with common and rare CFTR mutations provided airway cell samples from nasal or tracheobronchial tissues. Three CF individuals were genotypically characterized by carrying the common F508del mutation on both alleles (F508del/F508del), four CF individuals had a rare CFTR mutation on the other allele (F508del/3905insT, F508del/1154insTC, F508del/Y563N, F508del/A455E), and six CF individuals had two rare CFTR mutations on both alleles (G551D/Y1092X, G542X/3849+1kb C->T, V520F/1717-1G->A, G85E/1717-1G->A, G542X/1248+1G->A, W1282X/W1282X). Primary CF cells were cultured in presence of Y-27632 Rho kinase inhibitor and irradiated 3T3 murine fibroblasts to induce a proliferative state (CF-CRC). Cell numbers were expanded through serially passages, seeded (5x10 5 cells/cm 2 ) onto Snapwell inserts, and grown at an air-liquid interface to induce differentiation. The activation of mutant CFTR Clcurrents by a small molecule potentiator (VX-770) and corrector was studied by measuring the acute responsiveness to forskolin and VX-770 (1μM) followed by CFTR inhibitor 172 (50 μM). CF-CRCs from three CF patients homozygous for F508del responded to VX-770 acutely at passages 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 10 but showed a trend to decline at passage 10. Prior treatment with VX-809 (3 μM, 12-24 h) enhanced F508del-CFTR currents ~2-fold. Responsiveness to VX-770 was detected in CF-CRCs from three patients carrying the F508del mutation on one allele and included F508del/3905insT, F508del/1154insTC and F508del/Y563N, whereas no response was found in one patient who carried the F508del/A455E genotype even after treatment with VX-809. Responsiveness to VX-770 was detected in two CF patients who carried rare CF mutations on both alleles and included the stop mutation Y1092X (G551D/ Y1092X) and the splice mutation 3849+10kb C->T (G542X/3849+10kb C->T); enhancement by VX-809 was also observed. In contrast, no responsiveness to VX-770 was found for the splice mutation 1717-1G->A in two CF patients carrying V520F/1717-1G->A or G85E/1717-1G->A. Similarly, no responsiveness was found for 1248+1G->A in a patient with the G542X/1248+1G->A genotype and a patient homozygous for the stop mutation W1282X. The limited numbers of CF patient-derived cells can be expanded through conditional reprogramming and used to assess efficacy of CFTR-targeted compounds. These data suggest the utility of CRCs for personalized ion transport measurements in Ussing chambers and demonstrate responses to small-molecule potentiators (VX-770) and correctors (VX-809) for a selected number of rare CF genotypes. Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Foundation ILLEK15G0 (BI), RDP-R613 (MM, DN, WF), NIDDK P30-DK072517 (DN,WF), NIGMS T32-GM007546 (MM), and Elizabeth Nash Foundation. To overcome the most prevalent defects leading to cystic fibrosis, two biomolecular activities are required, namely correctors to increase CFTR levels at the cell surface and potentiators which allow the effective opening of the CFTR channel. Combined, these activities allow chloride ion transport yielding improved hydration of the lung surface. We are developing a series of compounds capable of performing these roles. We already described the characterization of GLPG1837, derived from a previously disclosed potentiator series. GLPG1837 has progressed to Phase 2 clinical trial to determine safety, tolerability and activity in patients harbouring a G551D or S1251N CFTR mutation. Here, the further characterization of the potentiator is shown using patient-derived organoids. The focus is on G551D/F508del-derived and S1251N/F508delderived patient organoids from rectal biopsies. The assay development using organoids is presented as well as the data generated using our potentiators. S1251N-derived organoids have some residual CFTR activity, which is completely absent in G551D-derived organoids. Forskolin titration is done in organoids containing the different mutations to determine the optimal concentration for assessment of potentiator activity. Our data show a good correlation between the data obtained in YFP halide assays and in organoids. In the case of G551D, a good correlation is also seen when using patient-derived primary bronchial epithelial cells and organoids from G551D/F508del heterozygous patients. In summary, we present the development of assays using patientderived organoids and the data obtained using GLPG1837 across assays. Andrews, M. 1 ; Van der Plas, S. 1 ; Gees, M. 1 ; Vandevelde, A. 1 ; Musch, S. 1 ; Verdonck, K. 1 ; Foolen, N. 1 ; Christophe, T. 1 ; Singh, A.K. 2 ; Tse, C. 2 ; Nelles, L. 1 ; Conrath, K. 1 1. Galapagos, Mechelen, Belgium; 2. AbbVie, Chicago, IL, USA To address the most prevalent defects leading to cystic fibrosis, molecules with two biomolecular activities are required; correctors to increase CFTR levels at the cell surface and potentiators to allow the effective opening of the CFTR channel. Combined, these activities allow chloride ion transport yielding improved hydration of the lung surface. Here, we report the characterization of a novel series of potentiators and the combination of these with corrector(s). GLPG2451 represents a potentiator from a new series distinct from GLPG1837. Improving potency in the F508del YFP assay was matched by improvement in the ADME and PK profiles, with good exposure in vivo found for several compounds within the series. All compounds tested were able to open channels from the different mutants in an efficient manner. This was determined in YFP halide assays using other class III and IV CFTR mutants, performed by transient transfection of the CFTR mutant in HEK293 cells with iodide influx measured after addition of forskolin and potentiator. For several class III mutants, the maximal opening of the mutant channel exceeded that of VX-770 (which was used as comparator in the assay), and was similar to iodide influx levels observed with GLPG1837 (currently in Phase 2 clinical study). Multiple compounds from the series exhibited strong, dose-dependent activity in transepithelial clamp circuit measurements (TECC). Primary epithelial cells derived from F508del homozygous patients were first corrected with either GLPG2222 alone or GLPG2222 plus a next-generation corrector in order to increase the level of F508del CFTR at the plasma membrane. As predicted by the YFP halide assay results, this rescued F508del CFTR can then be opened in a dose-dependent manner with compounds from the series. In summary, we describe the identification of a second-generation potentiator series with very good channel opening activity. From this series, GLPG2451 was identified and is currently entering clinical trials. S-Nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) and other S-nitrosothiols are endogenous cell signaling compounds that have potential relevance to cystic fibrosis (CF) and other human lung diseases. S-nitrosylation signaling is metabolically regulated and it is often disordered in pulmonary diseases including CF. GSNO levels are low in the CF airway, in part because of increased expression of GSNO reductase (Zaman K, et al. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2016; 310:L263-70) . Co-chaperone C-terminus Hsc70 interacting protein (CHIP), an E3 ubiquitin ligase, helps to target improperly-folded CFTR for degradation (Younger M, et al. J Cell Biol. 2004; 167:1075-85) . CHIP is of particular interest to our research because it co-localizes with CFTR and interacts with the chaperones Hsc70, Hsp70, Hsp90, and co-chaperone Hop. CHIP has eight cysteine residues, and has the potential to act as an S-nitrosylation motif. We have previously shown that an active site cysteine in another E3 ubiquitin ligase, protein von Hippel Lindau, is inhibited by S-nitrosylation (Palmer L, et al. JCI 2007; 117:2592-601) . Therefore, we hypothesized that CHIP could be modified by GSNO to prevent CFTR degradation. Furthermore, inhibition of the expression and function of CHIP, Hsc70, Hsp90 and Hop by S-nitrosothiols could not only improve CFTR expression and maturation, but also may affect its cell surface stability (Oklyoneda T, et al. Science. 2010; 329:805-10) . Here, we found that CHIP is expressed in CFBE41ocells expressing both F508del and wild-type CFTR. Our study showed that 10 μM GSNO significantly decreases CHIP expression after 4 hours (4.0-fold, and 3.6-fold respectively, p<0.002). To characterize further the interaction of CHIP with CFTR, we knocked down endogenous CHIP with 50 nM of CHIP siRNA duplexes. 48 h after transfection, the level of CHIP was decreased (3.5-fold, p<0.002) , and this produced an increase in levels of immature and mature forms of F508del CFTR (1.5-fold and 1.8-fold) . However, in the presence of GSNO, the increase of F508del CFTR maturation was more significant (1.8-fold and 2.8-fold, p<0.005) . In addition, we demonstrated that GSNO S-nitrosylated CHIP in a concentration-dependent manner. To confirm that F508del CFTR is expressed on this cell surface following knockdown with siRNA CHIP, we performed cell-surface labeling. After CHIP knockdown, levels of full F508del CFTR maturation on the cell surface increased (2.1fold, p<0 .002). However, the presence of GSNO ensured that the increase of CFTR maturation was more pronounced (3.4-fold, p<0.005) . Of note, the proteosome inhibitor MG132 prevented depletion of cellular CHIP levels after GSNO treatment (2.4-fold, p<0 .005), and GSNO-treated cells have less-ubiquitinated CFTR (3.4-fold, p<0 .001) than GSNO-untreated cells, suggesting that S-nitrosylation of CHIP inhibits CFTR ubiquitination by targeting CHIP for degradation and/or inhibiting CHIP function. We believe our observations will offer a novel approach in identifying the key mechanism by which S-nitrosothiols S-nitrosylate CHIP so as to increase CFTR maturation and prolong F508del CFTR cell-surface expression. Supported by the NIH. cleavage. In order to activate NMD, expression mini-genes, which include portions of the introns flanking the exons with nonsense mutations, are being constructed in collaboration with Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics. The mini-genes include reporter systems so that, in stable cell lines expressing these mini-genes, high-throughput luminescence assays serve as the readout for changes in CFTR expression. For ASOs with effective increases in luminescence, qPCR, intracellular and plasma-membrane localized protein expression and channel conductance will be measured to evaluate their effects on CFTR. We will screen ASOs relevant to four CFTR nonsense mutations (Y122X, G542X, R553X and W1282X) in vitro to determine if they can upregulate the expression of functional CFTR. Eventually, top ASOs will be tested for CFTR upregulation in mouse models of CF. Data: Proof of concept data showed upregulation of a PTC-containing beta-globin transcript reporter after ASO treatment targeting NMD factors. siRNA treatments targeting NMD and translation termination factors showed enhanced read-through of a nmCFTR reporter system in vitro, and showed synergism with G418 treatment. Considering this positive preliminary data, ASOs are being synthesized for each of the described strategies to upregulate nonsense mutated CFTR. Conclusions: ASO modulation of PTC read-through or the NMD pathway may be able to upregulate functional protein production from CFTR with nonsense mutations. This work is supported by The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation and Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Conrath, K. 2 ; Swensen, A. 3 ; Gees, M. 2 ; Verdonck, K. 2 ; Van der Plas, S. 2 ; Andrews, M. 2 ; Hwang, T. 1 1. Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA; 2. Galapagos, Mechelen, Belgium; 3. AbbVie, Chicago, IL, USA Using YFP-based high-throughput screening assay, we identified novel compounds that can potentiate cAMP-dependent activity of low temperature-rescued F508del CFTR in CFBe41o-cells. A series of reagents was developed further, with improvement in the potency of compounds down to <10nM for a number of new analogues. These compounds were profiled in additional YFP halide assays using other class III and IV CFTR mutants. These assays were performed by transient transfection of CFTR mutant in HEK293 cells and iodide influx was measured after addition of forskolin and potentiator. All compounds tested were able to open channels from the different mutants in an efficient manner. For several class III mutants, the maximal activity of the mutant channel exceeded that of VX-770-treated channel (which was used as comparator in the assay) with iodide influx up to 250% of the maximum obtained by VX-770. Furthermore, our compounds showed higher potency compared to VX-770 in the same assay. A broad set of compounds was evaluated in parallel on low temperature-rescued F508del CFTR and G551D CFTR and a good correlation between potencies in these two assays was observed. One of the compounds (GLPG1837) was characterized in detail with the patch-clamp technique. In inside-out patches excised from CHO cells transiently expressing WT, G551D or F508del CFTR, applications of the compound resulted in reversible potentiation of the activity of the channels pre-activated with protein kinase A and ATP. For WT CFTR, the P o in the presence of 3 mM GLPG1837 is 0.78 ± 0.03 (n = 9) with open time (t o ) and closed time (t c ) constants of 1479 ± 387 ms and 292 ± 26 ms respectively, a result compatible with those seen with VX-770 (Jih KY, Hwang TC. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2013; 110:4404-9) . However, a 27.5 ± 3.0 fold increase of macroscopic G551D CFTR currents was observed (~10 fold for VX-770 in Jih and Hwang, 2013) . For F508del, the P o was dramatically increased to 0.55 ± 0.05 (n = 9) with t o = 3290 ± 819 ms and t c = 2182 ± 516 ms. In summary, further characterization of recently identified novel potentiators was performed confirming the increased channel opening observed in primary cells using patch clamp. Hwang, T. 1, 2 ; Zhang, J. 2 1. Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA; 2. Department of Biological Engineering, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA Coupling of ATP hydrolysis at CFTR's nucleotide binding domains (NBDs) and gating transitions in its transmembrane domains (TMDs) is an operational hallmark for this transporter-turned ion channel, whose defective function is responsible for cystic fibrosis. Exactly how this coupling occurs remains debated, but previous reports of a charge-neutralization mutation in CFTR's 6th transmembrane segment (R352C or Q in TM6) enable direct visualization of ATP hydrolysis-driven gating transitions due to the existence of two distinct open-channel conductance levels (smaller O 1 and larger O 2 ), and a preferred pattern of C-->O 1 -->O 2 -->C transition over C-->O 2 -->O 1 -->C, which indicates a violation of microscopic reversibility and hence demands an input of free energy likely from ATP hydrolysis. While cysteine scanning CFTR's 5th TM (TM5) with negatively charged 2-sulfonatoethyl methanethiosulfonate (MTSES − ), we also found two open-channel conductance levels for N306C/Cysless-CFTR after MTSES − modification with the same preferred gating topological pattern of C --> O 1 --> O 2 --> C. Similar phenotypes were observed with N306D-or N306E-CFTR, suggesting that introducing a negative charge at this very position confers this unique behavior. Whereas R352Q/C and N306D/E are mutations with a net subtraction of a positive charge in the internal vestibule of CFTR's pore, even with the net charge unaltered, by altering the position of endogenous positively charged side chains at R303 and R352 along TM5 and TM6 respectively, we could observe similar O 1 -O 2 states and asymmetrical gating transitions, indicating that the position of the charge in the inner vestibule also affects sub-conductance. To further understand the structural/biochemical mechanism underpinning this hydrolysis-driven O 1 to O 2 transition, we examined the effects of channel-permeant blocker SCNand channel-impermeant blocker MOPSon O 1 and O 2 states. While these two states show indistinguishable sensitivity to SCNblock, MOPSblocks the O 1 state more than it does to the O 2 states when the net charge of the inner vestibule is unchanged or increased. Unexpectedly however, when the net charge in the internal vestibule of CFTR's pore is decreased, this differential sensitivity to MOPSblock no longer exists. A two-step blocking mechanism is proposed to explain the differential responses of pre-hydrolytic and post-hydrolytic open states to MOPSblocking: MOPSfirst docks to the inner vestibule of pore before it sojourns deeper into the pore. Furthermore, we propose, based on what we know about the gating conformational changes in CFTR, that the internal vestibule is expanded during O 1 to O 2 transition so that the mutation-induced charge perturbations cause a diminished electrostatic attraction or repulsion to the MOPSfrom the internal vestibule in the O 2 state. This expansion of the internal vestibule during ATP hydrolysis also explains why the single-channel conductance of the O 2 state is higher than that of the O 1 state. Collectively, the current study not only affirms and perhaps generalizes the O 1 -O 2 phenotype, but also provides a large toolbox for future mechanistic studies of CFTR gating by ATP hydrolysis. membrane and partially restores chloride transport. Unfortunately, there are few small molecules that specifically target NBD1. Lumacaftor, which partially restores CFTR folding and trafficking, must be present during synthesis for maximal effect, suggesting that it acts by facilitating proper folding of one or more transient biosynthetic intermediates. Understanding and manipulating the cotranslational NBD1 folding pathways therefore provides a potential approach for CFTR correction. To address these challenges, we isolated ribosome nascent chain complexes (RNCs) and measured FRET between donor and acceptor fluorophores that were incorporated into NBD1 during its synthesis to define the NBD1 cotranslational folding pathway (Khushoo A, et al. Mol Cell. 2011; 41:682-92 and Kim SJ, et al. Science. 2015; 348:444-8) . These studies revealed a highly orchestrated sequential folding pathway that depends on biosynthetic machinery, translation rate, and primary sequence. To overcome low concentrations of RNCs obtained from in vitro translation systems (1-5 nM) , RNCs were immobilized on Nickel-NTA/IDA beads to increase the effective local concentration and enable quantitative fluorescence measurements via high-content microscopic imaging. This system allowed rapid assessment of nascent polypeptide folding and was scalable for high-throughput screening in 384well format. Bead imaging provided exceptional sensitivity that allowed detection of attomol quantities of protein (6 x 10 5 molecules/bead), and high degree of reproducibility (Z' score of 0.6-0.8). Quantitative imaging of immobilized RNCs allowed interrogation of (i) length-dependent structural changes of cotranslational folding intermediates at virtually any stage of synthesis, (ii) nascent protein folding in ribosome attached and released states, (iii) structural effects of disease-associated mutations, and (iv) correction of these defects by complementary genetic manipulation. Moreover, RNCs isolated from cell-free translation reactions are stable at room temperature and amenable to cryopreservation, enabling scaling efforts needed for screening consistency. These results therefore provide a novel platform to identify small molecules that interact with de novo folding intermediates as well as full-length protein, while avoiding problems associated with large-scale purification of unstable or low-yield substrates. (Supported by CFF, NIH, and ALA.) Cui, G. 1 ; Khazanov, N. 2 ; Imhoff, B. 1 ; Senderowitz, H. 2 ; McCarty, N.A. 1 1. Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA; 2. Department of Chemistry, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) Clchannel. Increasing evidence suggests that CFTR dysfunction is also a significant contributor to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). CFTR potentiators increase CFTR activity and might be a potential therapeutic strategy for COPD patients in addition to CF patients. It was reported that the approved CFTR potentiator, ivacaftor, reduces F508del-CFTR cellular stability and has multiple off-target functions necessitating the discovery of novel potentiators. We recently found that IOWH-032, OSSK-2, and OSSK-3 function as blockers and potentiators of human CFTR (hCFTR). Here, we report the identification of nearly 80 candidates from the ZINC database discovered using pharmacophore modeling analysis by removing the pore-blocking moiety of IOWH-032, OSSK-2, and OSSK-3. Moreover, we screened the candidate compounds with two electrode voltage clamp (TEVC) and found multiple compounds that potentiated without detectable block of WT-hCFTR expressed in Xenopus oocytes. The most potent compounds were further tested with inside-out macropatch recordings. The compounds potentiated WT-hCFTR from the intracellular side when the channels were activated with low concentration of protein kinase A (PKA, 6.4 U/ mL) in the presence of 1 mM MgATP. The compounds also potentiated F508del-CFTR under similar experimental conditions. Further studies will test the effects of the above compounds on hCFTR expressed in human airway epithelia in Ussing chambers. In future work, we will reiterate the pharmacophore analysis with the updated pharmacophore model to identify more high efficiency potentiators. (CFF MCCART14G0; NIH R01-DK-056481.) 27 TGF-β1 BLOCKS ΔF508-CFTR RESCUE VIA MICRORNA-145 Cihil, K.M. 1 ; Winschel, J. 1 ; Ranganathan, S. 1 ; Greene, C.M. 2 ; McKiernan, P.J. 2 ; Swiatecka-Urban, A. 1 1. Univ. of Pittsburgh School of Med., Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 2. Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland Transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1 is a modifier associated with accelerated lung disease in patients with ΔF508. Our published data demonstrate that TGF-β1 represses CFTR mRNA and prevents corrector-mediated rescue of the ΔF508-CFTR. Repression of ΔF508-CFTR may explain, in part, the limited efficacy of corrector and potentiator in recent clinical trials. Studies were conducted to elucidate TGF-β1 effectors responsible for CFTR repression in order to develop strategies to precisely eliminate the pathogenic activity. TGF-β1 controls expression of several microRNAs (miRNAs), including miRNA-145 that inhibits CFTR post-transcriptionally, acting on the miR-145 target sites in CFTR. Studies in ΔF508-homozygous primary differentiated human bronchial epithelial (CF-HBE) cells were conducted to examine whether TGF-β1 upregulates miRNA-145. First, we examined expression of miRNA-145 in CF-HBE cells after TGF-β1 treatment by qRT-PCR. TGF-β1 significantly increased miR-145 expression as a function of time (n=3 in triplicates in different CF-HBE cells; P<0.05). We observed a reciprocal decrease in CFTR mRNA (n=3 from different tissues in triplicates; P<0.05). Expression of miR-145 was completely blocked by TGF-β1 inhibitor, SB431542. Published studies demonstrate that miRNA-145 levels are increased in CF-HBE cells, compared to non-diseased controls while TGF-β1 gene polymorphisms are associated with high TGF-β1 levels. We hypothesized that if miRNA-145 expression in CF-HBE cells is regulated by TGF-β1, the miRNA-145 levels should differ between CF patients. Thus, we examined expression of miRNA-145 in CF bronchial tissues obtained at lung transplantation under an IRB-approved protocol, by in situ hybridization and compared to tissues with no known disease (negative control) or emphysema (positive control). A blinded reviewer assigned the score between 0 and 3 based on the miRNA-145 expression in the bronchial epithelium. The expression of miRNA-145 was 0 in negative controls, compared to +3 in the positive controls, and was variable at +1, +2, or +3 in the CF samples (n=3 in triplicates in each group). On-going studies examine miRNA-145 expression in CF bronchial epithelium, TGF-β1 levels in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and TGF-β1 gene polymorphisms. Next, we examined whether miRNA-145 inhibitors attenuate TGF-β1 repression of CFTR. Differentiated CF-HBE monolayers were treated with TGF-β1 and either the locked nucleic acid (LNA TM )-conjugated miRNA-145 inhibitor control (Exiqon Inc.; miRNA-145-inh-CTRL) or miRNA-145 inhibitor (miRNA-145-inh). miRNA-145-inh blocked TGF-β1-stimulated miRNA-145 expression, compared to miRNA-145-inh-CTRL and partially attenuated the TGF-β1 repression of CFTR. Next, we demonstrated that the LNA TM -conjugated miRNA-145 mimic reduced CFTR mRNA in non-diseased HBE monolayers in the absence of TGF-β1 stimulation. Taken together our data provide strong evidence that miRNA-145 is a TGF-β1 effector repressing CFTR in CF bronchial epithelium. Strategies to block CFTR repression by miRNA-145 may promote efficacy of correctors to restore the ΔF508-CFTR function in CF patients. wild-type CFTR. Primary HBE cells were treated with resveratrol or vehicle control (CTRL) for 24h. At lower concentrations (5-25 μM) , resveratrol did not affect the forskolin-stimulated, CFTR-inh172-sensitive short circuit currents (Isc) . However, at higher concentrations (50-100 μM), resveratorol inhibited the forskolin-stimulated Isc (p<0.01, N=12 from 4 different donors). Resveratrol also inhibited VX-809-rescued Isc in CF-HBE cells (p<0.05, N=9 from 3 different donors). As control, resveratrol did not affect the amiloride-sensitive Isc, irrespective of concentration. At high concentration, resveratrol inhibited CFTR protein abundance (58±4% vs. CTRL at 4h and 32±5% vs. CTRL at 24h; N=3 per group from 3 different donors); however, it had no effect on CFTR mRNA levels. To determine effects of resveratrol on CFTR protein stability we inhibited new protein synthesis with cyclohexamide. Resveratrol did not alter CFTR protein stability, indicating that it does not stimulate CFTR protein degradation. Taken together the data indicate that resveratrol inhibits CFTR Clchannel function by interfering with CFTR post-transcriptionally, in the biosynthetic pathway. Resveratrol works via several context-dependent mechanisms, including activation of class III histone deacetylase sirtuin 1 (SIRT1). The deacetylation reaction catalyzed by SIRT1 is coupled to the cleavage of a cofactor nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+). SIRT1 activity is critically dependent on the availability of cellular NAD+. Resveratrol increased NAD+ generation indicating activation of SIRT1. The specific SIRT1 inhibitor, EX-527, or the dominant negative (DN)-SIRT1 partially rescued resveratrol inhibition of CFTR protein levels in CFBE41o-cells. SIRT1 exerts its metabolic effects via inhibition of a potent inducer of protein synthesis, the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Blocking mTOR activity with rapamycin decreased CFTR protein levels, similar to resveratrol, suggesting that mTOR plays a role in the resveratrol-and SIRT1-mediated inhibition of CFTR. Current studies focus on confirming the role of mTOR in CFTR biosynthesis. Taken together our studies demonstrate a novel CFTR biosynthetic pathway and determine that the common nutritional supplement resveratrol may compromise the corrector-mediated rescue of mutant CFTR. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal genetic disease, caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. CF is characterized by a massive proinflammatory phenotype in the lung arising from profound expression of inflammatory genes, including interleukin-8 (IL-8). Long noncoding RNAs (LncRNAs) have emerged as novel regulators of gene expression, including inflammatory genes. Various diseases have been associated with the aberrant expression of LncRNAs. Here we report the role of LncRNA in the pathogenesis of CF lung disease. We find that the LncRNA nuclear enriched abundant transcript 1 (NEAT1) is aberrantly upregulated in CF cells including, IB3-1, CFPAC-1 and CFBE CF cells compared to the respective control cells. Moreover, we observe significant in vivo up-regulation of NEAT1 in CF bronchial brushings compared to normal human bronchial epithelial cells. NEAT1 has been shown to regulate the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-8 in other diseases. Consistently, we find that suppression of NEAT1 in CF lung epithelial cells leads to reduced expression of IL-8 expression. Additionally, NEAT1 is induced by p38-MAPK signaling pathway, which is activated in CF, and our results indicate that pharmacological inhibition of this pathway suppresses both NEAT1 as well as IL-8. NEAT1 has been shown to prevent the binding of a repressor protein, SFPQ (splicing factor proline/glutamine-rich) to the IL-8 promoter and thereby induce increased expression of IL-8. Interestingly, our data indicate that SFPQ is down-regulated in CF cells compared to control cells. Overexpression of SFPQ in CF cells, not only suppress IL-8 but also induces increased expression of F508del-CFTR protein. Consistently, knockdown of SFPQ in CFTR-repaired control cells leads to enhanced IL-8 mRNA expression and reduction in CFTR protein levels. In summary, elevated expression of NEAT1 and reduced expression of SFPQ in CF epithelial cells leads to transcriptional activation and hyperexpression of IL-8. Moreover, SFPQ can rescue F508del-CFTR expression in CF cells. These mechanisms are novel potential targets for CF therapy. contribute to the PM CFTR stability, including its compartmentalization in the sphingolipid (SL)-enriched lipid rafts, the formation of multiprotein complex involving ezrin and NHERF1 and in addition, many data provided by the literature show that the phosphorylation state of ezrin is, in turn, regulated by plasma membrane ceramide levels. Based on these findings, we investigated the effects of potentiators and correctors on CFTR PM microenvironment. We analysed the SL composition, the phosphorylation state of ezrin and the expression of NHERF1 in CF and non-CF bronchial epithelial cell lines, treated or not with VX-809 (corrector) and . In addition, in both cell lines we evaluated the SL pattern of lipid rafts. In both cell lines treated with VX-809 and VX-770, we observed an important reduction of phosphorylated ezrin, a reduction of the expression of NHERF1 and only modest differences in the SL pattern. Interestingly, in lipids rafts from both treated cells, we found a marked increase of all SL species, in particular ceramide, glucosylceramide and ganglioside GM3 that could be responsible for the ezrin dephosphorylation and reduction of NHERF1 expression. These preliminary results indicate that combined treatment with corrector/potentiator induces modification in lipid rafts organization in terms of proteins and lipids, that could be responsible for the limited stability of mutated rescued CFTR at PM level. The results of this study could permit the development of new therapeutical strategies for CF treatment by using SL modulators. Supported by: Italian Cystic Fibrosis Research Foundation (grant FFC # 09/2015 to AT and MA). After synthesis, F508del-CFTR is selected by molecular chaperones, retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), ubiquitinated, and targeted for ER-associated degradation (ERAD) by the cytoplasmic proteasome because it fails to achieve a transport-competent conformation. Existing small molecule F508del-CFTR correctors modestly improve maturation of the mutant protein, though they have no effect on CFTR ubiquitination as measured in vitro. Therefore, we hypothesized that combining CFTR correctors with inhibitors of protein ubiquitination would increase the pool of F508del-CF-TR protein available for correction, leading to synergistic improvements in F508del-CFTR trafficking and function. As a proof-of-principle, we discovered that the pyrazone compound PYR-41, which inhibits the ubiquitin activating enzyme (E1), decreased F508del-CFTR ubiquitination, and led to a small but significant increase in band C and in chloride currents when added in combination with VX-809 compared to treatment with VX-809 alone. Through targeted screening of structural analogs of PYR-41 and other known inhibitors of the ubiquitination machinery, we identified additional compounds that decrease the ubiquitination of CFTR as well as select model substrates. The majority of compounds fall into two classes: inhibitors of the ubiquitin activating enzyme (E1), and inhibitors of ubiquitin ligases (E3s) such as CHIP. When combined with VX-809, some of these newly identified inhibitors promote increased F508del-CFTR trafficking and protein function beyond what we observed when we combined VX-809 and PYR-41. We are continuing to screen potential inhibitors in an effort that is guided by the evolving structure-activity relationships and assisted by structural modeling of the E1 and E3 enzymes with existing inhibitors. Supported by CFF and NIH. Bikard, Y. 1 ; Litvak Jeger, J. 1 ; Suaud, L. 1 ; Rubenstein, R.C. 1, 2 1. Pulmonary, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 2. Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA ERp29 is a 29 kDa thioredoxin-homologous protein of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) that displays chaperone-like properties. Interestingly, ERp29 has only a single cysteine instead of the usual C-X-X-C thioredoxin motif. In addition to displaying chaperone-like properties at both the biophysical and cellular levels, ERp29 also has demonstrated roles in cortical neuron protection, suppressing tumorigenesis and regulating connexin 43 hemichannel biogenesis and assembly. We have previously demonstrated that ERp29 promotes CFTR biogenesis (Suaud et al. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:21239-53) , and, as the biogenesis of CFTR and ENaC share a number of features, we subsequently demonstrated that ERp29 also regulates ENaC biogenesis and functional expression (Grumbach Y, et al. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014; 307:C701-9) . In particular, these studies demonstrated that overexpression of wt ERp29 increased ENaC functional expression, most likely due to increased cleavage of cell surface ENaC, whereas overexpression of a mutant ERp29 lacking its single cysteine (C157S ERp29) decreased ENaC functional expression due to decreased ENaC cleavage at the surface. ERp29 overexpression also promoted the interaction of both ENaC and CFTR with the coat complex II (COP II) ER exit machinery, whereas C157S ERp29 overexpression decreased this interaction. These data suggested a model where ERp29 may promote ENaC cleavage during biogenesis by directing ENaC to the Golgi where it would be subject to cleavage by furin. We thus further hypothesized that ERp29's subcellular localization would be a key determinant of its regulation of ENaC and CFTR biogenesis. ERp29's C-terminal ER retention motif is KEEL, a KDEL variant that is associated with less robust ER retention. To assess if ERp29's retention at or its release from the ER are critical for its regulation of ENaC and CFTR biogenesis, we designed mutant ERp29s containing either a KDEL retention motif (ERp29 KDEL) that should be better returned to the ER from the proximal Golgi by the KDEL receptor, or a mutant where the retention motif was deleted (ERp29 ΔKEEL) that would interact less well with the KDEL receptor, and therefore potentially better escape the ER. Interestingly, ENaC functional expression was decreased by ERp29 ΔKEEL overexpression, while ERp29 KDEL did not elicit any significant effect. As already observed with wt and C157S ERp29 overexpression, β-ENaC expression at the apical surface was not changed with overexpression of ERp29 KDEL or ΔKEEL. In contrast, both ERp29 KDEL and ΔKEEL overexpression decreased CFTR functional expression. That ERp29 ΔKEEL inhibited both ENaC and CFTR functional expression suggested a role for the KDEL receptor in ENaC and CFTR biogenesis. In support of this hypothesis, our preliminary data suggest that siRNA-mediated depletion of Sec24D decreases the processing and cleavage of ENaC in the Golgi during biogenesis, as well as CFTR functional expression. Together our findings suggest a key regulatory role for ERp29's association with the KDEL receptor in the biogenesis of ENaC and CFTR. Supported by grants from the CFF. Traditional methods for primary culture of human airway epithelial cells rarely allowed more than 1-2 passages before significant loss of epithelial function. Recently developed approaches including irradiated fibroblast feeder layers and inclusion of rho-associated protein kinase inhibitor enable >6 passages (10 5 -to 10 6 -fold expansion of cell number) with good retention of epithelial function. The "gold standard" for in vitro testing of CFTR correctors and potentiators is well-differentiated primary human bronchial epithelial cells obtained from lungs transplanted from CF patients. The number of different patient samples obtained in this manner is small and the range of CFTR mutations available for study is limited. The goal of this work is to establish methods for collection, culture, and expansion of primary human nasal epithelial cells, derived from non-CF volunteers to examine intersubject variation in CFTR expression and function. Nasal brushings were obtained from 16 healthy, non-CF volunteers. Nasal cells were collected a second time (>2 months later) from 4 of the subjects. All twenty samples were expanded (to passage 2) and cryopreserved. For analysis of CFTR function and expression, cells from multiple passages were seeded onto filter supports for establishment of air/liquid interface culture. The epithelial monolayers were transferred to Ussing chambers 15-60 days after seeding, bathed with symmetrical Krebs bicarbonate ringers solution, and maintained under short-circuit conditions. Amiloride, forskolin, and inh172 were added sequentially to inhibit sodium absorption, stimulate CFTR-dependent Clsecretion, and to inhibit CFTR-dependent Clsecretion, respectively. Viable epithelial cell cultures were established from all 20 subject samples. All of the cultures seeded onto filter supports for air/liquid interface culture developed high transepithelial resistance and the mean amiloride-sensitive sodium current for 16 subjects was 83.1 ± 14.0 μA/cm 2 with a range of 3 -159 μA/cm 2 . Forskokin-stimulated and inh172-inhibited current was readily observed in all non-CF monolayers. The mean Clsecretory response (I 172 -sensitive current) for individual subjects was 12.1 ± 4 μA/cm 2 with a range of 5.7 -26.0 μA/cm 2 . The ion transport properties of cells obtained from multiple brushings of a subject were qualitatively and quantitatively similar. CFTR mRNA expression across 16 subjects varied by ~10-fold and was correlated to CFTR Clcurrent. Epithelial cells obtained by nasal brushing of non-CF volunteers are readily isolated, cultured, expanded, and cryopreserved. The isolated nasal epithelial cells can be expanded rapidly to produce >1 billion cells (>2,000 filters) within 3-4 weeks. We have previously shown that primary cultures of CF patient-derived nasal epithelial cells are a sensitive system for testing CFTR function and for evaluating small molecule CFTR-directed therapeutics. The current data identify a target level for CFTR function in non-CF subjects and demonstrate a wide range of normal CFTR expression and function that might also contribute to individual patient drug response variation among CF subjects. (Supported by the CF Foundation). Aleksandrov, L.; Cui, L.; Jensen, T.; He, L.; Aleksandrov, A.; Riordan, J.R. Biochemistry and Biophysics, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA CFTR is a highly dynamic multidomain membrane protein. Its co-translational folding culminates in correct domains assembly of a functional unit with swapping of NBDs and MSDs from opposite halves of the molecule. This CFTR functional unit must be maintained in a correctly folded state during protein purification and 3D structure analysis. For this purpose we have already generated a CFTR construct with stabilized NBDs and demonstrated that it remains functional for two weeks after purification and reconstitution. (1) With NBDs stabilized the MSDs may remain the most dynamic part of the protein after detergent disruptions of the lipid bilayer. Here we present further improvement of protein stability in a correctly folded state by spontaneous S-S bond formation between engineered Cysteines near the external ends of TM6 and TM12. Formation of this S-S bond between L333C and G1127C occurs only in the correctly folded protein and reversibly restricts the set of MSDs structural configurations to the ion pore closed states. Maintenance of correct MSD assembly in the purified protein after storage at 4 o C was evaluated by determining the degree of disulfide bond reformation after removal of the reducing agent (DTT) used to broken it. A much shorter life time was observed on the storage of the purified protein in the conditions with disulfide bond disrupted. The state of NBDs during these manipulations was monitored by ATP binding. Limited proteolysis also was used to apprise the overall assembly of the purified protein under these distinct conditions. This CFTR construct with stabilized NBDs and MSDs was able to maintain its folded state in the solubilized form for a month after purification. Reference: 1. Aleksandrov LA, et al. Protein Expr Purif. 2015; 116:159-66. (Supported by NIH and CFF) increases greater than those seen with lumacaftor. PTI corrector and lumacaftor are also additive, consistent with distinct mechanisms of action for the two correctors. Lastly, in triple combinations with PTI amplifier and PTI corrector, the chronic ivacaftor-mediated destabilization of F508del-CFTR is prevented. In Ussing chamber assays, the PTI potentiator shows comparable efficacy with ivacaftor. In HBE electrophysiology measurements, the amplifier, PTI corrector and PTI potentiator triple combination restores the activity of mutant F508del-CFTR protein to near-normal CFTR activity. In addition, the amplifier-based triple combination provides potential advantages through its ability to modulate non-F508del CFTR and by overcoming substrate limitations for correctors and potentiators. Based on the data generated in the HBE cells, the combined use of these three molecules has the potential to restore mutant CFTR function in CF patients homozygous for the F508del mutation to clinically beneficial levels. Funded in part by a Therapeutics Development Award from Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics, Inc. Turner, M. 1, 2 ; Abbott-Banner, K. 3 ; Randell, S.H. 4 ; Hanrahan, J.W. 1, 2 1. Physiology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; 2. CF Translational Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; 3. Verona Pharma plc, London, United Kingdom; 4. University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA The human cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDEs) are a family of enzymes encoded by 11 gene families (PDE1-PDE11), most of which contain several genes (eg, PDE4A, 4B, 4C, and 4D) , each with multiple splice variants. They degrade cyclic nucleotides and it has been shown that inhibiting certain PDEs can elevate intracellular cAMP levels ([cAMP] i ) and stimulate CFTR-dependent anion secretion by human airway epithelia, suggesting PDE inhibitors as a potential treatment option for cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Previous studies have focussed on the roles of PDE3, 4 and 5 in regulating CFTR activity and little is known regarding the importance of other PDE isoforms. Recently, we demonstrated that primary human bronchial epithelia (pHBE) express PDE8A mRNA at levels which are similar to those of PDE4D mRNA. We therefore examined whether PDE8 is involved in cAMP-dependent stimulation of CFTR by using a recently-described PDE8-selective inhibitor, Pfizer) . CFBE cells overexpressing wild type CFTR (CFBEwt) and pHBE cells from healthy subjects (pHBE WT) were grown as polarized monolayers and allowed to differentiate at the air-liquid interface (ALI) prior to study. Although adding the PDE8 inhibitor alone did not elevate [cAMP] i as measured using ELISA, a significant effect of the PDE8 inhibitor on [cAMP] i was observed during PDE4 inhibition and submaximal forskolin stimulation, indicating that PDE8 does contribute to cAMP metabolism in pHBE WT and CFBEwt cells. Furthermore, measurements of short-circuit current (I sc ) in CFBEwt cells mounted in Ussing chambers revealed that PDE8 inhibition increased CFTR-dependent I sc by 2.52 ± 0.21 μA cm -2 (p<0.01 vs DMSO; n=7), which is a small response compared to those produced by the PDE4 inhibitor rolipram (36.77 ± 6.58 μA cm -2 ; n=4) or dual PDE3/4 inhibitor RPL554 (49.82 ± 7.82 μA cm -2 ; n=4). Nevertheless, PF increased I sc by 1.71 ± 0.42 μA cm -2 (p<0.01 vs DMSO; n=18) in pHBE WT cells, which was comparable to the stimulations by rolipram (4.16 ± 2.51 μA cm -2 ; n=3), and RPL554 (3.37 ± 0.40 μA cm -2 ; n=7) in primary cells, and greater than those observed using the PDE3 inhibitor milrinone or PDE5 inhibitor sildenafil. Moreover, PDE8 inhibition enhanced the I sc response to rolipram and RPL554 by ~3 fold and PDE4 inhibition increased the response to PF by ~6 fold, indicating that PDE4 and PDE8 inhibitors act synergistically on CFTR-dependent secretion. Finally, we assessed the effect of inhibiting PDE8 in pHBE cells from CF patients with the R117H/F508del genotype. The PDE8 inhibitor did not stimulate I sc when added alone, however it enhanced I sc when these CF primary cells were pretreated with a submaximal concentration of forskolin. In summary, our data suggest PDE8 as a novel regulator of CFTR in wild-type and CF human airway epithelia. It has a more prominent role than PDE3 and PDE5 and inhibitors of PDE8 and PDE4 act synergistically, thus PDE8 may represent a novel therapeutic target in CF. Ran, Y. 1 ; Crum, C.M. 1 ; Yosipof, A. 2 ; Kaspi, O. 2 ; Senderowitz, H. 2 ; Thibodeau, P.H. 1 1. Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; 2. Chemistry, Bar Ilan University, Israel While the majority of cystic fibrosis patients have at least one copy of the F508del allele, a significant number of CF patients are compound heterozygotes and/or harbour two non-F508del alleles that affect protein folding, trafficking and function. Of the ~2000 sequence variants identified in CFTR to date, few have been rigorously evaluted for their effects on protein structure and function. Using the available CF/CFTR and human ABC-transporter mutation databases, we have identified and profiled a series of variants in the cytosolic domains of CFTR for their effects on CFTR protein folding and structure. By evaluating these mutation sets within the NBDs, these studies are designed (1) to inform our understanding of CFTR biosynthesis, (2) to identify the impact of reported sequence variations, and (3) to provide an experimental dataset for the development of more predictive models of CFTR mutations and their responses to treatment. Starting with the CFTR1/CFMDB mutation database, we have performed a comparative analysis of reported mutations across multiple ABC-transporter proteins to prioritize and provide confidence in rare CF-associated alleles. This scoring system ranks mutations based on the conservation of native ABC-transporter sequences and their reported variants to provide additional confidence in the identification of rare disease-associated alleles. Optimization of this method prioritizes > 80% of CF-causing CFTR2 alleles with highest confidence. Applying this computional strategy to the CFTR1 mutation database, we have identified roughly 60 missense mutations of interest in NBD1 and 35 in NBD2 for subsequent studies. This expands the CFTR2 NBD mutation sets by roughly 5-fold and allows for a more comprehensive mutation-driven analysis of NBD folding and structure and CFTR biogenesis. Using these datasets, we have generated mutation libraries to systematically study the folding and stability of the NBDs in vitro, the effects of mutations on their structure, and the folding and trafficking of full-length CFTR in cell culture. Using a combination of purified NBD protein and novel in-cell assays, we have assessed the stability of the wildtype and mutant NBD proteins and the effects of mutation on the folding and structure of the NBDs in isolation. In parallel, cell culture studies evaluated the effects of these mutations on full-length CFTR folding and trafficking. Mutations within both NBD1 and NBD2 provide comprehensive support for the hierarchical folding and assembly of CFTR domains; mutations may influence either or both the folding and structure of the NBDs locally or their assembly within the global quaternary complex of CFTR. Correction of these defects, either by known and novel second-site suppressors and small molecules, further stratifies these datasets. Using these data, we have developed computational approaches to further explore the relationships between mutations and their effects on CFTR structure and function using clustering and network analyses. These studies provide additional insight into the biosynthetic pathway of wild-type CFTR and inform our understanding of the molecular pathologies of a large number of rare CF mutations. CFTR class I and II mutations comprise a cohort of disease-associated alleles that have proven difficult to address by current therapeutic strategies. We previously described a novel approach (genome-wide yeast phenomics) to identify modifiers that rescue class II abnormalities, and high-throughput analysis revealed ribosomal protein L12 (Rpl12) as a primary target for this purpose. Rpl12 binds the 28S rRNA to form the P stalk base in the 60S subunit GTPase-associated center. The stalk interacts with many eukaryotic elongation factors (eEFs) during translation, including Rpl12 with eEF2. Our findings demonstrate siRNA-mediated knockdown of Rpl12 partially corrects functional expression of F508del CFTR and is additive or synergistic with VX-809 (lumacaftor TM ) in multiple cell models, including primary HBE codes homozygous for F508del. We next investigated mechanism(s) that underlie CFTR rescue in this setting by testing F508del second-site suppressors. In studies of HRP-tagged F508del CFTR stably expressed in Fischer rat thyroid (FRT) cells, Rpl12 inhibition displayed no additivity with R555K, a mutation that improves stability of nucleotide binding domain 1 (NBD1). In contrast, R1070W, which restores the NBD1-intracellular loop 4 interface, conferred significant increase in plasma membrane-localized F508del following Rpl12 knockdown, a finding which suggests NBD1 stabilization. Inside-out patch clamp analyses were utilized to investigate the folding integrity of rescued F508del protein, and preliminary results show that Rpl12 inhibition produces a thermostable F508del channel, compatible with pro-folding effects on mutant CFTR. Based on these observations, we tested whether additional class II defects might also be rescued, including G85E, A455E and N1303K. Rpl12 knockdown resulted in 2-3 fold increase of mature, fully-glycosylated CFTR (C-band) and improved vectoral ion transport for all three CFTR mutants, as quantified by Western analysis and short circuit current, respectively. We have suggested previously that Rpl12 suppression inhibits interaction with eEF2 to slow translation, allowing the ribosome and auxiliary proteins to achieve a more native CFTR conformation. Because other P stalk components known to assemble onto Rpl12 interact with eEF1a, the factor responsible for enzymatic delivery of aminoacylated tRNAs to the ribosome, we investigated whether Rpl12 knockdown might induce incorporation of noncognate amino acids. We show Rpl12 inhibition of G542X-and W1282X-CFTR promotes increases in full-length protein expression. Taken together, this work provides the first evidence that Rpl12 represents a novel therapeutic strategy for rescue of numerous CFTR class I and II defects. Refinement of the approach will establish the importance of ribosomal proteins during CFTR folding, and furnish new molecular targets for experimental treatment of the disease. Supported by CFF (SORSCH15R0; SORSCH13XX0) and NIH (F31HL131231; P30DK072482). In cystic fibrosis (CF), the deletion of phenylalanine at position 508 (F508del) mutation leads to the retention and degradation of CFTR (CF transmembrane conductance regulator) protein by the endoplasmic reticulum quality control (ERQC). This mechanism is composed of a series of enzymes and chaperones such as EDEM (Endoplasmic reticulum Degradation Enhancing α-Mannosidase-like) lectin variants, namely EDEM1, EDEM2 and EDEM3. It has been proposed that these lectins ensure the retrotranslocation to the cytosol of misfolded glycoproteins released from ER α1,2-mannosidase (ERManI) for the proteasomal degradation (Mast SW, and Moremen KW. Methods Enzymol. 2006; 415:31-46) . In this study, our objectives were to determine whether these lectins are involved in the trafficking defect of F508del-CFTR and to design and synthesize multivalent iminosugars to rescue this trafficking defect. Methods and Results: First, we demonstrated using Western-blot technique that our cell model, stably F508del-CFTR transfected HeLa cells, express the 3 variants EDEM1, EDEM2 and EDEM3. Moreover, using a duolink assay, we observed that the 3 lectins interact with F508del-CFTR. Next, we transfected cells with EDEM1, EDEM2 or EDEM3 specific siRNA and observed that the decrease of their expression was correlated to a decrease of their interaction with F508del-CFTR. Interestingly, we showed using iodide efflux technique a restoration of a CFTR activity in cells transfected with EDEM1 or EDEM2 siRNA but not in EDEM3 siRNA transfected cells. From these results, we investigated the effect of inhibitors of ERManI on EDEMs/F508del-CFTR interaction and on F508del-CFTR activity and revealed a corrector effect of kifunensine, swainsonine, deoxymannojirimycin (DMJ) and its N-butyl analogue N-BU DMJ. Therefore, we adapted a "click chemistry" methodology to synthesize more efficient F508del-CFTR correctors based on DMJ clusters. From screening, we observed that the trivalent-DMJ presented the best efficiency with an EC 50 of 0.8 μM. Next, we demonstrated that the trivalent-DMJ decreases by 30% the interaction of F508del-CFTR/EDEM1 or EDEM2 and by 14% with EDEM3. No effect was observed on the interaction with calnexin, HSP70 or HSP90, suggesting an EDEM-dependent mechanism of action. In parallel of these results, we confirmed the corrector effect of our corrector on human polarized bronchial epithelial cells (CFBE) using the Ussing chamber technique with a restoration of an Isc current of 20 μA/cm 2 . More interestingly, we confirmed its corrector effect on human respiratory epithelial cells freshly isolated from CF patients using the fluorescent probe oxonol. Conclusions: This work reveals for the first time the interaction of F508del-CFTR with the 3 isoforms of EDEM and suggests the involvement of both EDEM1 and EDEM2 but not EDEM3 in its retention. We identified that inhibiting ERManI corrects the trafficking defect of F508del-CFTR with an EDEM-dependent mechanism of action and we propose a new series of water-soluble and non-toxic correctors. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a lethal autosomal recessive inherited disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). A critical issue in CF is the inability of the most common CFTR mutation, deletion of the phenylalanine residue at position 508 (F508del CFTR), to achieve the native, folded state required for its export from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and traffic to the epithelial cell apical membrane. Instead, F508del CFTR protein is exclusively retained in the ER and degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome system, a process refered to as ER-associated protein degradation (ERAD). However, F508del CFTR mobilized to the plasma membrane retains substantial CFTR Clchannel function; therefore, understanding of molecular mechanisms that regulate F508del CFTR degradation during its early biogenesis is a critical step to achieve effective and selective mobilization of the mutant CFTR from the ER. Previously, our lab demonstrated that Derlin-1 promotes the efficient degradation of CFTR folding mutants including F508del CFTR. Here we report that VCP-interacting membrane protein (VIMP) is an ERAD component playing an important role in degrading the misfolded CFTR. Over-expression of VIMP reduced the steady-state levels of WT and F508del CFTR by 70% and 95%, respectively. In cycloheximide chase experiments, VIMP expression resulted in a shorter half life of F508del CFTR from 40 min to 20 min. Conversely, silencing of endogenous VIMP increased F508del CFTR expression by more than 5-fold in human airway epithelial cells. Co-immunoprecipitation and immunostaining revealed that VIMP interacts with F508del CFTR and co-localizes with the mutant protein in the ER region of airway epithelial cells. Since Derlin-1 has been reported as a key regulator of CFTR degradation, we asked whether VIMP plays any role in Derlin-1 mediated CFTR degradation. Double silence experiment was performed. Compared with silence of Derlin-1 only, the double silence of Derlin-1 and VIMP did not lead to further increase in F508del CFTR expression, suggesting that VIMP and Derlin-1 utilize the same pathway for the CFTR degradation. It has been shown that ubiquitin E3 ligases, RNF5 and CHIP, degrade F508delCFTR. To investigate if VIMP is associated with a specific ubiquitin E3 ligase we performed co-immunoprecipitation and found VIMP interacts with RNF5, but not CHIP in CFBE-41o-ΔF cells. Overexpression of both VIMP and RNF5 virtually eliminated F508del CFTR expression and VIMP-mediated mutant CFTR degradation was abolished by RNF5 dominate negative, indicating VIMP recruits RNF5 to degrade the mutant protein. In CFBE-41o-ΔF cells, silencing VIMP expression increased VX-809-mediated F508delCFTR maturation and its function. Taken together, our data demonstrate that VIMP recruits RNF5 to degrade misfolded F508del CFTR. Downregulation of VIMP enhancing the ability of VX-809 to rescue F508delCFTR provides a novel therapeutic strategy to synergistically restore the mutant protein function. Funding supported by CFF (SUN15XX0) and NHLBI/NIH (HL096800 and HL133162). Reduced CFTR activity has been observed in primary CF cells upon prolonged treatment with lumacaftor + ivacaftor, which may decrease clinical benefit. Flatley Discovery Lab is developing a novel CFTR corrector, FDL169, and potentiator, FDL176, which in combination show greater in-vitro activity following chronic treatment compared to the lumacaftor + ivacaftor combination. Method and Results: F508del-CFTR cell surface expression and functional activity were determined in cells treated with FDL169 + FDL176 or lumacaftor + ivacaftor. CFBE41o-cells transfected with the overexpressing F508del CFTR plasmid were used for Western blot experiments and cells with HRP-tagged F508del CFTR plasmids were used for HRP cell surface assays. Homozygous F508del CF human bronchial cells (hBE) from lung transplants were used to determine functional activity in electrophysiological assays and for Western blot experiments. In Western blot experiments and HRP assays, FDL169 increased CFTR maturation and cell surface expression in homozygous F508del-CFBE cells. In the equivalent current functional assay, homozygous F508del-CFTR hBE cells corrected with FDL169 (3 μM) and acutely exposed to FDL176 (1 μM) had a similar maximum chloride current response to cells treated with lumacaftor (3 μM) and acute ivacaftor (1 μM) . In HRP assays, a 60% reduction in CFTR surface expression was observed following 24 hours of exposure of CFBE cells to lumacaftor (3 μM) + ivacaftor (2 μM), whereas a 30% reduction was seen in CFBE cells exposed to FDL169 (3 μM) and FDL176 (2 μM) (see Figure) . Chronic exposure (24 hours) to FDL169 (3 μM) and FDL176 (1 μM) reduced the chloride current by 15% compared to exposure to both compounds under acute conditions; 24-hour exposure of cells to lumacaftor (3 μM) and ivacaftor (1 μM) decreased the chloride current by 55%. Conclusion: FDL169 promotes CFTR maturation and cell surface expression with equivalent potency and efficacy to lumacaftor. Upon chronic treatment of primary F508del-CFTR hBE cells, the combination of CFTR corrector FDL169 and CFTR potentiator FDL176 had greater in vitro efficacy than the lumacaftor and ivacaftor combination. As a substrate for endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD), the mechanisms of misfolding and disposal of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) remain incompletely understood. Steps in ERAD usually include the recognition, ubiquitin modification and proteasomal proteolysis of misfolded proteins. Due to its complex and protracted folding and domain assembly requirements, much of WT CFTR and ~100% of the common folding mutant, F508del CFTR, are degraded in most expression systems. Protein ubiquitylation is controlled by the opposing activities of ubiquitin ligases and deubiquitylating enzymes. The balance of ubiquitylation and deubiquitylation influences a variety of cellular processes. We have previously shown that, as opposed to WT CFTR, F508del CFTR is preferentially modified by small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) proteins, and that the small heat shock protein (sHsp), Hsp27, selectively facilitates F508del CFTR degradation by forming SUMO-2/3 conjugated poly-SUMO chains, followed by F508del ubiquitylation by the SUMOtargeted ubiquitin ligase (STUbL), RNF4. (1) We used protein-binding arrays to screen for protein interactions with mono-SUMO-1 or poly-SU-MO-2/3 chains, to identify targets for SUMO-mediated regulation of CFTR biogenesis/degradation. In protein-binding arrays, several deubiquitylating enzymes were identified, an example is USP28. Another ubiquitin-specific protease, USP11, has recently been reported to be capable of deubiquitylating SUMO-2/3-poly-chains that had been ubiquitylated by the SUMOchain targeted ubiquitin ligase, RNF4, thus counteracting the action of RNF4 in the DNA damage response. (2) To understand the roles of USP11 and USP28 in regulating CFTR biogenesis and degradation, we determined whether these proteins function similarly, to stabilize SUMO-modified CFTR via deubiquitylation. Indeed, the overexpression of either USP11 or USP28 elevated the levels of CFTR expression in both CFBE cells and HEK293 cells. In addition, USP11 also markedly reduced the ubiquitylation of F508del CFTR, whereas catalytically inactive mutant USP11 (C318A) eliminated its ability to augment CFTR expression. Our results also revealed that the USP28-induced CFTR expression increase occurred through USP28-induced reduction in SUMO-2/3 modification of F508del CFTR, which reduces RNF4 targeting to CFTR at the substrate level. These results suggest that these members of the ubiquitin-specific protease family, USP11 and USP28, can rescue SUMO-2/3 modified mutant CFTR from degradation via deubiquitylation, and may do so via different mechanisms. References: 1. Ahner A, et al. Mol Biol Cell. 2013; 24:74-84 2. Hendriks IA, et al. J Biol Chem. 2015; 290:15526-37 (Supported by grants from NIDDK (R01 068196 and P30 072506) and from CF Foundation Therapeutics.) Introduction: Restoring F508del CFTR function through modulator treatment has demonstrated clinical efficacy in CF patients homozygous for F508del CFTR, though less than that with ivacaftor in CF patients with gating mutations. Identifying factors limiting response to CFTR modulators is a pressing need, such as reports of potential negative interactions between VX-770 and VX-809 on F508del CFTR in vitro (Veit G, et al. Sci Transl Med. 2014; 6:246ra97) . In the TRAFFIC/TRANSPORT trials, a minority of patients not receiving β-agonists (n=54) demonstrated increased effects of Orkambi on FEV 1 (Wainright CE, et al. NEJM. 2015; 373:220-31) . We have demonstrated that chronic exposure of wt-and F508del CFTR human lower airway epithelial cells (LAECs) with the short-acting β-agonist (SABA) albuterol was sufficient to reduce subsequent CFTR activation by 30-70%. Further, we have shown this SABA-induced CFTR dysfunction is linked to reduced cellular cAMP production. We hypothesized that chronic SABA and long-acting β-agonist (LABA) use impairs adenylyl cyclase activity and reduces CFTR function in airway epithelia. Methods: CFBE41ocells stably transduced with wt-or F508del-CFTR were grown on permeable supports to confluence and studied in Ussing chambers where CFTR function was quantified as short-circuit current (Isc). F508del CFBEs were pre-treated for 72 h with VX-809 (3μM) prior to study. Results: As previously demonstrated, 72 h of continuous exposure of wt-CFTR CFBEs to SABA (albuterol, 10μM) reduced CFTR-dependent Isc by 34% (control 78 vs SABA 52.8 μA/cm 2 ; p=0.01) when stimulated with forskolin/IBMX (10/100μM). When stimulated with cell-permeant 8-Br-cAMP, however, SABA pretreatment did not impair CFTR activation (control 51.6 vs SABA 56.4 μA/cm 2 , p=0.67) . Similarly, 72 h of continuous SABA exposure in VX-809-corrected F508del CFBEs reduced CFTR-dependent Isc by 37% (control 5.2 vs SABA 3.2 μA/cm 2 ; p=0.01) when stimulated with forskolin/IBMX, while stimulation with 8-Br-cAMP overcame SABA-induced CFTR dysfunction (control 3.6 vs SABA 3.0 μA/ cm 2 ; p=0.36). In preliminary data from VX809-corrected F508del CFBEs, 72 h of intermittent SABA exposure (10μM twice daily) did not reduce CFTR-dependent Isc (control 2.0 vs iSABA 2.0 μA/cm 2 ; p=0.92). Chronic, intermittent LABA exposure (formoterol, 1μM twice daily), however, did reduce CFTR-dependent Isc by 30% (control 2.0 vs iLABA 1.4 μA/cm 2 ; p=0.002). Conclusions: Chronic airway epithelial stimulation with albuterol leads to impaired CFTR function due to reduced cAMP generation in response to direct adenylyl cyclase stimulation (forskolin). This impairment is overcome with application of exogenous cAMP, directly implicating downregulation of adenylyl cyclase function with chronic SABA use. Early data suggests that twice-daily SABA dosing is insufficient to replicate this effect, but intermittent dosing of LABA similarly impairs CFTR activation. Ongoing work evaluating intermittent SABA and LABA exposure is in process, including transcriptomic evaluation of the effects of chronic β-agonist exposure. Given the near-ubiquitous use of β-agonists in patients with CF, this potential negative interaction is an essential issue for study. Supported by CFFT. The discovery of small molecules that correct folding defects caused by F508del CFTR and enhance cell surface function has become a priority in cystic fibrosis translational research. Increasing the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-localized pool of mutant CFTR available for pharmacologic correction could offer substantial benefits to compound-heterozygous individuals carrying only one copy of F508del. Misfolded F508del CFTR undergoes premature degradation initiated by ubiquitination, followed by targeting to the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery and proteasome. E3 ubiquitin ligases such as gp78 play an important role during the routing of CFTR to degradation, and novel compounds that block CFTR ubiquitination could augment the mutant protein pool acted upon by small molecule correctors. Using the Ubipro TM discovery platform, we conducted a primary FRET-based screen of a library containing >220,000 small molecules, and isolated compounds that attenuate ubiquitination catalyzed by gp78. A total of 334 specific gp78 inhibitors were then selected and verified for blockade of recombinant human CFTR NBD2 ubiquitination, and prioritized by their ability to promote surface expression of F508del CFTR-HRP in epithelial cell models. Nineteen compounds were next evaluated for effects on F508del CFTR Band B accumulation and rescue by lumacaftor. Two of these, termed P80142 and P80152, increased F508del CFTR in both HEK293 and FRT cells, and synergistically enhanced chloride transport when combined with lumacaftor. P80142 also increased steady-state levels of other mutant CFTRs such as W1282X (class I defect) and E92K (class II), with synergistic rescue again observed following lumacaftor. These results indicate that inhibition of a specific ubiquitin E3 ligase can augment the reparable pool of F508del CFTR, and point to a novel drug-development strategy. In addition, demonstration that a gp78 modulator improves F508del, W1282X, and E92K stability indicates a shared degradative pathway that could be targeted to enhance correction among patients carrying these alleles. The compounds described are currently being evaluated in primary airway epithelial cells as experimental therapeutics for a broad spectrum of individuals with cystic fibrosis. (Funded by NIH and CFF.) shift changes upon VX-809 binding provides evidence of allosteric coupling between the direct binding site and the NBD1:CL4 interface, which is tightly linked to the NBD dimerization surface. While previous studies have shown an important role for VX-809 in modulating the conformation of MSD1 (Ren HY, et al. Mol Biol Cell. 2013; 24:3016-24) this additional mode of VX-809 binding provides insight into conformational dynamics and allostery within CFTR. We interpret these data to propose that the action of VX-809 on NBD1 and the subsequent destabilization of helices H8 and H9 contributes to the mechanism of action by allosterically stabilizing NBD1:CL4 interactions and releasing RE/R region from the core of NBD1, thereby promoting NBD dimerization and stabilizing full-length CFTR. This work was funded by grants from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics and Cystic Fibrosis Canada. Nonsense mutations represent 10% of cystic fibrosis (CF)-causing alleles. (1) These mutations result in the premature degradation of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) mRNA that would code for translation of a truncated protein. (2) Current therapeutic strategies have focused on suppression of the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) pathway and/or inducing readthrough of the premature termination codon (PTC) by altering the translation machinery allowing for misincorporation of an amino acid at the site of the nonsense codon. (3) We investigated the tolerance of missense amino acids at G542, W1282, and R553 by assessing CFTR maturation and function. Variants that matured were tested for function using transepithelial resistance and single-channel activity assays. The data indicate that not all amino acid substitutions are tolerated at each position, as highly evolutionarily conserved positions require specific amino acids for correct folding and/or function. Thus, readthrough agents may have the most clinical benefit when applied to CFTR containing nonsense codons at positions that are not highly conserved. To overcome these obstacles, we utilized a modified tRNA that can recognize PTCs and mediate incorporation of a desired amino acid. We have demonstrated improvement of CFTR function in cells harboring G542X and R553X mutations. Formulations for the delivery of the modified tRNA by nanoparticles were developed by screening a small library of nanoparticles with unique functional groups capable of RNA delivery using a cell line containing an endogenous nonsense mutation. Off-target effects of the modified tRNAs on natural stop codons were experimentally assessed. Positive formulations were assessed in primary HBEs derived from CF patient explants that harbor nonsense mutations in CFTR. The data suggest that nanoparticle delivery of modified tRNA can improve CFTR function in primary HBEs and may offer an alternative therapeutic approach for the treatment of CF caused by nonsense mutations. Despite a critical role in CFTR processing and gating, direct detection of nucleotide binding domain (NBD) heterodimerization remains elusive. Channel gating studies indicate that the channel rapidly cycles between open and closed conformations, suggesting that the NBD dimers form with a very modest affinity. Dimerization of the isolated NBDs is likely further compromised by disruption of critical interactions between the intracellular loops (ICLs) and the Q-loops of the NBDs. We have previously shown that the Q-loop of the isolated NBD1 domain exchanges between dimer-favorable and dimer-unfavorable positions and that deletion of F508 (F508del) pushes the Q-loop to the dimer-incompatible position (Chong PA, et al. J Biol Chem. 2015; 290:22862-78) . Similarly, in the isolated NBD2 the sidechain of the eponymous Q-loop glutamine, Q1291, flips roughly 180 degrees to hydrogen bond with S1359 (Zhao X, et al. Ped Pulmonol. 2008; 43(S31):205) . This rotates the alpha-helical subdomain out of a dimer-compatible position. Mutation of S1359 to disrupt this hydrogen bond allows the alpha-helical subdomain to move partway back to a dimer-compatible position. While both of these Q-loop problems may be mitigated by interactions with the ICLs, they nonetheless probably contribute energetically to the modest affinity of the NBD dimers in fulllength CFTR. We are using computational and bioinformatics tools to predict mutations that will stabilize the NBDs and NBD1-NBD2 dimers with the dual goal of understanding impediments to NBD heterodimerization in WT and F508del CFTR and obtaining stable NBD dimers for biophysical studies. We have successfully stabilized NBD2 for biophysical studies, including CD and NMR studies. NBD heterodimerization will be assayed using thermal melt assays, NMR chemical shift perturbation experiments and NMR paramagnetic relaxation enhancement (PRE), techniques that we have successfully used to confirm NBD1 homodimerization. We will probe the effects of disease-causing mutations, the C-terminal tail of CFTR, the regulatory insertion and the R region (both phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated) on NBD heterodimers. We will provide a progress update on these experiments. This work will also enable studies of small molecule modulators targeted at the NBD dimer interface. Supported by grants from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics and Cystic Fibrosis Canada. expressing F508del CFTR were exposed to CSE. Hydrogen peroxide has been shown previously to stimulate CFTR function and cigarette smoke contains oxidants, therefore we explored the role of reactive oxygen species by pre-treating cells with N-acetylcysteine (NAC). The stimulation by CSE was strongly attenuated after 10 mM NAC, consistent with the involvement of reactive oxygen species. The acute secretory response to CSE may be a host defense mechanism that clears noxious stimuli from the epithelial surface. Support: Canadian Institutes of Health Research. In our efforts to understand how sodium 4-phenylbutyrate (4PBA) corrects trafficking of F508del-CFTR in cystic fibrosis (CF) epithelia, we recently demonstrated that a transient increase in Hsp70 expression in CF epithelial cells treated with 4PBA occurs through a process mediated by Elp2 (elongator protein 2, (1)). Elp2 is a scaffold protein required for activation of STAT3; Elp2 is also a component of the Elongator complex that appears to regulate a number of cellular processes including RNA polymerase II activity. As other data suggest that increased Hsp70 expression promotes F508del trafficking (2) , we hypothesized that increased Elp2 expression will promote F508del trafficking to the plasma membrane. To test this hypothesis, we performed Ussing chamber experiments in CFBE41o-F508del cells that overexpressed Elp2, or CFBE41o-wt CFTR cells that were transfected with Elp2 specific siRNA. Overexpression of Elp2 increased CFTR-mediated currents in CFBE41o-F508del cells, whereas depletion of Elp2 by siRNA in CFBE410-wt CFTR cells decreased CFTR-mediated currents. Previously, we have shown that increased Hsp70 expression promotes interaction of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) with the Sec24D cargo recognition component of coat complex II (COP II) machinery, which carries protein cargo from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi. In co-immunoprecipitation experiments in IB3-1 CF bronchiolar epithelial cells, overexpression of Elp2 increased Hsp70 expression and promoted the interaction of F508del-CFTR and Sec24D. These data provide a mechanistic link of increased Elp2 expression leading to increased Hsp70 expression and, as a result, improved F508del trafficking. We also interrogated the mechanism by which Elp2, which is usually found in the cytoplasm, is able to translocate into the nucleus and regulate Hsp70 expression. Elp2 does not itself have a nuclear localization signal (NLS), and therefore likely needs a "carrier" to move to the nucleus. We initially hypothesized that STAT3 and more specifically activated phospho-STAT3, serves as the Elp2 "carrier," as we previously demonstrated that STAT3 translocated to the nucleus after 4PBA treatment (1) . We tested this hypothesis using luciferase reporter assays in IB3-1 cells, where luciferase expression was controlled by the human Hsp70 promoter. However, overexpression of STAT3 and mutant STAT3 constructs, including a constitutively active STAT3 (STAT-3C), and STAT3 tyrosine or serine phosphorylation-deficient mutants (STAT3-Y705F and STAT3-S727A) suggested that the phosphorylation state of STAT3 does not regulate Elp2 translocation to the nucleus and Hsp70 expression in response to 4PBA. Instead overexpression of other elongator complex proteins, namely Elp1 and Elp3, in similar luciferease reporter assays suggested that Elp3, which contains a NLS, may carry Elp2 into the nucleus in response to 4PBA. Together these data suggest a mechanism by which 4PBA can improve F508del trafficking, and potentially identify new targets for intervention. References: 1. Suaud L, et al. J Biol Chem. 2011; 286:45083-92 2. Choo-Kang LR, Zeitlin PL. AJP Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001; 281:L58-68 Supported by R01 DK58046. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a chronic lethal genetic disease, which is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). Previously, we constructed a variant of nucleotide-binding domain 1 (hNBD1) from human CFTR that maintains native-like stability when a visible fluorophore is covalently bound at a single labeling site, and fluorescence self-quenching (FSQ) of this labeled domain upon unfolding/aggregation provides a robust and accurate high-throughput assay for compounds that offset the temperaturedepending folding defect in both isolated F508del-hNBD1 and full-length human F508del-CFTR. Using this FSQ assay, we demonstrated that hNBD1 binds several common nucleotide analogs ~3-fold tighter than ATP --the physiological ligand of hNBD1. We demonstrated that these analogs preserve the gating function of F508del-hCFTR channels even at 37° C while ATP cannot. We have extended this approach to establish an equivalent FSQ assay for compounds that stabilize the hNBD1-hNBD2 in interface in human CFTR. This assay exploits a recent breakthrough that produced a monodisperse and stable construct of nucleotide-binding domain 2 (hNBD2) from human CFTR. We covalently linked this hNBD2 construct to the hNBD1 construct used in FSQ assay via an 80-residue-long inter-NBD linker from EttA (Energy-dependent translation throttle A) (1, 2) , a bacterial protein with two tandem NBDs. Biophysical and structural studies have shown this linker motif from EttA is compatible with functional ATP-mediated heterodimerization of its tandem NBDs, which are homologous to those in CFTR. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) shows that hNBD1 and hNBD2 unfold independently in the resulting hNBD1-(EttA-linker)-hNBD2 fusion protein construct, which is monodisperse at high concentration after purification. We will use the FSQ assay in this construct to screen for compounds that promote tight nucleotide-dependent thermodynamic interaction between hNBD1 and hNBD2. Such compounds would facilitate high-resolution structural studies of the functional hNBD1-hNBD2 interface in human CFTR, which stabilizes the open state of active CFTR channels. Based on the results described above for nucleotide analogs stabilizing isolated hNBD1, such compounds stabilizing the hNBD1-hNBD2 interface could also potentially represent lead compounds for drugs correcting the temperature-sensitive folding defect in full-length human F508del-CFTR. References: 1. Boël G, et al. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014; 21(2) : 143-51. 2. Chen B, et al. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2014; 21(2) :152-9. Dis. 2011;2:e141). Here, we provide evidence that BAG3 participates in the chaperone-assisted degradation of CFTR by autophagy. Our initial set of experiments demonstrated an increase in CFTR band B upon siRNA-mediated BAG3 knockdown in F508del-CFBE cells, suggesting a block of mutant CFTR autophagic degradation. This experiment allowed us to further investigate what role BAG3 and small heat shock proteins play in misfolded CFTR degradation. It is established that the interaction of small heat shock proteins (sHsps), Hsp22 and Hsp20, with BAG3 occurs though its IPV motifs, which are present in hydrophobic grooves (b4 and b8 strand) of the protein (Fuchs M, et al. Biochem J. 2009; 425:245-55) . In the present study, we examined the interaction of Hsp27 with BAG3, since it is possible that Hsp27 interacts with BAG3 similarly to other sHsps. We previously showed that Hsp27 initiates the degradation of F508del CFTR by promoting modification of the mutant by SUMO-2/3 (Ahner A, et al. Mol Biol Cell. 2013; 24:74-84) . We show here that overexpressed Hsp22 also reduces the CFTR band B. In view of the recognized interaction of Hsp22 with the BAG3-mediated degradation pathways, it was of interest to evaluate similarities/differences between these pathways for sHsp-mediated degradation. We demonstrated the selective recognition of CFTR band B by BAG3 in direct protein-protein interaction studies, and a BAG3 point mutation, R480A, which blocks its interaction with HSP70, also abolishes BAG3's interaction with immature CFTR. These findings suggest that BAG3 recognition of CFTR requires the cooperation of HSP70. The involvement of the aggresome marker, LC3, in this pathway provided further evidence for selective targeting of BAG3 towards aggresomal structures: aggregates of CFTR were found to be co-localized with LC3 positive compartments in COS7 cells and LC3 was also co-precipitated with CFTR in immunoprecipitation assays. Altogether, these data suggest that the selective disposal of misfolded CFTR can be mediated by aggresome-lysosomal degradation, assisted by chaperonemediated autophagy, and for CFTR, they identify a role for sHsps in cooperating with BAG3 in this process. [Supported by grants from the NIDDK (R01 068196) and from the CFFT (FRIZZE05X0)]. The most prevalent CF-causing mutation, F508del, impairs not only the first nucleotide-binding domain (NBD1) folding but also interdomain assembly of CFTR, resulting in defective trafficking of the protein to the plasma membrane in cells. The Phe508 residue lies at an interface of NBD1 and the intracellular cytoplasmic loop 4 (ICL4) in transmembrane domain 2 (TMD2). A recent NMR study indicated that the ICL4 interaction induces an allosterically coupled conformational change in NBD1 at the region of Phe508 and the C-terminal region including beta-stands S9/10 and helices H8/9. Interestingly, S9/10 and H8/9 are located distal to Phe508 in the NBD1 structure, and are critical for CFTR processing and channel activity. Histidine at residue 620 (His620) in S9 is well conserved across species. In human CFTR, amino acid substitution at His620 has been reported for four missense variants, H620Q, H620P, H620L, and H620R. When exogenously expressed in HEK293 cells, three of these, H620P, H620L, and H620R disrupted CFTR maturation. In contrast, H620Q CFTR was properly processed with a similar level of maturation as wild-type CFTR. All four His620 variants in cis with F508del failed to mature. Thus, H620Q is neither a processing defect mutation nor a second-site suppressor. In contrast, H620Q blocked the ability of a small-molecule corrector C18 (a VX-809 analog) to rescue F508del CFTR. Because a mutation R1070W in ICL4 perturbs the NBD1-ICL4 contact without any direct alteration of NBD1 folding, we examined its effect on CFTR biogenesis in cis with H620Q. H620Q/ R1070W CFTR further decreased a level of maturation and C18 response compared to that of R1070W CFTR. These results imply that H620Q exerts a mild folding defect on NBD1, which aggravates the biosynthetic defects of F508del CFTR. Enhancement of NBD1 folding by deletion of RI (RIdel) or restoration of NBD1-ICL4 contact by introduction of a second-site suppressor R1070W partially rescued F508del/H620Q CFTR, but H620Q still lowered the level of C18-rescue compared to F508del CFTR. Our results indicate that allosteric folding effects of the NBD1 C-terminal region play a role in C18-mediated correction of F508del CFTR. C18 response to the allosteric folding defects of F508del CFTR can be partially restored by combination of the two separate folding mechanisms -improvement of NBD1 folding and facilitation of NBD1-TMD2 interdomain assembly. Supported by NIH and CFF. Deletion of phenylalanine 508 (F508del) in CFTR, a Class II folding and maturation mutant, is the most common mutation associated with CF. As a result of the F508del mutation, the vast majority of CFTR protein is degraded through the proteasome, resulting in a deficiency of functional CFTR protein at the plasma membrane, and ultimately a deficiency in chloride ion flux. Even with pharmacological rescue through corrector treatment, the F508del CFTR protein at the cell surface still shows defective channel opening. This deficiency can be overcome by the addition of potentiator molecules. Building on Proteostasis Therapeutics, Inc.'s CFTR amplifiers, a high throughput phenotypic screen was performed in search of novel F508del-CFTR modulators which efficiently synergize with the amplifier class of modulators. Due to the reported in vitro destabilization of CFTR protein by chronic exposure to certain potentiators, chronic dosing conditions were employed in the phenotypic screen to discover potentiator-like molecules that lack this destabilization effect. To enrich for compounds that confer potentiator activity, forskolin-mediated activation of the F508del-CFTR was performed without the acute addition of potentiator molecules. Under this paradigm, several distinct chemical series of novel CFTR modulators were discovered. While these modulators were selected for their lack of destabilization activity with chronic exposure, one new class of compounds also demonstrates activity in HBEs with acute exposure. The series do not exhibit amplifier activity in that they do not increase the level of immature CFTR protein. The compounds do not increase the level of mature CFTR protein, consistent with a lack of corrector activity. Further investigation of these modulators shows that on F508del-CFTR, they work cooperatively with known correctors and amplifiers, but do not synergize with known potentiators. Lastly, in CFTR-mediated chloride transport assays, these compounds demonstrate a mutation-dependent efficacy that is distinct from that of known CFTR potentiators. In summary, we report a new class of CFTR modulators with characteristics distinct from known potentiators, correctors and amplifiers, and may represent a novel mechanism for improving mutant CFTR function. Objectives: It is generally recognized that both wild-type and F508del CFTR proteins undergo posttranslational modifications such as ubiquitination and sumoylation at multiple lysines in the protein and in one or more subcellular locations. Previously our group showed that ubiquitination of lysine residues in wild-type CFTR regulates its stability and subcellular localization. Here, we hypothesize that compared to wild-type CFTR, lysine residues in F508del CFTR are differentially modified during posttranslational modification and interference with posttranslational modification of lysine residues in F508del CFTR stabilizes the protein and regulates subcellular localization. Methods: IB3-1 cells were transfected with F508del CFTR cDNA in which site-directed mutation of lysine to arginine was performed to prevent posttranslational modifications. Whole cell and plasma membrane expression levels of F508del CFTR and the K-to-R mutants in F508del CFTR were measured. Posttranslational modifications such as ubiquitination and sumoylation were analyzed by immunoblot assay. Previously we showed that posttranslational modification of specific lysine residues regulates the stability and subcellular localization of wild-type CFTR. However, these same lysine residues in F508del CFTR do not play a similar role except for the N-tail lysine residues. Instead, we found different lysine residues in F508del CFTR are involved in stabilizing protein expression. Using a combination of steady-state immunoblot analysis and surface biotinylation, we demonstrated that lysine-to-arginine mutations in the N-tail, NBD1 and R domain led to mature CFTR production along with increased sumoylation. Conclusions: N-tail, NBD1 and R domain lysine resides in F508del CFTR are critical for degradation of the CFTR protein and interference with posttranslational modification of the lysine-to-arginine mutation allows mature CFTR production. Ubiquitination and/or sumoylation are likely involved in biosynthesis and further processing. Understanding the posttranslational modifications of CFTR that stabilize its production may lead to improved protein-sparing therapeutic strategies. Yang, Z. 1 ; An, J. 1 ; Zhou, Q. 1 ; Khazanov, N. 2 ; Hildebrandt, E. 3 ; Dai, Q. 1 ; Ding, H. 1 ; Macon, K.J. 1 ; He, L. 4 ; Riordan, J.R. 4 ; DeLucas, L.J. 1 ; Kappes, J.C. 1 ; Urbatsch, I.L. 3 ; Senderowitz, H. 2 ; Brouillette, C. 1 1. University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; Israel; 3. Texas Tech Univ Health Sciences Ctr, Lubbock, TX, USA; 4. UNC at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Several second-site mutations in NBD1, alone or in combinations, thermally stabilize the isolated NBD1 and promote maturation and trafficking of full-length (FL) F508del-CFTR (He, et al. J Mol Biol. 2015; 16:106-20) . Importantly, their corrective effect was also shown to positively correlate with the extent of NBD1 thermal stabilization. The latter observation enables NBD1 stabilization to predict F508del-CFTR correction. A subset of these mutations was also shown to increase exogenous expression levels of WT CFTR, as well as the purification yield and thermostability of reconstituted channel activity (Aleksandrov, et al. Protein Expr Purif. 2015; 116:159-66) . The immediate goal of the present study was to extend the previous work to identify additional NBD1 mutations that maximally stabilize the isolated domain when combined; some of these, like M470V, are newly reported NBD1 stabilizers. Using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), the unfolding temperatures (T m ) of 14 single stabilizing mutants in NBD1 (aa 387-646, Δ405-436) were determined. Various combinations of two, three or more were also introduced into NBD1 for T m determination. More than 20 such NBD1 mutants were studied and it was found that the stabilizing effect was generally additive; exceptions were noted and will be presented. The largest stabilizing effect was observed with a combination of 6 top-ranked single mutations, which increased the NBD1 T m by close to 30 o C over WT NBD1 (aa 387-646). A smaller subset was also introduced into the F508del-NBD1 and some differences in the extent of stabilization were found. To correlate T m -shifts with structural parameters, and ultimately predict T m -shifts of new mutations, the 14 single mutations were modeled into the existing NBD1 structure (PDB ID: 2PZE) of the NBD1 construct studied here. Changes in solvent-accessible surface area were calculated, and the free energy of stabilization (ΔΔG) was computed using several different ΔΔG prediction algorithms. Favorable qualitative and quantitative correlations between the predicted ΔΔG and the actual T m -shifts were found, setting the basis for predicting the effect of future mutations on NBD1 stability. Such predictions could be potentially extended to fulllength CFTR. Selected combo-mutations were introduced in human WT FL CFTR, expressed in mammalian cells, purified and their unfolding temperatures determined. A positive correlation between NBD1 T m and CFTR T m was observed and results will be shown. A detailed analysis of the thermal unfolding will be presented in another poster (Urbatsch et al.) . This work is supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics. Mutations in abca4 cause Stargardt macular degeneration, which results from failure to recycle all-trans retinal invariably ending in legal blindness. There is no known cure. We tested the hypothesis, using cells stably expressing common disease-causing mutants, A1038V, R1108C (previously published) and R1129C in NBD1 and G1961E in NBD2, that correctors that rescue ΔF508-CFTR (ABCC7) also rescue abca4 mutations because of the high degree of homology between their NBDs. was applied (10 and 20 μM) for 16h in HEK293 stably expressing the mutants. R1108C and R1129C express 60% less protein than wt ABCA4. Large increases in mutant protein levels occurred in cells grown at 27 o C demonstrating that both mutants just like many CFTR trafficking mutants are temperature sensitive. When translation was inhibited, mutant proteins rapidly disappeared, whereas wt-ABCA4 remained stable. The data indicate that these mutant ABCA4 proteins are unstable and rapidly degraded similar to ΔF508-CFTR. The corrector VX-809 increased total protein and cell surface expression of R1108C and R1129C by 1.5 and 2 fold, respectively. In contrast the effect of VX-809 on A1038V and G1961E was greater increasing the steady-state protein levels by between 2 and 3 fold with the greatest response noted with A1038V. Following treatment with VX-809 both mutants can now be observed at the plasma membrane as assessed by surface biotinylation suggesting that trafficking to the plasma membrane is restored. Interestingly, VX-809, considered to be a class 1 corrector, was effective in increasing the steady-state protein levels of ABCA4 mutants whereas the combination of class 1 and 2 was not additive compared to VX-809 alone. This is in contrast to ΔF508-CFTR where combination of Class 1 and 2 correctors is most effective. Our studies show that Hsp 27 and 40 are important for the rescue of ΔF508-CFTR but not the ABCA4 mutants where VX-809 may rescue the mutant protein by a direct effect on the folding. Conclusion: Correctors for ΔF508-CFTR will rescue ABCA4 mutants selected within regions of greatest similarity. Our results suggest that VX-809 may even be more effective in increasing the trafficking of the ABCA4 mutants than it is for ΔF508-CFTR. Because VX-809 is already in clinical trials for CF, consideration should be given to the possibility that it affects other ABC transporter proteins with motifs in common with CFTR. Boinot, C. 1 ; Sabirzhanova, I. 1 ; Guggino, W.B. 2 ; Cebotaru, L. 1 1. Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins U, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2. Department of Physiology, Johns Hopkins U, Baltimore, MD, USA In CF, approximately 90% of the patients have at least one copy of the F508del mutation and over 70% are homozygous for this mutation. Severe CF is also caused by class I mutations including premature stop codon mutations, which are found on 5-10% of CF chromosomes. Thus, to achieve the goal of treating everyone, therapies have to be developed to restore function to patients with early stop codons. Several studies performing systemic administration of gentamicin showed that aminoglycosides can partially rescue CFTR activity in CF subjects with Class 1 mutations. The purpose of the present work was to investigate two common disease-associated stop mutations, R1162X (stop codon between M12 and NBD2) and W1282X (NDB2) and how these mutations can be rescued by treating cells with small molecule correctors. We used the polarized airway epithelial cells CFBE41o-stably expressing either a CFTR-R1162X or -W1282X cDNA created in our lab using the Flip-in technology. Both cell lines display small steady-state amounts of truncated, R1162X and W1282X proteins. Surprisingly, when treated with the proteasome inhibitor, MG132, steady-state levels of R1162X and W1282X increase by 20-and 6-fold respectively. Smaller but significant increases were noted when HDAC6 was inhibited by tubacin. Application of a combination of small molecule correctors C4 + 18 increased steadystate levels of truncated protein of R1162X and W1282X between 2-3 fold. These data indicate that truncated protein is produced but rapidly degraded. The combination of C4+18 plus gentamicin (800 μg/mL for 24h) produced 5-and 10-fold increases in CFTR protein respectively. To determine whether the chloride transport function of R1162X-and W1282X CFTR can be restored, we performed short circuit current experiments. CFTR-dependent chloride currents increased approximately 2-fold for both mutants when treated with the combination of C4+18. The currents also increased about 2-fold for both mutants when treated with gentamicin. Treating cells with C4+18 plus gentamicin did not increase CFTR-generated currents in cells containing the R1162X mutation compared to each treatment alone. In contrast C4+18 plus gentamicin treatment did increase the CFTR-dependent currents in cells containing the W1282X mutant by 3-fold compared to 2-fold when each treatment was applied individually. Conclusion: We provide evidence that R1162X and W1282X can generate truncated proteins that are rapidly degraded. Combinations of correctors can increase the levels of the mutant proteins. Our functional studies showed that gentamicin plus correctors may be the preferred treatment particularly for the R1282X mutant. Although these stop mutations can be rescued to some extent with a combination of corrector plus a read-through agent, the better option may be achieved using AAV vectors that contain CFTR; which generate chloride currents on their own. Hazlett, H.F. 1 ; Czum, J. 2 ; Nymon, A. 1 ; Dorman, D. 2 ; Griffin, M. 2 ; Ashare, A. 1, 2 1. Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, USA; 2. Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH, USA Background: Lung function decline in CF can be largely attributed to irreversible destruction of the muscle and elastic tissue of the airways, a process referred to as bronchiectasis. Reports clearly demonstrate that bronchiectasis develops in localized regions of the lung, and that these specific regions of bronchiectasis worsen over time. Recent reports demonstrate that bronchiectasis develops preferentially in the upper lobes of the lung, despite mucus plugging occurring more diffusely. We have previously shown that there is stability of the microbiome in different regions of the lung despite clear differences in regional lung damage. These findings suggest that local host factors promote lung damage, but the actual mechanism underlying regional heterogeneity of disease remains unclear Methods: Fifteen CF subjects underwent CT scan and bronchoscopy. A CT scan was obtained with calculation of lobar Brody scores. After local anesthesia, a bronchoscope was inserted transorally and passed through the vocal cords. Regional bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples were obtained from the lobes with the highest, lowest, and median Brody scores and primary alveolar macrophages (AMs) were isolated from each region. Regional inflammatory cytokines were measured by ELISA. Results: We found that the majority of patients had the highest Brody scores in the RUL and that inflammatory cytokine levels correlated significantly with Brody score. The regional differences in Brody score were due in large part to regional differences in bronchiectasis and peribronchial wall thickening. AMs from the region with the highest Brody score demonstrated a more robust inflammatory response to hypoxia compared to AMs from regions with the lowest Brody score. There was no regional difference in the inflammatory response of AMs to Pseudomonas. RNA-Seq analyses of regional AMs demonstrated upregulation of genes regulating glycolysis in AMs isolated from regions with the highest Brody scores. Using a Seahorse XF, we confirmed that AMs from regions with a higher Brody score are more glycolytic compared to AMs from regions with a lower Brody score. In addition, treating AMs from high Brody score regions with a glycolysis blocker resulted in decreased inflammation following hypoxia. Conclusions: Our study is the first to demonstrate that there are metabolic differences between AMs isolated from different regions of the CF lung. These data suggest that glycolysis/OX PHOS balance may be an important regulator of hypoxia-induced inflammation by AMs. This balance alters the pool of reducing equivalents, which directly affects the epigenetic landscape of the cells, thereby altering their potential metabolic responses. Funding: This work was funded by the NIH (R01HL122372) and CFF (ASHARE15A0) to AA. Saavedra, M.T. 1, 2 ; Rysavy, N. 1 ; Caceres, S. 1 ; Nick, J.A. 1, 2 1. National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; 2. University of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA Background: Treatment outcomes in acute pulmonary exacerbations (APE) of cystic fibrosis (CF) are suboptimal, as 25% of treated subjects do not return to baseline pulmonary function following therapy. There is a growing appreciation that dysregulated T cell responses, specifically Th17 and Th2-skewed cytokine profiles, may contribute to pathogenic CF inflammation, but their role at the time of APE is incompletely understood. Effector memory CD4+ T cells are a useful model system of CF immune signatures because they are abundant in lung tissue, traffic to the peripheral circulation, and should manifest a recall program, in response to stimulation, which allows the host to efficiently clear pathogens. We hypothesized that, at the time of pulmonary exacerbations, differences in memory cell effector functions, including cytokine production and proliferation, would stratify subjects who exacerbate frequently (>2/year), versus those who require intravenous antibiotics infrequently (<1/year). Methods: CF subjects diagnosed with acute exacerbation, by a faculty member of the Colorado Adult CF Program, underwent phlebotomy at the diagnosis and then at the end of APE treatment, under an IRB-approved protocol. Patients were designated into "frequent (>2/year)" versus "infrequent (<1/year) " exacerbator categories. CD4+ memory T cells were isolated and phenotypes were determined by flow cytometry. Ex vivo stimulation of isolated memory T cells via the T cell receptor (CD3/CD28 agonistic antibodies) allowed global activation of previously programmed effector functions and were compared to memory T cell responses in normal and healthy CF subjects. Results: The ability of memory CD4+ T cells from all CF subjects (baseline, before, and after exacerbation) to express lfng, when maximally activated through the T cell receptor (TCR), falls short of normal healthy controls (p=0.03, n= 30 CF, n=10 normals). Frequent exacerbator memory CD4+ T cells manifest a phenotype characterized by low proliferation of lfng-expressing memory cells, increases rather than decreases in IL-17 expression by APE end, and more frequent dual expression of IL-17 and IL-4 (p<0.05). All CD4+ memory cells drawn before and after exacerbation treatment demonstrated marked expression of T cell exhaustion marker, PD-1, compared to normal controls (p < 0.05). Conclusions: The CD4+ memory T cell subset as measured from peripheral blood has a distinct signature at the time of APE and can be linked to disease course. We have characterized that CD4+ effector memory T cells in CF hosts with pulmonary exacerbations demonstrate an immunosuppressive phenotype, with evidence of T cell exhaustion, reduced proliferation, and reduced interferon gamma, suggestive of defective bacterial killing. Since these immunologic signatures are directly measurable from peripheral blood, they represent a potentially useful tool to stratifying patient responses at the time of exacerbation treatment, serving not only as a biomarker of host defense but also as a target for future immune modulation. Stanton, B.A. 1 ; Barnaby, R. 1 ; Berwin, B. 1 ; Ashare, A. 1, 2 1. Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA; 2. Department of Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA Macrophages play a key role in clearing P. aeruginosa lung infections. In response to bacterial infection macrophages migrate into the lungs where they phagocytose and kill bacteria and release several cytokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10 and TNF-α. However, in CF, macrophages exhibit a reduced ability to kill P. aeruginosa and manifest increased cytokine secretion compared to non-CF macrophages. Several reports have demonstrated that CFTR is expressed in macrophages and the bactericidal activity of macrophages is defective in CF. Moreover, inhibition of wt-CFTR by CFTRinh-172 reduces phagocytosis by macrophages. By contrast, VX-325 increases the export of F508del-CFTR from the endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane and F508del-CFTR-dependent Clcurrents in CF monocytes. We have shown that VX-325 increases the abundance of F508del-CFTR in immune cell phagolysosomes, which play an important role in bactericidal activity. Recent clinical trials with VX-809 + VX-770 (Orkambi) in CF patients homozygous for the F508del mutation have demonstrated a small increase in FEV1 and a decrease in the rate of exacerbations. However there are no studies on the effect of VX-809 + VX-770 on the ability of macrophages to phagocytose and kill P. aeruginosa. Thus, the goal of this study was to examine the ability of VX-809 + VX-770 to stimulate CF macrophages to phagocytose and kill P. aeruginosa and to reduce cytokine secretion. Stable subjects with CF (n = 5, F508del/F508del) donated blood and isolated monocytes were differentiated into macrophages (monocyte-derived macrophages, MDM) by incubation with M-CSF (100 ng/mL) for 7 days. VX-809 (3 μM) increased the phagocytic uptake of P. aeruginosa compared to vehicle-treated MDMs by 84%. Although the combination of VX-809 (3 μM) + VX-770 (5 μM) also increased the phagocytic uptake of P. aeruginosa, compared to vehicle-treated MDMs, the increase was 36%, a value significantly less than with VX-809 alone. VX-809 alone increased the ability of MDMs to kill phagocytosed P. aeruginosa by 110% compared to vehicle-treated MDMs. VX-809 + VX-770 also increased the ability of MDMs to kill P. aeruginosa compared to vehicle-treated MDMs by 27%, a value less than the increase with VX-809 alone. Preliminary studies also revealed that VX-809 decreased P. aeruginosa-stimulated secretion of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10 and TNF-α by MDMs by 54%, 28%, 24%, 60%, and 32%, respectively. Moreover, the combination of VX-809 + VX-770 was more effective in decreasing P. aeruginosa-stimulated cytokine secretion by MDMs than VX-809 alone. VX-809 + VX-770 reduced P. aeruginosa-stimulated IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10 and TNF-α secretion by 60%, 99%, 67%, 99% and 97%, respectively. In conclusion, VX-809 increased the ability of CF MDMs to phagocytose and kill P. aeruginosa, while VX-770 reduced the efficacy of VX-809 to stimulate the ability of CF MDMs to phagocytose and kill P. aeruginosa. By contrast, VX-770 increased the ability of VX-809 to reduce P. aeruginosa-stimulated cytokine secretion by CF MDMs. Supported by the NIH (RO1-HL-074175 and P20-RR018787) and the CFF (STANTO15R0 and STANTO16G0 to BAS and ASHARE15A0 to AA). Browne, N. 1 ; White, M. 1 ; Pohl, K. 1 ; Gargoum, F.S. 1 ; Hawkins, P. 2 ; Qayyum, S. 2 ; Reeves, E. 1 ; McElvaney, N.G. 1 1. Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons Ireland, Dublin, Beaumont, Ireland; 2. Beaumont Hospital, Dublin 9, Ireland Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an inherited genetic condition resulting in a higher frequency of airway infections causing irreversible damage to the lung and eventual respiratory failure. Increasing evidence suggests that CF neutrophils possess an intrinsic and pathological inflammatory defect. Hydrogen voltage-gated channel 1 (HVCN-1) is a transmembrane proton channel that regulates pH changes across the cell membrane. In neutrophils, HVCN-1 is central to the sustained activity of the NADPH oxidase upon uptake of a pathogen. Murine HVCN-1 knockout studies have demonstrated an increased phagosomal pH, significantly higher primary granule degranulation and reduced killing by neutrophils. As CF neutrophils demonstrate increased primary granule degranulation we hypothesised that CF cells may have reduced abundance of HVCN-1. The aim of this work was to investigate whether HVCN-1 was altered on the surface of CF neutrophils resulting in altered pH and phagosomal killing. Methods: Ethical approval was obtained from Beaumont Hospital. Patients with CF homozygous for the ΔF508 mutation or heterozygous for the G551D mutation and receiving ivacaftor were recruited to this study. Neutrophil phagosomes were isolated postphagocytosis of IgG-opsonised latex particles, followed by nitrogen cavitation and subsequent sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation. Western blot and FACs analysis for HVCN-1 was performed on isolated CF ΔF508, G551D, non-CF bronchiectasis (NCFB) and healthy control (HC) neutrophils. Altered phagosomal pH was assessed postphagocytosis of Staphylococcus aureus labelled with the pHsensitive fluorescence probe BCECF. Statistical analysis was carried out using GraphPad Prism 5. Results: Protein abundance of HVCN-1 was significantly reduced in whole cell lysates of CF ΔF508 neutrophils compared to HC (p<0.05) and NCFB (p<0.05) (n=5). HVCN-1 abundance on neutrophil membranes was significantly decreased in CF ΔF508 neutrophils at rest and poststimulation (TNF-alpha/IL-8) compared to HC (p<0.05) and NCFB (p<0.001) (n=4). The pH of CF ΔF508 cytosols was lower than HC neutrophil cytosols (p<0.05) and inhibition of HVCN-1 by ZnCl 2 reduced cytosolic pH compared to nontreated HC cells (p<0.05). The CF phagosome demonstrated a significantly higher pH compared to HC phagosomes (p<0.05, n=3). Significantly higher levels of the primary granule marker myeloperoxidase (MPO) (p<0.05) was observed in CF ΔF508 phagosomes compared to HC (n=13). The inhibition of HC neutrophil HVCN-1 with ZnCl 2 increased primary granule degranulation compared to untreated cells. The abundance of HVCN-1 protein both intracellularly (p<0.05) and on the neutrophil membrane (p<0.001) was restored to HC levels in G551D patients receiving ivacaftor. Similarly, intraphagosomal primary degranulation was significantly reduced in G551D patients receiving ivacaftor therapy. Conclusion: Reduced abundance of HVCN-1 in CF neutrophils generates an alkaline phagosomal pH, unphysiologically low for adequate ROS production, ultimately leading to impaired bacterial killing in CF. Day, B.J. 1 ; Min, E. 1 ; Nichols, D. 2 ; Chandler, J.D. 3 1. Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; 2. Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA; 3. Div Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA Introduction: Chronic bacterial lung infections are a hallmark of cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease and are difficult to eradicate. Chronic lung infections result in chronic lung inflammation which creates a paradox where most anti-inflammatory therapies can suppress an already inadequate lung immune response. Recently we have reported that the lung's innate immune response can generate hypothiocyanite that can be selectively metabolized by the host's thioredoxin reductase (metazoan type) but not the pathogen's thioredoxin reductase (non-metazoan type). In fact, bacterial thioredoxin reductase is readily inhibited by hypothiocyanite. Thioredoxin reductase is a critical enzyme that supplies an essential cofactor, thioredoxin, for ribonucleotide reductase which converts RNA to DNA. The potential importance of this pathway in the CF lung is that thiocyanate, the substrate for hypothiocyanate formation, is a small anion that is transported by CFTR and is dysfunctional in CF. Methods: We investigated the ability of hypothiocyanate to inactivate bacterial thioredoxin reductase. Purified E. coli thioredoxin reductase was incubated with increasing concentrations of hypothiocyanite and assayed for its ability to inhibit thioredoxin reduction. In addition, we looked at hypothiocyanite's ability to oxidize cysteine residues on bacterial thioredoxin reductase and compared it to another common oxidant, hydrogen peroxide. Studies were performed using dimedone labeling with Western blot analysis. Thioredoxin reductase activity was measured spectrophotometrically following NADPH utilization. Bacterial viability was assessed using standard dilution methodology to determine colony forming units (CFUs) . Bacterial lysates were assessed for their ability to metabolize hypothiocyanite by measuring loss of hypothiocyanite over time using spectrophotometry and HPLC with electrochemical detection assays. Results: Hypothiocyanite readily inactivated bacterial thioredoxin reductase and was much more potent at oxidizing cysteine residues on bacterial thioredoxin reductase than hydrogen peroxide. We next looked at a number of CF pathogens and the ability of their lysates to metabolize hypothiocyanate versus resistance to killing. A number of multidrug-resistant pathogen isolates, including Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, were unable to metabolize hypothiocyanite and were readily eradicated by it with MIC 50s that ranged from 1-300 μg/mL. Conclusions: We now report that hypothiocyanite can oxidatively inactivate bacterial thioredoxin reductase, a critical enzyme that supplies an essential cofactor, thioredoxin, for ribonucleotide reductase which converts RNA to DNA. Hypothiocyanite inactivation of bacterial thioredoxin reductase may be an important mechanism by which it kills and suppresses bacteria in the in the CF lung. Therapeutic utilization of the hypothiocyanate pathway versus the hypochlorite pathway could result in less lung inflammation and improved bacterial clearance in the CF lung. Supported by CFF research grant DAY16GO. Birket, S. 1 ; Tuggle, K.L. 2 ; Oden, A. 1 ; Fernandez, C.M. 1 ; Chu, K.K. 3 ; Tearney, G.J. 3 ; Fanucchi, M.V. 1 ; Sorscher, E.J. 1 ; Rowe, S.M. 1 1. Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; 2. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA; 3. Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA Background: The cystic fibrosis (CF) lung is characterized by delayed mucociliary clearance (MCC), although the mechanisms are not well understood. Recently, our center has developed the first CFTR -/rat, which recapitulates some features highly relevant to CF lung disease. Importantly, rat airways express submucosal glands that develop over time, a feature that is distinct from murine models and more accurately represents human physiology. Delayed mucociliary transport develops as the rat ages, allowing for a detailed investigation into the mechanisms underlying abnormal mucus transport. Methods: The tracheae of CF and WT rats at various ages and stages of airway development were imaged using micro-Optical Coherence Tomography (μOCT) to evaluate parameters including airway surface liquid (ASL) and periciliary layer (PCL) depths, and mucociliary transport (MCT) and viscosity, simultaneously and in situ under physiologic conditions. Mucus viscosity was measured in situ by particle tracking microrheology. Solutions of NaHCO 3 , TRIS, or HEPES at pH of 6. 5 -8.5 (in 0.5 increments) were added to the apical surface, with MCT measurements taken 20 minutes after addition. Results: CF rats at 4 weeks old, prior to development of submucosal glands, exhibit reduced ASL (8.2 ± 0.8 μm CF vs. 13.4 ± 2.1 μm control, p<0.05) and PCL (4.5 ± 0.3 μm CF vs. 5.4 ± 0.3 μm control, p<0.05) depths, as well as hyperacidic airway surface pH (6.42 ± 0.12 CF vs 7.25 ± 0.05 WT, p<0.001) but surprisingly demonstrate normal MCT rates. By 6 months of age, CF rats express mature airway submucosal glands and exhibit spontaneous mucus plugging of enlarged airway submucosal glands in the large airways, accompanied by delayed MCT rates (0.3 ± 0.1 mm/min CF vs. 0.7 ± 0.1 mm/min control, p<0.05) and hyperviscous mucus (74.15 cP CF vs 3.28 cP WT). Reduced pH and MCT rates in the older rats were secondary to deficient bicarbonate transport, and could be recapitulated in WT tracheae with bicarbonate-free buffers. Abnormal MCT was corrected in CF rat tracheae with addition of bicarbonate at increasing concentrations directly to the airway surface (peak effect 3.36 ± 0.9 mm/min with 115mM NaHCO 3 , vs 0.09 ± 0.02 mm/min baseline, p<0.001). While restoration of MCT was achieved with bicarbonate at any pH from 6.5 to 8.5, addition of TRIS only corrected MCT rates at pH of 7.5. HEPES addition had no effect at any pH, likely due to its zwitterionic, versus ionic, nature. Conclusions: A mucus transport defect is present and progressive in CF rats, and is associated with gland development and hyperviscous mucus. These effects were dependent on bicarbonate and recapitulated with its removal. Depleted ASL and hyperacidic pH are present prior to development of the MCT defect, suggesting that they may be necessary but not sufficient to delay mucus transport. While MCT rates in CF trachea were corrected by addition of bicarbonate, the pH range at which NaHCO 3 was effective, and lack of effect of pH correction by a zwitterionic buffer, suggests that the mucus transport defect is dependent on normal ion exchange. Fischer, A.J. 1 ; Shanrock, C.R. 1 ; Yahr, T.L. 2 ; Welsh, M. 3 1. Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; 2. Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; 3. Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA Objectives: In cystic fibrosis (CF), initial respiratory infections are associated with subsequent development of bronchiectasis. Because mucus release from submucosal glands (SMG) is defective in CF pigs, bacterial attachment to SMG mucus could facilitate airway infection. Our aim was to visualize where CF pathogens bind in newborn pig tracheas to determine whether the site of binding influences subsequent clearance by mucociliary transport. We hypothesized that Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa preferentially bind SMG-derived mucus strands, and that bacterial clearance worsens in CF after stimulation of SMG secretion by methacholine (MCH) . Because mucus integrity depends on disulfide bonds, these strands may be targeted by reducing agents. Methods: Tracheas were obtained from newborn CF or non-CF pigs and submerged in HEPES buffered saline at pH 7. S. aureus (strain SA43) or P. aeruginosa (strain PAK) expressing GFP were added at 10 6 CFU/ mL. We visualized GFP-labeled bacteria by confocal microscopy and used red fluorescent nanospheres to identify mucus strands. Imaris software was used to track instantaneous speeds of individual bacteria. We tested the susceptibility of mucus strands to mucolytic agents by counting mucus strands before and after adding 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) or 0.6 mg/mL DNAse. Results: In the first hour of infection, GFP signal from S. aureus and P. aeruginosa was enriched on SMG-derived mucus strands. P. aeruginosa (but not S. aureus) was also visualized less frequently as 10-20 μm aggregates bound to the mucosal surface. Mucus strands were heterogeneous: some strands selectively bound nanospheres but others selectively bound GFP-P. aeruginosa. We observed no differences between CF and non-CF tracheas in binding or transport of bacteria in the absence of MCH. Following in vivo MCH, CF tracheas transported GFP-S. aureus less effectively than non-CF littermate controls (fraction of time in motion for CF 0.48 ± 0.02, non-CF 0.82 ± 0.10, P = 0.03). S. aureus alone did not alter mucociliary transport of tantalum microdisks in CF or non-CF pigs. Mucus strands binding S. aureus and P. aeruginosa were susceptible to 1 mM DTT (For S. aureus, 33 ± 5 strands per cm before treatment, 1.3 ± 0.7 strands per cm after, P < 0.001). DTT at this concentration did not show bactericidal effects. DNAse had no effect on the number of bacteria-laden mucus strands. Mucosal surface aggregations of P. aeruginosa were resistant to both DTT and DNAse. Conclusions: S. aureus and P. aeruginosa adhere primarily to SMG-derived mucus during initial infection. Because the release of mucus strands is defective in CF, clearance of these bacteria may also be impaired. Mucus strands were heterogeneous in their binding specificities, but were uniformly susceptible to the reducing agent DTT. Reducing agents may help release mucus strands and facilitate clearance of bacteria following initial infection. However, P. aeruginosa that adhere to the mucosal surface were resistant to clearance, even after treatment with DTT, suggesting binding to receptors that are not released by reducing agent. Abraham, W.M. 1 ; Sabater, J.R. 1 ; McClain, D. 1 ; Ball, R.W. 1 ; Cohen, I. 2 ; Milla, C. 3 1. Research, Mount Sinai Med Center, Miami Beach, FL, USA; 2. Silurian Pharmaceuticals, Oakland, CA, USA; 3. Pediatrics, Stanford Univ, Stanford, CA, USA Introduction: A key pathophysiological endpoint of CFTR dysfunction is airway mucus stasis. This slowed mucus clearance becomes more problematic in CF exacerbations because of the additive effect of an increased airway load of free neutrophil elastase. To model these events we used aerosol challenge with CFTRinh-172 (CFTRinh) alone or in combination with aerosol human neutrophil elastase (HNE) and studied the effects of these challenges on whole lung mucociliary clearance (MCC) and its surrogate marker tracheal mucus velocity (TMV) in sheep. We showed that CFTRinh and CFTRinh+HNE slowed TMV for 12-24h and then showed that clinically used agents, eg, hypertonic saline or albuterol, failed to reverse this dysfunction (Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015; 50(S41) :300). Here, we attempt to reverse the TMV impairment produced by aerosol challenge with CFTRinh or CFTRinh+HNE with aerosol ivacaftor and compared these results to those obtained with aerosol brevenal, a natural product produced by K. brevis. Methods: This study was conducted with the approval of the Mount Sinai Medical Center Animal Research Committee. The methods for measuring TMV and for aerosol nebulization have been published (Chest. 2005; 128:3743-9; Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013; 304:L746-56) . The therapeutic efficacy of ivacaftor (10,1, or 0.1 mg/3mL) or brevenal (100 breaths of 50 μg/mL= 87.5 μg) was assessed by treating the sheep with the agents 4h after CFTRinh challenge (10 mg/3mL) with or without the addition of HNE (2380mU/3mL) and the recovery of TMV after treatment determined. Results: All data are reported as mean percent of baseline. Challenge with CFTRinh slowed TMV to 54% by 4h and TMV remained low (59%) up to 12h. Challenging with HNE 2h after CFTRinh did not further reduce the fall in TMV at 4h (52%) but increased the time course of the response to 24h (56%). Ivacaftor given at 4h reversed the CFTRinh-induced slowing of TMV with 10, 1, and 0.1 mg returning TMV to 90% of baseline between 5-12h . Brevenal given at 4h gave similar results. When HNE was added to the CFTRinh challenge, 10 and 1 mg ivacaftor reversed TMV to a maximum of 97% and 90%, respectively, but the 0.1 mg dose failed to correct the mucociliary dysfunction (TMV remained at 58%). Brevenal, however, corrected the TMV to 91% of baseline at 5h and TMV remained at this level through 24h. Conclusion: These data may be the first showing that aerosolized ivacaftor is effective in reversing CFTRinh or CFTRinh+HNE induced slowing of mucus transport in vivo and are consistent with reports that ovine CFTR responds to ivacaftor in vitro. Aerosolized brevenal also corrects these dysfunctions, but in the CFTRinh+HNE challenge model does so at a 10-fold lower dose. Since inflammation can impede CFTR restoring therapies, the increased potency of brevenal may be a function of its anti-inflammatory properties (AJRCCM. 2012;185:A2773). These results suggest that brevenal alone, or as an adjunct to current therapies, may be beneficial for the treatment of airway diseases characterized by CFTR dysfunction. Background: While loss of CFTR-mediated airway hydration is hypothesized to be the initiating defect in CF airways disease, recent animal studies suggest that reduced bacterial killing and subsequent airway infection may precede changes in mucus hydration. To assess which factors are associated with the earliest stages of airways disease in humans, we measured mucin and metabolomic profiles of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) relative to measures of infection, inflammation, and structural lung disease in preschool subjects enrolled in AREST CF. Methods: Separate aliquots of BALF were obtained from the right middle lobe and lingula of 40 preschool subjects with CF (80 lobes) enrolled in AREST CF (age 3.5±2.0 years) and 14 non-CF disease controls (28 lobes) (age 3.2±1.8 years). Mucin concentrations were measured by refractometry, staining intensities of MUC5AC and MUC5B by immunohistochemistry, and rheological characteristics by microbead rheology. Findings were analyzed relative to BALF inflammatory markers, cultures, and metabolomic profiling in 24 subjects (48 lobes) as well as lobe-specific CT scores for bronchial wall thickening or bronchiectasis as markers of structural lung disease. Results: Airway mucus concentrations were higher in preschool subjects with CF relative to non-CF disease controls μg/mL vs. CF 182 [101-629] μg/mL, p<0.01), even in the subset without airway infection (58 [30-97] μg/mL vs. 155 μg/mL, p<0.002). Mucus concentrations correlated with inflammatory markers including IL-8 (r=0.60, p<0.001) and % neutrophils (r=0.64, p<0.001) as well as metabolomic biomarkers of airway hypoxia (lactate r=0.69, p<0.001) and oxidative stress (oxidized glutathione r=0.57, p<0.001). Staining intensities of both MUC5AC (1.2 [0.6-1.7] vs. 4.6 [1.4-9 .7], p<0.01) and MUC5B (4.2 [3.1-7.7] vs. 13.0 [4.5-28] , p<0.01) were elevated in CF, suggesting that mucins arose from both airway epithelia and glands. Mucus concentrations were most highly elevated in lobes with bronchial wall thickening as an early marker of disease (p<0.001 by ANOVA), and changes in structural lung disease scores were associated with altered mucus rheology. Conclusions: Airway mucus is elevated in preschool children with CF and associated with inflammatory markers, changes in the airway milieu, and early structural lung disease. These findings appeared independent of airways infection and are most consistent with airway mucus dehydration as the initiating defect in human CF airways disease. Thus, airway dehydration remains a high value target for therapeutic intervention in the youngest children with CF. Several members of the SLC26A family of anion transporters associate with CFTR, forming complexes in which CFTR and SLC26A function are reciprocally regulated. This regulation involves interactions between the STAS domain of SLC26A members and the R domain of CFTR. In eukaryotes, the SLC26A STAS domain is composed of two highly conserved regions bracketing a unique intervening sequence (IVS); the specific region(s) involved in the interaction with CFTR have not been identified. SLC26A9, found in several epithelia including the airways, functions as a constitutively active chloride channel that, when co-expressed with wt CFTR, results in a synergistic increase in the response to cAMP stimulation. This synergism is indicative of reciprocal regulation, and SLC26A9's ability to co-immunoprecipitate wt CFTR suggests they physically interact (J Gen Physiol 2009, 133:421) . Using the Eukaryotic Linear Motif resource (Nucleic Acids Res 2016, 44(D1) :D294), we scanned the STAS domain of SLC26A9 for potential regulatory motifs, and found a motif-rich region in its IVS. A search of NCBI's single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) database identified several SNPs within the IVS. One SNP (rs149474736, S594F), located in a predicted CK2 phosphorylation site also predicted to be part of a 14-3-3 binding motif, led to striking changes. When expressed alone in HEK293 cells, SLC26A9-S594F produced a whole-cell constitutive chloride current of 191 ± 41 pA (n=4), similar to native SLC26A9. When SLC26A9-S594F was co-expressed with wt CFTR, however, constitutive chloride current increased more than 6-fold to 1274 ± 214 pA (n=17), significantly greater than that observed with co-expression of native SLC26A9 and wt CFTR (195 ± 30 pA, n=9) . Cell surface biotinylation did not show increased SLC26A9-S594F protein at the plasma membrane relative to wt SLC26A9, suggesting that the increased activity resulted from the interaction of this variant with CFTR. Because S594 is a predicted phosphorylation site, we also tested alanine and aspartic acid substitutions. Interestingly, SLC26A9-S594A produced the opposite pattern seen with S594F, with high constitutive activity when expressed alone that was substantially diminished with co-expression of wt CFTR. SLC26A9-S594D did not alter constitutive activity. To confirm that SLC26A9-S594X was the source of constitutive chloride currents observed when co-expressed with CFTR, constructs containing the STAS domain alone of SLC26A9 (aa 520 -791, STAS(A9)±S594X) were tested. STAS(A9) is non-conductive, but it still interacts with wt CFTR to facilitate the synergistic response to cAMP stimulation. Comparison of whole-cell chloride currents measured in HEK293 co-expressing wt CFTR and STAS(A9)-S594X with currents measured in HEK293 co-expressing full length SLC26A9-S594X and wt CFTR confirmed that SLC26A9-S594X was the source of constitutive chloride current. Thus, amino acid substitutions at S594 in the IVS of SLC26A9 led to modifications in its constitutive activity that were enhanced (S594F) or suppressed (S594A) by co-expression with wt CFTR. These results suggest that this motif-rich region of the IVS of SLC26A9 may be involved in reciprocal regulation with CFTR. Supported by BERTRA12G0, CFF R883-CR02, & NIH P30 DK072506. Dong, Q. 1 ; Shah, V.S. 2, 3 ; Tang, X. 5 ; Welsh, M. 4, 2, 5 ; Randak, C.O. 1 1. Stead Family Department of Pediatric, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; 2. Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; 3. Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; 4. Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; 5. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Iowa City, IA, USA Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is a Cland HCO 3 channel. CF lung disease develops when defective CFTR HCO 3 channel activity results in airway surface liquid (ASL) acidification. A lower ASL pH causes host defense defects: it reduces the ability of the ASL to kill bacteria and increases ASL viscosity thereby impairing mucociliary clearance (1) (2) (3) . CFTR function is coupled to either ATPase (ATP→ADP + P i ) or adenylate kinase (ATP + AMP↔2 ADP) activity (4, 5) . The role of adenylate kinase-dependent channel activity in vivo is not known. We showed that mutating CFTR amino acid Q1291 disrupts adenylate kinase-but not ATPase-dependent channel activity (6). This gave us an unprecedented opportunity to test the hypothesis that normal CFTR function in airway epithelia relies on its adenylate kinase activity. We found that both wild-type and the adenylate kinase-deficient mutant Q1291F CFTR localized to the apical membrane of airway epithelia and were expressed in similar amounts. CFTR-dependent Cland HCO 3 short circuit current and transepithelial conductance were significantly lower in epithelia expressing Q1291F CFTR. We obtained similar findings with CFTR carrying the CF-associated mutation Q1291H (7). Airway epithelia from CF donors had a lower ASL pH compared to non-CF. Expression of wild-type CFTR corrected the ASL pH but expression of Q1291F CFTR did not. Likewise, wild-type CFTR but not Q1291F CFTR expression increased the ability of the epithelia to kill bacteria and reduced ASL viscosity (the experiments were performed as in Ref. 1) . Thus, the results indicate that the physiologic role of CFTR in airway epithelia relies on its adenylate kinase activity. References: 1. Shah VS, et al. Airway acidification initiates host defense abnormalities in cystic fibrosis mice. Science. 2016; 351:503-7. 2. Pezzulo AA, et al. Reduced airway surface pH impairs bacterial killing in the porcine cystic fibrosis lung. Nature. 2012; 487:109-13. 3. Tang XX, et al. J Clin Invest. 2016; 126:879-91. 4 . Randak C, Welsh MJ. An intrinsic adenylate kinase activity regulates gating of the ABC transporter CFTR. Cell. 2003; 115:837-50. 5 . Randak CO, Welsh MJ. Adenylate kinase activity in ABC transporters. J Biol Chem. 2005; 280:34385-8. 6 . Dong Q, et al. Mutating the conserved Q-loop glutamine 1291 selectively disrupts adenylate kinase-dependent channel gating of the ATPbinding cassette (ABC) adenylate kinase cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and reduces channel function in primary human airway epithelia. J Biol Chem. 2015; 290:14140-53. 7. Jones CT, et al. Hum Mol Genet. 1992; 1:11-7. is an important part of airway innate defense system and is reduced in CF subjects and CF animal models. In ex vivo ferret tracheas, MCC velocity (MCCV) is enhanced by ENaC inhibition and synergistically increased by combining a low dose of carbachol (Carb, a Ca 2+ agonist) with forskolin (Fsk, a cAMP agonist) (Joo et al., submitted) . Airway submucosal gland (SMG) secretion is also reduced in subjects with CF and animal CF models, and is also synergistically increased by combining a low dose of Carb with Fsk. To better understand the mechanisms of synergistic MCCV increases, we compared measures of MCCV, SMG secretion and short-circuit currents (Isc) in ex vivo ferret (and pig) tracheas. Methodology: MCCV was measured via particle tracking (Jeong JH, et al. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2014; 307:L83-93) , mucus secretion rates of individual tracheal glands were measured via time-lapse optical imaging of mucus bubbles forming in an oil layer (Joo NS, et al. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001; 281:L458-68) , and trans-tracheal epithelial Isc measurements (0.45 cm 2 exposed surface) were made via voltage clamp and Ussing chambers. In each situation we stimulated with 30 min of 0.3 μM Carb or 10 μM Fsk, followed by 30 min of combined treatment (all compounds added basolaterally). Results: MCCV and SMG secretion rates induced by combined treatment were significantly faster than those of either drug alone or their summed value. MCCV (average for T10-T30 period in mm/min) were: Carb: 8.5 ± 1.1 (n = 15, ferret tracheas); Fsk: 7.1 ± 0.8 (n = 32); combined: 36.2 ± 0.9 (n = 40). Arithmetical sum vs. combined: P = 4.5E-11. SMG secretion rates (average for T5-T30 for Carb or T10-T30 for Fsk, in nL/min/ gland) were Carb: 1.0 ± 0.3 (n = 5); Fsk: 0.3 ± 0.1 (n = 7); combined: 2.2 ± 0.4. Combined vs. arithmetical sum: P=0.017. By contrast, Isc increases induced by combined treatment were smaller than the sum of single treatments. Values were (T10 to T30, average ΔIsc in μA/cm 2 ): Carb: 0.5 ± 0.4 (n = 7 from 5 ferrets); Fsk: 4.7 ± 1.4 (n = 7 from 5 ferrets); combined: 1.4 ± 0.2 (n = 7 from 5 ferrets). Combined vs. arithmetical sum: P = 0.06. Pig tracheas also showed smaller Isc responses to combined agonists (T10-T30, average ΔIsc in μA/cm 2 ): Fsk: 13.1 ± 2.2 (n = 12 from 7 pigs); Carb: -1.7 ± 1.4 (n = 10 from 6 pigs) and combined 9.5 ± 2.6 (n = 12 from 7 pigs). Combined vs. arithmetical sum: P = 0.75. Conclusion: Forskolin plus carbachol synergistically increased both MCCV and SMG secretion rates. By contrast, combined stimulation produced smaller Isc increases than the sum of each agonist used alone. Isc reflects both anion-mediated secretion and sodium absorption. Forskolin stimulates secretion. Carbachol transiently increases secretion but produces longer term inhibition of absorption (Joo NS, et al. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:20735) . While these two processes are subtractive with regard to Isc, they are mutually reinforcing with respect to mucosal fluid accumulation. These coordinated actions further accelerate MCCV. Supported by CFF and CFFT. Recently, rehydration agents have been gaining attention in treatment of patients with muco-obstructive lung disease, particularly cystic fibrosis (CF). One such agent is inhaled hypertonic saline (HS), which purportedly creates a luminal osmotic ion gradient, drawing additional water onto the dehyrated (concentrated) airway surface layer (ASL). HS has been reported to improve mucus clearance rates, lung function, and reduce the number of acute exacerbations. However, the mechanism and duration of action for mucus hydrating agents to accelerate clearance in CF patients is poorly understood. The mucus layer is a polymer gel that can swell or shrink upon addition or removal of water. Typically, the hydration of the mucus layer is controlled by ion transport across the epithelium. However, in CF, the dysregulation of CFTR-mediated ion transport results in airway fluid depletion and mucin hyperconcentration. We hypothesize that the kinetics of mucus swelling (by added fluid) are determined by the balance between the driving force from osmotic pressure and reversible associations of mucin globular domains, the resistive force from friction of the fluid (i.e. solvent) penetrating through the mesh of mucin network, and the elasticity of the stretched mucins. Further, we hypothesize that there are two stages of mucus swelling: 1) the rapid osmotic gel swelling phase, in which mucus swells without significant rearrangement of inter-molecular associations, and 2) the slow mucus dissolution state in which the mucin molecules continue to rearrange to reduce overlap with one other. To test our hypotheses, we developed a novel dual-labeling imaging technique, to monitor the swelling kinetics of the mucus layer over a range of concentations in reponse to exposure to isotonic solutions. In each experiment, mucus-swelling kinetics were normalized as the increase of swelling height (h t ) to the initial height (h o ) of the mucus layer [(h t -h 0 )/h 0 ] and recorded as a function of time (t). Our results demonstrate that the kinetics of mucus swelling depend on specific mucus properties, e.g., increased initial mucus concentrations and osmotic pressures lead to a faster and longer swelling in all kinds of mucus. CF sputum samples and mucus from human airway cultures show a 2-phase swelling curve, with a fast followed by slow phase until dissolution. This behavior contrasts to mucus obtained from porcine glands (stimulated with acetylcholine), which exhibits a fast swelling phase but then reaches an equilibrium swelling plateau, suggesting that gland mucus is biochemically/ biophysically different from superficial mucus. From a therapeutic perspective, we envision our model system can be applied to test the effectiveness of mucus hydrating agents and other mucolytics designed to re-establish the normal hydration status of the ASL and facilitate efficient mucus clearance. This work was supported by the CFFT Mucus Clearance Consortium. In cystic fibrosis (CF), loss of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) anion channel activity causes airway surface liquid (ASL) pH to become acidic, which impairs airway host defenses. One potential therapeutic approach is to correct the acidic pH in CF airways by aerosolizing HCO 3 and/or non-bicarbonate pH buffers. Here, we show that raising ASL pH with inhaled HCO 3 increased pH. However, the effect was transient, and pH returned to baseline values within 30 minutes. Tromethamine or Tham is a buffer with a long serum half-life used as an intravenous formulation to treat metabolic acidosis. We found that tromethamine aerosols increased ASL pH in vivo for at least 2 hours and enhanced bacterial killing. Inhaled hypertonic saline (7% NaCl) is delivered to people with CF in an attempt to promote mucus clearance. Because an increased ionic strength inhibits ASL antimicrobial factors, we added tromethamine to hypertonic saline and applied it to CF sputum. We found that tromethamine alone and in combination with hypertonic saline increased pH and enhanced bacterial killing. These findings suggest that aerosolizing the HCO 3 --independent buffer tromethamine, either alone or in combination with hypertonic saline, might be of therapeutic benefit in CF airway disease. Dickinson, J. 1 ; Hupp, D. 1 ; Sweeter, J. 1 ; Brody, S.L. 2 1. UNMC, Omaha, NE, USA; 2. Int. Med., Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA Background: Autophagy is a cellular pathway responsible for the trafficking of intracellular cargo within double-membrane structures termed autophagosomes in response to metabolic demands, pathogen recognition, and immune activation. A recently recognized paradigm is that autophagy proteins are necessary for protein secretion. A common gene variant of the autophagy regulatory protein, ATG16L1 (T300A amino acid substitution), has been associated with defects in epithelial secretion and inflammation in inflammatory bowel disease (risk, GG vs. non-risk, AA). We recently reported that autophagy is required for IL-13 activated-MUC5AC secretion. It is not known whether autophagy regulates MUC5AC secretion independent of inflammation. The prevalence of the ATG16L1 gene variant in cystic fibrosis (CF) is not known nor is the effect on MUC5AC secretion known. Objective: Identify the prevalence of the ATG16L1 gene variant in adults with CF in a single-site CF center and compare MUC5AC secretion in ATG16L1 risk allele (GG) vs. non-risk allele (AA) as well as ATG5-deficient airway epithelial cells. Methods: Inhibition of autophagy was done by depletion of regulatory protein, ATG5, using RNAi in hTEC without the ATG16L1 variant (GG). ATG5 knockdown was verified by gene expression and immunoblot. The in vitro role of the ATG16L1 variant on secretion was investigated in well-differentiated primary human airway epithelial cells (hTEC) derived from donor lungs not suitable for transplant. Basal and ATPg-S activated MUC5AC secretion was measured in hTECs (GG vs. AA) under ALI conditions. Autophagy activity was determined by LC3 flux assay using chloroquine (50mM) for transient autophagosome-lysosome inhibition and quantified as LC3BII levels, using immunoblot. Genomic DNA was isolated from de-identified blood samples from adults with CF (age range 18-45) from UNMC and age/gender matched controls from the Nebraska BioBank Repository. The ATG16L1 genotype was identified by Taqman probe and confirmed using Sanger sequencing. Results: ATG5 depletion in hTECs reduced LC3BII levels consistent with reduced autophagy. Basal and ATP-activated secretion of MUC5AC was significantly reduced in ATG5-deficient hTEC. Immunofluorescent staining confirmed intracellular MUC5AC retention and mucous cell hypertrophy in the ATG5-depleted hTECs. Despite differences in secretion, there was no change in total MUC5AC expression in ATG5-depleted hTECs. The ATG16L1 gene risk variant (GG) was identified in 18% of adult CF patients compared to 35% of persons without CF. Preliminary data from hTEC with risk (GG) vs. non-risk (AA) ATG16L1 variants (n=2 different hTEC donors each genotype) indicates that the risk variant has reduced autophagy activity (LCBII levels) and reduced ATP-activated MUC5AC secretion. Conclusions: Autophagy regulates both basal and ATP-mediated MUC5AC secretion independent of Th2 inflammation. This provides additional validation that autophagy activity is broadly required for mucin secretion. The ATG16L1 risk variant (GG) is common in adults with CF but found at a lower frequency than non-CF individuals. In vitro, this genetic variant may convey reduced cellular autophagy and altered MUC5AC secretion in airway epithelial cells of affected individuals. Luan, X. 1 ; Grishchenko, N. 1 ; Chapman, D. 2 ; Ianowski, J.P. 1 1. Physiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada; 2. Anatomy & Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada Balanced fluid secretion and absorption is a crucial part of maintaining a healthy respiratory tract. Failure to maintain a critical volume of airway surface fluid may cause blockage of airflow or lead to reduced mucociliary clearance that normally protects the airway from infection. Epithelial cells regulate the ion and fluid balance; therefore, they are the cornerstone of keeping fluid balance in the airway. As the major contribution of liquid secretion in the upper airway, airway submucosal glands play a major role in secreting airway surface liquid into the large airway. On the other hand in the distal airway, where there are no submucosal glands, the regulation of airway surface liquid layer depends on the balance of secretion and absorption of ions and fluid by the surface epithelia. In CF patients, airway surface liquid volume regulatory function seems to be abnormal which results in the collapse of the innate immune defense. In this research project, we investigated the function of the airway submucosal glands and surface epithelia and their role in CF airway disease using CFTR-/-swine. Using electrophysiology techniques, we showed that serous acini and collecting duct of the submucosal glands transport Na + into the lumen of the gland after stimulation with the cAMP-elevating agent forskolin and the cholinergic agonist carbachol. Interestingly we found that the ciliated duct transports Na + in the opposite direction, i.e. from lumen to basolateral side after forskolin and carbachol stimulation. We hypothesize that the ciliated duct function reduces the osmotic pressure of the fluid secreted by the gland. In CFTR-/-glands all of these segments failed to respond to forskolin stimulation but responded to cholinergic stimulation, suggesting the involvement of CFTR in the forskolin-stimulated secretion. Moreover, our result showed the distal airway epithelia in wild-type and CFTR-/-swine lung have different ion transport properties. In wildtype lung distal airway epithelia, each cell seemed to be able to both secrete and absorb fluid and ions. However, CF distal airway epithelia displayed significantly lower basal ion transport as well as reduced response to forskolin stimulation. CF tissue had on average a reduced response to the ENaC (sodium channel) blocker, amiloride. However, some tissue sites had a response to amiloride four times higher than wild-type, suggesting that some epithelial cells seem to have hyperactive ENaC activity, which could indicate airway surface liquid hyperabsorptive sites. We hypothesize that those hyperabsorption sites of CF distal airway might be the origin points where CF small airway disease starts. Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Canada and Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Luan, X. 1 ; Chapman, D. 2 ; Ianowski, J.P. 1 1. Physiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada; 2. Anatomy & Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada Although chronic infection and inflammation are the major parts of the CF lung disease, recent data suggest that the pathogenic event in CF airway disease starts from abnormal bacterial eradication. Airway surface liquid (ASL) plays an important role in the airway defence mechanism against bacteria. Evidence suggests that abnormal ASL secretion in the CF airways may be involved in CF airway pathogenesis. Recently, we showed that inhalation of Pseudomoas aeruginosa triggered ASL secretion in the upper swine airway ex vivo, and we also suggested a basal spontaneous ASL secretion may protect the airway in normal airway. We hypothesized that in CF airways those responses fail, which leads to the failure to eradicate pathogens. However, whether ASL secretion against inhaled P. aeruginosa actually occurs in vivo or whether this response is missing in CF airway has never been directly tested. We create a novel noninvasive in vivo imaging method to study ASL secretion is swine. We used synchrotron-based phase contrast imaging to overcome the limitations of conventional imaging methods to provide soft tissue discrimination and appropriate spatial and temporal resolution for live animal imaging. And we successfully studied the ASL secretion changes in response to inhaled bacteria. The objective of this project is to investigate the effect of inhaled P. aeruginosa on ASL secretion in live CFTR -/swine using synchrotron-based phase contrast imaging method. CFTR -/piglets, age from 2 to 7 days old, were imaged at Canadian Light Source, BioMedical Imaging and Therapy beamline. Our results showed that P. aeruginosa, as well as Haemophilus influenzae and Staphylococcus aureus, trigger ASL secretion in vivo. CFTR-/-pigs failed to respond to P. aeruginosa. Interestingly, we also detected a basal spontaneous ASL secretion in wild-type animals that was suppressed in CFTR -/swine. Our result indicated that the ASL secretion against inhaled P. aeruginosa is missing in the CF airway, which may contribute to the airway defence failure and further lead to chronic infection and inflammation. Moreover, our result suggested the basal ASL secretion is lost in CFTR-/-piglets. This basal secretion might play a major function that helps the airway defence to trap particles in the inhaled air and explain the mucus viscosity changes in the CF airways. Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Canada and Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Luan, X. 1 ; Belev, G. 3 ; Chapman, D. 2 ; Ianowski, J.P. 1 1. Physiology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada; 2. Anatomy & Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada; 3. Canadian Light Source Inc., Saskatoon, SK, Canada There is strong evidence that CF lung disease starts in the small airway. Studies show that CF children may develop small airways structural damage in very early life. And recent study shows that the newborn CF piglet shows lesions in the airway that appear as regions with obstructed airflow in the distal airways without any obvious evidence of airway infection, inflammation, or mucus accumulation. However, it is still unclear how CFTR dysfunction leads to CF peripheral airway disease. Evidence suggests CF lung lesions occur in the small airways less than 1 mm in diameter. Unfortunately, current imaging methods, such as hospital CT and MRI, are unable to visualize small airways about 1mm in cross section. Thus, a new imaging method is required to provide high-resolution image for the small airways and to perform longitudinal studies in order to follow the development of CF small airway disease. Our objective is to develop a new imaging method to study CF airway disease in the distal airways and to track the progress in live swine. We propose to use a synchrotron-based phase contrast imaging method to visualize the distal airways and to investigate the possible anatomical and physiological variations during the early stage of disease. There is substantial evidence that synchrotron-based phase contrast imaging has great potential to image the lung. The large differences in refractive index between air, fluid, and soft tissue give a strong refraction signature that is easily detected using phase-related imaging methods. Our preliminary data suggested that synchrotron-based phase contrast imaging CT scan allows us to visualize and investigate the distal airways. High-energy monochromatic x-ray (70 KeV) was selected since the higher the x-ray energy, the lower the radiation dose delivered to the animal. Also, in order to provide a better signal-to-noise ratio, sample-to-detector distance had been carefully chosen to highlight the distal airways but to avoid detecting the alveolus. The data showed that airways smaller than 100 μm in diameter can be detected in ex vivo preparations. The result indicated that phase contrast imaging CT can provide much better image quality with a reasonable radiation dose. In the future, we want to compare the small airway anatomy for both wild-type and CFTR-/-swine. Our ultimate goal is to investigate the changes in airway anatomy, to understand the cause of air trapping in CF airways using live CF swine and follow the progression of the disease over time as the CF animals develop chronic infection and inflammation. Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonization, prominent inflammation with massive expression of the neutrophil chemokine IL-8 and luminal infiltrates of neutrophils are hallmarks of chronic lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. The nociceptive transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1) calcium channels have recently been found involved in non-neurogenic inflammation. Here, we investigated the role of TRPA1 in CF respiratory inflammatory models in vitro. Expression of TRPA1 was evaluated in CF lung tissue sections and cells by immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. Epithelial cell lines (A549, IB3-1, CuFi-1, CFBE41o -) and primary cells from CF patients were utilized to a) check TRPA1 function modulation, by Fura-2 calcium imaging; b) down-modulate TRPA1 function and expression with pharmacological inhibitors (HC-030031 and A-967079) and siRNA silencing; and c) assess the effect of TRPA1 down-modulation on expression and release of cytokines upon exposure to pro-inflammatory challenges, by qRT-PCR and 27-protein Bioplex assay. TRPA1 channels are expressed in the CF pseudostratified columnar epithelium facing the bronchial lumina exposed to bacteria, where IL-8 is co-expressed. Inhibition of TRPA1 expression results in a relevant reduction of release of several cytokines, including IL-8 and the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and TNF-α, in CF primary bronchial epithelial cells exposed to P. aeruginosa and to the supernatant of mucopurulent material (SMM) derived from the chronically infected airways of CF patients. In conclusion, TRPA1 channels are involved in regulating the extent of airway inflammation driven by CF bronchial epithelial cells. ] are key regulators of the activities of ion transporters and channels involved in transepithelial fluid secretion in airway epithelia. Dysregulated intracellular Ca 2+ homeostasis in CF bronchial epithelial cells has been claimed as a potential druggable target to compensate for CFTR Cltransport defect and/or to reduce excessive CF lung inflammation (as a summary see the Figure) . However, the precise identification of the Ca 2+ transporter/channel to be targeted is contradictory and requires further understanding on the pros and cons of pharmacological modulation of intracellular Ca 2+ mobilization. Here we present results focusing on the role of some of the intracellular Ca 2+ modulators activated upon interaction of P. aeruginosa with bronchial epithelial cells, inducing the classical intracellular pro-inflammatory signaling leading to upregulation of IL-8, IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α release. We previously showed that direct interaction of P. aeruginosa with toll-like receptors (TLR2, 5 and 4) strongly overexpresses the IL-8 gene by MyD88/dependent phosphorylation of mitogen activated protein kinases ERK1/2, p38, JNK, and downstream kinases RSK1/2 and HSP27, leading to intranuclear translocation of transcription factors such as NF-kB, NF-IL6, AP-1, CREB and CHOP. Release of ATP in the extracellular milieu is able to sustain a P2Y purinergic receptors-and phospolipase C beta 3-dependent release of intracellular Ca 2+ which potentiates the MyD88-dependent inflammatory pathways. More recently, we observed that flagellin from P. aeruginosa alters in a CF-specific manner the Ca 2+ homeostasis, leading to mitochondrial perturbation with increased Ca 2+ influx and production of reactive oxygen species, which drives to exaggerated inflammasome activation and the release of IL-1b. This opens further questions on the role of the different intracellular Ca 2+ compartments and subcellular domains, widening the panel of candidate molecular targets to be considered. Gastrointestinal disease is one of the earliest manifestations of cystic fibrosis (CF) and presents life-long conditions such as dysbiosis, low-grade inflammation and an increased risk for gastrointestinal cancer. Recently it was shown that ~60% of aged CF mice develop intestinal polyps and altered Wnt/β-catenin signaling, a pathway responsible for intestinal stem cell (ISC) proliferation (Than BL, et al. Oncogene. 2016 :doi:10.1038 / onc.2015 . Based on previous evidence of intestinal hyperproliferation in CF mice, we investigated two hypotheses using sex-matched wildtype (WT) and Cftr knockout (KO) mice. In the first hypothesis, we asked whether Cftr KO intestinal hyperproliferation was either an epithelial-autonomous effect of Cftr loss or secondary to the environmental conditions of the CF intestine. For this study, comparisons were made between freshly isolated intestinal crypts (ex vivo) and intestinal epithelial crypt organoids (enteroids) grown and passaged in primary culture. Relative to WT, ex vivo Cftr KO crypts and Cftr KO enteroids (devoid of inflammation, microbiome, systemic factors) had similar increases in epithelial proliferation (+34% vs.+37%), numbers of ISCs (30% vs 74%) and levels of active β-catenin and the Wnt target gene Lef1. Previous studies have shown that binding of the signaling mediator disheveled (Dvl) to the Wnt receptor frizzled (Fz) is stabilized by a pH-sensitive interaction at the plasma membrane that facilitates Wnt signaling. Since we have shown that the Cftr KO crypt epithelium maintains an alkaline intracellular pH (Liu J, et al. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012; 302:C1492-503) , it was hypothesized that Dvl would be more closely associated with the plasma membrane in Cftr KO relative to WT enteroids. Using enteroids from Cftr KO and WT mice bred to Dvl2-EGFP/Rosa plasma membrane dTomato mice, it was found that Dvl2-EGFP more closely associated with the plasma membrane at the apical pole of crypt base cells in Cftr KO crypts. Reduction of Dvl2 association at the apical pole by reducing intracellular pH in Cftr KO enteroids was correlated with decreased active β-catenin and proliferation. We conclude that 1) intestinal hyperproliferation in the Cftr KO intestine is an epithelial-autonomous consequence of Cftr loss; and 2) a potential mechanism of increased Wnt/β-catenin signaling and hyperproliferation in the Cftr KO intestine is increased Dvl2 plasma membrane association resulting from dysregulated intracellular pH in crypt base cells. Funded by NIH and CFF. Background: Measurements of airway surface liquid (ASL) on primary airway epithelial cultures (AECs) grown at air-liquid interface (ALI) identified ASL depletion as a characteristic abnormality in cystic fibrosis (CF) and may be used as an endpoint for preclinical testing of strategies to improve airway surface hydration in patients with CF. Traditionally, ASL height has been measured by fluorescent confocal microscopy after addition of fluorescently labelled liquid to the apical surface of the epithelium, however, several hours are required to restore steady state ASL depth after this volume challenge. Objective: To provide a novel approach to study ASL depth and regulation using confocal reflection microscopy. Methods: Primary AECs were isolated and cultured at an ALI from βENaC-overexpressing mice, a model of CF lung disease, and their wildtype littermate controls. ASL height was measured simultaneously by confocal reflection microscopy and fluorescent microscopy as reference and results were compared. Results: Directly after fluorescent dye addition (t=0h), ASL height on AEC from wild-type mice obtained by reflection (rm) and fluorescent microscopy (fm) were not different (rm: 32.6±5μm vs. fm: 30.6±4μm; p=0.8). At t=2h after volume challenge, ASL height was reduced (rm: 5.2±0.4μm vs. fm: 5.3±0.2μm; p=0.9) and at t=24h ASL height recovered to normal levels and did not differ between the two techniques (rm: 5.8±0.3μm vs. fm: 6.1±0.2μm; p=0.2). In AEC from βENaC-overexpressing mice, ASL height was similar at early time points (t=0 and t=2h) but remained reduced at t=24h (rm: 4.4±0.2μm vs. fm: 4.7±0.4; p=0.5) , and did not differ between techniques. Conclusions: Reflection confocal microscopy can be used as an alternative method to fluorescent microscopy to study ASL height (dys)regulation. This approach may facilitate preclinical evaluation of novel drugs designed to improve airway surface hydration in patients with CF under more physiological conditions. Supported by BMBF (82DZL00401). Neutrophil elastase (NE) is a destructive serine protease found in the primary granules of neutrophils and is predominantly inhibited by alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT). NE plays a major role in pulmonary inflammation and unchecked lung levels of released active NE can cleave elastin, leading to structural damage and impaired lung function. Exaggerated NE levels also compromise the protective antimicrobial screen of the lung by degrading important anti-proteases and antimicrobial peptides. For this reason, NE is a major drug target for novel therapies in inflammatory lung disease, including cystic fibrosis (CF), non-CF bronchiectasis (NCFB) and alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD). In this study, we evaluated a novel Protein Epitope Mimetic (PEM) NE inhibitor (POL6014) for therapeutic potential in CF, NCFB and AATD by comparing IC 50 values with a prototype inhibitor (AZD9668) and the known endogenous inhibitor, AAT, in lung fluids, whilst also evaluating its toxicity and functional effect on neutrophils. Ethical approval was obtained from Beaumont Hospital. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was collected from consented CF (n=6, mean FEV 1 55% ± 8.4) and AATD patients (n=6, mean FEV 1 67% ± 13). Sputum samples were also collected from CF (n=6, mean FEV 1 44% ± 3.82) and NCFB (n=6, mean FEV 1 58% ± 12) patients. NE activity was quantified using a specific fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) substrate. A range of inhibitor concentrations was evaluated to determine the IC 50 . Viability and neutrophil-mediated bacterial killing assays determined potential cell toxicity issues and host defense capabilities. AAT and POL6014 stability in respiratory samples at 37°C over 24 hours was determined by Western immunoblot analysis and LC-MS respectively. One-way ANOVA followed by post hoc Tukey test was used to determine significance. POL6014 and AAT IC 50 values were significantly lower than those observed for the prototype inhibitor AZD9668 in CF (P<0.001), NCFB (P<0.01) and AATD (P<0.001). Of note, there was no statistical difference observed in IC 50 values between POL6014 and AAT in CF, NCFB or AATD (P>0.05). Importantly, POL6014 did not affect neutrophil viability or ability to effectively kill Pseudomonas aeruginosa or Staphylococcus aureus in vitro at concentrations up to 10 μM. AAT integrity was preserved in CF BALF and sputum samples and in contrast POL6014 was partially degraded over a 24-hour time course thereby avoiding potential drug accumulation in the lung. These results indicate that POL6014 has comparable NE inhibitory action with AAT whilst not impacting upon neutrophil function. Therefore, POL6014 represents a novel potential therapeutic avenue for further exploration in inflammatory lung diseases such as CF, NCFB and AATD. The in vivo effect of this novel NE PEM inhibitor will be determined in models of airway infection in the future. (CF) lung disease. In addition, TGFβ levels are elevated in the plasma and lower airways of CF patients, with relationships to infectious status and lung disease severity (Harris W, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2011; 46:688-95) . However, it is unclear how TGFβ negatively impacts CF lung disease. A clearer understanding of TGFβ's effects on CF lung disease may allow better selection of patient-specific treatment regimens. Our group has previously demonstrated that exposure of primary human airway epithelial cells in vitro to TGFβ downregulates both CFTR and an alternate chloride transporter, TMEM16A (Sun H, et al. PLoS One. 2014; 9(9) ). Previously, we have also shown that brief pulmonary administration of recombinant TGFβ to mice was sufficient to downregulate CFTR and TMEM16A, as well as induce mucous cell hyperplasia. Here, we examine the effects of TGFβ overexpression via an adenoviral vector in mouse lungs. We hypothesized that pulmonary exposure to Ad-TGFβ in vivo downregulates chloride transporters and promotes goblet cell hyperplasia. Methods: Transient pulmonary TGFβ overexpression was achieved using an adenoviral vector containing the TGFβ transgene (Ad-TGFβ). Ad-TGFβ (at doses ranging from 1 x 10 6 -5 x 10 8 pfu), PBS, or an empty vector control were intratracheally administered to wild-type, C57-BL6 mice. After one week, mice were sacrificed, and BALF and lungs were collected for cytology, ELISA, histology, and Western Blot analysis. Results: As expected, Ad-TGFβ caused increased TGFβ expression in a dose-dependent manner to a maximum of 160 ng/mL in BAL at the highest dosage of Ad-TGFβ. Mice exposed to Ad-TGFβ lost up to 24% of starting weight by day 7, while control mice did not lose weight. Mice exposed to 5x10 6 pfu or more Ad-TGFβ showed increased cellularity of BAL with an increase in lymphocytes and neutrophils compared to controls. CFTR protein levels were reduced to <1% of control levels at the highest dosage of Ad-TGFβ. Trichrome staining did not reveal significant fibrosis, although PAS staining did show a dose-dependent increase in goblet cell numbers in animals exposed to Ad-TGFβ. Conclusions: Overexpression of TGFβ by administration of pulmonary Ad-TGFβ was sufficient to replicate important features of CF in a dose-dependent manner, including weight loss, pulmonary inflammation, goblet cell hyperplasia, and CFTR reduction. Future studies will define the molecules or pathways activated downstream of TGFβ that are responsible for these effects and investigate potential therapeutic targets. Objectives: Aspergillus fumigatus colonizes the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and frequently causes allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) characterized by type 2 airway inflammation that has been associated with severity of CF lung disease. However, the mechanisms leading to Aspergillus fumigatus-induced type 2 airway inflammation in CF airways remain poorly understood. We hypothesized that reduced mucociliary clearance, a characteristic feature of CF, facilitates Aspergillus fumigatus-induced type 2 airway inflammation. Methods: To test this hypothesis, juvenile Scnn1b-Tg mice with CF-like lung disease and wild-type (WT) controls were challenged with Aspergillus fumigatus extract (Af) or vehicle alone and key features of type 2 airway inflammation such as airway eosinophilia, goblet cell metaplasia and airway hyperresponsiveness were compared. Further, cellular sources of the type 2 signature cytokine IL-13 and molecular mechanisms leading to its expression were investigated. Additionally, effects of therapeutic improvement of mucus clearance by inhibiting epithelial sodium channels (ENaC) with topical administration of amiloride were evaluated. Results: Mucociliary clearance and whole lung Af clearance were significantly reduced in naïve Scnn1b-Tg mice compared to WT littermates. Reduced clearance of Af aggravated Stat6-dependent IL-13 secretion, airway eosinophilia and airway hyperresponsiveness in Scnn1b-Tg mice treated with Af. Increased expression of IL-13 and IL-33 was detected in airway epithelial cells of Scnn1b-Tg mice treated with vehicle or Af. In vitro stimulation by IL-33 induced expression of IL-13 in primary tracheal epithelial cells isolated from WT or Scnn1b-Tg mice. The number of IL-13 producing T-cells and type 2 innate lymphoid cells was elevated in lungs of Scnn1b-Tg mice challenged with Af. Preventive treatment with the ENaC blocker amiloride improving airway surface hydration and mucus clearance abrogated Af-induced airway eosinophilia in WT and Scnn1b-Tg mice. Further, amiloride treatment prevented induction of IL-13 expression in response to Af challenge. Conclusions: Our data support that impaired clearance of inhaled Af triggering IL-13 production by multiple cell types in the airways plays an important role in the pathogenesis of type 2 airway inflammation and suggest that therapeutic improvement of mucociliary clearance may be an effective strategy to prevent this disease aggravating inflammatory response in CF. Supported by DFG (MA 2081/3-2) and BMBF (82DZL00401). Cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterized by progressive chronic infection and inflammation of airways, which represents the major cause of mortality in CF patients. Several studies indicate that sphingolipids (SLs) play a regulatory role in CF lung inflammation. In fact, the downregulation of plasma membrane (PM) glucocerebrosidase-GBA2 is associated with a significant reduction of IL-8 after P. aeruginosa infection, as well as a reduction of the intrinsic inflammatory state in CF human bronchial epithelial cells. However, it is nowadays accepted that, in addition to GBA2, several enzymes involved in SLs catabolism are associated with the PM. These enzymes could be directly involved in in-situ PM modifications resulting in the activation of the inflammatory response occurring in CF, even if their possible involvement is unknown so far. To address this issue, we measured the activity of the main PM-hydrolases in wild-type (NuLi-1) and CF (CuFi-1) human bronchial epithelial cells. CuFi-1 cells showed a double activity of β-glucocerebrosidase-GBA1, β-galactosidase (β-gal) and β-hexosaminidase (β-hex) and the activity of GBA2 was four-fold higher with respect to NuLi-1 cells. We investigated the effect of P. aeruginosa strain PAO1 on the same hydrolytic enzymes and we found similar activities in both not-infected and infected cells. As known, SLs form specialized regions called lipid rafts able to recruit mediators of signal transduction. In order to examine whether P. aeruginosa infection induces modifications at this level, we isolated the detergent resistant membrane fraction (DRM) from infected and not infected NuLi-1 and CuFi-1 cells. In CuFi-1 cells, PAO1 infection causes an increase in glucosylceramide and ceramide, and a reduction in GM3. We also observed an increased activity of GBA1, β-gal and β-hex. Conversely, no changes were found in the SLs composition of DRM of NuLi-1 cells. Taken together, these data suggest that, in CF cells, P,aeruginosa infection causes a recruitment of PM glycohydrolases into lipid rafts. The concomitant presence of the enzymes and their substrates allows the changing of SL composition that, with ceramide, is responsible for the activation of inflammatory response. Introduction: Defective CFTR function affects most mucin-producing organs. More specifically, the CF pathogenesis is characterized by the build-up of viscous mucus in organs such as the lungs, sinuses, intestine, pancreas and reproductive tract. For this reason, CF is also known as mucoviscidosis, suggesting that polymeric, gel-forming mucins, the large O-linked glycoproteins responsible for the viscoelastic properties of mucus, play a critical role in the disease. CFTR malfunction causes reduced transepithelial Clsecretion, Na + hyperabsorption, and mucin hyperconcentration, which results in slowed mucociliary clearance (MCC). Our goal is to understand the factors that regulate mucus viscoelasticity and restore normal mucus properties in CF. Ivacaftor, a CFTR potentiator (e.g., targeting G551D mutation), was shown to yield large improvements in lung function. Ivacaftor was also shown to dramatically increase the rate of MCC and significantly improve ventilation defects, suggesting an effect on mucus biophysical properties. However, direct effects of CFTR rescue on mucin concentration and mucus transportability have not been established. Methods: To investigate the molecular mechanisms linking CFTR rescue to improved mucus properties, we used immortalized HBE cells carrying a G551D mutation, i.e., UNCCF6T cells, to measure the effects of ivacaftor on mucin production and mucus properties. We also used the F508del cftr (cf) mouse model to study the impact of Cftr function on gastrointestinal mucus and used intestinal organoids to identify modulators that are effective in mice. Results: UNCCF6T cells showed enhanced transepithelial short-circuit currents when treated with ivacaftor. Treatment had no effect on mucin mRNA expression, mucin secretion and ciliary beat frequency (CBF). However, cilia beat amplitude (CBA) was ~30% greater in ivacaftor-treated cells, suggesting an effect on the surrounding milieu (i.e., the mucus layer), perhaps due to improved hydration. We are currently working at collecting undiluted mucus from these cells to measure percent solids and passive bead diffusion (i.e., microrheology). Using these two approaches, we showed that gut mucus was more concentrated in cf mice (7.7% vs 4.6% in WT mice) and bead sub-diffusivity was reduced 100-fold in cf mucus, confirming a robust gut/mucus phenotype in this model. We then tested CFTR modulators on murine enteroids to uncover potential compound(s) that would rescue murine Cftr activity. We identified a corrector/potentiator combination wherein cf organoids swelled at ~40% of WT (similar to ivacaftor on G551D). This model is being used to study the molecular/organizational changes within the mucin polymeric network following CFTR rescue. Conclusion: We demonstrated that CFTR rescue had no direct effect on mucin production and/or CBF, but improved mucus viscoelastic properties. Using murine intestinal organoids, we identified two compounds that restored F508del Cftr function in mice. These modulator compounds are being used in vivo to study the effects of Cftr rescue on mucus concentration, pH, viscoelastic properties, bacterial burden and GI transit. Chronic inflammation remains a challenge for cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Left untreated, inflammation contributes largely to pulmonary lung function decline. High-dose ibuprofen is currently the only anti-inflammatory approved by the CF Foundation, where benefits include decreased lung disease progression, reduced neutrophil migration, and decreased propensity for nasal polyp growth; however, the mechanism of action is unclear. Further, only 3.3% of patients are prescribed high-dose ibuprofen due to potential side effects, including gastrointestinal bleeding and renal injury. There is a clear need to understand the mechanism of ibuprofen efficacy in order to develop an effective and safer replacement. Previously in our lab, we have reported that microtubule acetylation expression and polymerization rates are decreased in CF epithelial cells. The decrease in microtubule formation rate contributes to decreased intracellular transport and thus inflammatory signaling. Here, we hypothesize that high-dose ibuprofen improves inflammation via improved microtubule structure and dynamics. Microtubule polymerization rates were analyzed by the initiation of microtubule formation, where the percent of cells with an alpha-tubulin aster at various time points was determined. After high-dose ibuprofen (500μM) for 24 hours, there was a 33.5% increase in CF (IB3-1) cells with asters after 8 minutes of re-polymerization, normalizing it to wild-type cells. Functionally, there were 45% less CF cells with accumulated cholesterol after being treated with high-dose ibuprofen, indicating a reinstatement of intracellular transport. Comparing microtubule polymerization rates to other analgesics and cyclooxygenase inhibitors (ie aspirin, acetaminophen, and celecoxib), the reformation of microtubules was specific to high-dose ibuprofen, where no other drug significantly increased CF microtubule formation rates. Enhanced microtubule polymerization was confirmed in primary human nasal epithelial (HNE) cells obtained from CF patients after ibuprofen treatment. Mechanistically, effects of ibuprofen were mimicked by stimulation of AMPK (AICAR, 500 μM, 24h), where there was a 34.6% increase in CF (IB3-1) cells with asters after 8 minutes of re-polymerization and a 51.2% reduction in CF cells with accumulated cholesterol. Effects of ibuprofen were blocked with AMPK inhibitor compound c. It is concluded that highdose ibuprofen treatment enhances microtubule formation in CF cells likely through an AMPK-related pathway, implicating microtubule structure and dynamics as an important facet linking CFTR to inflammation. Supported by the CFF and NIH. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is primordially characterized by the loss of anion secretion at the apical side of the epithelium due to mutations in the CFTR gene. CFTR dysfunction affects multiple complex and interactive elements of the airway electrophysiology network that ultimately lead to organ level disease. There exist several experimental techniques that allow for the characterization of the interactions governing such mechanisms. However, they generally lack the ability to provide simultaneous information about the individual dynamics of multiple network elements without the need to significantly perturb the nature of the monolayer. Here we describe the development of an in silico, compartment-based model that allows for the exploration of these interactive elements, and captures the volume regulation and ion transport under the conditions of an Ussing chamber (UC) experiment. Methods: The model is centered on a cellular compartment interfacing two semi-infinite source/sinks representing the apical and basolateral fluid volumes in an UC. We generated a system of differential algebraic equations that relate changes in the intracellular electrolyte concentration, membrane potentials and ion movement as functions of time. UC experiments on fully differentiated, primary human bronchial epithelia (HBE) cultures were used to inform the model. Parameters for cellular volume regulation, some ionic fluxes and permeabilities were estimated using nonlinear regression on unperturbed UC short-circuit current data obtained under isotonic conditions. The remaining model parameters were obtained from previous literature models of human airway electrophysiology (Guilherme JM, et al. Biophys J. 2013; 104:716-26; Cibele V, et al. Biophys J. 2010; 98:1476-85; Novotny JA, Jakobsson E. Am J Physiol. 1996; 207:C1751-63) . Results: Model validation was performed by simulating in silico the response of the model to common challenges used in UC experiments (e.g. amiloride, forskolin). The simulated results were compared to actual values obtained under analogous UC experiments. The model predicted the non-CF (n=5), and CF (n=3) HBE response to amiloride within 9% ± 4% of the UC-measured amiloride-sensitive current, while predicting the experimental forskolin-induced current within 11% ± 6% of the actual, UC-measured forskolin response. Conclusion: The model recapitulates the experimental results, providing strong support for this novel, mathematically stable, UC model that incorporates both electronic and chemical cellular response. The resulting in silico model, in tandem with UC experiments, highlights the ability of the model to provide insight into the interindividual differences observed between different HBE cultures to different challenges and therapeutics. Supported by NIH R01 HL108929-01 and P30 DK72506-06. With approximately 70,000 sufferers and 8 million carriers, cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common lethal genetic diseases worldwide. Mutations within the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene result in altered anion (Cland HCO 3 -) secretion across airway epithelia. This, in combination with hyperabsorption of Na + , via the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), leads to reduced airway surface liquid (ASL) volume, impaired mucociliary clearance, chronic inflammation and bacterial colonization in cystic fibrosis (CF) airways. Excessive volumes of mucopurulent material (MM) present within CF airways results in airway obstruction and in turn airway obstructive disease, reported to account for up to 8 out of 10 deaths in CF patients. In addition, MM present within CF lungs contains numerous proteases which may abnormally regulate ENaC activation and degrade ASL proteins required for innate defense. We have previously reported that the secreted protein, SPLUNC1, regulates ENaC activity and ASL hydration levels and that SPLUNC1's regulation of ENaC is defective in CF airways. (1) Furthermore as past studies have shown that proteases cleave SPLUNC1, we hypothesize that proteases present within CF mucopurulent material can cleave SPLUNC1 and may alter its ability to regulate ENaC. Postmortem MM was harvested from Pseudomonas aeruginosa-and Staphyloccocus aureus-positive CF lungs. SPLUNC1 levels were determined by Western blot following incubation with MM at 37°C, in the presence or absence of protease inhibitors. Significant breakdown of 10 μM SPLUNC1 was observed after incubation with MM diluted 1:2 with PBS (t 1/2 = 1.17 hours; N = 3). MM was pre-incubated with protease inhibitors including aprotinin, EDTA, E64 and leupeptinin to determine which enzymes were responsible for SPLUNC1's cleavage. These compounds failed to inhibit SPLUNC1 cleavage (all N = 3). Sivelestat, a neutrophil elastase (NE) inhibitor, significantly prevented SPLUNC1 cleavage (10μM **** p < 0.0001, N = 4). Given that SPLUNC1 regulates ENaC activity and SPLUNC1 is cleaved by MM, the effects of MM and SPLUNC1, alone and in combination, on ENaC protein levels in normal human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) were investigated. Proteolytic cleavage of γENaC is indicated from our preliminary data (N = 3), with increased levels of cleaved γENaC subunit expression observed compared with controls. Conversely, decreased γENaC protein levels, consistent with ENaC degradation and reduced ENaC activity, were evident in normal HBECs incubated with SPLUNC1 alone or SPLUNC1 and MM in combination. The effect of SPLUNC1 and MM in CF HBECs remains to be determined. In conclusion, we have shown that MM readily cleaves SPLUNC1, and that cleavage can be prevented by the neutrophil elastase inhibitor sivelestat. Abnormal cleavage of SPLUNC1 in CF MM may impair SPLUNC1's ability to regulate innate defense in CF airways. Funded by NIH R01 HL108927 Background: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a devastating congenital disease that afflicts ~70,000 people worldwide and results from loss-of-function mutations in the epithelial chloride channel cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). CF patients commonly present with persistent pulmonary bacterial infections that correspond with worsening of clinical prognosis. Sphingomyelinase (SMase), an enzyme that cleaves the membrane lipid sphingomyelin into phosphocholine and ceramide, is a secreted bacterial virulence factor that has been shown to inhibit CFTR chloride channel function and may contribute to the observed exacerbation of disease by dehydrating airways and facilitating bronchial plugging. The goal of this study is to determine the mechanism by which SMase inhibits CFTR channel activity. Results: Our data indicate that isolates of S. aureus collected from the airways of CF patients avidly secrete SMase in vitro. We found that these S. aureus isolates caused hot/cold hemolysis when grown on blood agar plates. Conditioned mediate from liquid cultures of the same isolates showed significant SMase activity in a fluorometric, SMase-specific assay. Additionally, we found evidence that inhibition of CFTR channel activity by S. aureus SMase occurs via a novel, state-dependent process. Inhibition occurs at the plasma membrane and does not rely on the regulatory (R) domain. Patch-clamp experiments also indicate that inhibition is not membrane delimited which suggests that the effect relies on an intracellular factor. Experiments performed with mutant channels showed that channels with increased activity have a decreased sensitivity to inhibition by SMase; conversely, mutations that decrease channel activity increase sensitivity to inhibition, which suggests that inhibition represents CFTR being locked into a closed state. Finally, we found that Kalydeco pretreatment can protect CFTR from the inhibitory effect of SMase supporting the conclusion that SMase targets a closed state of CFTR. Conclusion: Taken together, these data suggest that S. aureus isolated from CF patients avidly secrete SMase, and that inhibition of CFTR in vitro occurs via a novel, state-dependent mechanism. SMase secretion in the CF lung could limit CFTR-mediated chloride secretion. Funding for this project provided by NIH grant 5R01DK075016. Rationale: Many infants with cystic fibrosis (CF) have structural airway injury and airway obstruction, however these abnormalities are often clinically silent. Developing sensitive tools that detect early but silent disease is imperative. Computational fluid dynamic (CFD) techniques use computer models to measure airflow and airway resistance. CFD modeling in newborn CF pigs demonstrates airflow abnormalities (Awadalla M, et al. Ann Biomed Eng. 2014; 42:915-27) but has not been applied to infant studies. Using preliminary data from a large prospective study, we estimated airflow in infants with CF using CFD techniques. We hypothesized that increased airway resistance would correlate with inflammation in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and airway obstruction measured by infant pulmonary function tests (iPFTs). Methods: Newborn-screened infants diagnosed with CF had iPFTs through the raised volume technique and BALF obtained at 3.5 and 12 months. Cytology and IL-8 were measured in BALF. Chest CT scans were obtained at 12 months. Three-dimensional, conducting airway reconstructions were created from CT scans. Cross-sectional area of the airways was estimated. CFD simulations of laminar, steady-state inspiratory airflow at 2.9 L/min estimated both airway resistance (pressure drop (Pa)/flow rate (mL/s)) from the trachea to distal bronchi and lobar airflow. Results: Nine infants (mean age 13.1 months at time of CT scan) had an average of 49 distal airways segmented and modeled using CFD techniques. Mean airway resistance was 0.124 Pa/mL/s (SD = 0.045). Airway resistance was not significantly correlated with height or weight. Resistance was moderately correlated with neutrophil percentage at 3.5-month BALF (R 2 = 0.63) but not with the 12-month BALF measurement. Resistance was mildly correlated with IL-8 at 3.5-month BALF (R 2 = 0.32). Resistance did not significantly correlate with iPFT indices. Resistance was strongly correlated with the proportion of airflow that went to the left and right lungs (R 2 = 0.91). Airflow was correlated with distal airway cross-sectional area (R 2 = 0.76) but not lobar cross-sectional area. Conclusions: Inflammation in BALF at 3.5 months of age was correlated with airway resistance at 12 months of age. Airway resistance was correlated with alterations in airflow and airway size. This provides further evidence of the powerful early relationship between inflammation and airway injury. The lack of association with inflammation at 12 months suggests that remodeling of airways might be occurring early in life, in association with the inflammation. Further comparisons of these variables in additional subjects are needed. CFD methods are complex and cannot replace iPFTs, but may provide supplementary clinical information during this otherwise silent window. Supported by the NHLBI R01HL116211. Content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not represent the official views of the NIH. This study evaluated the pulmonary pathophysiology of the transgenic "gut-corrected" cystic fibrosis (CF) pigs. Four sows produced 18 piglets of which 11 were stillborn with only 2 animals surviving beyond 2 weeks. Failure to survive beyond the neonatal period by 5 piglets was judged to result from metabolic dysfunction likely related to the genetic manipulation for CFTR gut expression or due to cloning artifact. Plasma analysis of neonatal animals showed very low plasma proteins, highly elevated liver enzymes, and severe acidosis. All surviving offspring received furosemide for systemic edema. One piglet survived to 2 weeks with intensive care and was humanely euthanized due to respiratory distress and generalized, severe edema. At necropsy, findings suggested that the clinical features observed were unrelated to any CF phenotype and were consistent with what was observed in the neonatal animals. Physiologic evaluation was performed with lung tissues from the 2 pigs that survived to 2 months of age. Both acetylcholine-and forskolin-induced mucous liquid secretion were significantly lower in CF bronchi than non-CF bronchi. The percent nonvolatile solids in mucus secreted from CF bronchi was elevated following acetylcholine or forskolin compared to mucus secreted from non-CF bronchi. Mucociliary transport in excised tracheas was reduced in the CF tracheas relative to non-CF tracheas. The diameter of CF tracheas was less than that of non-CF pigs in spite of their greater body weight. Despite exhibiting severe metabolic dysfunction and very high mortality during the neonatal period, this CF animal model appears to express important characteristics of human CF pulmonary disease. ( Chronic infection of the cystic fibrosis (CF) lung with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) is associated with an accelerated decline of lung function. PA bacteria cultured from CF sputum secrete alginate, a major component of biofilms. Biofilms protect bacteria against killing by antibiotics and host defenses. The novel alginate oligomer OligoG CF-5/20 is a low molecular weight oligosaccharide enriched from sodium alginate polysaccharides. It is an oligomer composed of α-L-guluronic acid (G) (>85%) and β-Dmannuronic acid (M) (<15%). OligoG CF-5/20 is currently in Phase 2b clinical trials in CF patients. Previous in vitro studies have shown the ability of OligoG CF-5/20 to disrupt biofilm formation and to potentiate the effects of certain antibiotics. Moreover, these G-rich oligomers have also been shown to disrupt interactions in complex mucus by reducing cross-linking within mucus. G subunits preferentially bind calcium, a divalent cation that crosslinks PA alginate polymers, and increases PA biofilm gelation. Hypothesis: We hypothesized that OligoG disrupts alginate crosslinking induced by calcium, and increases the neutrophil's capacity to kill PA bacteria grown in biofilms. A PAO1 overnight culture was diluted to OD 600 =0.05, in trypticase soy broth (TSB), and divided in two separated groups; one with and one without 6% OligoG. Biofilm formation was induced by adding 5μL of PAO1 cultures to 0.22 μm filters with a 22mm diameter that were placed on trypticase soy agar (TSA) in static conditions. Equal volumes of PAO1 were used for the planktonic conditions, 24 h at 37°C in TSA with agitation. Bacteria were opsonized with 10% autologous serum 20 min at 37°C with gentle agitation before adding neutrophils (1.25x10 6 cells) and then incubated 2h at 37°C with gentle agitation. After incubation, these reactants were diluted in water for 10min at RT for cell lysis, vortexed for 30 sec and serial dilutions were plated on TSA and incubated overnight at 37°C. To determine the effect of OligoG on neutrophil-mediated bacterial killing, colony-forming units (CFU) were counted by standard platecounting procedure. Results: OligoG at 6% concentration completely reversed the calcium-induced gelation of sodium alginate, and changed the biofilm colonies from a green-brown to turquoise color, suggesting that OligoG markedly alters biofilms. As expected, neutrophils readily killed PAO1 bacteria grown in planktonic conditions within 2 h (killing index = 71.2±6.4%, n = 4, p< 0.001 compared to no neutrophils) and the index decreased with the addition of OligoG (killing index = 31.3±7.8%, n = 4, p <0.01). In contrast, neutrophil killing of PAO1 grown in biofilms was decreased (56.0±8.5%, n=4) with respect to that observed with planktonic bacteria, and the addition of 6% OligoG to the PA grown in biofilms significantly increased neutrophil killing of bacteria (killing index = 79.2±9.0%, n = 4, p =0.03). Conclusions: We conclude that OligoG affects bacterial biofilms, markedly disrupts calcium-dependent alginate gelation and increases the efficacy of neutrophil-mediated killing of PA bacteria grown in biofilms. Supported by a grant in aid of research from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation -CFFT award #CANTIN14A0. The TLR5-agonist flagellin (FLG) is the key protein component of bacterial flagella expressed by a number of organisms including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The pro-inflammatory activity of bacterial FLG has been well documented in leukocytes although the effects on airway epithelial function are less clear. The acute addition of FLG to murine trachea ex-vivo has been demonstrated to inhibit Na + transport (Kunzelmann K, et al. FASEB J. 2006; 20:545-6) although effects on the human tissue have not been examined. The aim of the present study was to test the hypothesis that the prolonged exposure of primary cultures of human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) at air-liquid interface to FLG would modify both the structure and function of the tissue. These conditions might be reasonably expected to model aspects of the environment of the chronically colonised human lung and in particular regions adjacent to infected mucus plugs. Concentration-response studies in 4 CF and 3 non-CF HBEC donors demonstrated a FLG-induced reduction in trans-epithelial resistance (R T ). Concentrations of FLG as low as 12 ng/mL significantly attenuated R T when cultures were treated for the initial 14 days at air-liquid interface. Associated with the reduction in R T was a concentration-dependent increase in MUC5AC+ goblet cells in all donors studied. The ion transport properties of FLG-treated HBEC were then studied. In non-CF HBEC there was an increase in both the amiloride-sensitive short circuit current (ISC) of 1.7-fold and a >3-fold increase in the forskolin-stimulated, Inh172-sensitive ISC. The UTP-stimulated anion-secretory ISC response was also increased by approximately 10-fold. In CF-HBEC, effects of FLG pretreatment on the amiloride-sensitive ISC were more variable and there was no enhancement of the small response to forskolin. However, the enhanced response to UTP was still observed in the CF-HBEC. Together these data would support a model whereby in the healthy airway epithelium, FLG drives an increase in the mucin load that is paralleled by an increased capacity to secrete fluid. In the non-CF epithelium this is mediated through both cAMP (CFTR) and Ca 2+ (TMEM16A) regulated anion conductances. This homeostatic mechanism has likely developed to ensure appropriate hydration of the mucus gel and therefore enable mucus and pathogen clearance. A similar FLG-driven goblet cell phenotype in the CF airway may further imbalance the mucin-fluid load in the absence of CFTR function, predisposing to mucus plugging, a failure to clear the plugs and further contributing to chronic colonisation of the lung. Rationale: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder characterised by sustained neutrophil recruitment and neutrophildominated infiltration. Plasma membrane metalloproteinases ADAM-10 and ADAM-17 are involved in the cleavage of pro-inflammatory membrane (m) bound cytokine mTNF-α and receptor mIL-6r further augmenting inflammation. Cholesterol, a major structural component of membranes, influences membrane stability and the activity of proteins that reside there. We have previously demonstrated that neutrophil plasma membrane cholesterol was reduced in CF. Therefore the aim of this study was to investigate the effect of reduced neutrophil plasma membrane cholesterol content on the activity of ADAM-17 in adults with CF. More specifically, our objective was to investigate the circulating levels of TNF-α soluble receptor TNFR1 and sIL-6r, and to determine whether ivacaftor therapy mediates a reduction in ADAM-17 activity, indirectly reducing inflammation. Methods: Peripheral blood neutrophils and plasma were isolated from healthy control (HC) donors and patients with CF (PWCF) either homozygous for the ΔF508 mutation or heterozygous for the G551D mutation pre-and post-ivacaftor therapy. ELISA was employed to quantify plasma levels of pro-inflammatory mediators IL-6, sIL-6r, and TNFR1. ADAM-17 activity was determined fluorometrically. Flow cytometry investigated the levels of membrane-bound IL-6r. Ethical approval was obtained from Beaumont Hospital Ethics Committee. Student's t test was used to determine significance. Results: HC neutrophils exposed to the cholesterol-depleting drug methyl beta cyclodextrin (1mM MβCD) demonstrated increased ADAM-17 activity (n=4, p=0.0001) resulting in reduced membrane bound IL-6r (n=4, p=0.0005), and increased sIL-6r (n=4, p=0.03). Furthermore, neutrophils isolated from PWCF have reduced plasma membrane cholesterol (n=8, p=0.007) resulting in increased ADAM-17 activity (n=4, p=0.01), and decreased membrane-bound IL-6r (n=3, p=0.02). Elevated circulating levels of IL-6 (n=6, p=0.04), sIL-6r (n=6, p=0.01), a complex of IL-6 bound to sIL-6r (n=6, p=0.03) and TNFR1 (n=13, p=0.008) were found in the plasma of PWCF. Neutrophils isolated from patients receiving ivacaftor therapy had increased plasma membrane cholesterol (n=4, p=0.02) and reduced ADAM-17 activity resulting in increased membrane-bound IL-6r. Furthermore, ivacaftor therapy decreased the circulating plasma levels of IL-6 (n=6, p=0.02), sIL-6r (n=6, p=0.04) and TNFR1 (n=4, p=0.01). Conclusions: Our novel findings indicate that blood neutrophils provide a source of pro-inflammatory mediators, by increasing circulating levels of sIL-6r and TNF-α. In addition, we have demonstrated that ivacaftor therapy indirectly reduces ADAM-17 activity thereby reducing the inflammatory burden. In conclusion, this study further emphasises the role of neutrophils in augmenting the inflammatory environment in PWCF, and identifies a new anti-inflammatory role for ivacaftor therapy in the treatment of CF. This study was funded by SFI, grant number 11/RFP/BMT/3094. However, the functional role and phenotype of airway macrophages in CF-like lung disease needs further investigation. Objective: The aim of this study was to characterize the phenotypes of airway macrophages isolated from lungs of Scnn1b-Tg mice and wild-type (wt) controls, and to compare responses to stimulation with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Pseudomonas aeruginosa ex vivo. Methods: To achieve this goal, primary airway macrophages from Scnn1b-Tg mice and wt controls were isolated by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Macrophage cultures were exposed to lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 100 ng/ml) or medium alone, supernatants and cells were collected 6, 12 and 24 hours posttreatment and expression of macrophage signatures and proinflammatory mediators were determined. Results: Isolated airway macrophages from Scnn1b-Tg mice showed significantly increased baseline expression of genes associated with alternative activation, such as arginase 1 (P<0.001; for all wt vs. Scnn1b-Tg) and the chemokines CCL17 (P<0.001) and CCL22 (P<0.001) compared to wild-type controls. Upon treatment of airway macrophages with LPS, key genes involved in proinflammatory and antibacterial responses were upregulated in both Scnn1b-Tg and wt macrophages. However, expression levels of LPS-induced proinflammatory mediators, like IL-1β (P<0.01), IL-6 (P<0.05), IL-12 (P<0.001), MMP12 (P<0.001) and NOS2 (P<0.01) were significantly enhanced in airway macrophages isolated from Scnn1b-Tg mice compared to wt controls. Conclusions: Our findings indicate that a mucostatic airway environment triggers polarization of airway macrophages toward alternative activation at baseline and primes them for augmented cytokine responses when challenged with bacterial-derived LPS. These results suggest that activated airway macrophages may play an important role in the in vivo pathogenesis of chronic airway inflammation, and that a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying macrophage activation may lead to novel antiinflammatory therapies for CF. Supported by BMBF (82DZL0040A1). The human nasal potential difference assay is a widely accepted method for measuring CFTR activity in vivo. Because nasal epithelium may not reflect CFTR activity within the sinuses, we developed the endoscopically directed sinus potential difference (EDSPD) assay. Direct targeting of the pathologic epithelium using the endoscope in the EDSPD suggests this technique may be superior to the nasal PD assay as it provides improved capability of measuring in vivo chloride (Cl -) activity at the site of disease. The objective of this study is to evaluate the EDSPD assay as a novel instrument for detecting diminished chloride (Cl -) transport at the site of inflammation in human sinuses. Methods: Patients undergoing sinus surgery were prospectively enrolled. A potential difference catheter was inserted under endoscopic visualization into the maxillary, ethmoid, or frontal sinuses. The abbreviated protocol for detecting CFTR-mediated Cltransport was as follows: Ringer's solution (baseline potential difference), Ringer's+100 μM amiloride (blockade of epithelial sodium (Na + ) channels), and Low Cl -Ringer's+10 μM isoproterenol (activation of Cltransport). Results were correlated to mucosal grading at the catheter site using visual analog scale (VAS). Results: Twelve patients were included in the study. The EDSPD assay revealed significantly diminished response to amiloride and Clfree Ringers+isoproterenol in CRS compared to controls (amiloride ΔPD(mv): Control, 7.68±0.8 vs. CRS, 0.19±1.5; p = 0.017; Cl -free+isoproterenol ΔPD(mv): Control, -11.9±1.9 vs. CRS, -2.87±1.1; p = 0.02). Robust baseline potential difference indicated the presence of epithelial integrity and preserved tight junctions. There was a moderate but significant negative correlation between amiloride response and sinus mucosa grading system (r = -0.69, 95% CI: -2.55 to -0.38, p = 0.01) indicating higher VAS mucosal grades correlate to diminished Na + channel function or transport. The sinus mucosa grade also demonstrated a strong and significant positive correlation with maximal stimulation of Cltransport (Clfree + isoproterenol) (r = 0.75, 95% CI:0.51 to 2.26, p < 0.005). A positive correlation indicates higher mucosal grade (when endoscopic finding is worse) is associated with a decreased ability to secrete Clthrough the epithelium. Conclusion: The markedly diminished Clsecretion (and Na + absorption) across in vivo sinus epithelium in human subjects with CRS with significant inflammation as measured by the EDSPD assay suggests acquired CFTR (and ENaC) dysfunction in the mucosal site of inflammation in CRS. Compared to the nasal cavity, the sinuses provide an attractive model in PD measurement as they are lined with an epithelium, continuous with and qualitatively similar to the lower respiratory epithelium, including similar ion transport mechanisms and microbiology. These patients may derive therapeutic benefit from Clsecretagogues. Objective: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) affects nearly 16% of the US population each year with an estimated 13 million yearly physician visits and has an enormous impact on quality of life. Sinusitis is a heterogeneous disease with a universal hallmark involving dysfunctional mucociliary clearance (MCC), reminiscent of cystic fibrosis (CF). The objective of the current study is to investigate the influence of mucus stasis on the transepithelial chloride transport using a preclinical (rabbit) model of rhinosinusitis. Rabbits were chosen because small rodents do not reproduce key aspects of human upper airway physiology and our previous experiments showed that rabbit and human nasal epithelium have similar physiologic features in vitro. We have created a rabbit model of sinusitis without administrating any bacteria or pathogens. A sterile synthetic sponge was placed in the middle meatus (natural outflow tract of maxillary sinus) of New Zealand white rabbits to block mucociliary flow of the sinus for two weeks. This method (transnasal endoscopic approach) causes no damage to sinus mucosa, is reversible by removing merocel transnasally, and does allow for the assessment of recovery after two weeks of merocel placement. After removal of synthetic sponge, half of the rabbits were assessed for development of acute rhinosinusitis (ARS). The rest of the rabbits were observed for another 12 weeks to see whether the rabbits developed CRS. Histology sectioning, CT images, microbiome analysis, nasal potential difference (NPD) assays, and micro-optical coherence tomography (μOCT) were performed to characterize the preclinical model of rhinosinusitis. Results: CT demonstrated opacification of left sinuses after 2-week placement of sterile packing in all rabbits (n = 8), which was seen again on week 12 in rabbits followed (n = 4). In histology, rabbits sectioned on Week 2 showed findings of acute inflammation (mostly neutrophils) with superficial ulceration. On week 12, significant infiltration of plasma cells and lymphocytes were noted with osteitis and hyperplastic changes. Control rabbits had significantly greater mean NPD polarization than rabbits with sinus inflammation (-28.6 ± 4.03 mV vs. -6.14 ± 1.13 mV; p = 0.0039). Microenvironment was markedly different between the two groups: Shannon's diversity index was significantly elevated in the sinusitis rabbits compared to controls (6.93 ± 0.18 vs. 1.68 ± 0.64; p<0.0001). Samples on week 2 were dominated by anaerobic bacteria. Maxillary sinus epithelia from sinusitis rabbits demonstrated significantly lower PCL depth compared to controls (Sinusitis = 3.34 +/-0.38μm vs Control = 4.28 +/-0.41μm, p = 0.0008). Conclusions: After blocking MCC for two weeks, rabbits exhibited features of ARS on week 2 and CRS on week 12. Shifts in sinus bacterial colonization were observed with decreased transepithelial chloride transport in sinusitis rabbits compared to controls. Lower PCL depth may represent CFTR dysfunction in rhinosinusitis. Mucus stasis via blockage sinus ostia may lead to hypoxia and result in substantial changes in the sinus microbiome and CFTR dysfunction in rhinosinusitis. Beaty, T.C.; Brown, M.R.; Forrest, O.A.; Ingersoll, S.; Stecenko, A.; Tirouvanziam, R. Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA Background: CF airway disease is dominated by intense neutrophilic inflammation. This inflammation results in high levels of enzymes such as neutrophilic elastase (NE) and myeloperoxidase which damage the airways and perpetuate inflammation. Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are frequently used in an attempt to reduce this inflammation, however there is no evidence of clinical benefit and withdrawal of ICS has been shown to be safe (Balfour-Lynn IM, et al. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014) . Furthermore, some studies have suggested ICS have detrimental effects in CF, such as increasing the prevalence of infection with Pseudomonas. Previous work in our lab demonstrated that systemic steroids increase active primary granule exocytosis and subsequent release of NE (Laval J, et al. J Immunol. 2013; 190:6043-50) . Based on these prior studies, we hypothesized that ICS withdrawal would result in improved lung function and decreased inflammatory markers. Methods: CF patients 6 years of age or older who had been treated with ICS for 6 consecutive months were eligible for enrollment. Subjects were required to be at baseline health and have an FEV1 of ≥ 40% predicted. Subjects were excluded if they had evidence of asthma, previous failure of ICS withdrawal, or were on oral corticosteroids for any reason. Lung function measurement, blood samples, and induced sputum were obtained prior to and a minimum of 14 days after cessation of ICS. Flow cytometry was used to identify live sputum neutrophils and quantify surface CD63, a marker for primary granule exocytosis. NE activity was measured in the sputum by spectrophotometry. Results: Six patients have enrolled in the study, with four completing both sample collections. We plan to continue enrollment, and will have complete data on the initial six patients by August 2016 for presentation in October 2016. In the four patients who have completed the study so far, FEV1 % predicted has increased from an average of 86% to 92% since ICS withdrawal. Average acute pulmonary exacerbation incidence has decreased from 2.12 to 1.75 per year. Complete clinical data and experimental results of airway neutrophil function and NE activity will be reported on the six patients to be completed by August. Discussion: This prospective trial of ICS withdrawal in CF will help better understand the relationship between airway neutrophil function, NE activity, and lung function in CF, both at baseline and under the influence of steroidal anti-inflammatories, and may provide information on targets for better, more specific, anti-inflammatory treatments for CF airway disease. Funding for this study was provided by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (TB), the Children's Healthcare of Atlanta Friends Fund (TB, AS, RT) and the Emory+Children's Center for CF Research (Startup fund, RT). Chandler, J.D. 1 ; Horati, H. 2, 3 ; Scholte, B.J. 2, 3 ; Jones, D.P. 1 ; changes in metabolic components of this fluid in infancy may be key to preventing adult disease. Methods: We employed targeted (Biocrates p180 IDKit) and untargeted (QExactive LC-MS, Thermo) metabolomics of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from CF infants (n=13; aged 34±8 months; 92% with >1 copy of F508del, and 46% F508del homozygous) as well as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) patients (n=5) and healthy controls (HC; n=5). Chest computed tomography (CT) scans of CF infants were also scored according to the PRAGMA method, a sensitive measure of early lung disease, discriminating bronchiectasis, air trapping and mucus plugging. Results: CF metabolic profile was markedly different from both HC and ARDS, and clear differences between ARDS and HC were also observed. In CF-infant BALF, targeted metabolomics revealed increased hydroxyproline, putrescine and spermidine compared to controls (all p<0.05), likely reflecting increased proteolysis (hydroxyproline) and arginase activity (putrescine, spermidine) from neutrophil activation in early CF lung disease. Using untargeted metabolomics, we also identified 8,343 unique m/z features in the same CF BALFs. 349 of these significantly differed from HC at a 1% false-discovery rate threshold, with 8% matching known metabolites including hydroxyproline. Untargeted analysis quantification of hydroxyproline significantly associated with targeted data quantification (r 2 =0.72, p<0.0001), suggesting good agreement between the methods. Finally, we tested associations of metabolomics data with PRAG-MA CT scores in CF infants using a partial least squares method to identify biomarkers and make mechanistic inferences regarding early CF lung disease development. In total, 6 targeted metabolites and 273 untargeted m/z features associated with PRAGMA CT scores with high model importance (i.e., variable importance projection >2). Among these, known matches to metabolites associated with glutathione oxidation (glutathione sulfonamide and cysteinyl glutathione) and phospholipid metabolism were present. Conclusion: Metabolomics readily discriminated infant CF from non-CF controls and identified novel factors associated with lung disease severity. These newly identified candidates may be validated as biomarkers and/ or lead to mechanistic targets for intervention strategies to arrest disease progression. Chronic pulmonary infections continue to be the predominant cause of morbidity in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Emerging multidrug and totally drug-resistant strains of P. aeruginosa are an increasing threat in these patients. Hence there is an urgent need to develop new strategies to combat P. aeruginosa infections. The pathogenic profile of P. aeruginosa is related to its ability to secrete a variety of virulence factors and promote biofilm formation. Strategies that strengthen the ability of the host to inhibit virulence factors would allow for enhanced bacterial clearance and could be employed in the treatment of resistant infections. Recently, we have shown that the laboratory strain of P. aeruginosa (PAO1) inhibits expression of PPARγ in macrophages. Here we investigated the effects CF isolates of P. aeruginosa (mucoid and nonmucoid) have on PPARγ and its dependent genes in macrophages and epithelial cells. Human moncocyte-derived macrophages and epithelial cells treated with CFBR 573 and 450 (nonmucoid), CFBR 388 and 309 (mucoid) P. aeruginosa (MOI of 1) showed significantly reduced expression of PPARγ message and protein in a time-dependent manner. Furthermore PPARγ-dependent genes, CD36 (a scavenger receptor) and Paraoxanase-2 (PON-2), an enzyme that possesses lactonase activity and which enhances the hydrolysis of quorum-sensing molecules, were also inhibited by these isolates. Pioglitazone, a PPARγ ligand at 10μM enhanced clearance of P. aeruginosa from macrophages infected with P. aeruginosa. Mechanistically, we show that PPARγ agonists induce paraoxonase 2 (PON-2) and CD36 to enhance bacterial clearance. Together these data show that CF isolates of P. aeruginosa inhibit expression of PPARγ in host cells, suggesting a mechanism by which bacteria evade host defenses. By downregulation of PPARγ and its dependent genes these pathogens compromise phagocytosis and enhance virulence. Our studies suggest a role for PPARγ immunotherapy for P. aeruginosa infections in patients with CF. Epidemiological studies suggest that antiviral host defenses may be compromised in people with cystic fibrosis (CF), as patients exhibit prolonged recovery times and frequent hospitalizations in association with viral respiratory infections. In vitro studies implicate impaired antiviral responses in airway epithelia as a feature of this phenotype. The airways are home to multilayered antiviral host defenses, which may be cell-based or extracellular. Compared with non-CF cells, CF airway epithelia support greater levels of viral infection and replication when infected with several classes of respiratory viruses, and exhibit dysregulated expression of several gene products involved in host defense. In this study, we hypothesized that airway surface liquid exhibits direct antiviral activity and, further, that the antiviral activity of respiratory secretions is reduced in CF. To test these hypotheses, we developed an in vitro assay to measure the innate antiviral activity present in native airway secretions from CF and non-CF pigs. We found that cell-free tracheal and nasal secretions from newborn non-CF pigs exhibited dose-dependent inhibitory activity against several enveloped and encapsidated viruses including Sendai virus (SeV), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), influenza, and adenovirus. This activity, which was heat labile, was also detected in human nasal secretions. Importantly, we found that the anti-SeV activity of nasal secretions from newborn CF pigs was significantly diminished relative to non-CF littermate controls. When we mixed CF and non-CF secretions at varying ratios, we observed a correlation between the amount of non-CF secretions and anti-SeV activity, suggesting the possibility of reduced abundance or function of antiviral factors in CF secretions. Based on previous reports that cathepsin activity is elevated in CF airway fluids from human subjects, we measured cysteine protease activity in newborn CF and non-CF pig secretions. We found increased cathepsin B, L, and S-like activity in BAL from newborn CF pigs, relative to non-CF littermates; similarly, we observed a trend toward increased cathepsin B activity in newborn CF nasal secretions. We observed that the anti-SeV activity of the pig antimicrobial peptide protegrin-1 was abolished by pre-treatment with cathepsin B, suggesting that increased cathepsin activity may negatively influence the activity of secreted antiviral factors. Our data indicate that native airway secretions exhibit inhibitory activity against viruses, and that, at birth, the antiviral capacity of CF airway secretions is diminished relative to non-CF. Future studies will investigate the possible contributions of secreted proteases to this phenomenon, as well as the overall impact of loss of CFTR function on cellular and extracellular antiviral defenses on the onset and progression of CF lung disease. Levy, E.J.; Barone, C.; Bruscia, E.M.; Egan, M.E. Pediatrics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA Background: Recently it has been suggested that the innate immune response is dysregulated in CF. The innate immune system is responsible for activating host defenses as well as initiating tissue repair, thus it is essential for maintaining tissue homeostasis. The macrophage, a key player of the innate immune system, continuously surveys the extracellular environment and adopts distinct characteristics via activation by specific immune signals (polarization). This process of activation allows the macrophage to respond and function appropriately to preserve tissue homeostasis. In vitro the macrophage can be differentiated into two major phenotypes: M1 (LPS+INF-gamma) which is essential for the pro-inflammatory response and M2 (IL-4) which is essential for tissue repair. Hypothesis: We hypothesize that intrinsic defects in CF macrophages affect their ability to adequately respond to extracellular stimuli, affecting their phenotypic response and contributing to a state of hyperinflammation. Methods: Peripheral blood-derived monocytes from healthy donors (HD) (n=7) as well as CF subjects (n=7) were differentiated into macrophages using RPMI media with 50 ng/mL of MCSF for 10 days. Cells were treated for 24 hours with 100 ng/mL of LPS plus 20 ng/mL of INF-gamma to activate the M1 phenotype or 20 ng/mL of IL-4 to activate the M2 phenotype. RNA was isolated and reverse transcribed to cDNA. Q-RT-PCR was performed using IL-6, IL-1B, and TNF-alpha primers as M1 markers and TGF-B1, MRC, PPAR-gamma as M2 markers. In total, seven experiments were performed, each using a different set of HD and CF subjects, utilizing 8.0 x 10 5 to 1.0 x 10 6 cells per well. Results: As expected, HD macrophages (n=7, experiments) demonstrated appropriate plasticity and polarization with increased expression of M1 markers and decreased expression of M2 markers in response to LPS/ INF-gamma. Furthermore, they demonstrated modestly increased expression of M2 markers and decreased expression of M1 markers in response to IL-4. In marked contrast, when stimulated with LPS/INF-gamma CF macrophages (n=7, experiments) demonstrated hyper-inflammation with dramatically increased expression levels of M1 markers as well as aberrant polarization as evidenced by increased expression levels of some M2 makers. Aberrant polarization was further characterized by increased expression of M1 markers in the presence of IL-4 in addition to increased expression of M2 markers. Conclusions: These data suggest that lack of functioning CFTR in macrophages leads to the inability of macrophages to adequately respond to environmental cues and activate into appropriate phenotypes suggesting there is an intrinsic cellular defect. Moreover, the mechanism(s) that underlie these aberrant responses likely involve(s) altered intracellular signal transduction which is currently under investigation. Future Considerations: We will interrogate the STAT1 and STAT6 pathways as well as the role of insulin-like growth factor 1 in macrophage activation. Supported by: NIH and CFF. A series of elegant studies by Yankaskas, Knowles, Boucher and colleagues in the 1980s using nasal cells derived from nasal polyps established the utility of nasal airway cells for studies on electrolyte transport from both non-CF and CF donors. The results of these pioneering studies established the high rate of sodium transport and lack of chloride secretion to cAMP agonists in CF-derived nasal cells compared to non-CF cells. The studies reported here were designed to establish in vitro diagnostic methods to determine the responsiveness of CF nasal epithelial cells derived from nasal brush biopsies. The nasal epithelium expresses an abundant amount of CFTR protein and compared to other potential tissue sources minimally invasive procedures can be used to procure nasal epithelial cell samples from patients. Methods: Working in collaboration with physicians we acquired nasal epithelial cells by brush biopsy from non-CF and CF donors. Nasal cells (1 x 10 6 ) were expanded to 250 x 10 6 in vitro using recently published methods for the growth and expansion of primary cells. The primary nasal epithelial cells were differentiated on permeable supports for electrophysiological studies using methods already established and in routine use in the Bridges lab. The efficacy of Kalydeco and other experimental drugs with known efficacy on CFTR was evaluated. Results: To date 100 donors have been enrolled in this study: 12 non-CF and 88 CF donors. Nasal cells from 5 non-CF and 7 CF donors have been successfully expanded and grown on permeable supports. Both non-CF and CF cells were well differentiated as evidenced by abundant ciliated cells and mucus secreting goblet cells. The baseline electrolyte transport phenotypes were as expected; non-CF cells displayed low sodium transport and a chloride secretory response to cAMP agonists; CF cells displayed a high sodium transport and no secretory response to cAMP agonists. Chloride secretion was unaltered by the CFTR correctors VX-809 or C18 or the potentiator Kalydeco in non-CF cells. In contrast chloride secretion was improved by overnight treatment with VX-809 and C18 and further potentiated by Kalydeco in CF cells. Conclusions: Our preliminary results document the feasibility of harvesting nasal epithelial cells, expanding the cells and growing the cells for electrophysiology and pharmacological studies. Baseline electrolyte transport phenotypes as well as the responses to known CFTR modulators demonstrate the utility of nasal cells as a resource for CF drug discovery. The outcome of the preliminary studies can be considered highly successful. The methods and protocols we have developed will allow for the testing of newly approved drugs on small numbers of patients with rare mutations who would otherwise be excluded from clinical trials. Moreover we anticipate nasal cells will be used to assist in the stratification of patient populations for clinical trials and thereby accelerate the approval of drugs for the treatment of CF. Supported by CFF. Introduction: Chronic airway inflammation and impaired inflammatory response to infection are among the main manifestations of CF. Although several mechanisms linking abnormal ion secretion and inflammatory dysregulation have been suggested, the link between CFTR function and altered inflammatory response needs to be better understood. Lipid raft microdomains (LRM) are specialized regions of the plasma membrane with a particular lipid and protein composition. We and others have shown that CFTR in LRM is a critical modulator of the inflammatory and the immune responses. In the present work, we investigated if the F508del CFTR mutant modifies the proteome of LRM in proinflammatory conditions. Methods: HeLa cells stably transfected with either wild-type or F508del-CFTR were grown in DMEM with Lys6/Arg6 or Lys0/Arg0 and incubated for 10min with 100U/mL of TNF-α. Cells were lysed with 1% Triton X-100 for 1h at 4°C. Cell lysates with equal amounts of proteins were centrifuged in a sucrose density gradient for 3h at 166,000g at 4°C to purify LRM. LRM were trypsin-digested, and peptides analyzed by nano-RSLC LTQ-Orbitrap velos MS in a 40min gradient. Proteins were quantified by a SILAC approach using MaxQuant and statistical analysis was performed with Perseus. Immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy were performed on the same HeLa cells and bronchial epithelial CFBE cells issued from a F508del homozygous patient and immortalized by D. Gruenert. CFTR immunodetection was performed with IgG-clone 24-1 diluted 1/200, GRPC5A immunolocalization with IgG 306-320 diluted 1/100 and cholera toxin subunit B cell staining at a concentration of 0.5μg/mL. Preliminary data: In order to discriminate between changes in recruitment in lipid rafts and changes of global expression of the proteins, we analyzed the total proteome to unveil proteins that are constitutively differentially expressed between the WT and F508del-CFTR cells. In the total cell, 1381 proteins were identified and quantified. In parallel, we analyzed the LRM fraction to identify proteins that are differentially recruited in the lipid rafts. In the LRM fraction we could identify and quantify 332 proteins, of which 66 could be identified only in LRM. Among the 332 proteins, 22 proteins showed significant ratio variations after TNF-α stimulation. Out of the 22 proteins differentially recruited in LRM after inflammatory exposure, 17 were increased in F508del cells with respect to wild-type, including G-protein coupled receptors, anion transporters, and one cell-surface mucin. In both HeLa and CFBE cells, we confirmed that one of the G-protein coupled receptor GRPC5A relocates to LRM along with F508del-CFTR after 10 min of TNF-α treatment. These results could enlighten the crosstalk between CFTR and TNF-α and its impact on the cell response to inflammatory challenge, and support and extend our recent findings (Bitam S, et al. F1000Res. 2015 4:218) . Novel aspect: In this work, we address for the first time the impact of CFTR mutation F508del and TNF-α stimulation on the LRM proteome. Supported by French Associations Vaincre la Mucoviscidose and Mucoviscidose-ABCF2. Cystic fibrosis (CF) airway disease is characterized by thickened mucus of increased viscoelastic properties which results in poor clearance from the lung and increased infection and airway inflammation. Currently, there is a debate in the CF community as to the cause of pathologically thickened mucus. One hypothesis is that defective chloride transport by absent or misfolded cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) results in sodium hyperabsorption to maintain intracellular ionic balance. In this hypothesis, water moves with sodium from the airway lumen into the underlying cellular epithelium, thereby dehydrating the airway surface layer (ASL) and creating a high concentration mucus with increased viscoelastic properties. A competing hypothesis is that the defective CFTR inhibits bicarbonate secretion into the ASL which results in acidification of the ASL, thereby increasing the rheological properties of the mucus layer and impeding clearance. We seek to define the relative contributions of each competing hypothesis (mucus pH and concentration) to the increased viscoelastic properties of CF mucus. We perform all of our assays on mucus harvested from our human bronchial epithelial cell culture model system which allows for control of mucus concentration as defined by % solids dry weight, as well as the pH. Our results show that altering pH from 8 to 6 results in a doubling of the viscosity of mucus of 2% solids mucus. However, our results also show that doubling the concentration of mucus from 2% solids to 4% solids results in a 10-fold increase in the viscosity of mucus. Further, the increases in mucus concentration results in an increase in the buffer capacity of mucus, making it more resistant to changes in pH. Taken together, our results show that pH alters the viscosity of low concentration mucus, but that effect is diminished at high mucus % solids. The data further show that % solids is ultimately the dominant factor in creating the highly viscous mucus that is a hallmark of CF airway disease. Hill, D.B. 1, 3 ; Forest, M. 2 ; Seim, I. 2, 1 ; Ramsey, K.A. 6 ; Esther, C.R. 4 ; Muhlebach, M.S. 5 ; Stick, S.M. 6 ; Boucher, R.C. 1 1. Cystic Fibrosis Center, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Center for Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 3. Mathematics, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 4. Pediatric Pumonology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 5. Pediatrics, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NY, USA; 6. Respiratory Medicine, Princess Margaret Hospital for Children, Perth, WA, Australia The AREST CF project represents a unique opportunity to document the early onset of airways disease in cystic fibrosis. In this ongoing study, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples are being collected from pediatric patients at regular intervals over the first 6 years of life. The goal of our analysis is to investigate changes in the rheological properties of mucus brought on by CF airway disease. We have previously shown that CF sputum is characterized by significantly increased mucin concentration [1] , resulting in modified biophysical properties such as viscoelasticity and osmotic pressure [2, 3] . Due to the dilute nature of BAL samples, determining the native concentration of mucus along the airways from BAL samples has proven impossible. While small flecks of concentrated, viscoelastic mucus are present in the pediatric CF BALs, the samples also contain highly diluted mucus that is rheologically identical to saline. By combining sophisticated microbead rheological measurements of BAL samples with advanced data analytics, we are able to determine a diversity of rheological microenvironments in which tracer particles are sampling. Specifically, we embed 1 micron diameter tracer particles into the sample volume and analyze their diffusive fluctuations. Analytically, we firstly determine which particle tracked paths are consistent with normal saline and exclude those from further analysis. For non-excluded particles, anomalous sub-diffusion parameters of each particle path are calculated [4] , reflecting motilities from a range of diluted to pure mucus sample. We compare our results to adult CF and normal BALs, finding that the samples collected from the pediatric AREST participants display a rheology that lies between that of healthy adults and adult CF patients. We additionally compare the results of over 150,000 particle tracks from 64 patients and 12 non-CF pediatric disease patients with traditional clinical biomarkers such as CT scan scoring and cell counts. The mechanism by which loss of CFTR leads to blunted PI3K/ AKT signaling in response to TLR4 activation remains to be investigated. Here we test whether ezrin, a member of the ezrin-radixin-moesin proteins that bridge the cytoskeleton to cell membrane proteins, links CFTR and PI3K/AKT signaling. Methods: MΦs were generated by culturing bone marrow cells from B6.129-KOCftr tm1UNC and WT littermate mice for 7 days in M-CSF. Human MΦs were differentiated from peripheral blood of healthy donors (HD) (n=5) or CF patients (n=5) for 10 days in human M-CSF. Murine MΦ cell lines (J774A.1) were stably infected with a retroviral vector expressing an shRNA against ezrin (shRNA-Ezr) or a scramble control (shRNA-CTR). For the celecoxib study, murine and human MΦs were treated overnight with 25mM celecoxib or vehicle (DMSO) and then challenged with LPS. Results: Using confocal and transmission electron microscopy, we show that in response to LPS, MΦs form plasma membrane ruffles with high levels of ezrin. In contrast, loss of CFTR in MΦs causes a profound reduction of ezrin protein levels in the plasma membrane ruffles in response to LPS. In activated CF MΦs, ezrin is trapped intracellularly and fails to be phosphorylated at its actin-binding domain, thus leading to proteasomedependent degradation. Reduced ezrin is also observed in human CF MΦs bearing Class I-II (n=3) but not mild CFTR mutations (n=2). Studies in shRNA-Ezr-MΦs reveal that ezrin is required for PI3K/AKT induction in response to LPS. Low levels of ezrin in MΦs also augment TLR4 signaling in response to LPS, and impair Pseudomonas aeruginosa phagocytosis. Treatment with celecoxib, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug that we have previously used to reestablish PI3K/AKT signaling in CF MΦs challenged with LPS and to reduce lung hyperinflammation in CF mice, increases ezrin levels and promotes its phosphorylation in CF cells. Thus, we speculate that the beneficial effects of celecoxib in CF MΦs are, in part, due to ezrin protein stabilization, which ensures efficient PI3K/AKT signaling in response to LPS. Conclusion: In summary, we have identified a major dysfunction in the organization of plasma membrane ruffles during CF MΦ activation, which disrupts a key immune signaling network and weakens host defense. Funded by CFF. Cui, D. 1, 2 ; Leung, H. 1, 4 ; Chu, K. 1, 4 ; Ford, T. 1, 4 ; Hyun, C. 1 ; Yin, B. 1, 4 ; Singh, K. 1, 4 ; Birket, S. 3, 5 ; Solomon, G. 3, 5 ; Rowe, S.M. 3, 5 ; Tearney, G.J. 1, 4 1. MGH, Boston, MA, USA; 2. NTU, Singapore, Singapore; 3. UAB, Birmingham, AL, USA; 4. HMS, Boston, MA, USA; 5. Gregory Fleming James Cystic Fibrosis Research Ctr, Birmingham, AL, USA Background: Mucociliary clearance (MCC) is a critical defense mechanism of the human respiratory system. In CF, the impairment of MCC often leads to severe morbidity such as obstruction of the airways and increased susceptibility to chronic lung infection. By providing high resolution (1-2 μm) cross-sectional imaging capabilities at rapid imaging speed (40 frames per second), the μOCT (Liu L, et al. PLoS One 2013; 8:e54473) technology that our group has pioneered is a useful and unique tool capable of facilitating the understanding of the mechanistic pathways associated with CF pathogenesis. Method: μOCT imaging is capable of performing comprehensive analysis of various aspects of CF pathophysiology such as the functional microanatomy of the airway epithelium, including ASL and PCL thickness, cilia beat frequency, and mucociliary transport rates (MCT). In addition to the ex vivo work performed on the benchtop μOCT imaging system, we have also developed a rigid 4 mm μOCT probe for in vivo imaging of airway epithelium in breathing swine. To improve the clinical utility of μOCT for CF studies, we now report the implementation of a flexible μOCT probe that is designed to be compatible with a standard clinical bronchoscope. The probe has a smaller diameter of 2.5 mm and transduces beam scanning motion using a flexible polyetheretherketone tube. The new design allows the probe to fit into the instrument channel of a bronchoscope. At the proximal end, a piezo-electric stack motor is attached to the instrument channel of the bronchoscope via a customized ergonomic attachment. The piezo motor provides a longitudinal scan at 40 Hz over an approximate 200 μm field of view. Results: The Figure compares two images of excised mice trachea tissue, one obtained from the benchtop μOCT system and the other from the miniaturized flexible μOCT probe. In both cases, cilia on the apical surface are clearly distinguishable, which indicates that the flexible bronchial probe has comparable imaging performance as the benchtop system. Conclusions: We successfully developed a miniaturized flexible μOCT probe suitable for imaging the epithelial functional microanatomy in vivo. Translation to human subjects will greatly benefit the study of CF pathogenesis and the assessment of the efficacy of experimental therapeutics. We gratefully acknowledge the support of this work by NIH R01 HL116213-01 and CFF funds ROWE10XX0 and TEARNE07XX0. Figure: A comparison of mouse trachea tissue images obtained from the benchtop µOCT system (left) and from the flexible bronchial probe (right). Cilia tips (green arrows) and periciliary liquid (PCL) layer (red bar) are seen on the surface of the epithelial layer (EP). Tracheal submucosal glands (SMGs) impact airway health by secreting mucus and serous fluids and by contributing to cellular regeneration as a tissue-specific stem cell (SC) niche. It has been shown that CFTR defects lead to dysregulation in the SMG SC niche likely through altered gland secretions, but much is still unknown regarding how glandular SCs are regulated. Wnt signaling is required for lineage commitment of glandular SCs during SMG morphogenesis from the surface airway epithelium (SAE). Whether similar Wnt-dependent processes coordinate SC expansion in adult SMGs following airway injury remains unknown. We found that two Wntreporters in mice (BAT-gal and TCF/Lef:H2B-GFP) are co-expressed in actively cycling SCs of primordial glandular placodes and in a small subset of adult SMG progenitor cells that enter the cell cycle 24 hours following airway injury. At homeostasis, these Wnt reporters showed nonoverlapping cellular patterns of expression in the SAE and SMGs. Following tracheal injury, proliferation was accompanied by dynamic changes in Wnt-reporter activity and the analysis of 56 Wnt-related signaling genes revealed unique temporal changes in expression within proximal (gland-containing) and distal (gland-free) portions of the trachea. For example, seven Wnt ligands (Wnt10a, Wnt10b, Wnt2, Wnt3a, Wnt4, Wnt5a, Wnt6) and six Wnt receptors (Fzd1, Fzd2, Fzd5, Fzd7, Lrp5, Lrp6) were differentially regulated. Additionally, Wnt modulators (Dkk2, Dkkl1, Sfrp1, Sfrp2, Bambi, Dvl1, Wif1) and downstream targets of Wnt signaling (Wisp2, Ccnd3, Myc) were also differentially expressed following injury. Wnt stimulation in vivo and in vitro promoted epithelial proliferation in both SMGs and the SAE. Interestingly, slowly cycling nucleotide label-retaining cells (LRCs) of SMGs were spatially positioned near clusters of BAT-gal positive serous tubules. Isolation and culture of tet-inducible H2B-GFP LRCs demonstrated that SMG LRCs were more proliferative than SAE LRCs and culture expanded SMG-derived progenitor cells outcompeted SAE-derived progenitors in regeneration of tracheal xenograft epithelium using a clonal analysis competition assay. SMG-derived progenitors were also multipotent for cell types in the surface airway epithelium and formed gland-like structures in xenografts. These studies demonstrate the importance of Wnt signals in modulating SC phenotypes within tracheal niches and provide new insight into phenotypic differences of SMG and SAE SCs. These studies also provide a foundation for the isolation and propagation of multipotent glandular progenitors that may be useful for SC therapies for CF airway disease. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an opportunistic pathogen causing infections in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Chronic CF airways are also characterized by robust neutrophilic infiltration. Neutrophils fight P. aeruginosa by multiple mechanisms: besides phagocytosis, they also release neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) to trap pathogens. NETs are composed of extracellular DNA decorated with histones and granule components. NETs are present in CF airways indicating that recruited neutrophils extrude NETs -most likely in response to bacteria including P. aeruginosa. Although clinically a potentially relevant mechanism in CF, the details of P. aeruginosa-induced NET formation remain unclear. Previously, we have shown that laboratory standard strains and CF isolates of P. aeruginosa are all strong inducers of NET formation in human neutrophils in vitro. To identify which bacterial components are crucial for NET induction, we cultured P. aeruginosa for different lengths of time representing bacteria in their early or late exponential, or early stationary growth phases. Interestingly, P. aeruginosa in the early exponential growth phase triggered the most robust NET formation while bacteria from older cultures led to diminished NET release. This indicated that bacterial components/virulence factors characteristic in their early growth phase are mainly responsible for triggering NET formation. Aflagellated mutants of P. aeruginosa PAK and PAO1 were seriously impaired in triggering NETs. Purified flagellum or flagellin monomers failed to stimulate NET release in human neutrophils. TLR5-blocking antibodies did not influence the ability of P. aeruginosa to trigger NET release. Similarly, murine neutrophils deficient in the main flagellin-sensing receptors, TLR5 and NLRC4, release NETs in response to P. aeruginosa just as wild-type neutrophils. The seemingly paradoxical finding of P. aeruginosa-induced NET release being flagellum-dependent but TLR5-and NLRC4-independent could be explained by the requirement of flagellar motility. The main function of the flagellum is to provide the bacterium with the ability to swim. We tested flagellar motor-deficient P. aeruginosa PAK mutants (DmotABD, DmotBCD) that express flagellum but are unable to move it for their ability to induce NETs in human neutrophils. Interestingly, we have found that motor-deficient mutants were incapable of inducing NET formation. In summary, we identified the bacterial flagellum as the major component of P. aeruginosa to induce NETs. The flagellum does not stimulate NET formation by binding to flagellum-sensing receptors but by providing swimming motility. We speculate that this mechanism could be also partially responsible for the well-described loss of flagellum of P. aeruginosa during CF airway infections. Specific Objective: We used transcriptomic analysis and connectivity mapping to discover novel mechanisms and identify small-molecule treatments for IL-13-and IL-4-induced GCM. Methods and Results: The LINCS-cmap connectivity map is a collection of chemical-induced transcriptional profile signatures from multiple cell lines. This allows inputting a transcriptional signature of interest to the database to retrieve compounds that may replicate or revert the input signature. We generated a transcriptional signature consisting of the top 75 up-and down-regulated genes in HAE cultures exposed to IL-13 for 3 weeks, which resulted in robust GCM; the LINCS-cmap database identified multiple compounds that may revert this transcriptional signature. We then hypothesized that some of these compounds may block IL-13 induced GCM. We exposed HAE cultures to IL-13 and IL-4 in the presence of the top 6 compounds. Multiple compounds prevented IL-13-induced GCM, including blockers of pathways known to play a role in GCM. We found that an HSP90 inhibitor dose-dependently blocked IL-13-and IL-4-induced GCM in multiple HAE donors, and also reverted IL-13-induced GCM once established. Conclusions: We conclude that HSP90-blockade robustly prevents IL-13-and IL-4-induced GCM in HAE. We speculate that HSP90 plays a direct role in GCM and that it likely acts downstream of IL-13 and IL-4-receptor binding. Therefore, HSP90 may be involved in GCM induced by a broad variety of mechanisms. Multiple HSP90 inhibitors are currently being used in clinical trials, predominantly for cancer treatment. Repurposing these drugs to block GCM may allow control of mucus hypersecretion in cystic fibrosis and other airway diseases. Supported by: University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine Physician-Scientist Training Program. Introduction: Glucose is present in the airways of patients affected by cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) and those with bacterial airway infections. Since the lung function of patients diagnosed with CFRD declines at an accelerated rate and since insulin controls glucose metabolism, the effect of insulin on normal and CF airway epithelia glucose clearance was investigated. Methods: Determine whether airway epithelia have functional apical insulin receptors that contribute to glucose clearance and whether these responses are impaired in CF. Insulin responsiveness of human airway epithelial cells matured at air-liquid interface was characterized by PKB/ Akt signaling pathway analysis utilizing pharmacological and immunoblot assays. Results: Application of insulin stimulated glucose uptake in normal primary human airway epithelial cells. Human airway cells expressing mutant CFTR were less responsive to insulin and did not increase glucose uptake as much as wild-type. Application of SC-79, an enhancer for Akt activation, did not increase the amount of Akt phosphorylation or function in airway cells expressing mutant CFTR. Conclusions: Insulin stimulated Akt2 signaling preferentially over Akt1 in normal airway cells, but not in CF airway cells. Akt2 activation by insulin is important for glucose uptake in normal human airway cells. The response to insulin in CF patient airway epithelia is impaired and an insulin-independent approach may be needed to provide an efficacious treatment for CF and CFRD. Strug, L.J. 1 ; On behalf of the International CF Gene Modifier Co,. 2, 3, 4 1. Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2. INSERM, Paris, France; 3. University of North Carolina/Case Western Reserve, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 4. Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA Introduction: Meconium ileus (MI) , intestinal obstruction at birth, is heritable and previous genome-wide association studies for MI by the International CF Gene Modifier Consortium (ICFGMC) identified SNPs near SLC26A9 and SLC6A14; these findings have since been replicated and shown to contribute to disease severity in other CF-affected organs such as the lungs. Here we report the results of a meta-GWAS for MI with an expanded CF population in the ICFGMC, with the goals of identifying additional loci that contribute to MI susceptibility and additional insight into disease severity in other CF-affected organs. Methods: We analyzed 5,845 individuals with CF, consisting of four patient collections recruited through Johns Hopkins University, the University of North Carolina/Case Western Reserve University and population-based patient cohorts from France and Canada who were genotyped on a variety of platforms, and imputed to a common set of >12 million SNPs. Each of the four cohorts were analyzed at all SNPs across the genome separately, and then combined using random effects meta-analysis. For the Johns Hopkins cohort containing siblings, generalized estimating equations with a compound symmetry covariance structure was used to account for the relatedness between sibling pairs; all other groups used logistic regression. Genome-wide significant findings and nearby variants in linkage disequilibrium (LD) were assessed in the context of publicly available data from the Roadmap Epigenomics and ENCODE projects. Results and Interpretation: Five loci contained SNPs that reached the genome-wide significance threshold, P < 5*10 -8 . These loci included the previously reported MI candidate genes SLC26A9 and SLC6A14, and three novel regions containing PRSS1, ABCG5/ABCG8 and ATP12A. SLC26A9 is an anion transporter/exchanger known to interact with CFTR. SLC6A14 encodes an amino acid transporter expressed in the intestine. Rs12710568 is in high LD with the top ranked SNP at the SLC6A14 locus and falls in the putative promoter for the gene. Analysis in the context of chromatin states, DNase hypersensitivity and transcription factor binding data enables us to narrow the SLC26A9 regional association to SNPs close to the transcription start site of SLC26A9 that may influence expression levels. PRSS1 encodes cationic trypsinogen, a protease from the pancreas, with elevated serum levels indicating CF in newborns. Given our PRSS1 regional association (rs9969188) and recently reported luciferase assays with a promoter variant in strong LD (rs4726576) associated with childhood-onset pancreatitis, it appears that a decrease in PRSS1 levels may increase the risk for MI. ATP12A was recently reported to contribute to CF lung disease, and is a nongastric proton pump. ABCG5 and ABCG8 work together to transport cholesterol and sterols out of the liver, or in and out of enterocytes of the small intestine. Conclusions: All of our associated variants suggest regulatory effects of gene expression, and most are located near genes previously implicated in CF. Funding received from CFF, CF Canada, CIHR, Genome Canada and INSERM. Blackman, S.M. 1 ; Vecchio-Pagán, B. 2 ; Strug, L.J. 3, 4 ; Pace, R.G. 8 ; Corvol, H. 5, 6 ; Rommens, J.M. 3, 4 ; Drumm, M.L. 7 ; Knowles, M.R. 8 ; Cutting, G.R. 2 1. Pediatric Endocrinology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2. Genetics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 3. Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 4. University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 5. Pediatric Pulmonology, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France; 6. Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France; 7. Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA; 8. Marsico Lung Institute, Univ of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Background: CF-related diabetes (CFRD) develops over time in adolescents and adults with CF and causes worse lung function and mortality. Previous studies have demonstrated that variation in the risk of CFRD is due to genes other than CFTR, ie, genetic modifiers. We identified CFRD modifier variants in 5 loci (see below) using a genome-wide and candidate-based association study (BlackmanSM, et al. Diabetes. 2013; 62: 3627-35) . The International CF Gene Modifier Consortium (ICFG-MC) recently increased the sample size and completed a lung phenotype meta-analysis (Corvol H, et al. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:8382) . Objective: To identify new risk loci for CFRD by genome-wide association meta-analysis. Design/Methods: CF study participants were recruited through the ICFGMC studies, almost all from North America and France. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were as described for the earlier GWAS (Blackman, et al.) including a requirement that the CFTR genotype be known to cause severe exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Diabetes was defined as insulin treatment for at least 1 year. Genotyping, quality control, and imputation were performed as described (Corvol, et al.) . Variants with minor allele frequency ≥2% were analyzed for association. Association was tested using Cox proportional hazard regression within each study cohort, adjusting for population stratification. Cohorts were combined by fixed-effects meta-analysis. Results: A total of 6030 individuals had full genotype and phenotype information. CFRD was confirmed to occur more frequently in females (HR = 1.7) as in our previous GWAS. No substantial difference in CFRD cumulative incidence was noted between study cohorts. Notably, all previously associated variants in CFRD modifier loci (TCF7L2, SLC26A9, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, and IGF2BP2) showed independent replication (P<0.05 for the same variant in newly tested samples). The TCF7L2 locus continued to have strong genome-wide support (P=2.4×10 -11 ). Two loci had variants associated with CFRD with P<1×10 -8 , including chr2q35 (P=5.9×10 -9 ) and chr8q24.3 (P=4.5×10 -11 ). There was no significant evidence of heterogeneity among cohorts at any of the loci (Cochran P=0.41 for chr2q35; P=0.82 for chr8q24.3). The associated SNPs at both new loci lie in and/or adjacent to genes not previously associated with CFRD or type 2 diabetes. Conclusions: Increase in sample size has increased the power to detect CFRD genetic modifiers. All previously identified CFRD modifier loci were replicated. Preliminary analyses identify so far 2 new CFRD modifier loci. These results support an important role for SLC26A9 and for type 2 diabetes risk genes in CFRD and reveal new loci involved in CFRD pathogenesis. Supported by CFF, NIH, Gilead Sciences, CF Canada, CIHR, Genome Canada. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within and 5' to SLC26A9 modify risk of CF-related diabetes (CFRD) (Blackman SM, et al. Diabetes. 2013; 62:3627-35) and meconium ileus (Sun L, et al. Nat Genet. 2012; 44:562-9) . To evaluate the genetic architecture of SLC26A9, we sequenced the entire SLC26A9 locus (9.9 kb 5', 30.4 kb gene and 7.4 kb 3') in 762 F508del homozygotes. Two linkage disequilibrium (LD) blocks defined by a single recombination in intron 8 were identified. Haplotypes were tested for association with CFRD onset using a continuous trait in which severity is reflected by earlier onset CFRD vs. older ages without CFRD diagnosis (Blackman, SM, et al.) . Two common haplotypes (29.2% and 32.7% frequency) within the 5' LD block containing the variants identified by GWAS were associated with higher and lower risk of CFRD, respectively. No coding SNPs were in LD with either haplotype and no individual SNPs showed greater association with CFRD than the two common haplotypes. This suggests that CFRD risk is conferred by either a single SNP in high LD with the remainder of the haplotype, or a combination of these noncoding SNPs. Next, we analyzed variants associated with SLC26A9 expression (eQTLs) reported by GTEx within 100 kb of SLC26A9 in three tissues known to express SLC26A9: pancreas, lung and stomach. In the pancreas, eQTLs clustered in two groups, one 5' and one 3' of the gene. In the 5' group, the most significant eQTL (rs2036100; p=4.9E-3, intron 1) is associated with CFRD, and is in LD with other CFRD-associated variants (8 of which have eQTL p-values from 6.2E-3 to 3.9E-2). In the 3' group, 49 SNPs had p-values ranging from 8.1E-4 to 4.4E-3, however this region contains no CFRD-risk variants. In the lung and stomach tissues, the most significant eQTLs in this region had p-values of 3.4E-2 and 1.3E-2, respectively, neither of which were CFRD-associated. SLC26A9 has 3 annotated human protein-coding isoforms. Isoform 1 (ENST00000367135) codes a 791aa protein that terminates in a PDZdomain binding motif, which facilitates SLC26A9 interaction with CFTR. Isoforms 2 (ENST000000367134) and 3 (ENST00000340781) both code the same 887aa protein that lacks the PDZ-binding motif. Comparative genomic analysis of SLC26A9 predicts that isoform 1 is present in all species beyond Xenopus, whereas isoforms 2 and 3 are primate-specific. Transcriptome analysis revealed that isoform 1 was the primary transcript in the lung, pancreas, salivary gland, skin and stomach (n=3 per tissue, Human Protein Atlas). Isoform 3 has lower expression, and was only found in lung and skin (4.5% and 43.5% of isoform 1, respectively). Isoform 2 was not identified in any of these tissues. RT-PCR of SLC26A9 RNA transcripts detected abundant isoform 1 in primary stomach, lung, and pancreas tissues, whereas isoforms that do not encode a PDZ-binding motif (ie, isoforms 2 or 3) were only found in the lung. Isoform 2 has also been previously reported in primary lung cells (Bertrand CA, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015; 50(S41):230) . Together, these results support a role for CFRD-associated variants influencing the expression of SLC26A9 isoform 1 in the pancreas. Funded by CFF and Aetna/US Healthcare Chair. Introduction: Considerable phenotype diversity exists among patients with the same CFTR mutation. Additional genetic modifiers contribute to this variability and it was previously estimated that 50% of lung function variance is attributable to non-CFTR genetic factors. FAM13A was previously associated with lung function in the general population and in chronic lung diseases, especially COPD. FAM13A protein has a RhoGAP domain suggesting its involvement in modulating the activity of RhoGTPases, which are key regulators of cytoskeletal dynamics. In this study we assess if FAM13A is involved in CF patients' FEV 1 variability and to characterize its biological role. Methods: The contribution of FAM13A as a modifier gene of lung function was tested by VEGAS (Versatile Gene-based Association Study) including 1354 French CF patients. A549 cells were cultured in F12 medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FCS and antibiotics. Primary human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC) from controls and CF patients are from Epithelix. The FAM13A antibody was from Sigma-Aldrich. FAM13A siRNA was from Ambion, and the expression plasmid is from Origene. Knock-out mice were obtained from the Knock-out Mouse project. Results: Using VEGAS, we showed that FAM13A is associated with lung function in CF patients. Immunohistochemistry in human and mouse lung shows that FAM13A is detected in both bronchial and alveolar type II cells. In inflammatory context, FAM13A mRNA expression is downregulated especially by IL-1β, both in A549 cells and HBEC cells. In order to understand the consequences of this downregulation, we used a siRNA against FAM13A and observed the induction of F-actin stress fibers both in A549 cells and HBEC and an increase of rhoA activity. Conversely, rhoA activity is diminished when FAM13A is overexpressed. Furthermore, inhibition of FAM13A expression enhanced the reduction of the EMT marker E-cadherin expression and the increase of vimentin by TGFβ. Preliminary results using Fam13a -/and wild-type mice showed no differences in weight, appearance or breathing rate. Conclusion: We observed that the FAM13A gene is associated with lung function in CF patients. Data suggest that FAM13A is involved in cytoskeletal dynamics, confirming its expected role as a RhoGAP. FAM13A regulates rhoA activity and may contribute to the EMT process. Future in vivo studies using physiopathological models (TGFβ, F508del-Fam13 -/-) will result in an increased understanding of how this gene affects lung function of CF patients. KS, USA; 2. Univ of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 3. Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA; 4. Case Western Reserve Univ, Cleveland, OH, USA; 5. Univ of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 6. North Carolina State Univ, Raleigh, NC, USA Background: In CF, chronic pulmonary infection with P. aeruginosa is associated with lung function decline and decreased survival. Studies of heritability for chronic P. aeruginosa infection have shown estimates of 0.76 by concordance analysis, and 0.85 after adjusting for age of onset of infection (Greene, et al, J Pediatr. 2012) . These studies suggest host genetic susceptibility to chronic P. aeruginosa infection. We hypothesized that in vivo human nasal epithelia show differential gene expression associated with age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection. Methods: We enrolled 152 CF subjects with 2 pancreatic insufficient CFTR mutations (91% homozygous Phe508del), obtaining nasal mucosal epithelia via curettage biopsies. Isolated RNA was submitted for mRNA-Seq. Age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection was determined by annual nasopharyngeal and sputum culture data. Chronic infection was defined as P. aeruginosa cultured for 2 consecutive years, or 2 out of 3 years, unless subjects had >5 consecutive years of negative cultures after meeting positive criteria early in life. Subjects above age 7 were required to have at least 1 negative culture before a first positive culture could be considered for analysis (Pittman JE, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2011; 46:497-504) . We performed SAFE pathway analysis integrating principle components and clinical covariates including: sex, lung transplantation, nasal steroid use, and inflammation (indexed by CD45 expression). We additionally controlled for lung disease severity in our primary analysis, and used azithromycin as an exploratory covariate in secondary analyses. FDR values <0.15 met statistical significance. We characterized age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection in 94 subjects; 5 subjects were negative for P. aeruginosa at final culture. Our analysis showed 12 significant pathways that associated with age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection in the primary analysis (and 30 for primary and secondary analyses combined), including many genes related to cell surface glycoproteins and receptors, cellular integrity, and innate immune response (eg, EGFR, CDH1, CD44). As one example, expression of cell surface receptor CD44 significantly contributed to pathway significance, wherein increased CD44 expression was associated with a later age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection (p<0.035 in all analyses). Discussion: Human respiratory epithelia are a vital component of the innate immune system. Our studies of CF respiratory epithelia show significant differential expression of genes related to cellular growth and development, immunity, and cell-cell signaling in association with age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection. Future mechanistic studies of identified candidate genes may elucidate the pathophysiology of CF host susceptibility to P. aeruginosa infection. Funding: CFFKNOWLE00A0; NIHHL095396; NIHHL068890; Gilead Sciences Research Scholars Program. Desai, S. 1 ; Sykes, J. 3 ; Stephenson, A. 2 ; Quon, B.S. 2 1. University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 2. Div. of Resp, St. Paul's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 3. Div. of Resp, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada Introduction: Approximately 5% of all CF diagnoses are made during adulthood. The CF mutations observed in adult-diagnosed (AD) cases differ from childhood-diagnosed CF and often lead to a milder disease phenotype. The proportion of AD patients with specific mutations who could benefit from currently available CFTR modulator therapies across Canada remains unknown. The purpose of this study was to describe the frequency of specific CF mutations in AD CF patients currently alive in Canada and to estimate the proportion that could benefit from currently available CFTR modulator therapies. Methods: Population-based cohort study of AD CF patients (≥18 years) currently alive and diagnosed between 1972-2014 without a prior lung transplant followed in the Canadian CF Registry. We characterized the prevalence of CF mutations in this AD cohort, specifically focusing on mutations that can be targeted by Kalydeco™ and Orkambi™ (F508del homozygous, G551D, non-G551D gating mutations and R117H mutations). Clinical characteristics including sweat chloride, pancreatic status, FEV1 % predicted (using GLI reference norms), and P. aeruginosa culture status were evaluated within 2 years of diagnosis and at the last reported clinic visit. Results: 291 AD patients were identified as currently alive without lung transplant. The mean age at diagnosis was 35±13 years and 72% of patients presented with pulmonary symptoms. The mean sweat chloride measurement at the time of diagnosis was 77±27 mEq/L. Thirty-nine percent were classified as pancreatic insufficient (based on pancreatic enzyme use) and the mean BMI at diagnosis was 23.9±5.2 kg/m 2 . Seven percent of AD CF patients are F508del homozygous, 43% are F508del heterozygous, 19% have two non-F508del mutations, 18% have just one identified mutation, and 13% have no mutations identified or missing genotype data. Twenty percent have mutations that can be targeted by currently available CFTR modulator therapies. Specifically, 10.7% have the R117H mutation, 7.2% are homozygous for F508del, and 2.1% have a G551D gating mutation. No patients with a non-G551D gating mutation were identified in this cohort. The clinical characteristics of AD patients stratified by these mutations are summarized in the Table. Conclusion: Twenty percent of AD CF patients in Canada have mutations that may be targeted by currently available CFTR modulator therapies. CFTR modulator therapies targeting mutations observed more commonly in AD CF patients are needed. Rock, M.J.; Makholm, L. Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA Background: Despite making a genetic diagnosis of CF, both the United States Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) and the European Cystic Fibrosis Society state that a sweat chloride test will always be necessary. (Farrell PM, et al. J Pediatr. 2008; 153:S4-S14; Castellani C, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2008; 7:179-96) . Previous studies comparing quantity not sufficient (QNS) rates of Gibson-Cooke collection versus Macroduct® collection have yielded conflicting results. In 1994, Hammond and colleagues (Hammond, et al. J Pediatr. 1994; 124:255-260) found a 0.7% QNS rate with Gibson-Cooke collection (QNS defined as <50 mg of sweat) compared to a QNS rate of 6.1% for Macroduct® (QNS defined as <15 μL). Conversely, in 2012, Laguna and colleagues (Laguna TA, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2012; 47:736-42) found a 15.4% QNS rate (QNS defined as <75 mg of sweat) with Gibson-Cooke collection compared to a 2.1% QNS rate with Macroduct®. The sweat testing method at the University of Wisconsin-Madison changed from Gibson-Cooke collection to Macroduct® collection in September 2015. Objective: Describe historical QNS rates of sweat testing via Gibson-Cooke with collection of sweat onto filter paper compared to Macrod-uct® sweat collection. Methods: All sweat tests were performed bilaterally. The technician performing over 95% of the tests has 25 years of experience of sweat testing. QNS data from 2007 through September 2015 of sweat collection via Gibson-Cooke are summarized. QNS was defined as a sweat weight of <75 mg from both arms. The sweat collection method changed to Macrod-uct® on Sept. 21, 2015. QNS data from then until April 26, 2016 are also summarized. QNS was defined as <15 μL of sweat from both arms. Results: Are as listed in the Table. Conclusion: Sweat collection via Macroduct® resulted in higher QNS rates than Gibson-Cooke collection. These higher rates applied to patients both above and below 3 months of age. Introduction: Although cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with mutations in the CFTR gene, for similar mutations (genotypes), we can observe very different clinical manifestations (phenotypes) from one patient to another. YKL-40 (chitinase 3-like 1 gene; CHI3L1) is an inflammatory marker increased in blood of patients with inflammatory diseases including CF (Hector A, et al. PloS One. 2011; 6:e24399; Kang MJ, et al. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015; 53:863-71) . Studies have also shown that YKL-40 is inversely correlated with pulmonary function (Hector A et al.) . Specific alteration in gene expression in diseases could be explained by the presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in specific regions of the CHI3L1 gene (Thomsen SB, et al. PloS One. 2012; 7:e47094) . The purpose of this study was to determine if the presence of SNPs could change CHI3L1 gene expression and lead to higher levels of YKL-40 as well as a specific clinical profile in CF patients. Objective: Determine if there is an association between genotypes of selected SNPs in the promoter region of CHI3L1 (rs4950928 and rs871799) and serum concentration of YKL-40 as well as clinical markers of disease severity in a clinical cohort of CF patients. Methods: We have developed a prospective cohort study of 200 adult CF patients where blood samples will be collected to analyse DNA (SNPs) and circulating levels of YKL-40. We present the preliminary data obtained on 51 patients. The SNPs and circulating levels of YKL-40 were correlated with the following biological and clinical parameters (FEV 1 , body mass index (BMI), glucose tolerance, episodes of pulmonary exacerbations). Statistical analyses will be tested using SPSS 20.0. Results: The subgroup of 51 adult patients had a mean age of 33.2 ± 9.3 years and mean BMI of 23.1 ± 3.3 kg/m 2 . We found that patients expressing the C/C-rs4950928 genotype have higher levels of YKL-40 in their blood. Also, C/C-rs4950928 expressing patients are more likely to have episodes of pulmonary exacerbations. We also observed that patients with the lowest values of FEV 1 tend to express the C/G-rs871799 genotype. Conclusion: These preliminary data suggest that CHI3L1 could be a susceptibility gene (modifier gene) and that specific genotypes could lead to an increase in circulating levels of YKL-40. These preliminary data need to be confirmed in our larger cohort of 200 patients as well as in a larger independent confirmatory cohort. These results could also provide information regarding the role of YKL-40 in CF pathophysiology and its role as a novel biomarker of disease evolution. Acknowledgments: Supported by Cystic Fibrosis Canada (grant and post-doctoral fellowship). Splice variants can have a number of consequences on protein synthesis ranging from the production of no protein, truncated forms of protein or reduced quantities of wild-type protein. Differentiating among these possibilities is essential for the design and testing of therapeutic strategies for treating splice-site variants. Splice-site variants that permit expression of CFTR protein, whether aberrant or a reduced quantity of normal, may respond to corrector and/or potentiator therapy. To stratify the molecular consequences of splice variants, we have created a series of expression minigenes (EMGs) bearing 38 putative disease associated splice-site variants. (Source: CFTR2 and CFMD.) 37 of the 38 variants caused a splicing defect. More than one splice-isoform was detected for 18 variants, including six "leaky" variants that allowed production of reduced amount of full-length CFTR mRNA (621+3A>G, 2789+2InsA, 2789+3delG, 2789+5G>A, 3849+40A>G, and 4374+2T>C, legacy nomenclature). A variety of other splicing defects were observed: exon skipping (n= 26 variants), shortened exon (n=9 variants), cryptic splice-site activation in intron (n= 12 variants), and complete abridged intron retention (n= 2 variants). The effect of splice variants on CFTR protein production and processing was evaluated by Western blotting. Four categories were observed: (i) No protein (n= 13 variants, e.g. 4005+1G>A), (ii) Core glycosylated truncated protein (n=14 variants, eg, 621+1G>T), (iii) Complex glycosylated truncated protein (n=5 variants, e.g. 3849+5G>A), and (iv) Complex glycosylated full-length protein (n=6, "leaky" splice variants as listed above). Among the six leaky splice variants, four generated full length CFTR band C that was less than 20% of WT levels (2789+5G>A, 3849+40A>G, 4374+2T>C, and 2657+3delG). The milder phenotype associated with each variant, except one, was consistent with the presence of reduced full length mRNA and protein. To evaluate the feasibility of using small molecules to achieve therapeutic levels of chloride transport, we performed short-circuit current (Isc) measurements of MDCK Flp-in stable cell lines expressing the 3849+40A>G variant. The cells were treated for 48h with either corrector molecule VX-809 or VX-661 (3 μM each). The potentiator molecule VX-770 (10 μM) was added during Isc measurements on the apical side of the transwell. The Isc values observed for the variant 3849+40A>G relative to WT were -untreated (37.8±2.1%), VX-770 (48.0±3.8%), VX-770+VX-809 (74.4±4.7%), and VX-770+VX-661 (87.6±1.5%). These results suggest that patients carrying "leaky" splice site variants should benefit from the combination of corrector and potentiator rather than potentiator alone. This treatment strategy could also benefit those splice site variants that generate core (e.g. 621+1G>T) or complex glycosylated truncated protein (e.g. 3849+5G>A). This work was supported by the CFF, MDBR and NIH. Several amino acid residues found in the 6th transmembrane domain (TM6) line the CFTR channel pore and are involved in ion conductance. CFTR bearing disease-causing amino acid substitutions in TM6 expressed in Fischer rat thyroid (FRT) cells had minimal forskolin-activated chloride transport and were minimally responsive to VX-770. The lack of chloride conductance was surprising because these variants are associated with a milder phenotype due to low rates of pancreatic insufficiency (PI). The lack of response to VX-770 of these variants was also surprising because these variants generate mature CFTR protein in cell culture. To explore these discrepancies, we sought to test these variants using an airway epithelial cell line. We generated CFBE41o-cells with stable expression of a single copy of CFTR cDNA containing a TM6 variant (R334W, I336K, T338I, or R347P). Western blot using the m596 antibody (UNC) was used to quantify the amount of CFTR produced and assess the degree of processing (C/C+B ratio). Ussing chambers were used to measure short circuit currents (I sc ) after activation of CFTR chloride transport by forskolin (10μM), stimulation by VX-770 (10μM) and inhibition by inh172 (10μM). Effect of correctors was measured after 24h incubation with VX-661 (3μM), VX-809 (3μM), or equal volume DMSO. R334W and T338I expressed fully processed CFTR indistinguishable from WT while I336K and R347P showed reduced protein levels and processing, as reported in FRT and HeLa cells. In contrast to the FRT cells, all TM6 variants tested generated forskolin-stimulated currents ranging from 2%-8% of WT, consistent with the mild clinical presentation of patients with these variants. Unlike most partially functional CFTR variants, the TM6 variants demonstrated minimal response to VX-770; consistent with data from FRT cells. Notably, the response of TM6 variants to correctors VX-661 and VX-809 was not consistent across these variants: R334W, T338I, and R347P showed no change in protein folding, processing, or I sc or significant response to either corrector. In contrast, using I336K cells, incubation with corrector (VX-661 or VX-809) increased protein levels from 5% (DMSO) to 60% (VX-661) and 100% (VX809) of WT and increased C/C+B ratio from .33 (DMSO) to .84 (VX-661) and .88 (VX-809). Forskolin-stimulated chloride current increased from 8% (DMSO) of WT to 25% (VX-661) and 31% (VX-809). VX-770 further increased currents, resulting in total currents of 56% of WT (VX-661) and 74% (VX-809). In the case of I336K, correction of protein folding to generate properly processed CFTR significantly improved conductance and VX-770 response. But this was in stark contrast to R334W, T338I, and R347P, which demonstrated no increase in conductance or response to VX-770 even though they are able to generate properly processed CFTR. Inspection of the location of all 3 nonresponder residues revealed that each is predicted to line the channel pore and actively participate in ion conductance while no such evidence has been published suggesting the same for I336K. We hypothesize that CFTR variants of residues directly involved in ion conductance comprise a unique theratype that may require a new class of molecular therapy. Extensive phenotypic variability is observed in CF patients homozygous for the common CF-causing variant F508del. To determine whether variants at the CFTR locus contribute to this phenotypic variability and also to inform the search for small molecule therapies which target F508del CFTR, we have systematically investigated genetic variation present on CF alleles bearing F508del. Our overarching goal was to identify any variants or combination of variants that modify disease severity associated with the F508del mutation. We performed deep re-sequencing of intragenic and extragenic regions surrounding CFTR in 1524 F508del chromosomes. In phase 1, 200kb encompassing CFTR and extending 10 kb 5' and 5 kb 3' of the gene was sequenced in 486 F508del homozygotes selected from the extremes of sweat chloride concentration. In phase 2, a 510 kb region which included the entire topologically associated domain of CFTR was sequenced in 276 F508del homozygotes drawn from extremes of lung function. A total of 1388 variants was observed; of these, 602 common variants (MAF>1%) were tested for association with sweat chloride concentration or lung function. Single variant association testing did not reveal significant associations with either trait. To increase power to detect rare variant associations in this cohort, a region-based burden assay using the SKAT-O algorithm was performed to identify groupings of variants which associated with trait variation. Variants were tested for association with sweat chloride or lung function in groups defined by a series of overlapping 5kb windows (offset in 1250bp increments) with each window generating a test P-value. All P-values have been Bonferroni corrected for multiple testing based on the total number of unique windows assayed. Testing of common and rare variants revealed seven regions of significance (P<0.01), five of which overlapped known regulatory elements or chromatin interactions. Notably, one region was associated with both sweat chloride concentration (chr7:117039250-117053000; P=5.9e-4) and lung function (chr7:117030500-117050000; P=8.9e-3). This region is 80kb upstream of CFTR, and has been shown to interact with the CFTR promotor in chromatin interaction studies. Three additional regions were associated with sweat chloride concentration only (chr7: 116941750-116951750, chr7:117074250-117078000, chr7:117153000-117156750; P=7.1e-3, P=3.3e-3, P=5.8e-3) . Two additional regions were associated with lung function only (chr7:117010500-117014250, chr7:117159250-117164250, hg19; P=5.8e-3, P=3.3e-3). Collectively, our findings suggest a combination of rare and common variation within known and suspect regulatory regions at the CFTR locus may contribute to the phenotypic heterogeneity observed in F508del homozygous patients. Variants at these loci may modify CFTR expression levels and/or timing of expression, and should inform future studies of the regulatory architecture of the CFTR locus and rational design of F508del specific molecular therapies. Supported by CFF and NIH. (3/2008-4/2010) , INNOGENETICS (4/2010 (4/ -12/2012 (4/ ), and Hologic 40+4 (12/2012 . With the implementation of the current Hologic 40+4 panel, infants in the state of IL with an IRT measurement in the top 4% of specimens for the day were screened for the D1270N variant. The D1270N variant was originally described as a mild mutation associated with congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD) in men. However, further evaluations have introduced the possibility that this variant is more likely a benign polymorphism that is not disease-causing in most individuals unless it is paired with other CF mutations on the same allele. Specifically, recent studies indicate a triple complex allele including the D1270N, R74W, and V201M variants may be responsible for the disease phenotype. Methods: A database was established at the onset of CF NBS to track outcomes of infants seen at Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital in follow-up of a positive CF NBS. Retrospective chart review was performed on all infants with an abnormal CF NBS who received follow-up care at our institution since December 2012 (using the current Hologic 40+4 molecular screening panel). Descriptive statistics were performed. Results: Since implementing the current Hologic 40+4 panel in December 2012, 351 infants were referred to Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago for follow-up of a positive CF NBS. Of the total 351 infants, 17% (n=60) were identified to be heterozygous for the D1270N variant without a second mutation. All 60 heterozygote carriers of the D1270N variant had a normal follow-up sweat test. Four additional infants were identified to carry the D1270N variant in combination with a known CF mutation. Of those four infants, three had a normal follow-up sweat test and one had a positive sweat test (101 and 93), followed by 2 intermediate sweat tests (48 and 49; 48 and 54) and has a current diagnosis of CFTR-related metabolic syndrome (CRMS). Of note, this infant was subsequently determined to have a triple complex allele (R74W/D1270N/ V201M) in addition to a known CF mutation. Full gene sequencing was offered to the remaining three families despite normal sweat testing. Two families declined additional genetics. The remaining infant was also found to carry the triple complex allele in combination with an R117H mutation. Conclusion: Overall, these findings are consistent with previous studies regarding the classification of the D1270N variant. Given the emotional duress associated with a positive CF NBS, which is well established in the literature, reconsideration should be given to the value of including infants who are heterozygous for the D1270N variant (in the absence of a known CF mutation) in the positive CF newborn screen pool. The ABCC1 gene has close structural and functional association with CFTR gene with increased expression thought to play a role in disease manifestations in cystic fibrosis (CF), an inherited multisystem disease characterized by progressive deterioration in lung function and pancreatic insufficiency attributed to dysfunction of a single gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). The correlation between CFTR genotype and clinical severity is poor with regard to CF lung disease with a variable clinical course even in patients with the same CFTR mutation, suggesting that modifier genes and/or epigenetic modification impact disease severity. Objective: Analyze ABCC1 promoter SNP and methylation status among CF probands, siblings and parents with differing CFTR genotypes and correlate with severe lung disease as defined by change in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), response to antibiotics, sweat chloride levels and time to diagnosis and CFTR genotype. Methods: We analyzed 400 probands with CF, their siblings and parents followed at Children's Hospital of Wisconsin and Lurie Children's CF center. Symptom and medication histories were recorded via questionnaire and entered into a database and validated in Red Cap using CF Foundation Patient Registry information. Data on >300 variables are collected, including patient demographics, sweat chloride levels, age at diagnosis, growth, lung function, respiratory microbiology, and CF therapies. All participants were genotyped at the rs504348 SNP and methylation status analyzed. For the siblings, analyses incorporating generalized estimating equations to account for the relatedness between sibling pairs; all other analyses used logistic regression for association analysis. Results: Plasma-induced transcriptional profiles of CF patients with CFTR mutations displayed differential expression of ABCC1 (|log 2 ratio| ≥ 0.5 (1.4-fold) ; FDR ≤ 0.01) among probands, sibling and parents suggesting that other genetic and environmental factors influence the CF phenotype. Ongoing work is now targeted at deriving genetic and epigenetic data of the ABCC1 promoter region in all 400 CF probands, siblings and parents using our developed molecular-based methods. Conclusion: ABCC1 is a subfamily C member of the ATP-finding cassette (ABC) transporter genes. While CFTR is unique among the ABC subfamily C members of transporters due to its intrinsic ability to conduct chloride ion at a much faster rate, it shares the closest homology with ABCC1 and known to interact with CFTR. SNP rs rs504348 falls in the putative promoter for the gene suggesting regulatory effects in its expression and correlation with lung disease severity. Future studies will involve ABCC1 analysis in the context of chromatin states, DNase hypersensitivity and transcription factor binding data enabling us to associate a potential functional SNP of ABCC1 that influences its expression levels with disease severity. The spatial and temporal regulation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (CFTR) in endoderm-derived cell types is tightly regulated. The same cell type, such as lung epithelium, can show dynamic differences in RNA levels during development. Additionally, based on RNA-seq expression values (reads per kilobase per million, or RPKM) in adult epithelial tissues, CFTR is expressed at a broad range of levels, from low in lung epithelial (RPKM 1-6) to modest expression in pancreatic epithelial (RPMK 40) and at intermediate levels in salivary gland and colon tissues (8-15 RPMK). This low expression of CFTR in lung tissues leads to fewer CFTR proteins to be corrected pharmacologically with existing and future therapies. Therefore methods to increase the amount of CFTR RNA, and thus CFTR protein would increase the pool of "correctable" proteins by small molecules. We have combined a synthetic DNA binding protein Crispr associated protein 9 (dCas9) with enzymes that activate transcription of a target gene. The advantages of a synthetic approach is that it allows for specific and robust activation without relying on endogenous co-factors. We have utilized CRISPR/dCas9 based methods to synthetically upregulate CFTR expression in both adult lung epithelium cell lines (A549 and Calu3) and to a lesser extent in pancreatic (CAPAN1) cell lines. Currently we are exploring the "tunability" of this synthetic CFTR activation method, to determine if we can predictably control the amount of CFTR RNA produced in different epithelial cell types. These results show an alternative method for CFTR modulation as well as an avenue for better quantitative understanding of CFTR mRNA levels on cellular function. Introduction: Air-liquid interface (ALI) cultures of mucociliary differentiated airway epithelial cells are a well-established model to determine CFTR function and CFTR modulator responses. The nasal turbinates are an easy accessible source of airway epithelial cells. However, despite reports using nasal airway epithelial cells (NAECs), the differentiation of these cells in ALI-cultures is less efficient compared to lower airway epithelial cells. Therefore, we aimed to optimize the differentiation of NAECs in ALI-cultures using the small molecules: TTNPB, Y-27632, and A83-01. This study is part of the HIT-CF program. Methods: Bronchial airway epithelial cells (BAECs) were obtained from tumor-free lung resection material. NAECs were obtained from nasal brushings. Airway epithelial basal cells (p63 + and KRT5 + ) were isolated from donor material, and expanded using mitotically inactivated mouse fibroblast feeder cells. ALI-culturing of expanded cells was performed as previously described (Amatngalim GD, et al. J Immunol. 2015; 194 (7):3340-50). Instead of retinoic acid we used the small molecule TTNPB, a highly potent retinoic acid analog. Moreover, we used the ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 during the submerged culturing phase, and explored the effect of TGF-beta inhibition using the inhibitor A83-01. Results: BAECs were efficiently differentiated in combination with TTNPB. In contrast, NAECs did not reach full confluency during the submerged phase or displayed a long stretched squamous morphology upon 1-2 weeks of ALI culturing. Including Y-27632 and A83-01 during the submerged phase of culturing drastically improved NAECs confluency, with monolayer that displayed a similar cuboidal cell morphology as BAECs cultures. Moreover, including A83-01 in combination with TTNPB during the ALI-phase increased the transepithelial electrical resistance and prevented the occurrence of squamous cells. Mucin deposition in the apical compartment and ciliary beating was observed after 3 weeks of culturing. Conclusion: Replacing retinoic acid with TTNPB, and including Y-27632 and A83-01 improves mucociliary differentiation of NAECs to a similar extent as BAECs. The improved protocol using a novel combination of small molecules can be used for efficient differentiation of NAECs and usage of these cells for CFTR function measurements. Introduction: Novel CF therapies can correct molecular defects in a limited number of CFTR mutations. Expanding these drugs to patients with rare/novel mutations will be facilitated by patient-derived model systems quantifying CFTR restoration. Models based on nasal epithelial cells (NECs) may provide a noninvasive and portable option for modulator testing. We sought to develop a reliable NEC-derived model system to quantify CFTR function and modulation. Methods: NECs obtained by inferior turbinate curettage in healthy volunteers (n=6) and patients with CF (n=14) were expanded to confluence in conditional reprogramming culture conditions as previously described (Liu X, et al. Am J Pathol. 2012; 180:599-607) . Passaged cells were suspended in matrigel and fed daily with ultroser-G airway differentiation media until mature (10 ± 4 days). Mature spheres were imaged in an incubated chamber before and after stimulation with forskolin/IBMX (10/100μM) to raise cAMP and activate CFTR. Luminal area of pre-and post-stimulation spheres was measured, and percent change was calculated (n=10-20 spheres per condition). Results: NEC spheres form within 3-4 days of plating and reliably polarize with the apical cell surface towards the sphere lumen. Spheres demonstrate markers of a mature respiratory epithelium, including luminal cilia/mucus secretion, tight junctions, and CFTR. Across all donors/conditions, stimulation of functional CFTR led to luminal ion/fluid secretion and sphere swelling, while stimulation of dysfunctional CFTR led to reduced swelling or shrinking. Specifically, wtCFTR spheres swelled (+19.1 ±5.0%) with stimulation, but shrank when stimulated after treatment with the CFTR inhibitor Inh172 (10μM; -15.5 ±5.9%, n=6 donors; p<0.001). Untreated F508del homozygous spheres shrank with stimulation (-13.9 ±5.3%), with reversal to swelling when pretreated with VX-809 (3μM; +7.9 ±4.7%; n=6 donors; p<0.01) or when incubated at 27 o C (+26.6 ±4.4%; n=1 donor, p=0.01). These trends were recapitulated in spheres derived from wt and F508del CFTR LAECs. Spheres with partial-function mutations swelled intermediately to non-CF controls and F508del/F508del spheres (+2.5 ±3.4%, n=6 donors). Spheres heterozygous for a gating mutation (F508del/G178R) showed increased swelling following stimulation when treated with VX-770 (1μM; +18.9 ±3.5% vs +5.8 ±5.3% without VX-770; p=0.04). Spheres from two patients each with one copy of F508del and a second processing mutation responded robustly to VX-809 and VX-770 (I618T: +29.1 ±5.5% vs baseline +2.9 ±6.4%, p=0.001; I507del +13.3 ±3.5% vs baseline -4.2 ±3.0%, p=0.002). Conclusions: Human NEC spheroids are able to reliably differentiate a spectrum of CFTR activity from normal (wtCFTR) to partial or near-absent (F508del homozygotes) function. Spheres from patients homozygous for F508del or with a gating mutation responded to appropriate modulators, recapitulating clinical efficacy in an ex vivo model system. Additionally, spheres from select patients with rare CFTR mutations responded robustly to available modulators, suggesting a potential gateway to logically assess therapy for these patients. This model holds promise for personalized testing of CFTR modulators to drive therapeutic evaluation. Supported by CFFT. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the CFTR gene that result in a lack of functional CFTR channels that transport Cland HCO 3 across the apical membrane of epithelial tissue. CF airways are characterized by diminished hydration of epithelial surfaces, altered mucus viscoelasticity and impaired mucociliary clearance. Enhancing surface hydration facilitates airway clearance by improving viscoelastic properties of mucus. Currently, accurate and relevant preclinical models that predict rescue of mucus properties by CF therapeutics are not available. We utilized measurements of viscoelastic mucus properties of nasal and bronchial organoids to predict the outcome of pharmacological treatments, thus offering advanced, translational models for preclinical testing. Aims: Research and development involving CFTR modulator compounds is rapidly accelerating. In addition to CFTR-targeting drugs, epithelial Na + channel (ENaC) inhibitors and mucolytics may benefit CF patients by affecting CF airway hydration and mucus structure and composition. The goal of this study is to develop and utilize preclinical assays leveraging nasal and bronchial organoids to obtain insight into the activities of these agents on CF mucus viscoelasticity and transport in CF. Furthermore, we evaluate properties of organoid mucus as personalized measures of disease severity. Methods: Changes in viscoelastic properties of nasal and bronchial spheroid mucus were determined utilizing particle tracking microrheology (PTM). Fluorescent, passive tracer particles were introduced into the lumen of spheroids, videos of tracer particle motion were obtained and the frequency-dependent viscoelastic properties of each tracer particle's local environment were calculated as we have described recently (1) (2) (3) (4) . For particle tracking microrheology measurements in spheroids, we demonstrated that fluorescent microspheres can be delivered to the spheroid lumen either by co-culture or injection and tracked to assess alteration of mucus viscoelastic properties upon activation of CFTR. Our results clearly indicate that CFTR function affects mucus viscoelastic properties. Activation of CFTR function resulted in both decreased mucus viscosity and elasticity across a broad range of biologically relevant frequencies as compared to vehicle controls. Conclusions: Viscoelastic properties of organoid mucus are a precise, biologically-relevant predictor of clinical efficacy of ion channel-and mucus-targeting pharmacological treatments. Implementation of our preclinical organoid mucus assay will allow accurate prediction of clinical outcomes of CF drugs, which is essential for identifying successful therapies individually tailored to treat all CF patients. Supported by NIH and CFF. Rationale: CF mouse models are widely used in CF research and recapitulate many disease manifestations of CF observed in patients including disease aspects of the gastrointestinal, immune, pulmonary, epithelial, endocrine and reproductive systems. Since the publication of the first CF mouse model in 1992, there have been at least 15 CF mouse models published and utilized by the CF research community to provide new understanding of CF and the ability to test therapeutic strategies in vivo. While all of these CF mouse models have proved useful, conventional gene targeting methods had deficiencies that included the use of selectable markers, affecting Cftr expression, and did not allow for gene targeting on a desired genetic background, leading to a lengthy process. In the last few years, a new gene editing system, CRISPR/Cas, has been utilized to create specific gene mutations faster and without the issues of conventional gene targeting. The aim of this study was to utilize the CRISPR/Cas system to make three common mutations in mouse Cftr to be utilized for in vivo studies by the CF research community. Methods: To create the three Cftr mutations (F508del, G542X and G551D), guide RNAs (gRNA), that direct the Cas9 nuclease to a specific DNA sequence, were evaluated utilizing an in vitro transcription and screening system. Optimal gRNAs, Cas9 and oligonucleotides carrying the desired Cftr mutation were injected into one-cell mouse embryos from the C57Bl/6J background and implanted in pseudo-pregnant mice by the CWRU Transgenic and Targeting Facility. DNA from the resulting pups of these three lines were sequenced using next generation sequencing with a MiSeq instrument allowing for the accurate identification of mutations present. We identified and mated founders to create lines for the F508del, G542X and G551D mutations. Results: For the creation of the F508del strain, we identified 9 of 45 mice (20%) with Cftr mutations and 2 of these 9 containing the F508del mutation. For the creation of the G542X strain, we identified 16 of 22 mice (73%) with Cftr mutations and 9 of these 16 containing the G542X mutation. For the creation of the G551D strain, we identified 30 of 36 mice (83%) with Cftr mutations and 1 of these 30 containing the G551D mutation. The F508del strain displays reduced CFTR function but with mild CF manifestations similar to the Cftr tm1Eur mouse. Intestinal short-circuit current was measured in intestinal sections and was significantly reduced in F508del mice compared to wild-type mice (84.2±8.3 vs. 177.8±26.5 μA/ cm 2 ; P<0.05). Weight of the F508del mice was reduced at all ages compared to wild-type (P<0.05) but survival was similar. The CF manifestations in the G542X and G551D strains are currently being assessed. We have created three Cftr mutations (F508del, G542X and G551D) in the mouse utilizing the CRISPR/Cas gene editing system. These mutations were created at a high rate and in a short time period compared to conventional gene targeting methods. These models will be useful for the in vivo testing of CFTR-directed therapies and strategies. The development of bronchiectasis in CF patients is thought to occur as a result of life-long cycles of infection and inflammation. Symptomatic treatment with antibiotics has significantly prolonged the life of CF patients; however, the emergence of multiple antibiotic-resistant strains still plague CF clinical care. The CF ferret model provides the opportunity to study the development of bacterial antibiotic resistance and bronchiectasis in an experimental setting free from preexisting multidrug resistant bacterial strains. Methods: A mature 1-3 year old cohort of 7 CFTR-KO ferrets and age/treatment-matched controls were maintained from birth on combination antibiotics twice daily (piperacillin/tazobactam 4 mg/kg, enrofloxacin 10 mg/kg, and metronidazole 20 mg/kg) and underwent longitudinal bronchoscopic collection of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) along with high-resolution CT imaging. Imaging was quantified in a standardized fashion and incorporates data from more than one scan for each animal. BALF was assayed for culturable bacteria (CFU/mL) and interrogated for 16S rDNA bacterial genomes by means of qPCR. Fungal pathogens are undergoing investigation using selective culture methods and qualitative PCR on BALF samples. Results: CT imaging of this cohort demonstrates the development of severe structural lung disease consistent with bronchiectasis in the CF ferrets. When compared to age/treatment-matched controls, CF cartilaginous airways were larger than adjacent vessels (ratio 1.220 vs 0.893, p=0.0003), extended closer to the pleura (0.697mm vs 3.110mm, p=0.002), and the bronchial wall was thicker in the upper lobes (1.260mm vs 0.929mm, p=0.00002). Imaging of untreated wild-type ferrets demonstrated no differences in endpoints with treated non-CF controls. BALF from CF and control animals over a prolonged period of time reveals that the bacterial burden was not different with the exception of one CF animal that was transiently colonized on two sequential BALF collections after which the infection spontaneously resolved. In the total cohort, the bacterial burden by CFU/mL or 16S rDNA bacterial genome quantification was not significantly different (p=0.3594 and 0.3541, respectively). Severe mucus plugging of the lungs of one CF ferret occurred twice and was treated with a novel mucolytic PAAG (Synedgen Inc). Subsequent aerosolized PAAG treatment of this animal prevented reoccurrence. Neutrophil counts in the BALF of CF animals were elevated and proteomics analysis of the BALF demonstrated enhanced mucus and inflammatory proteins in CF animals. Discussion: These results suggest that CF bronchiectasis can evolve in the absence of bacterial colonization. We hypothesize that mucus impaction secondary to impaired clearance enhances inflammation, even in the absence of bacterial infection, and that this process can lead to structural changes in the CF lung. broadened disease detection and characterization during this early-stage window, but potential, therapeutic intervention is still challenged by an incomplete understanding of the pathophysiology in the early-CF lung. Thus, animal models are needed which effectively recapitulate the pulmonary phenotype characteristic of early-stage disease. Methods: We investigated young CF mice to determine if they exhibit a pulmonary phenotype consistent with early CF lung disease. Pulmonary mechanics were examined in 12-16 week old congenic C57bl/6, F508del, and R117H CF mice using a forced oscillation technique (flexiVent). Gross histological measurements of large and small airways were quantified via light microscopy, and alveolar ducts and sacs in the distal airspace were calculated and reported as a Mean Linear Intercept (MLI). Results: There were no significant differences in the resistance, or in the measured luminal diameter of the large airways (bronchioles (p=0.50), terminal bronchioles (p=0.93) and respiratory bronchioles (p=0.84)). However, in both CF mouse models, prominent differences in the mechanical properties of the peripheral lung compartment were identified. Static lung compliance was decreased in both F508del (0.038±0.003 mL/cmH 2 O; p=0.003) and R117H (0.033±0.003 mL/cmH 2 O; p<0.001) compared to wild-type (WT) controls (0.045±0.003 mL/cmH 2 O). Tissue elastance was increased in both F508del (23.6±1.9 cmH 2 O/mL; p=0.040) and R117H (28.6±3.3 cmH 2 O/mL; p<0.001) compared to WT (19.8±1.9 cmH 2 O/mL). Tissue damping was also increased in both CF models (F508del (4.80±0.43 cmH 2 O/mL; p=0.001) and R117H (4.84±0.22 cmH 2 O/mL; p=0.001), compared to WT (3.97±0.34 cmH 2 O/mL)). Lastly, CF mice exhibited distal airspace enlargement with a significantly increased mean linear intercept in F508del (21.1±3.3 mm; p<0.005), and R117H (22.1± 1.7 mm; p<0.005) compared to WT (13.8±1.7 mm). Conclusions: The peripheral lung of young CF mice, carrying two independent Cftr mutations, demonstrated an impaired ability to stretch and expand, while revealing no measurable differences in the large, conducting airways. Furthermore, there were significantly increased distances between gas exchange surfaces in the alveolar sacs and ducts in the CF mouse parenchyma. These findings are consistent with the early development of disease in the peripheral lung compartment in the absence of infection or inflammatory symptoms, and provide a compelling framework for establishing the CF mouse model as a representative of the early lung phenotype in CF patients. A test of β-adrenergically stimulated sweat secretion provides a real time assay based on the function of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) that discriminates between cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and healthy controls. Therefore, we sought to determine the feasibility, safety, and efficacy of assaying β-adrenergic sweating in children identified in newborn screening to help determine prognoses for individuals with CFTR-related metabolic syndrome (CRMS). Methods: Preschool age children with a positive newborn screening test for CF participated in this cross-sectional study. Sweat rates were measured by evaporimetery (cyberDERM inc.) as transepidermal water losses (kg H 2 O/M 2 /hr) before and after selectively stimulating sweat glands either cholinergically or β-adrenergically. Net peak sweat responses assayed as evaporation rates were compared between CF and CRMS cohorts. Results: After a pilot test in adults, children between 4 to 6 years of age were evaluated (CF n=16, CRMS n=10). The test protocol was well tolerated; electrocardiograms and vital signs were within normal range for all subjects. The mean evaporative sweat rates in both groups in response to cholinergic stimulation were similar (CF 60.3±23.8; CRMS 57.7±13.9; p = 0.72) as well as to β-adrenergic stimulation (CF 1.1±1.7; CRMS 2.0±2.0; p = 0.14). The β-adrenergic sweat test was safe and well tolerated by young children. However, the β-adrenergic sweat secretion rates as measured by evaporimetery were too small to discriminate between CF and CRMS cohorts. Introduction: Mouse models of human disease are powerful tools which enable the study of complex mechanisms and the evaluation of potential novel therapies. Unfortunately the CFTR deficient mouse does not develop spontaneous lung disease. There are two mouse models that result in a CF-like lung disease due to upregulation of ENaC in airway epithelial cells (AEC). It has been hypothesized that ENaC hyperactivity leads to mucus dehydration and accumulation in CF patients. Increased ENaC levels in the lungs, (Mall M, et al. Nat Med. 2004; 10:487-493) and deletion of Nedd4L, the ubiquitin ligase which controls the levels of ENaC on the cell surface in airway epithelial cells (AECs), has been demonstrated to increase levels of ENaC expression which results in cystic fibrosis-like disease (Kimura T, et al. PNAS. 2011; 108; 8:3216-21) . The AEC specific knockout of Nedd4L results in ASL depletion, reduced mucus transport, goblet cell metaplasia and mucus accumulation, massive inflammation, fibrosis and death by 3 weeks of age. We have evaluated an antisense strategy for the establishment of an adult-onset cystic fibrosis mouse model. Objective: To target Nedd4L in AECs by antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) delivery to the lung in adult mice with the goal of creating a late onset mouse model for cystic fibrosis. Methods: We identified several Nedd4L specific ASOs and assessed their effectiveness for reducing target mRNA levels in cell culture. The most potent ASOs were then tested by intratracheal (I.T.) instillation into the lungs of adult mice. Lungs were fractionated on density gradients and mRNAs for Nedd4L and several genes involved in mucus production were assessed by RT-PCR. ENaC protein levels were determined by Western analysis. Lungs were processed for histopathology. Results: Delivering Nedd4L specific ASOs directly into the lungs of normal adult mice by I.T. administration once a week for six weeks resulted in 80-90% Nedd4L RNA knockdown and a 3-fold increase in ENaC protein which began increasing as early as 3 days after the initial Ned-d4L ASO dose. RNA levels for mucus markers, including Gob5, FOXa3, SPDEF, AGR2 and MUC5B, were all significantly increased by Nedd4L ASO treatment. PAS-stained lung sections from a time-course of Nedd4L ASO-treated mice demonstrate that goblet cell number and mucus accumulation begins after 3 doses of ASO and reaches maximum levels at ~6 weeks (6 doses). Inflammation is also increased throughout the lung by 6 weeks. The ability of the Nedd4L ASO to induce goblet cell metaplasia is a specific effect as a control ASO has no effect. In addition, we tested the ability of the Nedd4L ASOs to induce airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR) and find a dose responsive increase to methacholine compared to vehicle-treated mice. Mice treated with Nedd4L ASO for 6 weeks followed by discontinuance of dosing, still exhibit lung histopathology and AHR at 9 weeks (3 weeks after stopping dosing). Conclusion: Many of the endpoints observed in the Nedd4L knockout mice and CF patients are reproduced with this Nedd4L ASO-induced model, therefore, this model may be useful for evaluating novel therapies in an adult onset CF-like disease. Rationale: Patient-derived model systems are needed to examine activity of modulator agents for CF patients with rare CFTR mutations. Bron-chial epithelial cell models can detect and quantify CFTR function and pharmacologic modulation, but obtaining these cells is invasive. A similar model system from brushed nasal cells is attractive due to the simplicity of sample procurement. We seek to determine the electrophysiological behavior of paired nasal and bronchial cells from CF patients, focusing on modulator impact on CFTR function. Methods: Cells from CF patients were obtained from brushing the 2nd-3rd generation bronchi and the inferior nasal turbinate and cultured on petri dishes with Y-27632 media. Upon reaching confluence, cells were passaged onto collagen-coated inserts and matured in Ultroser-G media. Mature inserts were treated with VX-809 or vehicle for 48-72 hours and studied under voltage clamp conditions. Short circuit currents were monitored in Ussing chambers with baseline currents in symmetric Ringers buffer followed by apical exchange with low [Cl -] buffer and addition of amiloride, forskolin/IBMX, VX-770, and CFTR inh172 (all apical except apical/basolateral forskolin/IBMX). Results: Nasal and bronchial paired brushings were provided by eight donors, with three paired results currently available to report. Baseline resistance for the control nasal cell monolayers was 913Ω*cm 2 (SD 645), and 1311Ω*cm 2 (SD 941) for the bronchial monolayers (p=0.22). Amiloride-sensitive current for nasal monolayers was -52.6μA/cm 2 (SD 39.2) and -118.7μA/cm 2 (SD 54.2) for bronchial monolayers (p=0.002). The The magnitude of F508del current correction with VX-809 was greater in bronchial monolayers than nasal monolayers within subjects, but all pairs correlated well. While not identical in performance, nasal cell monolayers appear to be a suitable proxy for brushed bronchial cell monolayers to study CFTR modulation. Supported by CFFT. Cough clearance (CC) is an important airway defense mechanism which enhances the removal of accumulated mucus from our lungs. Clinical studies have revealed that CC is less effective in clearing mucus in people with CF, compared with healthy individuals. However, there is currently a gap in our knowledge of why CC is defective in CF, and what therapeutics can be used to increase CC. Our previous studies have demonstrated that in CF, dysregulation of ion transport (i.e. defective CFTR) leads to airway fluid depletion, mucin hyperconcentration, impaired mucociliary clearance (e.g. collapsed periciliary layer) and adhesion of the mucus to the airway surface layers. Furthermore, the properties of mucus are hypothesized to be heavily influenced by the two major gel forming mucins: MUC5B and MUC5AC. While non-CF and healthy mucus is dominated by MUC5B, clinical studies have shown that MUC5AC expression is up-regulated in CF patients during an acute exacerbation. Therefore, we hypothesized that CC is controlled largely by mucus concentration and is additionally dependent on the relative and absolute amount of MUC5AC. To study the effect of CF-related concentration changes in mucus properties on cough clearance rates, we developed an in vitro cough machine which incorporates well-differentiated human bronchial epithelial cultures within a custom chamber that we used to subject cultures to cough-mimicking airflow velocities up to 35 meters per second. In these studies, we compared the effect of endogenous mucus over a range of mucus concentrations, spanning healthy to CF, as well as with exogenous mucus having different ratios of MUC5B to MUC5AC. The CC of mucus was captured by tracking the movement of particles embedded in the mucus layer with hi-speed camera during 200 millisecond airflow pulses. Our results reveal that CC is critically dependent upon mucus concentration. We found that in healthy (non-CF) mucus, cough produces substantially higher clearance rates of transport than cilia (800 vs. 60 μm/sec). However, our studies demonstrate that, like cilia-mediated mucus clearance, the ability to clear mucus by cough is also significantly reduced when mucus becomes concentrated in CF. Our studies also showed that MUC5B-dominated mucus is effectively cleared by cough, supporting the hypothesis that MUC5B is important for clearing mucus. However, CC was significantly reduced in MUC5AC-dominated mucus at the same concentration. Finally, from a therapeutic prospective, we have used our novel devices to show that cough clearance can be accelerated by a combination of mucus hydrators (7% hypertonic saline) and reducing agents (DTT). Our results demonstrate the utility of our model system to robustly assay the parameters mediating CC in health, why it fails in disease, and the relative effects of MUC5B and MUC5AC. This work was supported by the CFFT Mucus Clearance Consortium. CF human bronchial epithelial (CF hBE) cultures demonstrate characteristics associated with cystic fibrosis pathophysiology such as defective trafficking of F508del CFTR and absence of chloride transport. Well-differentiated CF hBE cells may be cultured on filters at an air/liquid interface (ALI) as described by Neuberger et al (1) and responses to F508del corrector compounds measured using the equivalent current assay developed by Bridges and van Driessche (2). This system is used heavily for the optimization of F508del correctors and increasingly for the study of mechanisms of F508del rescue. We evaluated the influence of filter plates made with different materials and pore densities on corrector responses, the differentiation state and CFTR levels of the ALI cultures. F508del homozygote CF hBE cells differentiated on the standard polyester membrane supports (Corning Transwell-24, 0.4 μm pores, 4 x 10 6 pores/cm 2 ) were compared to cells differentiated on polycarbonate membrane supports (Corning Transwell-24, 0.4 μm pores, 1 x 10 8 pores/cm 2 ). The cultures were evaluated by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining for morphology, PCR for CFTR mRNA levels and other differentiation markers, Western blot for CFTR protein and maturation, and equivalent current electrophysiology assays (basal and corrector-induced responses to forskolin and potentiator, amiloride response, and transepithelial resistance). H&E staining revealed that cells grown on polyester membranes formed a cuboidal epithelium while cells grown on polycarbonate membranes formed a pseudostratified columnar epithelium, similar to the natural morphology of lung epithelium. Cells on polycarbonate supports had significantly greater CFTR activity in response to corrector treatment than on the polyester supports. This increase in corrector response was observed for VX-809 as well as several other corrector scaffolds with distinct mechanisms. Unexpectedly, biochemical characterization of CFTR revealed no increase in mRNA or protein levels to explain this enhancement of functional activity on the polycarbonate supports. Combining a significant improvement in both cellular differentiation and corrector responses, CF hBE cells grown on polycarbonate filters appear to offer a more robust and physiologically relevant system for the study of mechanisms of F508del rescue and for the optimization of correctors. The CFTR-G542X mutation is the most common premature termination codon (PTC) in CFTR, and the second most common CF-causing allele. Previously, we showed F670del-Yor1 (Yeast Oligomycin Resistance-1, a member of the ABC gene family) can serve as a useful model for genomewide analysis of modifiers that govern F508del-CFTR biogenesis. The work demonstrated evolutionary conservation of gene-gene interaction between yeast and human, and resulted in discovery of novel targets for improvement of F508del-CFTR misfolding. yor1-G704X results from a mutation in S. cerevisiae homologous to CFTR-G542X, and thus can be used as a phenomic model to identify gene targets for promoting readthrough. We introduced yor1-G704X into the full genomic collection of S. cerevisiae knockout and knockdown (YKO/KD) strains, and performed quantitative high throughput cell array phenotyping (Q-HTCP) to measure growth on oligomycin as an endpoint for nonsense codon suppression. Parallel analysis of the yor1-Δ0 mutant served as a control for effects of YKO-KD mutation on oligomycin sensitivity. G418 (an aminoglycoside readthrough agent) increased oligomycin resistance in the context of Yor1-G704X, but had no effect on the yor1-Δ0 strain. Similarly, the Yor1-G704X-eGFP exhibited increased fluorescence when cultured with G418, supporting use of yor1-G704X for genome-wide screening. Analysis across the complete yeast deletion strain library in concert with Yor1-G704X revealed participants in the nonsense mediated decay (NMD) pathway, NAM7 (UPF1) and UPF3, both of which are known targets for CFTR-G542X readthrough. Overall, we discovered 250 candidate gene targets more potent than UPF3 deletion for inducing full length Yor1. All gene interactions tested thus far by a secondary assay for readthrough (based on Yor1-G704X-eGFP fluorescence) have validated the primary phenotypic results. Additional testing of "hits" in combination with each other (epistasis analysis) is in progress. Also ongoing is use of the technology to establish a pharmacogenomics approach for determining genes responsible for effects of readthrough agents. Taken together, the studies describe a powerful new system with application to cystic fibrosis drug discovery. In diseases, such as cystic fibrosis (CF), where normal water, salt, and mucus concentrations are abnormal, the normal mucus layer becomes dehydrated and compresses the periciliary gel layer, collapsing the cilia and preventing normal clearance. The properties of the flowing mucus layer are predicted to be heavily influenced by the two major gel-forming mucins, MUC5B and MUC5AC. Data from cell culture, induced secretions, and animal models suggest that MUC5B forms the basis of the normal flowing gel. However, if the lung is "irritated" by allergies, pollutants, and/or infection, MUC5AC levels increase. We hypothesize that cilia-dependent mucus flow and cough clearance are: (1) controlled by differing biophysical properties between the mucus layer and the underlying periciliary gel layer; (2) these differences in biophysical properties are controlled largely by mucus concentration; and (3) the biophysical properties of the mucus layer can be modified by the relative and absolute increase in MUC5AC. To provide a framework that will allow for direct comparison of the biophysical properties of MUC5B compared to MUC5AC, we have developed cells that are deficient in one or the other mucin. For this study we have utilized CRISPR-Cas9-mediated deletion of either MUC5AC or MUC5B to generate mono-mucin-producing A549 cells, which normally produce both mucins in nearly equal ratios. Results from Western blots, RT-PCR, sequencing, and mass spectrometry from clonally selected A549 cells confirm mono-mucin production, demonstrating the utility of CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing for generating cell models lacking mucin proteins. Mucin collected from the apical washes of these clonally derived cell lines was collected and concentrated. The harvested mucus has been evaluated by a variety of biophysical techniques, including measurements of adhesive and cohesive strength, cough clearance, light scattering and mucociliary clearance. Light scattering demonstrated an approximate 50% reduction in MUC5B or MUC5AC mono-mucin concentration compared to mucin-sufficient cells, consistent with the concept that the mucus produced by A549 cells contains both MUC5AC and MUC5B at nearly equal proportions. A preliminary study evaluating mucus transport on ciliated airway cultures indicates that MUC5B-deficient mucin transports less efficiently than MUC5AC-deficient mucus. Results from these studies will help elucidate the complex relationships between mucus properties and mucin composition, which will ultimately help our understanding of mucus pathogenesis in CF. Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; 2. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA; 3. Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 4. University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 5. Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA; 6 . University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Background: Human airway epithelial (HAE) cells in differentiated monolayers have formed a basis for preclinical study of many CFTR modulators. HAE provide a means to study disease and mutation-specific questions. HAE (especially human nasal epithelial, HNE) cells are easily acquired from patients with various CFTR mutations. Recent advances allow large-scale expansion of cells without altering the cellular genome, allowing for the establishment of an HNE biobank possible. This concept has been leveraged through multiple site collections of HNE cells through observational trials in the TDN. Objectives: This study aimed to demonstrate the capacity for largescale collection, shipping, expansion, and banking of HNE cells from a diverse patient population. We tested this using a standardized procedure of conditional reprogramming via fibroblast co-culture to allow for expansion of cells in a biorepository of cells for future use. Methods: After site training, patients with diverse CFTR mutations or normal subjects had HNE cells collected via nasal brushing or curettage. HNE cells were then shipped overnight (4°C) in 50:50 DMEM/F12 media containing antibiotics: ceftazidime, tobramycin, vancomycin (all 100μg/ mL), and amphotericin B (2.0μg/mL). Two repository labs processed cells using multiple centrifugations that included dissolution of mucus clumps with accutase. 1x10 6 cells were added to coated dishes with adherent, irradiated 3T3-fibroblasts. F-media + 10μM Rho-kinase inhibitor Y27632 was added daily until epithelial islands formed and were 90% confluent on the dish. Thereafter, cells were passaged twice, and expanded cells were cryopreserved in Cryostar® freezing media (1x10 6 cells/aliquot). Results: As part of the PROSPECT study, 81 normal and CF samples have been received in the central processing labs from 33 sites participating in the study (90% via cytology brush). Of these samples, 93% contain viable cells suitable for initial culture. Of viable cell pellets obtained, 81% were free of initial infection allowing for expansion. Mean initial viable cell pellets contained 0.41±0.30×10 6 cells. Cells were expanded and split with a mean of 6.5±0.8 days between passages. After 2 passages, the mean estimated cell count was 7.8±3.0 × 10 6 cells. When tested for viability after freezing, >90% of frozen cell pellets demonstrated viable cells for re-expansion (>50% cells viable by trypan blue staining after defrosting). Conclusions: We demonstrate feasibility of acquisition and expansion of HNE cells from diverse subjects. Although initial cell collections had relatively low numbers of viable cells, we demonstrate the ability to expand these cells to a significant quantity of viable cells suitable for biorepository storage and are focusing efforts to increase yield. We are also focusing on optimizing protocols for ion transport and mucociliary differentiation. Supported by CFFT, CFF, and NIH. Introduction: To determine the effectiveness of a putative CF cell or gene therapy to improve the CFTR ion channel defect in live intact CF mice, we have used a well-established transepithelial potential difference (PD) technique in nasal airways, where mice are oriented vertically to enable placement of the electrode tip into the nares and onto ciliated epithelium. This method used a slow infusion rate (1 μl/min) of sequential Krebs buffers, with the flow-rate limited largely by the ability of the animal to cope with the fluid volume delivered. We have now assessed a more rapid PD protocol using higher fluid rates, in mice that are nonsurgically intubated to eliminate fluid ingress into the lung. Methods: Normal C57Bl/6 and CF (unc-FABp) mice were anaesthetised and nonsurgically intubated with a 20G cannula (BD Insyte TM IV catheter) to permit normal breathing during the perfusion solution deliveries. We first examined the feasibility of infusion rates of 10, 20 and 50 μL/min and compared these to our standard 1 μL/min in the same animal, using normal basal (B) and low chloride (LC) kerb buffers to determine an optimal flow rate. The standard slow infusion rate was then compared to the optimal infusion rate in both normal and CF mice, using the addition of the sodium channel blocker amiloride (A) and the β-agonist isoproterenol (Iso) in the sequence. Nasal perfusions of B, B+A, LC+A, and LC+A+Iso buffers were performed 1 week apart to allow for complete recovery of the airway epithelium from any physical disturbances that may have occurred due to previous placement of the recording/perfusion cannula. Results: There was no significant difference in the change in nasal PD in normal mice under LC conditions at all faster infusion rates compared to the standard rate (n.s., ANOVA, n=4). The optimal flow rate for rapid and consistently stabilised PD recordings was the 20 μL/min infusion rate, and this resulted in a typical reduction in PD assessment time from 40 to 10 mins. When tested at this rate, CF mice displayed a significant difference in their nasal PD response for LC+A perfusion: normal mice (Mean +/-SEM: -8.29 +/-1.32 mV) vs CF mice (6.28 +/-0.92 mV, p<0.0001, paired t-test, n=9), a difference maintained irrespective of infusion rate (n.s., paired t-test, n=9). The addition of Iso to LC+A perfusion also demonstrated a significant difference between normal mice (-10 +/-2.56, n=4) and CF mice (-1.19 +/-1.02, n=8, p<0.01, t-test) . Discussion: The rapid infusion method, in conjunction with nonsurgical intubation, provided similar PD measurement capability to our much slower established method, eliminated potential adverse effects due to fluid inhalation, and improved PD assessment throughput 4-fold. The reduced anaesthesia time and fluid load required allowed for the inclusion of additional perfusion solutions to further discriminate specific changes in the bioelectrical defect responsible for CF. These changes have improved the quality and speed of this nasal PD protocol for in vivo assessment of new therapies to correct the basic defect in CF airways. Acknowledgements: Supported by the USA CF Foundation, the Cure4CF Foundation, and the NHMRC. Intestinal organoids can be used to study CFTR function by means of CFTR-dependent forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) in a 3D Matrigel culture condition (1) . FIS of organoids is clearly different between organoids with mild, severe or even identical CF-causing mutations. The exact mechanisms causing differences in swelling remain incompletely understood. Additional culture approaches and assays may help to further study mechanisms controlling differences in organoid swelling, and relations of this phenotype with CFTR and other ion channel activities. We aim to set up alternative CFTR assays using 2D intestinal monolayers generated from rectal organoid cultures. We hypothesize that CFTR genotype-specific differences in organoid swelling are reflected by forskolin-induced currents in 2D monolayers. This study is part of the HIT-CF program. Organoids were generated as previously described (1), and we adapted the 2D monolayer culture method as published (2) . Ussing chamber measurements were performed on 2D monolayers of six CFTR genotypes (wild-type; carrier; p.Arg117His/p.Phe508del (R117H/F508del); p.Ser-1251Asn/p.Phe508del (S1251N/F508del); p.Phe508del/p.Phe508del; p.Glu60X/p.Ile1295PhefsX33 (E60X/4015delATTT). 2D monolayers were generated by disrupting and trypsinizing organoids, and seeding single cells onto pre-coated Transwell inserts plus organoid culture medium 1 with ROCK inhibitor. We monitored the transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) values for 5 days. When resistance was >100 ohm.cm 2 , inserts were transferred to Ussing chambers to monitor short-circuit voltage-clamped transepithelial ion transport after addition of amiloride, forskolin (dose range), and CFTR(inh)-172 (dose range). Every CFTR genotype is measured in two to four independent experiments and two donors. Forskolin dose-dependently induced transepithelial ion transport in a CFTR-dependent manner as indicated by inhibition upon addition of CFTR(inh)-172, and absence of currents in CFTR class I/class I monolayers. The response to forskolin of S1251N/F508del monolayers lies between F508del/F508del and R117H/F508del, like with the FIS. However, the sensitivity of the 2D assay seems reduced as compared to FIS. The response to forskolin (10 μM) of S1251N/F508del (9.02μA/cm 2 ±3.14) is minor compared to R117H, while with the FIS both genotypes respond comparably. Also, we cannot distinguish between wild type and R117H/F508del based on forskolin response (49.41μA/cm 2 ±20.43 and 37.92μA/cm 2 ±20.37). The data suggest that 2D monolayers generated from rectal organoids can be used to study the function of CFTR in Ussing chambers. The current preliminary data suggest that this setup will help to complement FIS studies by allowing the direct study of ion channel activity independent of their coupling to fluid secretion and via the select stimulation of apical or basolateral compartments. Jerusalem, Israel; 2. CF Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel; 3. CF Center Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel; 4. CF Center, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel; 5. CF Center, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; 6. CF Center, Soroka Medical Center, Beersheva, Israel; 7. CF Center, Schneider Children's Hospital, Petach Tiqva, Israel Cystic fibrosis is associated with defective cAMP-mediated (CFTR) Cl − secretion and an accelerated rate of basal Na + transport across epithelial membranes resulting in a change in transepithelial potential difference (PD) that can be measured in the nasal epithelium (NPD). The sweat chloride concentration is still the gold standard for diagnosis of CF. New CF phenotypes have been recognized, eg cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)-related disorders and there are an emerging number of non-classical or atypical phenotypes. Patients with such uncertain diagnoses represent a challenge. The aim of this study was to compare the diagnostic outcome of a cohort of patients referred for electrophysiological testing. Methods: Patients with suspected CF were referred between 2003 and 2014 for sweat test (Gibson Cooke or Macroduct) and NPD (Knowles) in one tertiary center. Sweat test was defined as <40mmol/L normal, borderline 40-60 and positive >60mmol/L. The measurement of e Δchlor/ΔAmil >0.7 was defined as an abnormal NPD while e Δchlor/ΔAmil <0.7 was defined as a normal NPD. Final diagnosis was defined as registration in the Israeli CF Registry. Results: 449 patients underwent both NPD and sweat tests. 246 had sweat < 40, 33 had >60 and 170 had 40-60. Of the 449 patients, 375 had normal NPD and 74 abnormal, 26 of 375 are in the CF registry. Of the 74 diagnosed as abnormal, 21 are in the CF registry. The sensitivity of NPD is 44.7% and specificity 86.8% with negative predictive value of 93% This is better than the sweat test which has sensitivity of 45.4%, specificity of 58.1% and negative predictive value of 88.8%. There were 8 patients with a normal sweat test and abnormal NPD of which 5 are registered as CF. There were 83 patients with a positive sweat test and normal NPD of which 5 are in the CF registry. The sensitivity of NPD in this group is 50%, specificity is 96.2%, positive predictive value 62.5% and negative predictive value of 93.9%. Of the 170 patients with borderline sweat test, 5 out of 140 (3.6%) with normal NPD are in the registry while of the 31 patients with abnormal NPD, 7 (23%) are in the registry. Conclusion: In patients with a questionable diagnosis of CF, the NPD is very useful and is best at ruling out the diagnosis in the presence of a false positive sweat test. Bos, A.C.; Tiddens, H. Pediatric Pulmonology, Radiology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands Background: In cystic fibrosis (CF) progressive small airways disease (SAD) and mucus impaction play a major role in the pathophysiology of CF lung disease. Inhaled dornase alfa is successful in improving SAD. However, residual SAD persists and progresses with age in most patients with CF. The Akita nebulizer allows efficient targeting of the small airways and improved SAD substantially in stable patients with CF on maintenance dornase alfa therapy, but not in patients who were admitted for an exacerbation. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) showed for inhaled antibiotics that concentrations were inversely related to the severity of structural changes as seen on chest CT-scans. CFD can allow us to personalize aerosol delivery strategies for dornase alfa for more effective treatment of SAD taking into account the presence of structural lung changes. To predict local dornase alfa concentrations in airways of patients with CF differing in disease severity nebulized with the Akita targeted to the small airways, Pari LC Plus or Pari eFlow nebulizer. Methods: CFD was applied to patient-specific airway models reconstructed from chest CT-scans. Reconstruction of airway models and simulations were performed by FLUIDDA nv (Kontich, Belgium). The following information was used for simulations: nebulization of dornase alfa (1.25 mg for Akita and 2.5 mg for Pari LC Plus and Pari eFlow), aerosol diameter, epithelial lining fluid thickness of 5 μm. Concentrations were expressed relative to an effective dornase alfa concentration of 2.9 μg/mL. Results are reported as median [range] . Results: 40 CT-scans (35% male) were selected, age 10.9 [6-18] years, CF-CT bronchiectasis subscore 2.8 [0-16.0] % of max., %pred. The Akita resulted in significantly higher dornase alfa concentrations in the small airways than the other nebulizers (p <0.001). With half of the nebulized dose, large airways concentrations for the Akita were 7 times higher than for the Pari LC Plus and Pari eFlow (4173, 588 and 571 μg/mL, respectively). Small airways concentrations were 9-10 times higher than for the other nebulizers (Akita: 58. 3 [42-84] , Pari LC Plus: 6.5 [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] , Pari eFlow: 5.6 [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] μg/mL). Concentrations in all small airways combined were 14-29 times 2.9 μg/mL for the Akita and 1-3 times 2.9 μg/mL for the Pari LC Plus and Pari eFlow. When looking at separate lung lobes, several lobes received dornase alfa concentrations below 2.9 μg/mL with the Pari LC Plus and Pari eFlow. Conclusions: CFD modeling showed that most airways received sufficient dornase alfa concentrations. Half the dose, nebulized with the Akita, resulted in small airway dornase alfa concentrations that were 10 times higher than with the Pari LC Plus or Pari eFlow nebulizers. This can be promising to improve SAD in patients with more severe CF lung disease. The research was funded by financial support provided by Roche Pharmaceuticals. Small-molecule correctors of F508del CFTR misfolding are being developed as therapies for cystic fibrosis. Corrector activity can be assayed in cell lines expressing recombinant F508del CFTR as well as F508del patient-derived primary cells. However, poor correlation between cell line assays and primary cell assays has necessitated the use of patient bronchial epithelial cell assays to optimize corrector compounds (1) . Culturing well-differentiated CF human bronchial epithelial (CF hBE) cells requires a significant investment of time and effort as well as the use of reagents and cells with limited availability and high cost. Assaying for corrector activity can be performed in a semi-automated 24-well format equivalent current assay using equipment and methods developed by Bridges and van Driessche (2) . This assay is a great improvement over electrophysiology assays in Ussing chambers but still remains labor-intensive. The authors have implemented several improvements to the culture and differentiation protocol developed by Neuberger et al (3) , and the equivalent current assay methods developed by Bridges and van Driessche (2) in an industrial setting. This has resulted in a more efficient use of limited availability CF patient cells, a reduction in workload, and the generation of reproducible corrector dose-response data that has accelerated the optimization of corrector compounds. These modifications include: 1. Preparation of cryopreserved cell banks at passage 2 and use of passage 4 ceIls for generation of well-differentiated epithelia. This increased the yield of assay plates per passage 1 vial by up to 20-fold. 2. Use of semi-and fully-automated robotics and liquid handlers to substantially reduce the amount of manual effort for medium changes. 3. Increasing the number of assay plates per equivalent current experiment from 6 to 9 has increased the number of data points per experiment by 50%. 4. Use of an automated dispenser to add DMSO solutions of correctors directly into assay plates has reduced workload and improved data quality in corrector dose-response testing. In combination, these and other protocol modifications have supported a 60% increase in assay throughput together with robust and reproducible determination of corrector dose-response curves. These improvements have the potential for broad applicability to many laboratories culturing CF hBE cells for the study of mechanisms of F508del rescue and for the optimization of correctors. In cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, poor phenotype/genotype correlation for the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) mutation has been described with particular regard to the severity of the pulmonary infections. Thus, the identification of non-CFTR genetic variations as contributors of individual risk factors of lung pathology is one of the clinical needs and the challenges ahead in CF. To date, genetic studies in humans are ongoing but they should be joined to other approaches. Recently, a highly geneticallydiverse mouse resource population, the Collaborative Cross (CC), has been generated to mimic the genetic diversity of the human population (http:// csbio.unc.edu/CCstatus/index.py). Here, we took advantage of these mouse resources to define host genetic variations that influence the severity of P. aeruginosa lung infection. A large-scale screening for P. aeruginosa infection was carried out in a cohort of 44 CC lines. CC mice were infected with the CF clinical P. aeruginosa AA2 strain and subsequently monitored for mortality, mean survival time, morbidity and change in body weight for seven days postinfection. CC mice exhibit distinct disease phenotypes after P. aeruginosa infection ranging from complete resistance to lethal disease and severe pneumonia characterized by high bacterial burden. Most importantly, the differential response to P. aeruginosa infection in CC lines was found to be greater than that reported in classical inbred mice. More detailed analysis on CC mice showed that initial variables including body weight, age and gender have no influence on P. aeruginosa outcome, emphasizing the role of complex genetic traits in the severity of infection. When broad-sense heritability of phenotypic traits was evaluated we confirmed the influence of genetic factors rather than environmental factors among the CC lines during P. aeruginosa infection. Next, quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping was performed. We found a significant locus on chromosome 3 named "Pseudomonas respiratory infection resistant locus 1" (Prlrl1), associated to the severity of infection after seven days postinfection (mortality). When we refined QTL localization, exploiting the sequence variations of the eight founder murine strains of the CC and gene/protein public databases, we identified 14 genes as new candidate disease-modifiers of the airways infection. The most promising candidate genes are related to leukocyte recruitment and inflammatory processes. Validation of candidates genes is ongoing in model systems. We conclude that: i) CC mice represent an innovative model that can reproduce the variable responses related to disease severity in humans affected by P. aeruginosa pneumonia; ii) host genetics plays a significant role modulating lung defence and disease severity during P. aeruginosa pneumonia; iii) a set of genes involved in the pathogenesis of P. aeruginosa infection may be explored to complement human studies. Supported by Italian CF Research Foundation (FFC# 9/2014 and FFC#11/2015). Hartmann, S. 1 ; Layish, D. 2 ; Pratley, R.E. 3 ; Bredberg, U. 4 ; Haseltine, E. 4 ; Beusmans, J. 4 ; Lesko, L.J. 1 ; Trame, M.N. 1 1. Pharmaceutics, University of Florida, Orlando, FL, USA; 2. Central Florida Pulmonary Group, Orlando, FL, USA; 3. Translational Research Institute for Metabolism and Diabetes, Orlando, FL, USA; 4. Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA, USA Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF), one of the most common lifeshortening genetic diseases, is caused by mutation of the CFTR gene, leading to reduced synthesis, function, stability, and/or trafficking of the CFTR protein. CF disease progression is hypothesized to be greatly influenced by the type of CFTR mutation as well as patient demographics such as BMI, pancreatic status, onset of diabetes, and treatment with pancreatic enzymes or insulin. The aim of this analysis was to develop a population pharmacodynamic (PopPD) model in order to evaluate contributing factors influencing disease progression measured as a change in FEV1 in CF subjects. Methods: A PopPD model was developed to describe longitudinal changes of FEV1 in 109 CF subjects monitored during routine clinical practice over an average period of 9 years (Table. Effects of different covariates on the disease progression were examined by estimating the fractional change of FEV1 induced by each covariate and covariate combination. Covariates tested were: F508del mutation, age, gender, BMI, diabetic status, pancreatic status, and sweat-chloride levels. Subjects being pancreatic insufficient were on pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy and diabetic subjects were given insulin. Results: A linear FEV1 disease progression model (slope = 0.062 L/ year) was found to best describe the observed FEV1 data for all CF subjects included in this analysis. Additionally, the model identified key covariates contributing to the decline of FEV1, estimated as a fractional change of slope, to be (change in slope of FEV1 shown in %): diabetes (10%), pancreatic insufficiency (21%), and female gender (37%). The effect of older age contributed to a decline in baseline FEV1 of 0.8% based on the subject's age. A BMI above 20.5 was determined as being beneficial for lung function, with the effect on slope being 6.2% based on individual BMI. Being homozygous for F508del caused FEV1 to decline faster as compared to heterozygous subjects. Conclusion: Using a PopPD model, we were able to describe the time-courses of FEV1 in CF subjects as well as identify factors influencing CF disease progression measured in change of FEV1 over time. The developed model may be used as a tool in clinical practice to predict a change in time-courses of FEV1 for individual CF patients, determining possible risk factors worsening as well as factors improving lung function. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common genetic disease caused by a defect in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a membrane-bound anion channel that is permeable to both chloride and bicarbonate. The main features of CF lung disease are bacterial colonization and chronic infection in the conducting airways, which are thought to be due to alterations in the physical and chemical properties of the airway surface liquid (ASL). Pathological and clinical data suggest that the disease is initiated in distal small airways with a diameter <2mm. However, most studies regarding the pathogenesis of CF rely on data from excised or cultured proximal large airways, such as tracheal and bronchi tissue. Thus, there are no direct experimental data to support the dogma that CF lung disease is initiated in distal small airways. Our group has engineered pigs with either a deletion of or mutation of CFTR, which mimics human CF. CF pigs develop spontaneous airway infections, and airways become obstructed with mucus and inflammatory cells. This model provides an unprecedented opportunity to investigate the spatial origins of CF lung disease. We hypothesize that selective expression of CFTR in distal small airways in vivo prevents development of lung disease in CF pigs. Using a directed evolution strategy both in vitro and in vivo, we have identified a novel adeno-associated virus vector (AAV2H22) with high tropism for both large and small airway epithelial cells. Based on previous studies indicating that small airways have higher surfactant protein D (SPD) expression as compared to large airways, we constructed AAV2H22 vectors to direct expression of eGFP or CFTR to small airway epithelia using a SPD promoter fragment (562bp). There are significantly more GFP + cells in small airway cultures infected with AAV2H22SPD>eG-FP, compared to large airway cultures. Administration of AAV2H22SP-D>eGFP to both trachea and distal small airways in 1-week-old live pigs through bronchoscope confirmed that GFP+ cells were observed in distal small airways, but not in trachea or bronchi in vivo. In addition, there is significantly more cAMP-stimulated short circuit current in CF small airway cultures infected with AAV2H22SPD>hCFTRΔR in vitro. Ultimately, these tools will allow us to test our hypothesis in future studies in vivo, which will enhance our understanding of CF lung disease pathogenesis. Congenital absence of the vas deferens is observed as a clinical manifestation in upwards of 99% of males with cystic fibrosis. In this study, we investigated loss of male reproductive structures in the CF rat model, including epididymis and regional involution of the vas. Based on analysis of over 70 CFTR+/+ and -/-male animals ranging from E15.5 to P8, these developmental abnormalities were shown to occur perinatally. Timed matings and histomorphometry were used to establish that CF embryonic Wolffian and Mullerian ducts develop normally until E17.5, after which both structures begin to degenerate. Regional atresia of the vas deferens at the time of birth (and immediately thereafter) was observed, with no indication of luminal mucus or other physical obstruction. Moreover, in contrast to parenchymal damage in human and porcine CF lung and pancreas, no indication of inflammatory cell infiltrate or increased myofibroblast differentiation (as judged by TGFβ1 and pSMAD2/3 signaling) were noted in association with involution of the vas. Interestingly, we found that epididymal defects such as diminished smooth muscle proliferation appear to predate loss of the vas deferens. In addition, RNAseq of tissue biopsied from the CF male rat reproductive tract suggests gross alteration of signaling and developmental pathways, including Wnt9b and homeobox-like transcription factors Emx2 and Gata3 (loss of Wnt9b, Emx2, and Gata3 function has been associated previously with destruction of mesonephric duct derivatives in studies of knockout mice). Immunohistochemistry to determine the role of these pathways within the developing rat genitourinary tract, together with studies of androgen receptor signaling and TUNEL assays (to monitor epithelial apoptosis) are in progress. The findings provide an important test of fundamental mechanisms that underlie tissue damage in cystic fibrosis reproductive epithelia, with potential relevance to more generalized exocrine abnormalities in the disease. (Funded by CFF and NIH.) CF patients harboring rare CFTR mutations or those unresponsive to current pharmaceutical intervention currently have no therapeutic option beyond secondary therapies. Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells represent a patient-specific and renewable resource for derivation of tissues affected in CF to serve as a valuable platform for drug discovery and development. Here, we use iPS lines derived from a patient cohort harboring the rare CF-causing mutation c.3700 A>G-CFTR to model drug responses in engineered lung epithelium. This mutation is most prominent in Middle Eastern populations and causes aberrant splicing and deletion of six residues in the nucleotide-binding domain 2 (ΔI1234_R1239-CFTR) leading to nearly undetectable protein and chloride channel activity. Chronic and acute exposure to VX-809 (lumacaftor) and VX-770 (ivacaftor) respectively -a condition mimicking the combined therapeutic Orkambi TM -significantly rescued the cell surface expression and activity of the ΔI1234_R1239-CF-TR mutant in overexpression HEK cells as shown by Western blotting and a fluorescence-based assay monitoring membrane potential (FLIPR). We validated the Orkambi TM effect in patient-derived lung epithelium, a study requiring innovation given the inaccessibility of such tissue. iPS cells were generated from an affected individual bearing the c.3700 A>G-CFTR and differentiated into lung epithelium using our published protocol (Wong AP, et al. Nat Protoc. 2015; 10:363-81) . Correction with VX-809 and potentiation with VX-770 led to modest but significant changes in apical, CFTR mediated chloride conduction as measured using FLIPR. Importantly, in a multiwell plate reader assay we ranked the response of this iPSC-derived lung tissue to multimodulators pointing to the utility of this platform for developing personalized treatments for individuals with rare mutations. Future work will utilize CRISPR-Cas9 edited isotypic controls to decipher a patient-specific benchmark for maximum improvement upon correction of the CFTR locus. This work is supported by Al Qamra Holding Inc., CF Canada, and CIHR. The CFTR2 project was established to catalog a diversity of CFTR mutations, and promote discovery of novel "precision-type" approaches to therapy. Our laboratory participates in the CF theratyping initiative through development of epithelial cell models encoding clinically relevant mutations on a Fischer Rat Thyroid ((FRT)/Flp-in TM ) background. To date, we have established over 40 isogenic FRT CFTR2 cell lines expressing rare CF alleles from a single chromosomal insertion site-as well as mechanistically important CFTRs intended to improve understanding of both missense and nonsense abnormalities. The FRT lines demonstrate similar levels of CFTR mRNA, and are profiled according to steady-state core and fully glycosylated protein, vectoral ion transport, responsiveness to corrector molecules (VX-809, VX-661), potentiator (VX-770) activity, and more specialized assays tailored to individual CF alleles. Insight from global analysis of CFTR2 mutants will be presented, including observations that: 1) distinct mutations (eg from CFTR classes I, II, and IV) are significantly stabilized by chronic treatment with corrector and potentiator molecules (VX-809 and VX-770), 2) numerous processing mutations (class II) show correction with VX-809, suggesting a shared "off-pathway" misfolding intermediate, 3) many gating defects (class III) are potentiated in a manner that correlates strongly with alleles clinically approved for treatment with Kalydeco, 4) conductance mutations (class IV) may exhibit minimal or no response to potentiator (VX-770) therapy, although exceptions exist (eg R117H), and 5) a majority of CFTR mutations display molecular characteristics of more than one traditional subcategory, indicating importance of new methods for reclassifying CFTR2 alleles with a focus on theratype. These findings highlight the significance of cell-based model systems for understanding CF disease pathogenesis, and directing therapeutic trials that will help advance "precision" treatment for all individuals with the disease. (Funded by CFF and NIH.) Even though cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease is characterized by severe and persistent neutrophilic inflammation, the actual role of this phagocyte in the disease pathogenesis is underappreciated. One of the major obstacles impeding the related research is that neutrophils isolated from CF patients are short-lived ex vivo and nonpermissive to genetic manipulation. Taking advantage of the new CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing technology, we are establishing a ΔF508-CF neutrophil-precursor cell line, from which unlimited CF neutrophils can be differentiated by dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) induction. A specific sgRNA target sequence on Exon 11 in the human CFTR gene, which covers the F508 site, was identified, synthesized and engineered into the S. pyogenes Cas9 plasmid pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP (PX458). The resulting CFTR-sgRNA-Cas9 vector was verified by DNA sequencing. A 127-bp single-stranded DNA oligo was synthesized as the template for homology-directed repair (HDR) for Cas9-induced DNA double strand breaks (DSBs). This oligo, complementary to the nontarget strand of CFTR exon 11 and with 36-bp of homology upstream and 91-bp of homology downstream of the Cas9-induced DSB site, has two modifications: 1) a 3-bp deletion immediately downstream of the DSB site to create the ΔF508 mutation, and 2) a silent C→T point mutation to create an SspI restriction enzyme cut site 5-bp upstream of the DSB site. To test the principle, HEK-293T cells were transfected with the sgRNA-Cas9 plasmid and the HDR template via calcium phosphate precipitation. Forty-eight hours post-transfection, the GFP-positive cells were FACS-sorted and single-cell-cloned by limited dilution. DNA PCR-amplification of the cell clones, followed by SspI analytic digestion and DNA sequencing, confirmed that 1/31 (3.2%) clones had double-allele HDR, and 4/31 (13%) clones had single-allele HDR. To create a designed neutrophil precursor cell line, HL-60 cells were transfected with the CFTR-sgRNA-Cas9 vector plasmid along with the HDR template oligo via electroporation. Twenty-four hours later, the GFP-positive cells were FACS-sorted and single-cell cloned. The HL-60 cell clones are currently under expansion and will be analyzed similarly for HDR. We anticipate that a ΔF508-CF neutrophil precursor cell line will be established for CF research and drug screening. This work is supported by a CFFT research grant (WANG15XX0). Many CF-causing mutations are rare, and not presently within the scope of the FDA-approved population for CFTR modulator therapy. Currently, the only means to test available CF modulators for ultrarare populations, either potentiator or corrector, that may benefit these sub-populations of patients are costly "n-of-one" trials or grouping various CFTR mutations into single study populations, which may be problematic. Recent focus has shifted to ex vivo approaches to address this challenge. Our chosen model is the culture of human sweat glands, which have been highly sensitive to CFTR modulator therapy. Objective: To isolate, culture, propagate and characterize sweat gland epithelial cells from human subjects. Results: We show enzymatic digestion of skin samples from remnant surgical specimens and punch biopsy enables isolation of sweat glands. Further microdissection separates the duct from the coil. Of several coating protocols and conditions tested to enhance adherence of the isolated sweat glands for culture, we have found that irradiated 3T3 fibroblast co-culture provides a superior background to successfully initiate cellular growth. We have observed successful outgrowths from intact glands and separated coils. Thus far, outgrowth from duct has been more challenging. Cellular growth begins typically after several days and generally reaches the point at which passaging can begin after ~14 days. We are currently assessing media conditions to enhance growth rate and propagation. Antibody staining using cytokeratin 8 as a marker for coil, and cytokeratin 10 as a marker for duct, demonstrates multiple clear subpopulations of cells within the cell outgrowths. Antibody staining of intact tissue demonstrates the usefulness of these markers to identify duct vs coil. In conjunction with establishing protocols to culture sweat gland epithelial cells, we are performing patch clamp studies to provide functional characterization of the cellular cultures. Multiple channel populations have been observed, including a small, linear conductance (~10pS) Clchannel (control subject) which was responsive to ivacaftor (VX-770). Our ultimate goal is to provide a method whereby samples from CF patients can be obtained from punch biopsy, sweat gland cultures established, and ex vivo testing of the efficacy of CF modulators will be undertaken using electrophysiological techniques, enabling precision approaches to rare CFTR variants. (Supported by CFFT) Introduction: A number of therapeutic molecules under investigation and necessity to develop personalized therapy in CF require a physiologically relevant human system to test the efficacy of molecules to restore CFTR function. The in vitro reconstituted epithelium from primary human nasal epithelial (HNE) cells is a promising system for prediction of a drug activity in patients. Since nasal epithelium is much easier to sample than bronchial epithelium and provides a possibility of repeated isolation of cells from the same patient, an effort is concentrated on improvement of the HNE cultures. The general aim of the study was development of a physiologically relevant tool for the in vitro prediction of efficacy of a given compound in an individual patient. The primary measures were the characterization and comparison of the primary human nasal cells to commonly known bronchial epithelial cells, cultured in the same conditions, and tests of efficacy of CFTR correctors VX-809 and VX-661 in both cell models. Methods: Nasal epithelial cells, isolated by brushing of the inferior nasal turbinate, and bronchial cells, issued from bronchial explants, were grown on microporous inserts in air-liquid interface for 3 weeks for differentiation, then incubated or not with VX-809 or VX-661 for 48h, in combination or not with VX-770. The short circuit current experiments were performed in the Ussing chamber system with Clconcentration gradient. Immunocytochemistry and confocal microscopy were done for CFTR immunodetection with IgG-clone 24-1 diluted 1/100, accompanied with the apical plasma membrane staining with wheat germ agglutinin. Results: The primary HNE cell cultures recapitulate the properties of bronchial epithelium in terms of CFTR expression and ion transport. As expected, statistically significant differences in ΔIsc Amiloride , ΔIsc Forskolin and ΔIsc Inh172 are observed between F508del/F508del and wt/wt cell cultures of nasal (9 healthy donors/9 CF patients) and bronchial origin (7 non-CF/13 CF patients). Treatment of F508del homozygous HNE and HBE cultures with VX-809 or VX-661 corrects CFTR to variable patientdependent levels. In the HBE cultures from 12 F508del homozygous patients, after 48h incubation with 3μM VX-809, the average correction of CFTRdependent Clsecretion is of 1.8 μA/cm 2 and is statistically significant (p=0.005) taking into account the inter-and intra-patient variabilities. Two-sample T-test power analysis estimated that 20 patients are required to achieve the correction of 1.8 μA/cm 2 with 98% power providing that 2 control and 2 treated inserts are analyzed for each patient. We also observe residual CFTR-dependent Clsecretion and significant VX-809-related correction in HNE and HBE cultures issued from patients with mild CF phenotypes and various CFTR-related genotypes. Conclusion: The primary HNE cultures, after previous cells amplification, can be implemented as a model to test the efficacy of CFTR correctors. Such patient-derived differentiated epithelia constitute a tool for personalized therapy in CF. Lacerda, A.; Kojukhova, M. Discovery, Charles River Laboratories, Inc., Cleveland, OH, USA Functional evaluation of correctors and potentiators in primary cultures of cystic fibrosis patient derived bronchial/tracheal epithelial cells is a critical component for advancing development of these compounds. We generate highly differentiated air liquid interface cultures of cystic fibrosis patient derived primary bronchial epithelia (CFhBE) with the culture protocol described by Neuberger et al. (1) . The epithelia are typically plated on Snapwell polyester (polyethylene terephthalate) inserts. While evaluating culture conditions we found that epithelia plated on polycarbonate Snapwell inserts generated Phe508del CFTR short circuit currents that were about a factor of 2 greater compared to the same cells on polyester inserts. ENaCand calcium-activated current magnitudes were also affected as well as the composition of calcium activated currents. Corrector and potentiator responses were maintained and similar to responses obtained with polyester inserts. A similar change in insert type impacts the phenotypes of tracheal gland cells (2) . The increased signal magnitude is useful for expanding the fidelity and range of current measurements. Background: Early onset and progression of lung disease in children with cystic fibrosis (CF) indicates that sensitive noninvasive outcome measures are needed for diagnostic monitoring and early intervention clinical trials. The lung clearance index (LCI) and chest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were shown to detect early lung disease in CF, however, the relationship between the two measures remains unknown. Objectives: The aim of this study was, therefore, to correlate the LCI with abnormalities detected by MRI in infants and preschool children with CF. Methods: Multiple breath washout (MBW) and chest MRI were performed in 32 clinically stable young children with CF (15 infants and 17 preschool children < 6 years) at their annual check-up at our CF center. Children with CF and 35 age-matched pulmonary healthy children underwent weight-adapted MBW testing in sedation using sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6 ) if <12kg body weight and nitrogen (N 2 ) wash-out if ≥12kg body weight to assess the LCI and determine LCI z-scores. MRI scans were also performed in sedation and evaluated using a dedicated morphofunctional score. Results: The LCI z-score was significantly increased in children with CF (2.94 ± 4.33) compared to pulmonary healthy controls (0.14 ± 1.46; P<0.01). Chest MRI detected abnormalities in lung structure and perfusion in most infants and preschool children with CF, with airway wall thickening/bronchiectasis (100%) and mucus plugging (50%) constituting the most prevalent morphological abnormalities. In infants and preschool children with CF, the LCI z-score correlated strongly with the MRI morphology score, MRI-defined airway wall thickening/bronchiectasis (P<0.05 to P<0.001) and the MRI global score as a measure that integrates all abnormalities detected by MRI (P<0.05 to P<0.01). However, a correlation between LCI z-score and the MRI mucus plugging score was only observed in infants (P<0.05), but not in preschool children with CF, and LCI did not correlate with the MRI perfusion score in either age group. Conclusions: Our results indicate that LCI and MRI may be useful complementary tools for noninvasive monitoring and as quantitative endpoints in early intervention trials in young children with CF. However, our data also suggest that MRI is more sensitive than LCI in detecting early regional mucus plugging causing abnormal lung perfusion in infants and preschool children with CF. 4, 5 1. Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA; 2. Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, Boston, MA, USA; 3. Vertex Pharmaceuticals (Europe) Limited, London, United Kingdom; 4. Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; 5. Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom On behalf of the KLIMB Study Group. Introduction: The 24-wk open-label Phase 3 KIWI study demonstrated that the pharmacokinetics and safety of ivacaftor (IVA) in patients (pts) aged 2-5 y with CF and a CFTR gating mutation are similar to those seen in older pts (Davies JC, et al. Lancet Respir Med. 2016; 4:107-15) . We report here the final results from KLIMB, the long-term (84-wk) extension of KIWI. Methods: Pts completing KIWI Part B (24 wks of IVA) could enroll in KLIMB, an open-label extension study evaluating an additional 84 wks of treatment. Pts aged 2-5 y received weight-based dosing (50 mg q12h for body weight <14 kg; 75 mg q12h for ≥14 kg); pts who turned 6 y during the trial received 150 mg IVA q12h. The primary outcome was safety. Other outcomes included change from baseline (at the start of KIWI) in sweat chloride, weight, BMI, and fecal elastase-1 (FE-1) and immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) levels. Results: In total, 33 of 34 pts from KIWI Part B enrolled in KLIMB (mean age at KLIMB baseline, 3.7 y). Five discontinued study drug (1 due to elevated ALT/AST levels; 2 switched to commercial IVA; 2 for noncompliance). The most common AE of any grade was cough (73%). Eleven pts had serious AEs; 2 were considered related to IVA (elevated ALT/AST levels). Ten pts had elevated ALT/AST levels >3x ULN. Of these pts, 4 had elevated ALT/AST levels >8x ULN in KIWI; IVA was maintained or resumed in all pts except for 1 who discontinued. Significant improvements in sweat chloride, FE-1 and IRT concentrations and BMI z-score were observed at wk 84 (108 wks total; Table) . Conclusions: IVA demonstrated a stable safety profile during an extended 84-wk follow-up period in pts with CF aged 2-5 y with a CFTR gating mutation. Reported adverse events were consistent with the known safety profile; the incidence of elevated liver function tests per 24-wk period was consistent with that observed in KIWI. The improvements seen in KIWI in sweat chloride, BMI z-score, and measures of pancreatic function were maintained in KLIMB. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated.  We have set up a functional CFTR assay using patientderived intestinal stem cell cultures, termed organoids (Dekkers JF, et al. Nat Med. 2013; 19:939-45) . This assay allows the quantification of individual responses to CFTR-modulating drugs, for example potentiators such as ivacaftor (VX-770) or a combination of the food supplements curcumin and genistein that harbor potentiator activity, and shows clear differences between potency and efficacy of different treatment modalities. Our objective is to evaluate the correlation between the in vitro efficacy of CFTR potentiators in organoids and the corresponding in vivo treatment effect for individual patients with CF. The study is part of the HIT-CF program. Methods: In total 16 patients with at least one S1251N gating mutation were sequentially treated during 8 weeks with curcumin and genistein, followed by a washout and 8 weeks of ivacaftor treatment (NTR4585 and NTR4873). Organoid cultures were established and potentiator efficacies were investigated using a forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) assay together with pure compounds or with plasma of patients collected before and during treatment. The in vivo treatment effect was evaluated by measuring change in % predicted FEV1 (%FEV1) and sweat chloride concentration (SCC). Results: Responses in organoids show a similar efficacy but a much lower potency of the food supplements curcumin and genistein in comparison with ivacaftor on restoration of FIS (Dekkers JF, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2016; doi:10.1016 /jcf.2016 . Plasma of patients collected during treatment with ivacaftor strongly potentiated CFTR activity in organoids, but this was absent when using plasma from subjects receiving curcumin and genistein. Patients treated with curcumin and genistein had a mean change in %FEV1 of +1.17 (NS; range -7 to +17) and SCC of -7.91 mmol/L (p=0.047; range -34 to +18). Patients treated with ivacaftor had a mean change in %FEV1 of +12.50 (p=0.001; range -1 to +32) and a mean SCC change of -54.47 mmol/L (p=0.001; range -119 to -8). Conclusions On behalf of the VX13-809-011 Part B Investigator Group Introduction: In prior published clinical trials, lumacaftor/ivacaftor (LUM/IVA) was generally well tolerated and led to improvements in lung function and other efficacy measures in patients (pts) aged ≥12 y with CF homozygous for the F508del-CFTR mutation. We report findings from a multicenter, open-label, 2-part Phase 3 study evaluating LUM/IVA in pediatric pts with CF and the same mutation status. Methods: Pts aged 6-11 y received LUM/IVA 200 mg/250 mg q12 h for 24 wk, a dosage determined during part A of the study. Primary endpoints for part B were safety and tolerability of LUM/IVA through 24 wk; safety measures included adverse events (AEs) and spirometry. Secondary endpoints included sweat chloride, BMI, height, weight, and CFQ-R. Lung clearance index (lung volume turnovers required to reach 2.5% of starting N 2 concentration [LCI 2.5 ]) was measured as an exploratory endpoint. Results: Of 58 pts enrolled (31 female; mean age, 9.1 y), 54 completed treatment; 1 was ineligible, 1 withdrew, and 2 discontinued due to AEs (rash, n=1; elevated AST and ALT levels, n=1; all resolved following drug withdrawal). AEs were reported in 55 (94.8%) pts; most were mild (37.9%) or moderate (50.0%) in severity. Common AEs were cough (50.0%), headache (20.7%), infective pulmonary exacerbation (20.7%), and nasal congestion (20.7%). Serious AEs were reported in 4 pts, with 1 possibly related to study drug (elevated AST/ALT). AEs of special interest were observed in 11 pts: 7 (12.1%) with elevated AST/ALT and 4 (6.9%) with respiratory events (dyspnea, n=1; respiration abnormal, n=1; wheezing, n=2). Significant improvements were observed in CFQ-R scores at wk 24 (LS mean change from baseline [95% CI], 5.4 [1.4, 9.4] ; P=0.0085) and in sweat chloride, BMI, and LCI 2.5 (Table) . After a 2-wk washout, values returned to near baseline for sweat chloride and ppFEV 1 but not for LCI 2.5 or BMI (Table) . Conclusions: LUM/IVA was generally well tolerated in pts with CF aged 6-11 yrs homozygous for the F508del-CFTR mutation, with a safety profile consistent with that observed in older pts. Discontinuation due to AEs was infrequent; respiratory AEs (6.9%) were not associated with treatment discontinuation. Clinical improvement observed in lung function, sweat chloride, BMI, and CFQ-R scores support the efficacy of LUM/IVA in this population. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. Methods: Pts on LUM/IVA in TRAFFIC/TRANSPORT continued their assigned dosage in PROGRESS; pts on placebo (PBO) were randomized to 1 of 2 LUM/IVA dosages. The primary endpoint was safety through PROGRESS wk 96; the primary efficacy analysis was at wk 72, with sensitivity analyses at wk 96. Rate of FEV 1 decline was analyzed by matching study pts with pts homozygous for F508del from the US CFF Patient Registry using propensity scoring based on variables associated with FEV 1 decline. Results for the marketed 400 mg/250 mg q12h LUM/ IVA dosage are reported. Results: Including TRAFFIC/TRANSPORT, 340 pts received LUM/ IVA for ≤120 wks, and 176 pts on PBO in TRAFFIC/TRANSPORT received LUM/IVA for ≤96 wks in PROGRESS. The 96-wk safety profile was consistent with TRAFFIC/TRANSPORT; the most common AEs were PEx, cough, increased sputum, hemoptysis, and dyspnea. As in TRAFFIC/ TRANSPORT, respiratory AEs occurring in pts initiating LUM/IVA in PROGRESS mostly occurred in the first wk. Blood pressure increases seen in TRAFFIC/TRANSPORT were also observed in PROGRESS. As previously reported, three deaths occurred in PROGRESS (all considered unrelated to LUM/IVA). Mean ppFEV 1 remained above pretreatment baseline (LUM/IVA to LUM/IVA group absolute LS mean change: 0.5 percentage points at PROGRESS wks 72 and 96). After starting LUM/IVA, PBO pts had a LS mean increase of 3.4 percentage points in ppFEV 1 at wk 24 of PROGRESS. BMI continued to improve in PROGRESS (LUM/IVA to LUM/IVA group LS mean change: 0.70 kg/m 2 at wk 72; 0.96 kg/m 2 at wk 96). Reduction in PEx risk was maintained; annualized event rate was 0.65 for pts receiving ≤120 wks of LUM/IVA-similar to that observed in TRAFFIC/TRANSPORT and less than the PBO rate in TRAFFIC/TRANS-PORT (1.14). For rate of ppFEV 1 decline, 455 LUM/IVA pts were matched with 1588 controls. The groups were well matched. Pts receiving LUM/ IVA had a 42% slower rate of decline than controls (1.33 vs 2.29 percentage points per year, respectively; P<0.001). Conclusions: The safety profile of extended LUM/IVA in pts with CF aged ≥12 yrs homozygous for F508del for up to 120 wks was consistent with pivotal studies. LUM/IVA maintained mean ppFEV 1 above pretreatment baseline and showed sustained benefits in PEx rates and BMI for up to 120 wks. LUM/IVA also resulted in a 42% decrease in the annual rate of ppFEV 1 decline vs matched controls, an effect similar to the 47% reduction previously observed with IVA-treated G551D pts. Sponsored Introduction: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the most prevalent cause of lung infections in adults with CF and is associated with increased morbidity. During the progression of infections from initial onset to chronic disease, P. aeruginosa acquires traits such as mucoidy, antibiotic resistance, loss of motility, and altered quorum sensing that have been correlated to the stage of infection, pulmonary exacerbation, and lung function decline (Mayer-Hamblett N, et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014; 190:289-97) . Therefore, these phenotypes may serve as prognostic indicators of patient outcomes and disease progression. Our long-term goal is to identify volatile biomarkers that can be used to rapidly, sensitively, and noninvasively detect chronic infection-associated P. aeruginosa phenotypes directly from lung specimens, ie, sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), and breath. Objective: The goal of this study is to identify P. aeruginosa volatiles that are characteristic of chronic infection adaptation, and putative biomarkers of P. aeruginosa phenotypes that are associated with chronic infections. Methods: Paired early-and late-infection P. aeruginosa isolates from 16 patients were phenotyped for antibiotic resistance, mucoidy, motility (swimming, swarming, and twitching), and the production of proteases, rhamnolipids, pyoverdine, and pyocyanin. Selected genes were sequenced to confirm known mutations associated with these phenotypes. The isolates were cultured aerobically in rich media, and the headspace volatiles were collected for analysis by comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography -time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Multidimensional statistical analyses were used to identify characteristic changes in volatiles during the progression of infection, and putative biomarkers of specific chronicinfection phenotypes. Volatiles analysis of sputum, BAL, and breath from P. aeruginosa-infected patients were analyzed to confirm the presence of these biomarkers in patient specimens. Results: All of the P. aeruginosa late-infection isolates exhibited different volatile profiles than the early-infection isolates from which they evolved. Through the analysis of paired samples, we have expanded our set of previously-identified biomarkers of mucoidy, and identified new putative biomarkers for quorum-regulated phenotypes. Subsets of these volatiles have been confirmed to be present in the lung specimens of P. aeruginosa-infected patients. We will perform additional longitudinal analyses of the volatiles from P. aeruginosa chronic infections to validate the putative biomarkers we have identified. Introduction: Serine trypsin-like (TL) proteases, which are excessively active in CF airways, promote activation of the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) and airways dehydration; a key initiating factor for CF lung disease. Furthermore TL-proteases enhance mucin gene expression and mucus hypersecretion, as well as inflammation in human airway epithelial cells. The relationship between TL-protease activity and markers/outcome of CF airways disease has however not been reported to date. Objectives: The primary objective of the current investigation was to determine whether TL-protease activity, measured in adult CF sputum sol, correlates with lung disease and patient outcome (survival). A secondary objective was to compare the strength of any relationships observed with that of neutrophil elastase (NE), an established protease biomarker. Methods: In this cross-sectional retrospective study we analysed CF sputum sol collected from 30 clinically stable adult CF patients. Protease activity was measured by monitoring the hydrolysis of peptide-based substrates: BOC-QAR-NH 2 Mec was used to determine TL activity and NE activity was measured using N-methoxysuccinyl-AAPV-p-nitroanilide. Biomarkers of inflammation (IL-8 and TNF-α) were measured by ELISA. Lung function was assessed by spirometry (FEV 1 ). Mortality data were retrospectively obtained and time in months until death or transplantation used for subsequent survival analysis. Results: TL-like protease activity inversely correlated with lung function (FEV 1 ) (r=-0.4, p=0.031) however, no relationship with IL-8 and TNFα was observed. In contrast, NE was found to correlate with IL-8: r=0.7, p<0.001 and TNFα: r=0.7, p<0.001 but showed no relationship with lung function, indicating that these serine proteases play very distinct roles within the disease process. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated significantly reduced survival for those individuals with above-median TL-protease activity. Levels of NE activity showed no relationship with patient survival. Using a multivariate analysis (adjusted for age and BMI) a significantly increased mortality hazard (HR 1.028, 95% CI 1.007-1.049; p=0.009) was also identified. These findings are supported by analysis of a validation cohort consisting of samples collected from a separate cohort of 33 adult CF patients. Conclusions: TL-protease activity inversely correlates with reduced lung function and patient survival. As such, tryptic activity may represent a novel biomarker and moreover a covariate that requires consideration when modelling CF outcomes. Objective: Over 1,500 subjects with cystic fibrosis (CF) live in the Netherlands for which only 15 mutations, out of ~2,000 reported CFTR mutations, are responsible to cause CF in more than 90% of these subjects, with the remaining ~10% having rare, noncharacterized mutations. For these subjects, identification of CFTR-restoring drugs is challenging. We developed a functional CFTR assay using patient-derived intestinal stem cells, termed organoids, in which CFTR function and response-to-therapy can be measured easily by the forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) assay. This assay is an ideal drug-screening platform to identify (novel) drugs to restore CFTR function in a patient-specific manner and preclinical setting. As proof-of-concept study being part of the Dutch HIT-CF program, we demonstrate the ability to repurpose existing drugs, ivacaftor and/or lumacaftor, for CF subjects harboring rare CFTR mutations for which these drugs were not registered using our medium-to-high throughput screening (HTS) format. Organoids were generated from CF subjects harboring homozygous 1811+1G>C, R553X/1789C>T/4375-3T>A, F508del/2789+5G>A, F508del/G461R, F508del/G1249R, and F508del/ R347P mutations. Response to ivacaftor and/or lumacaftor was investigated using the FIS assay. Three of the CF subjects were clinically treated with ivacaftor, based on organoid responses, and clinical outcome parameters SCC, NPD, FEV1 and CFQ-R were evaluated. Results: In vitro pharmacological restoration of CFTR function by (i) ivacaftor was observed for CF subjects with F508del/G461R, R553X/1789C>T/4375-3T>A and F508del/G1249R mutations; and by (ii) ivacaftor/lumacaftor for the F508del/2789+5G>A and F508del/R347P mutations. No drug response was measured in the homozygous 1811+1G>C organoids. The three CF subjects that were selected for in vivo treatment with ivacaftor were treated and monitored for a 4-week period. CFTR-dependent biomarkers to evaluate the in vivo effect (SCC and NPD), pulmonary function parameters (FEV1 and airway resistance) and CFQ-R improved significantly for the two CF subjects with the F508del/G1249R mutations but not for the CF subject harboring the F508del/R347P mutations. Conclusions: Our data obtained in this proof-of-concept study indicate the feasibility and strength of the in vitro HTS organoid-swelling assay to identify CFTR-restoring therapies for extremely rare, uncharacterized CFTR mutations and, importantly, that in vitro FIS measurements correlate with in vivo drug responses. Next, we will use our novel 384-well HTS format to screen (i) published but not clinically approved CFTR-restoring compounds, (ii) an FDA-approved drug library, and (iii) the registered ivacaftor and lumacaftor drugs. We anticipate to identify novel, and/or repurpose, old CFTR-restoring compounds and/or drugs for CF patients with an extremely rare CFTR mutation with a prevalence of <0.5% in the Dutch CF population. Kruisselbrink, E. 1,2 ; van der Ent, C.K. 1 ; Beekman, J. 1, 2 1. Pediatric Pulmonology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands; 2. Regenerative Medicine Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands Approximately 12% of the reported mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene cause aberrant pre-mRNA splicing, thus constituting a significant proportion of all reported CFTR mutations. The majority of documented splice mutations are rare "orphan" mutations, indicating a need for the development of therapeutics that requires a novel, highly personalized drug development approach. One of the most straightforward splice modulating approaches is the use of antisense oligonucleotides (AONs), short complementary RNA molecules of ~20 nucleotides that base-pair with the target pre-mRNA, thereby correcting aberrant splicing by masking or modulating the aberrant splice site(s) or splicing regulatory element(s) and forcing the spliceosomal machinery to use the authentic splice site. A rapid and standardized preclinical approach that facilitates the selection of AONs with potential in vivo benefits is currently the important rate-limiting step in CFTR splice modulation therapy. Over the last years, we developed a novel functional CFTR assay using organoids in which CFTR function and response to therapy can be measured by the forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) assay. Importantly, FIS measurements correlate with known CFTR genotype/phenotype/response-to-therapy relations, indicating that the organoid in vitro model incorporates important in vivo disease characteristics and therapeutic effects. Here, we present our approach that is part of the Dutch HIT-CF program, to set up a novel therapeutic development pipeline for identification of AONs that target CFTR splicing mutations. Recently, we expanded and optimized the FIS assay into a 384-well medium-to-high throughput-screening format. Our AON development pipeline will consist of three successive steps: (i) identification and development of candidate AON sequences by using previously published guidelines and bioinformatic tools, with the potential to modulate levels of correctly spliced CFTR in CF subjects; (ii) efficacy testing of AONs to restore CFTR function in organoids harboring splicing mutations using a two-step AON-tiling approach to select effective AONs; and (iii) characterization and validation of AON-induced mechanisms of splicing modulation in organoids and primary airway cells. Our approach to establish a robust development pipeline using intestinal organoids of CF subjects will allow us to quickly identify antisense oligonucleotide therapies and addresses the needs of subjects expressing CFTR splice mutations that can be modulated by AONs in a subject-specific manner and preclinical setting. Anti-inflammatory therapies are needed to improve outcomes for individuals with CF. Biomarkers of inflammation and oxidative stress can play a critical role in antiinflammatory drug development. However, the most informative and responsive biomarkers in sputum and/or blood need to be determined. Methods: In a recently completed clinical trial of an oral antioxidant-enriched multivitamin supplement, CF subjects ≥10 years of age with an FEV1 40-100% predicted were randomized to 16 weeks of an antioxidant-enriched multivitamin (n=36) or control multivitamin without antioxidants (n=37). Systemic and sputum markers of inflammation and oxidative stress [blood markers: WBC counts, hs-CRP, calprotectin, serum amyloid A, myeloperoxidase (MPO), malondialdehyde, protein carbonyls, total antioxidant capacity; sputum markers: MPO, free neutrophil elastase activity, A 1 AT, SLPI, IL-8, TNF-α, 8-iso-PGF 2a , 8-OHdG; urine marker: 8-iso-PGF 2a ] were measured at baseline and 16 weeks along with clinical outcomes (pulmonary function, anthropometric measures, pulmonary exacerbations). Results: Baseline biomarker data are available for 73 subjects (33 males, 40 females). The mean age of these subjects was 22.6 years (29 were <18 years of age, 28 were 18-30 years, and 16 were >30 years of age). Mean FEV1 was 74.1% predicted (21 had an FEV1 between 40-70%, 40 had an FEV1 between 70-90%, 12 had an FEV1 between 90-100%). Systemic and sputum biomarker data by age, gender, and underlying lung function will be reported. Correlations between markers of inflammation and oxidative stress and key clinical endpoints including FEV1 will be determined. Additionally, longitudinal changes in these biomarkers over 16 weeks can be examined in the control group. Conclusions: These analyses will help to determine which biomarkers to include as endpoints in anti-inflammatory clinical trials and who to target for these trials in terms of age (pediatric subjects, adults, or both) and underlying lung function. Background: Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) functions as a channel that regulates transport of ions across the epithelial barrier. Mutations in the CFTR gene form the basis for the clinical manifestations of CF which affects the epithelial innate immune function in the lung. Epithelial dysfunction results in the initiation of a pro-inflammatory cascade in CF airways that leads to the recruitment of leukocytes (1) . Exosomes are nanovesicles (40-100nm) actively secreted by most living cells that contain proteins involved in cell-to-cell signaling. In order to shed further light on how CFTR dysfunction could potentially regulate the inflammatory response we have characterised exosomes released from cells with mutated CFTR. Methods: Exosomes were isolated from WT-and ΔF508-CFBE and CF patient samples cells using ultracentrifugation. Exosome fractions were analysed by mass spectrometry. Bioinformatics using Ingenuity Pathway analysis was performed. Exosomes were further characterised by NanoSite NS300 analysis and biochemical assays. Results: We observed a higher number of exosomes released from ΔF508-CFBE cells compared to WT cells using Nanosite NS300 analysis. There was also an increase in the number of proteins identified in ΔF508-derived exosome populations. Ingenuity pathway analysis shows that the top pathways that differ between exosomes from WT vs ΔF508 exosomes include the eukaryotic initiation factor 2 pathway (a pathway associated with NFkB), integrin signaling and acute inflammatory response. In fact, ΔF508 exosomes were enriched with the integrin CD47 which has been reported to play a role in leukocyte transmigration (2) . We are currently characterizing the role of exosomal CD47 in modulating neutrophil transmigration. Furthermore, we analysed exosome profiles from CF patient BAL fluid and serum. We identified 66 different proteins between CF patients and controls in CF fluids. We are currently examining exosome profiles in serum samples from CF patients under different treatments. Conclusion: We have found evidence that exosomes from ΔF508 cells have unique protein profiles and are rich in inflammatory modulators that may regulate leukocyte transmigration in CF airways. This establishes a novel connection between CFTR dysfunction, exosome biogenesis and CF inflammation that we are further investigating. Additionally, we have identified a potential diagnostic role for exosomes in CF patient fluids. To determine the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics (PK) of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) amplifier PTI-428 in subjects with cystic fibrosis (CF) and in healthy volunteers. Background: Despite significant advances achieved by currently approved CFTR modulators, substantial medical need remains for CF patients who are either not eligible for or who experience suboptimal benefit from these genotype restricted treatment options. A high-throughput screening strategy that enriches for small molecules acting on the translated sequence of CFTR mRNA transcript was used to identify a new class of CFTR modulators termed CFTR amplifiers. Data generated in vitro with CFTR amplifiers demonstrated improvement in chloride currents across multiple CFTR mutations and synergy with other CFTR modulators, such as correctors and potentiators. Amplifiers are CFTR mutation agnostic and lead to increased levels of immature CFTR protein along with stabilization in CFTR mRNA allowing for more substrate for other CFTR modulators to act upon. PTI-428 is an amplifier currently in Phase I trials designed to determine safety and tolerability in CF subjects and healthy volunteers. Methods: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 1 clinical study is being conducted in subjects with CF, between the ages of 18 and 55, with a forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) > 50% of predicted. The single-ascending dose (SAD) study in CF subjects consists of three cohorts of 4 randomized 3:1 (active: placebo) with oral doses of PTI-428 starting from 10 mg. The SAD portion is followed by a multiple ascending dose (MAD) study consisting of three cohorts of 8 subjects randomized 6:2 (active: placebo) dosed for seven days with oral, daily doses of PTI-428 starting from 20mg. The primary objective is assessment of safety and tolerability with the secondary objective of assessment of the PK of PTI-428. Exploratory objectives include changes in sweat chloride measurements, as well as changes in CFTR mRNA expression from nasal brushings in order to validate the use of mRNA expression as a biomarker predictive of patient response to the investigational drug. Concurrently, an additional Phase 1 drug-drug interaction (DDI) study of PTI-428 with oral hormonal contraceptives in healthy volunteers is being conducted with SAD and MAD dose escalation components prior to DDI evaluation. Safety, tolerability, PK and CFTR mRNA expression are assessed. Results: Preliminary data from the SAD and MAD cohorts, which will include safety, tolerability, PK and biomarker evaluation in the Phase 1 trials, are expected in advance of the 2016 North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference (NACFC). Conclusions: PTI-428 represents a new class of CFTR modulator that is in clinical development targeting CF patients with any mutation. One therapeutic strategy to enhance clinical benefit in patients with CF who have one or two copies of F508del-CFTR is to combine CFTR correctors that act through different mechanisms to increase CFTR at the cell surface. Using cell-based assays of CFTR function we have identified "next-generation" CFTR correctors that are active on their own and additive to first-generation correctors (lumacaftor or VX-661). Extensive medicinal chemistry optimization of the pharmacological activity and drug-like properties led to the discovery of the next-generation CFTR correctors VX-152 and VX-440, which are in early-stage clinical studies. Methods: Pharmacological activity of VX-152 and VX-440 was assessed in biochemical and functional studies using cultured human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells derived from five patients with CF who were homozygous for F508del (F508del/F508del-HBE) or 3 patients who were heterozygous for F508del and either G542X or 3905InsT, which do not produce full-length CFTR protein. The functional data were normalized to chloride transport in HBE derived from 4 non-CF donors (% normal). Results: VX-152 and VX-440 are CFTR correctors, as they facilitated the processing and trafficking of CFTR in F508del/F508del-HBE to increase the amount of CFTR at the cell surface. Addition of a first-generation CFTR corrector in combination with VX-152 or VX-440 further facilitated the processing and trafficking of CFTR, indicating that the combination delivered more CFTR to the cell surface than either corrector alone. In Ussing chamber studies using F508del/F508del-HBE, 24-hour treatment with VX-152 or VX-440 alone enhanced chloride transport from a baseline of 6% normal to 19% and 16% normal, respectively. Compared with lumacaftor plus ivacaftor, which increased chloride transport to 27% of normal, the triple combination of VX-661, ivacaftor and VX-152 or VX-440 increased chloride transport to 75% and 68% normal, respectively. These levels were higher than the level of chloride transport in G551D/ F508del-HBE treated with ivacaftor (48% normal). For all conditions tested, the response in F508del/G542X-or F508del/3905InsT-HBE was approximately half of that observed in F508del/F508del-HBE, consistent with a gene dose effect. In addition to improving chloride transport, the triple combination with VX-152 or VX-440 improved fluid transport and ciliary beat frequency more than lumacaftor and ivacaftor in F508del homozygous and heterozygous HBE. In addition to these results, further progress on the identification and optimization of next-generation correctors will be discussed. Conclusion: These in vitro data support the clinical evaluation of VX-152 or VX-440 in combination with first-generation CFTR correctors and ivacaftor to evaluate clinical benefit in patients with CF who have F508del on one or both CFTR alleles. Sponsored Premature termination codons (PTCs) in CFTR result in nonfunctional CFTR protein and are the proximate cause of ~11% of CF-causing alleles. Aminoglycosides (AGs; G418, gentamicin), synthetic AGs (NB124, Eloxx), ataluren (PTC124, PTC Therapeutics) and escin have been shown to induce readthrough (RT) of PTCs and partially restore CFTR protein expression and function. To achieve therapeutic levels, we have shown that a combination approach of using the CFTR potentiator ivacaftor (VX-770) with the corrector lumacaftor (VX-809) is beneficial for enhancing RT of premature stop mutations. Using novel correctors and potentiators from Galapagos, we examined if these modulators had synergistic effect with RT agents that could enhance CFTR function to achieve therapeutic levels. Stably transduced Fisher rat thyroid (FRT) G542X, W1282X or R1162X cells were pretreated with G418 (250 μg/mL) or escin (10 μM) to induce RT, with corrector 1 (C1 or early corrector, 0.5 μM) and corrector 2 (C2 or late corrector (complementary to C1), 3 μM) alone or in combination to enhance processing; transepithelial conductance (Gt) was recorded before and after CFTR stimulation with forskolin (10 μM) followed by investigational potentiator (GLPG1837, previously described as GP-5, 10 μM) or ivacaftor (10 μM). Similar studies were also carried out in primary HBE (human bronchial epithelial, G542X/F508del and W1282X/F508del) cells for short-circuit current (Isc) analysis. A cell-surface expression assay with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-tagged FRT-G542X or W1282X cells was used to examine cell surface expression of CFTR following treatment. GLPG1837 and VX-770 showed dose-dependent increases in CFTR activity (Gt) in all the three FRT CFTR PTC cell lines compared to vehicle control (P<0.05), but only when RT was induced by G418 pretreatment. In FRT W1282X and R1162X, GLPG1837 CFTR activity was significantly greater than VX-770 (P<0.05). In a triple-combination approach, correctors alone (C1 or C2) or combined (C1+C2) did not significantly enhance CFTR-dependent Gt compared to G418 alone, indicating the synergy of CFTR modulators with RT agents. In HRP assay, CFTR expression levels were significantly higher in combination of C1+C2 and G418 compared to vehicle. Escin showed significant synergy with C1+C2 and GLPG1837 pretreatment (Gt: 6.5± 0.3 mS/cm 2 ) as compared to VX-809+GP-5 (Gt: 1.8± 0.1 mS/cm 2 ). In contrast to FRT G542X, in FRT W1282X cells, C1+C2 were significantly efficacious, both alone and in combination with RT agents. In addition, GLPG1837-induced response was significantly higher in the FRT-W1282X mutation compared to G542X and R1162X mutations. Evaluation of CFTR activity in primary cells is in progress. In conclusion, the combination of novel correctors and a potentiator show significant synergy with RT agents. Further, the combination of correctors (C1+C2) exhibited a significant benefit for the W1282X mutation as corrector therapy was efficacious on its own (without RT), especially when combined with GLPG1837. Combination therapy (CFTR modulators + RT agents) may be a useful approach to augment repair of CFTR nonsense mutations. In about 10% of CF patients premature termination codon (PTC) mutations, or nonsense mutations, are found in the CFTR gene on at least one allele. Nonsense mutations, also referred to as Class I mutations, cause premature termination of CFTR protein translation. Consequently, no functional full-length CFTR protein is generated from PTC mutant genes. For patients with nonsense mutation alleles readthrough-promoting therapeutics are a serious unmet need. Small molecule-mediated readthrough of PTCs holds the promise of potential treatment for patients with this mutation class. Here, we report on the functional rescue efficacy of natural and modified aminoglycosides (AGS) gentamicin, G418, and NBXX (Eloxx Pharmaceuticals). All have previously been shown to promote PTC readthrough. As non-AGS small molecule readthrough modulators, we studied ataluren, which has shown modest efficacy in some CF patients. It is currently in a pivotal clinical trial. Also tested was RTC13, a compound for which in vitro readthrough activity has been reported. We assessed functional rescue of the two most common CFTR nonsense mutations, G542X and W1282X, as well as for Y122X. The readthrough drugs were tested alone or in combination with nonsense mediated decay (NMD) inhibitors (SMG1i, NMDi14, Amlexanox), and/or CFTR corrector VX-809. Conductance (G t ) studies were performed with isogenic FRT cell lines stably transfected with CFTR PTC mutants, and hBE equivalent current (I eq ) measurements were carried out with heterozygote primary hBE cells of F508del/G542X or F508del/ W1282X genotypes. Key findings: hBE: 1) Responsiveness of three F508del/G542X and two F508del/W1282X donor cells was tested for certain treatments with above-mentioned agents, but only G418 and Eloxx AGS treatments (48/72h) yielded an increase in CFTR-mediated current in two of the G542X containing donor cells. 2) Functional rescue of CFTR G542X by G418 (50 μM) and Eloxx AGS NB84, NB127 (250 μg/mL) in these cells was quite modest, but significant (15-20% of VX-809 control). 3) 0.2 μM of SMG1i, an inhibitor of SMG1, doubled CFTR activity when combined with G418, while NMDi14 (to be confirmed) and VX-809 (3 μM) yielded only marginal increases. Amlexanox was ineffective. FRT: 1) G418 is over 20-fold more efficacious for all three PTC mutations than gentamicin when compared at 300 μM/72h. 2) Ataluren was ineffective, but RTC13 showed marginal rescue of CFTR function: 10-25% of G418 (W1282X > G542X, Y122X). 3) VX-809 coincubation boosted readthrough-mediated CFTR activity (mS/cm 2 ) by ca. 50%. 4) SMG1i (3 μM) increased CFTR activity in W1282X 2-fold (3-fold in combo with NMDi14), but both compounds were ineffective for CFTR Y122X or G542X. hBE & FRT: Streptomycin/hygromycin B (AGS) media supplements had no measurable effect on compound activities. Data supporting these findings as well as functional data of our best PTC hits from an 80K compound library screen will be presented at the conference. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a monogenic lethal disorder caused by mutation(s) in the CFTR gene. The most common mutation, ΔF508, leads to protein-misfolding that induces ROS-mediated autophagy-impairment leading to CFTR-accumulation in aggresome-bodies. Moreover, this can impair the autophagosome-mediated clearance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa), the common CF pathogen. Hence, in this study we synthesized and evaluated the efficacy of cysteamine (an autophagy inducing antibacterial drug)-tagged dendrimers (DDN CYS ) in rescuing ΔF508-CFTR protein aggregation and Pa infection. Methods: Generation-4 (G4) diaminobutane (DAB) dendrimer core with amine surface was synthesized and reacting G4-DAB core amine dendrimer with Traut's reagent formed G4-SH. The resulting nano-formulation was characterized using an autophagy-reporter assay, PAGE-gel analysis and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The CFBE41o-, IB3-1 and/or HEK293 cells were used to determine the therapeutic efficacy of DDN CYS as compared to DDN in rescuing ΔF508-CFTR by immunofluorescence microscopy, flow cytometry and immunoblotting. Moreover, cells treated with DDN-control or DDN CYS were infected with Pa-PAO1-GFP (MOI: 1 or 10) and the bacterial counts were quantified by immunofluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. Results: We first synthesized and characterized DDN CYS . Briefly, acidic PAGE was used to analyze the cysteamine conjugates. For comparison, ladder (G2-G5) was used. We verified the presence of conjugate obtained under our synthesis conditions as compared to the unreacted G4 that showed only one band "B." Moreover, we did not observe any evidence of cross-linking of the conjugates via disulfide formation. Next, we characterized the size and dispersion of DDN CYS formulation by TEM and found DDN/DDN CYS size to be around 8-10 nm. The efficacy of DDN-CYS in inhibiting ubiquitinated protein accumulation in aggresome bodies was verified by LC3/Ub-reporter assay. We also investigated the effectiveness of (DDN CYS ) in CFBE41o-cells and observed a modest rescue of ΔF508-CFTR as the C-form. Immunofluorescence microscopy of HEK293 cells transfected with ΔF508-CFTR-GFP showed that DDN CYS treatment rescues the misfolded-ΔF508-CFTR from aggresome bodies by inducing its trafficking to the cell membrane. We further verified these results by flow cytometry and observed significant (p<0.05; DDN vs. DDN CYS ) rescue of membrane-ΔF508-CFTR with DDN cys treatment using nonpermeabilized IB3-1 cells immunostained for CFTR. Finally, we assessed the antibacterial potential of DDN CYS by treating IB3-1 cells infected with PA01-GFP and observed a significant (p<0.01; DDN vs. DDN CYS ) decrease in intracellular bacterial counts by both immunofluorescence microscopy and flow cytometry. Conclusion: We demonstrate here the therapeutic efficacy of dendrimer-based selective autophagy-induction (DDN CYS ) in rescuing ΔF508-CFTR from aggresome bodies while promoting its trafficking to the cell membrane. Moreover, DDN CYS treatment significantly inhibits Pa-infection in CF cells by inducing autophagy-mediated bacterial clearance. Wang, X. 1 ; Tse, C. 1 1. Abbvie, Inc., North Chicago, IL, USA; 2. Galapagos, Mechelen, Belgium To address the most prevalent defects leading to cystic fibrosis, two biomolecular activities are required, namely correctors to increase properly folded F508delCFTR levels at the cell surface, and potentiators to allow the effective opening of the F508delCFTR channel. Combined, these activities allow chloride ion transport leading to improved hydration of the lung surface and subsequent enhancement of mucociliary clearance. Abbvie and Galapagos are collaborating to develop a series of compounds capable of performing each of these activities individually. Orkambi from Vertex Pharmaceuticals represents the first disease-modifying therapy for CF patients with homozygous F508del mutation, and was approved based on marginal but statistically significant improvement in lung function (FEV 1 ). However, there still exists a high unmet medical need with F508del CF patients for a more robust therapy. Herein we report the identification and in vitro characterization of ABBV/GLPG-2222, a novel, potent and orally bioavailable corrector currently in clinical trials that exhibits substantial improvements over the existing correctors in the clinic. This includes improvements in potency and drug-drug-interaction (DDI) compared to lumacaftor (VX-809) and improvements in potency and efficacy compared to VX-661. ABBV/ GLPG-2222 exhibits potent in vitro functional activity in primary patient cells harboring F508del/F508del CFTR with an EC 50 <10nM. In sum, ABBV/GLPG-2222 represents the second component of a three-component combination therapy to treat the most prevalent CFTR mutation, F508del. AS, SA, CB, YF, WG, SG, YJ, BL, AM, XS, AMS, TV, CY, XW and CT are employees of AbbVie. The design, study conduct, and financial support for the research conducted by AbbVie were provided by AbbVie. AbbVie participated in the interpretation of data, review, and approval of the publication. Madden, D.R. 1 1. Biochemistry, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA; 2. Chemistry, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA; 3. Pharmacology and Toxicology, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA CF is a lethal autosomal recessive disease in which the gene encoding the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) is mutated. The most common mutation in CFTR, ΔF508, results in 3 primary intracellular defects: inefficient folding in the ER, diminished chloride transport across the apical membrane, and increased lysosomal degradation. There is an FDA-approved combination therapy that alleviates those defects: VX-809 assists proper CFTR folding in the ER and VX-770 enhances the ability of CFTR to efflux chloride at the apical membrane. Combinatorial treatment with VX-809 and VX-770, however, demonstrates modest effects (ΔFEV 1 = 3%) in homozygous ΔF508 CF patients and no efficacy in heterozygous patients. Currently, no therapeutics are designed to stabilize CFTR. Rapid lysosomal degradation of mature CFTR is facilitated by the CFTRassociated ligand (CAL), a negative regulator that binds the CFTR C-terminus via a PDZ domain-mediated interaction (Cheng J, et al. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277:3520-9) . To directly address CFTR instability, we engineered a series of synthetic peptide inhibitors of CAL (iCAL) that bind the CAL PDZ domain (CALP) with unprecedented selectivity (Vouilleme L, et al. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl. 2010; 49:9912-6) . These inhibitors significantly increase ΔF508 CFTR abundance and conductance at the apical membrane. To determine if our therapeutic leads are amenable to nonproteinogenic amino acid substitutions, we substituted acetylated lysine residues at modulatory sites along iCAL without ablating its target affinity. We crystallized each peptide in complex with CALP and determined structure complexes at resolutions ≤ 1.55 Å (Amacher JF, et al. PLoS One. 2014; 9:e103650) . From these data, we hypothesized that the incorporation of complex, unnatural side-chains in iCAL will enhance its affinity and selectivity towards CALP. We utilized high-throughput in silico modeling to identify putative modifications that, when coupled to modulatory lysine residues, will enhance the affinity between our iCAL peptidomimetics and CALP. We performed fluorescence polarization competition assays to determine inhibition constants (K I ) between CALP and each modified peptide. Among the peptides investigated, we observed a 2-to 3-fold increase in affinity between CALP and iCAL (K I ≈ 20-30 μM) relative to the unmodified peptide, indicating a moderate-to-weak interaction. Furthermore, we subjected these peptidomimetics to crystallographic analysis to understand potential mechanisms by which these modifications enhance affinity towards CALP. These experiments demonstrate that the incorporation of synthetic side-chain modifications at modulatory sites can enhance the binding affinity between CALP and iCAL. Extending this experimental workflow to other iCAL sites will greatly expand the chemical diversity available to explore in order to enhance the affinity and selectivity of our therapeutic leads. A selective, highly potent iCAL therapeutic, administered in conjunction with Orkambi, could attenuate mutant CFTR defects and augment treatment efficacy in a broader spectrum of CF patients. This work was supported in part by NIH award R01-DK101451. Background: RNA editing is an enzymatic process that initiates site-directed mutagenesis within RNAs. This process is catalyzed by adenosine deaminases that act on RNA (ADARs), a family of enzymes that convert adenosines (A's) to inosines (I's) in various RNAs. I is structurally similar to guanosine (G) and an A-to-I change is interpreted as an A-to-G change by ribosomes and other biological processes. As a result of this mechanism, protein function may be altered, particularly if editing occurs within mRNA coding regions. In our lab, we have engineered a recombinant ADAR that guides the editing reaction to a specific adenosine of our choosing within an RNA. Using this site-directed RNA editing (SDRE) strategy, we have attempted to correct the most common premature termination stop codons (PTCs) in CFTR in transiently transfected HEK293T cells. Objective: Our long-term goal is to use SDRE for restoring functional CFTR chloride currents in five of the most frequent PTC mutations within CFTR (G542X, W1282X, R553X, R1162X, and Y122X). In the short-term we aim to maximize the efficiency of SDRE to correct different CFTR PTCs while reducing off-target edits in a transiently transfected system. Methods: As a first step, we tested editing efficiency of our SDRE in all five CFTR PTCs (G542X, W1282X, R553X, R1162X, and Y122X). HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with the different CFTR mutations, editase and RNA guide. Four days posttransfection, we measured correction at the level of RNA by RT-PCR and direct sequencing. To reduce off-target editing events, we added an SV40 large T-antigen nuclear localization signal (NLS) to our recombinant editing enzyme. Immunofluorescence experiments were performed with α-Flag antibody to determine nuclear localization. We next tested the editing efficiency of our nuclear-localized enzyme in all different CFTR PTCs as before. Results / Conclusions: Using our SDRE, we have detected efficient (≥ 37 %) editing at the target adenosine in HEK293T cells in all CFTR PTCs tested: CFTR G542X (UGAG; 37%), W1282X (UGAA; 63%), R553X (UGAG; 46%), R1162X (UGAG; 86%), and Y122X (UAA; 83 and 75%). However, there were various degrees of off-target editing events dependent on the mutation. To decrease off-target edits, we added an NLS to our editase and tested its ability to reduce off-targets in all PTCs as before. Using our nuclear editase we were able to decrease all off-target events. However, there was also a slight decrease in editing efficiency at the target adenosine. Future experiments will focus on testing our strategy on Fischer rat thyroid (FRT) epithelial cells that stably express these CFTR PTC constructs. We will also assess functional correction by testing our strategy in epithelial cell monolayers using the Ussing chamber. Support: This work was funded in part by CFF Award ROSENT14XX0 and we thank them for their support. It was also supported by R01 NS087726 from NINDS and RCMI Grant G12 RR 03051. are not responsive to drug therapy. The deep intronic splicing mutations 1811+1.6kB A>G, 3272-26A>G 3849+10kB C>T cause the incorporation of premature stop codons in the mature CFTR transcript due to the creation of cryptic splice sites. These three mutations account for 1614 entries in CF databases (1.82% of all CF-causing mutations). We have created pairs of CRISPR Cas9/guideRNAs to create two adjacent double-stranded breaks close to each of these mutations which allows us to delete short intronic sequences by NHEJ (nonhomologous end joining) in a highly efficient way. We have designed and tested the ability of different pairs of gRNA to cause deletions in the intronic regions where these three mutations can be found. These gRNA pairs were cloned in tandem in pSpCas9(BB)-2A-GFP, a vector capable of expressing both gRNA and Cas9. We show that the constructed Cas9 reagents are able to cause the desired deletions with efficiency up to 50% in a human trachael epithelial cell line. We have constructed a hybrid minigene system that allows heterologous splicing reactions between plasmid exonic sequences and the cloned wild-type or mutant CFTR region of interest. We have fully characterized the effect of these mutations in the splicing process. Moreover, when the selected Cas9 reagents were co-transfected with minigenes carrying the splicing variants the aberrant splicing pattern was successfully corrected due to the deletion of the cryptic signals, showing a high level of normally spliced transcripts after Cas9 NHEJ based editing. These constructs will be evaluated in epithelial cells derived from patients carrying these mutations to determine the level of restoration of CFTR function. The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA Viral vector delivered cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) can complement the anion channel defect in cystic fibrosis (CF) airway epithelia. Indeed, gene therapy is a curative strategy regardless of the disease-causing mutation. An important goal for CF gene therapy is to achieve long-term functional correction. While many vector options have been evaluated, integrating vectors have the greatest potential to maintain stable expression over time without a requirement for repeated administration. In this study, functional in vivo CFTR channel activity was restored in the airways of CF pigs using two integrating vector options: 1) a lentiviral vector; and 2) a hybrid piggyBac/AAV vector. In freshly excised tracheal and bronchus tissues and cultured sinus cells, we observed a significant increase in transepithelial cAMP-stimulated current, evidence of functional CFTR. In addition, we observed increases in tracheal airway surface liquid (ASL) pH and bacterial killing in CFTR vector-treated animals. In cultured airway epithelial cells from treated pigs, we observed increased ASL pH and decreased mucus viscosity. A third vector system based on an integrating hybrid piggyBac/adenoviral vector is currently being evaluated. Lentiviral vectors are a vetted option for CF gene therapy; whereas, the emerging technologies of DNA transposon-based hybrid vectors provide new tools for in vivo gene transfer and present an exciting opportunity to increase the delivery efficiency for therapeutic genes such as CFTR. Our results demonstrate that CFTR delivery using integrating viral vectors can partially correct the anion channel defect in a large animal CF model and validate a translational strategy to treat or prevent CF lung disease. Background: Inflammation and infection begins during early infancy in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), but little is known regarding the genes or pathways contributing to this pathophysiology or if they differ according to age. Whole genome blood transcriptome analysis represents a comprehensive tool to gain understanding in the pathogenesis of disease. In this study we evaluated the value of gene expression profiles to identify the pathways activated or suppressed in infants and young children with CF. Methods: Seventy children < 10 years of age with CF (20 infants and 50 children) and 12 age-matched healthy controls (HC) were prospectively enrolled and blood obtained for gene expression profile analyses. Transcriptional signatures were identified and validated in independent sets through linear mixed models adjusted for age and multiple testing. Modular analysis, molecular distance to health (MDTH) and Ingenuity pathway analysis were performed to identify the specific immune pathways expressed according to age. Results: The median age of CF infants was 4.3 months (4.0-4.8) and 4.0 years (2.3-6.1) in children. Linear mixed models (p<0.01, Benjamini-Hochberg, 1.25-fold change) identified a lower number of transcripts expressed in CF infants vs HC (555 differentially expressed genes-biosignature) compared with older children with CF (1953 transcripts). Modular analysis demonstrated decreased expression of monocytes, inflammation, apoptosis, and cell death related genes in CF infants. In contrast, transcriptional signatures switched to a proinflammatory, hyperinnate, and decreased adaptive immune response throughout the child cohort ( Figure) . Conclusions: Gene expression profiling is a promising tool to aid in discrimination of early CF disease, especially in infants and young children where early interventions may have significant impact. Gene expression profiling provides insight into pathways of innate and adaptive immunity disrupted in CF that may be future prognostic indicators or targets for novel therapeutic interventions. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by different mutations in the gene encoding the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). One of the most common of the mutation classes, premature termination codons (PTCs) in CFTR results in nonfunctional CFTR protein and causes ~11% of CF-causing alleles. Previously, we have screened for clinically available compounds that efficiently enhance translational readthrough of PTCs and improve CFTR function. Among the 8 lead compounds from the screen, escin, an herbal extract, has consistently been shown to enhance the CFTR activity in nonsense-mutation-expressing FRT and HBE cells. In the current study, we examined the role of escin in CFTR cell surface expression and evaluated its bioavailability in mice. Methods: To determine the cell surface expression of CFTR protein, we adapted a reporter-based, horseradish peroxidase (HRP) assay in stably transduced FRT cells expressing G542X, W1282X and Y122X cDNA tagged with HRP at the second membrane spanning domain. Monolayers were treated with escin (10 μM), positive control (G418, 250 μg/mL) or vehicle control (DMSO) for 48 hours followed by measurement of chemiluminescence activity. The pharmacokinetic properties of escin were investigated in mice following intraperitoneal (IP) and subcutaneous (SC) administration of escin and the mean plasma concentrations were analyzed using noncompartmental analysis. Results: There was a strong correlation (r=0.5; P= 0.02) between readthrough detected by a dual luciferase mRNA-based reporter compared to CFTR surface expression using a panel of readthrough agents. Escin significantly enhanced CFTR surface expression in FRT G542X HRP cells by 1.5-fold and by 2-and 3-fold in FRT W1282X HRP and FRT Y122X HRP , respectively (P<0.0001). Results were confirmed by Western blot. Escin levels in mice plasma showed two peaks, which corresponded to two known and active isomers of escin, escin Ia and escin Ib. The concentrations of escin Ia, escin Ib, and total escin (Ia + Ib) over time were lower in SC dosing compared to IP administration, and were nearly undetectable with oral administration (unique to mice since it has been shown that humans readily absorb escin). Mean peak concentrations of escin Ia (10,257 ng/mL), escin Ib (7,123 ng/mL), and total escin (17,380 ng/mL) were observed at 4 hours after SC dosing. AUC last values were 130 h.μg/mL for escin Ia, 84.7 h.μg/ mL for escin Ib, and 215 h.μg/mL for total escin Ia + Ib, demonstrating stable levels above the maximally effective concentration in vitro and suitable for in vivo studies. Conclusions: Escin enhances cell surface expression of several common CFTR nonsense mutations that corresponds to biochemical readthrough and functional activity. Escin is bioavailable by IP administration in mice at levels sufficient to mimic desired human exposures achieved PO. The efficacy of escin in transgenic hG542X-CFTR-expressing mice is currently in progress, which will set the stage to conduct clinical trials in CF patients with nonsense mutations. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) anion channel. Airway disease is the major source of morbidity and mortality. Successful implementation of gene-and cell-based therapies for cystic fibrosis (CF) airway disease requires knowledge of relationships between percentages of targeted cells, levels of CFTR expression, correction of electrolyte transport, and rescue of host defense defects. Previous studies suggested that when ~20-50% of airway epithelial cells expressed CFTR, they generated wild-type levels of Clsecretion, and overexpressing CFTR offered no advantage compared to endogenous expression levels. However, recent discoveries focused attention on CFTR-mediated HCO 3 secretion and airway surface liquid (ASL) pH as critical for host defense and CF pathogenesis. Therefore, we generated porcine airway epithelia with varying ratios of CF and wild-type cells. Epithelia with a 50:50 mix secreted HCO 3 at half the rate of wild-type epithelia. Likewise, heterozygous epithelia (CFTR +/or CFTR +/ΔF508 ) expressed CFTR and secreted HCO 3 at ~50% of wildtype values. ASL pH, antimicrobial activity, and viscosity showed similar relationships to the amount of CFTR. Overexpressing CFTR increased HCO 3 secretion to rates greater than wild-type, but ASL pH did not exceed wild-type values. Thus, in contrast to Clsecretion, the amount of CFTR is rate-limiting for HCO 3 - secretion and for correcting host defense defects. In addition, overexpressing CFTR might produce a greater benefit than expressing CFTR at wild-type levels when targeting small fractions of cells. These findings may also explain the risk of airway disease in CF carriers. Vonk, A.M. 1,2 ; Hagemeijer, M.C. 1,2 ; Oppelaar, H. 1,2 ; van der Ent, C.K. 1 ; Beekman, J. 1, 2 1. Pediatric Pulmonology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands; 2. Regenerative Medicine Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands Objective: Approximately 2,000 different mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene have been reported to cause cystic fibrosis (CF); the most common life-shortening autosomal recessive disease worldwide. Until now only two CFTR-restoring drugs, ivacaftor and lumacaftor, have been approved as therapies for CF but only for a relatively small number of CFTR mutations. As such, a clear need for a (preclinical) high-throughput screening (HTS) approach exists to identify new CFTR-restoring drug compounds for all CF subjects, independent of the prevalence of a particular mutation. Methods: A few years ago we developed a patient-specific functional CFTR assay using intestinal organoids, termed the forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) assay. Fluid secretion into the organoid lumen by forskolin administration to the organoid cultures is a process completely dependent on the presence of functional CFTR and can be measured by a simple phenotypic functional read-out. Importantly, the organoid FIS assay with its (i) relatively simple assay set up and readout, (ii) speed, (iii) robustness, and (iv) accuracy, is a highly suitable patient-specific primary screening platform for the identification and preclinical validation of CFTR-restoring drug compounds. Results: In this study that is part of the Dutch HIT-CF program, we expanded and optimized the FIS assay into a 384-well medium-to-high throughput-screening format. To validate this HTS screening platform we measured FIS responses to ivacaftor/lumacaftor treatment in previously characterized organoids harboring homozygous F508del and F508del/ S1251N mutations. We demonstrate that automated dispension of organoids and compounds is feasible in our 384-wells format; underscored by the results of our replicate-experiment, signal variability, Z'-factor and spatial uniformity studies. Conclusion: Our patient-specific CFTR function HTS measurements have a significant throughput, allowing us to screen thousands of conditions per person per week in our current 384-well medium-to-high throughput setting using small molecule CFTR-restoration approaches. We already started to utilize our HTS screening platform, among others, to develop splice modulation therapies using antisense oligonucleotides to restore aberrant CFTR splicing and to identify and/or repurpose old and new compounds/drugs to restore CFTR function in patients with a rare, uncharacterized CFTR mutation (prevalence of <0.5% in the Dutch CF population; the Rainbow Project). 1, 5 1. Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, NL, Netherlands; 2. Medicine and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; 3. Clinical Immunology, Central University Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of; 4. Lexicon Pharmaceuticals, Inc, The Woodlands, TX, USA; 5. Sophia Ped Pulmonol, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands Introduction: Aberrant lipid metabolism might be involved in CF lung inflammation and remodeling. In a separate HIT-CF study we show that bioactive lipid markers of oxidative stress in lung lavage fluid, including sphingosines, correlate with early CF lung disease in CF infants. Therefore, we studied in a mouse model whether pharmacological correction of sphingosine metabolism reduces inflammation, mucus production and tissue remodeling. In C57Bl/6 Cftr tm1EUR F508del CFTR mice we analyzed total lung sphingosine levels by mass spectrometry, and correlated this with basal and LPS-fMLP induced lung inflammation, by FACS analysis of myeloid (CD45+) cells, quantitative histology and ELISA for inflammation markers, in an intervention study with an experimental anti-inflammatory drug (LX2931), a sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) lyase inhibitor, (Lexicon Pharmaceuticals, Inc). Results: We observed a fourfold reduction of S1P in lung tissue of adult unchallenged F508del CFTR mutant mice compared to normal (n=10, P<0.01). This correlates with enhanced infiltration by (CD45+) myeloid cells, in particular granulocytes, inflammatory monocytes, B-and T-cells (n=16, P< 0.05). Moreover, in mutant mice we observe a 20% iNOS+ granulocyte subpopulation that is absent in normal mice (n=6). Importantly, the ratio of the pro-inflammatory macrophage-derived dendritic cells (MoDC) to conventional dendritic cells (cDC) is twofold higher in mutant mice (n=16, P<0.01). Two weeks after acute intranasal challenge with bacterial toxins (LPS-fMLP) we observe high levels of inducible mucin (mMU-C5AC) and pro-inflammatory cytokines including IFNγ, IL12p70, TNFα and KC by ELISA (n=7; P<0.01) in mutant compared to normal. Oral application of a S1P-lyase inhibitor (LX2931), increases S1P levels in mutant mouse tissues more than tenfold. This normalizes the lung MoDC/cDC ratio, and strongly reduces B-and T-cell counts and granulocyte iNOS expression in unchallenged mutant mice. In LPS-fMLP challenged mutant mice treated with LX2931 we observe reduced levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mMUC5AC to near normal levels (n=11, P<0.05). Conclusion: F508del CFTR mutant mice present basal lung inflammation and delayed resolution of induced inflammation, which correlates with reduced S1P tissue levels in the lung. This phenotype can be partially corrected by a S1P lyase inhibitor, suggesting a causal relationship between abnormal S1P metabolism and CF lung inflammation. This provides a strong rationale for therapeutic targeting of the S1P signaling pathway in CF patients. Acknowledgements: Funded by Dutch CF Foundation (NCFS HIT-CF C6/7) and the Dutch Lung Fund (3.3.10.027) . Disclosures: Part of this study was funded by Lexicon Pharmaceuticals, Inc. 5 1. Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, NL, Netherlands; 2. Sophia Ped. Pulmonol, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 3. LACDR, Leiden, Netherlands; 4. Center for CF and Airways Disease Research, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA; University Western Australia, Perth, WA, Australia Introduction: The CF clinics Erasmus MC Rotterdam and Utrecht University MC are engaged in a screening protocol pioneered by the Australian CF community (AREST CF), in which all CF patients identified by neonatal screening are followed by annual CT scans, bronchoscopy and collection of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). This approach allows a unique study of early CF lung disease, drug target finding and validation (HIT-CF program). Abnormalities in lung bioactive lipid metabolism were observed by several groups in CF patients and CF mutant mice. These bioactive lipids are generally involved in inflammation and tissue remodelling. Here we report the results of a lipidomics study on AREST-CF BALF samples. Methods: Using a state-of-the-art LC-MS platform (LACDR Leiden) we established a method to analyse a panel of oxylipids, polar lipids, and fatty acids in 1 mL of CF BALF obtained from the Australian AREST-CF consortium. The study cohort included CF infants (N=40, 1-6 yrs) with null-to-moderate lung CT disease score (based on the PRAGMA scoring method reflecting bronchiectasis, bronchial thickening, air trapping, mucus plugging), and non-CF infants with recurrent lung inflammation (N=17). Results: The analysis yielded a matrix of over ten thousand data points, covering a range of bioactive lipids involved in inflammation, oxidative stress and tissue injury. These data were correlated with lung CT scores, and other clinical parameters (including neutrophil counts, and bacterial load). Cluster analysis distinguished CF from non-CF patients based notably on markers of oxidative stress, even when neutrophil counts and bacterial load did not differ between the two groups. This suggests that CF patients have specific characteristics with respect to bioactive lipid profiles, irrespective of the level of airway inflammation. Using the Fisher correlation test, we identified 27 lipid species with a significant correlation (R 2 > 0.5, P<0.05) to PRAGMA CT scores. From these data emerged two clusters (sphingosine and phospholipase A pathways) that correlate with high disease scores. On-going studies of the Erasmus MC AREST-CF cohort will be presented (I-BALL study). Current studies include analysis of aberrant neutrophil function in early CF lung disease, in relation to lipidomic markers. Conclusions: The AREST-CF lipidomics approach proves effective in monitoring the development of lung pathology in CF infants (1-6 years) and offers valuable opportunities for research. We identified biomarkers in the sphingosine and phospholipase pathways that correlate with disease progression, allowing us to identify new therapeutic targets, monitor the effect of therapeutic interventions and better tailor treatment to individual patients. Supported by NCFS (HIT-CF C6/7), ZONMW (435000035) Objective: The validity of using nitrogen wash-out for determination of lung clearance index (LCI) depends on the assumption that nitrogen back diffusion from blood and tissues does not significantly affect the nitrogen washout curve. The objective of the present study is to determine whether back diffusion distorts the N 2 washout curve with a significant effect on LCI. Methods: 4 healthy adults were recruited (ages 23-63) for study. Subjects breathed quietly from a bag containing 0.2% SF 6 in air until end-tidal concentration of SF 6 was stable. Gas concentrations were analyzed with the Innocor LCI device (PulmoTrace, Inc, Atlanta, GA) equipped with a software version developed specifically for this project and configured for an open-circuit technique. Wash-out was then performed by having the subjects breathe 100 % O 2 until the N 2 concentration was less than 1%. During wash-out, the subjects were asked to perform two 30-second breath-hold maneuvers (BH1 at 45 seconds and BH2 at 120 seconds into wash-out). Rate of back diffusion is estimated by comparing the changes in SF 6 and N 2 concentrations following the breath hold. Measurements were repeated after a low level of exercise (25W) with cycle ergometer. Results: The Figure shows a typical recording of N 2 and SF 6 washout with two breath-hold maneuvers. During BH1, there was a mean relative change of N 2 of 20.5% (range 14.7 -27.5%), corresponding to N 2 back diffusion of 0.64 (range 0.371-0.914) mL/sec. During BH2 there was a mean relative change of N 2 of 5.8% (range 3.8 -9.7%), corresponding to N 2 back diffusion of 0.54 (range 0.358-0.762) mL/sec. We also observed a very slow decline in N 2 concentration even after reaching 1%, calling into question whether this is a true steady state. N 2 back diffusion was increased markedly by a low level of exercise (25 watts). Conclusions: There is significant intrasubject variation in the effect of N 2 back diffusion, and as a consequence, there are variable effects on LCI. Cardiac output affects N 2 back diffusion and may contribute to variability in MBW measurements. N 2 back diffusion may be an important and uncontrolled confounder in studies using LCI-N 2 . Additional data in 10 young adults are being collected and will be included prior to NACFC. Normalized end-tidal concentrations of SF 6 (diamonds) and N 2 (squares). Gas concentrations during the breath-hold that occurred between 120-150 seconds (circle) are shown in the inset. Meijer, L. 1 ; Hery-Arnaud, G. 3 ; Le Berre, R. 2 ; Nowak, E. 2 ; Le Roux, L. 2 ; Gueganton, L. 4 ; Mottier, D. 2 ; Rault, G. 4 1. ManRos Therapeutics, Roscoff, France; 2. CHU Brest, Brest, France; 3. Université de Brest, Brest, France; 4. Centre de Perharidy, Roscoff, France Objectives: Roscovitine is an orally available kinase inhibitor drug which has undergone extensive phase I and II clinical trials against various cancers. Under clinical evaluation against Cushing disease and rheumatoid arthritis, roscovitine displays biological properties suggesting potential benefits in CF treatment (1) . The ROSCO-CF clinical study aims at evaluating this therapeutic potential (2) . Methods: A Phase 2, dose-ranging, multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, involving 36 CF patients, is being launched to evaluate safety and effects of (R)-roscovitine in adults CF patients, carrying two CF-causing mutations with at least one F508del-CFTR mutation and chronically infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Results: Experimental results have shown roscovitine acts as a proteostasis regulator that partially corrects F508del-CFTR trafficking (3) . Roscovitine stimulates the bactericidal properties of alveolar macrophages by lowering the abnormally elevated intraphagolysosomal pH of CF macrophages (4) . Roscovitine displays anti-inflammatory properties due to its effects on neutrophils, on eosinophils and on the Th17/Tregs inflammatory lymphocytes balance (1) . Conclusion: Repurposing roscovitine for CF is a therapeutically valid proposal. We will present the clinical protocol designed to validate safety and potential beneficial effects of roscovitine in CF patients with chronic lung P. aeruginosa infection and hopefully the first clinical results. The management of paranasal sinuses complications of cystic fibrosis (CF) is a challenge for the otorhinolaryngologist caring for CF. The sinuses system represents a P. aeruginosa reservoir affecting lower airways system. Early diagnosis and follow-up of the ENT complications of CF, such as mucoceles and polyposis, are important in order to treat them. Currently maxillo-facial CT is the most used radiological exam for the follow-up of CF patients with sinonasal complications; however radiation exposure in these patients is a well known issue. Cone-beam CT scan (CBCT) is currrently used in maxillo-facial surgery, expecially developed for 3D reconstruction with a lower radiation exposure. In order to reduce radiation damage without losing clinical information, an experimental protocol, featuring cone beam CT (CBCT), is currently in progress in our center for the ENT follow-up of CF patients. Between May and October 2015, 12 patients attending our ENT CF clinic were evaluated for paranasal sinuses complications with CBCT. 6 were males, 6 females; mean age 15.75; range 6-30. The radiological results were described qualitatively and quantitatively using the Lund-Mackay score ( Figure) . CBCT-guided Lund-Mackay score: mean result 16.25; range 6-24. The most relevant radiological findings were: sinonasal polyposis, medialization of maxillary sinuses walls, mucocele and bone resorption. Mean effective dose was 174.2 μSv. Our results confirm the effectiveness of CBCT in detection of the most common paranasal sinuses complication of CF compared to standard maxillo-facial CT, that, however, remains the gold standard if major complications are suspected (eg, orbital, skull base erosion). CBCT was demonstrated to combine low irradiation with good image resolution of the maxillo-facial district in CF patients. In our opinion it represents the optimum technique to permit a much stricter radiological follow-up of the CF patients attending the ENT. Lund VJ, Mackay IS. Staging in rhinosinusitus. Rhinology. 993;31 (4):183-4. Background: Advances in cystic fibrosis (CF) drug development include the adoption of therapies targeting the underlying CF genetic defect into standard of care (SOC). These CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) "modulator" therapies include ivacaftor (Iva) and lumacaftor (Lum)-Iva. Development of new, second generation ("G2") modulators that are anticipated to work as well as or better than these existing modulators presents a unique challenge as they will need to be evaluated as replacements rather than add-ons to current SOC. Our objectives were to assess the feasibility of using placebo controls in the US for the evaluation of G2 modulators. Methods: Physician and patient/family surveys were independently administered in December 2015 and February 2016, respectively, for willingness to enroll in placebo-controlled G2 trials of varying duration and for G2 candidates superior (Sup) or noninferior (NI) to SOC. The physician cohort was composed of center directors from the CF Therapeutics Development Network, representing 82 centers conducting the majority of US CF trials. The patient/family cohort was composed of members of the CF Foundation's Adult and Family Advisors (AFA) group; survey questions in this cohort were customized based on genotype and current use of Iva and Lum-Iva, and family members answered on behalf of the patient. Results: Surveys were completed by 86/158 (54%) physicians and 71/262 (27%) CF cohort members with varying response rates by question. The Table provides willingness to participate in 1:1 randomized placebo-controlled trials of 2-week-to-6-month duration for G2 modulators hypothesized to be Sup or NI to Iva or Lum-Iva. Patient responses are reported for the subset of patients currently taking Iva, and by F508del homozygotes currently versus not currently taking Lum-Iva. Generally, willingness to participate in placebo-controlled trials decreased as trial duration increased and for participation in NI as compared to Sup trials. F508del-homozygote patients currently taking Lum-Iva were consistently less willing than those not taking Lum-Iva to participate in placebo-controlled studies, regardless of duration. There were notable differences in participation rates between physicians and patients taking Lum-Iva for G2 modulators expected to be NI or Sup. Conclusions: These data indicate a hesitancy in the CF community towards participation in placebo-controlled G2 modulator trials (particularly those of extended duration), and it is likely that this will grow as access to modulators increases. These results are essential for the development of feasible drug development plans in collaboration with regulators that will continue to enable the identification of safe and efficacious G2 modulators. Introduction: Cross-sectional studies show that ventilation distribution outcomes obtained from the multiple breath washout technique (MBW) are sensitive to detect the presence and extent of structural lung damage, infection and inflammation in infants and young children with cystic fibrosis (CF). However, longitudinal data assessing progression of early disease is needed to elucidate MBW as a tool that effectively monitors disease. Our objective was to determine if changes in ventilation distribution outcomes, including lung clearance index (LCI), the 1st and 2nd moment ratios (MR1, MR2), can identify structural lung disease progression on chest computed tomography (CT) and extent of pulmonary infection and inflammation. Methods: Twenty-eight children with CF (aged 3 to 9 years) underwent serial MBW measurements, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL) and/ or chest CT over a 12-month period. Structural lung disease was assessed using CF-CT scores. Differential cell counts were performed, and neutrophil elastase (NE) and interleukin 8 (IL8) were quantified by ELISA. An inflammatory score was derived from principal components of NE, IL8 concentration, total and neutrophilic inflammation. Changes in MBW and CT, infection and inflammation outcomes between repeat visits were assessed using mixed effects model. Results: Increases in LCI were significantly associated with progression of bronchiectasis (coefficient 0.17; 95% CI: 0.04, 0.29; p=0.01), air trapping (coefficient 0.13; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.25; p=0.04) and bronchial wall thickening (coefficient 0.15; 95% CI: 0.02, 0.27; p=0.02). There were no significant associations between changes in MBW outcomes and the extent of NE and IL8. However, increased MR1 was significantly associated with higher inflammatory scores (coefficient 0.04; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.07; p=0.02) and increased neutrophils (coefficient 0.06; 95% CI: 0.01, 0.10; p=0.02). LCI was increased by 1.45 units (95% CI: 0.36, 2.55; p=0.01) when a proinflammatory pathogen was detected at the second visit but not at the first visit. Conclusion: Increases in LCI over one year are associated with progression of bronchiectasis, bronchial wall thickening and air trapping on CT. Ventilation distribution outcomes were also associated with progression of inflammation and infection onset. LCI may be a sensitive tool to monitor the progression of structural lung disease and the development of lower respiratory tract inflammation and infection in young children with CF. Supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Chen, K.; Kolls, J. Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA Significant morbidity in cystic fibrosis (CF) results from chronic lung inflammation, most commonly due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. Recent data suggest that IL-17 contributes to pathological inflammation in the setting of abnormal mucosal immunity, and type-17 immunity driven inflammatory responses may represent a novel target to block aberrant inflammation in CF. Indeed, our transcriptomic analysis by RNA-seq on the airway epithelium from CF patients who underwent clinical bronchoscopy revealed a dramatic upregulation of IL-17 downstream signature genes, implicating a significant contribution of IL-17 mediated immunity in CF lungs. Bromodomain and extra-terminal domain (BET) chromatin modulators can regulate T cell responses, specifically Th17 mediated inflammation, by mechanisms that include bromodomain-dependent inhibition of acetylated histones at the IL17 locus. Here we show that, in vitro, BET inhibition potently suppressed Th17 cell responses in explanted CF tissue and inhibited IL-17 driven chemokine production in human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) cells. In Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Aspergillus fumigatus lung infection murine models, BET inhibition decreased inflammation without exacerbating bacterial or fungal infection, suggesting that BET inhibition may be an effective and safe therapeutic approach in treating lung inflammation in CF patients.  Background and Purpose: The guluronate oligomer OligoG CF-5/20 derived from seaweed alginate has been demonstrated to disrupt bacterial biofilms and release stagnant mucin in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo. OligoG is currently in clinical development for CF. The purpose of the present study is to demonstrate clinical efficacy in CF patients. Study Outline: This trial is a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled, cross-over phase II trial in 65 adult CF patients on a stable therapeutic regimen from 18 sites across five European countries. The subjects should have an FEV1 40%-100%, and have a history of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) infection. Concomitant use of N-acetyl cysteine, hypertonic saline and mannitol is not permitted during the study. The trial's primary efficacy outcome is the change in FEV1 after inhaled OligoG versus placebo. Secondary outcomes include the effect on mucociliary and cough clearance (MCC), lung clearance index (LCI), sputum rheology, microbiology and Quality-of-Life. The MCC and LCI assessments are being performed in subsets of patients. The secondary objectives are to demonstrate safety and tolerability of inhaled OligoG as a dry powder for inhalation, and to evaluate patient compliance with treatment. Results and Conclusions to be provided by October 15, 2016. Support: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, the Eurostars programme, and AlgiPharma AS. Armstrong, D.A. 2 ; Nymon, A.B. 2 ; Hazlett, H.F. 2 ; Marsit, C.J. 1 ; Ashare, A. 2 1. Emory Univ, Atlanta, GA, USA; 2. Pulmonary, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Med Ctr, Lebanon, NH, USA Introduction: Regional differences in resident lung macrophage (LMφ) responsiveness to hypoxia may be an important factor in the development of bronchiectatic lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF). It is not yet known if the regional variation in CF-related lung disease is due to differences in microbial pathogens, variation in the host response to infection, or a combination of the two. An increased understanding of this regional variation may aid in the discovery of interventions that will slow the progression of lung disease (Hogan DA, et al. PLoS One. 2016; 11:e0149998) . MicroR-NAs are ubiquitous regulators of human biology. Much optimism exists for microRNAs as biomarkers in cancer and lung disease (Vencken SF, et al. Thorax. 2015; 70:501-3.) Recent clinical and cell-based studies have revealed CF-specific alterations in miRNA expression, hence it follows that modulating miRNA expression in vivo looks very appealing for developing new CF therapies. The possibility that miRNAs may act as phenotype modifiers and that they could be used as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers warrants investigation (Noel S, Leal T. 2015. In: Cystic Fibrosis in the Light of New Research). Our work here seeks to identify LMφ -derived microRNAs and distinguish regional differences associated with oxygen stress comparing alternate lobes of the lung. Methods: All studies were performed using primary LMφ isolated from human subjects via bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid. Total RNA was isolated and microRNA profiling assayed via the NanoString nCounter microRNA assay. Results: Parallel profiling of in vitro oxygen stress induced via hypoxia in LMφ revealed static, convergent, and divergent expression of miRNA. To examine the phenotypic complexity of lung macrophages of the right lower lobe (RLL) vs the right upper lobe (RUL) we measured microRNA expression 24 hours posthypoxia treatment from LMφ of healthy participants. We detected more than 250 different microRNAs. Of the top 100 microRNAs expressed, fourteen miRNAs were differentially expressed RLL vs RUL including: miR-361-5p, miR-378g, miR-423-5p (up in RLL and down in RUL), and miR-107, miR-511-5p, miR-99a-5p (down in RLL and up in RUL). Interestingly, expression of five microRNAs was elevated in only the RLL in response to hypoxia: miR-22-3p, miR-30a-5p, miR-30e-5p, miR-155-5p and miR-1246 but demonstrated static expression in the RUL upon oxygen challenge. All of these miRNAs were readily detectable in CF LMφ, however their comparative expression and functional significance remains to be determined. Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that some LMφ-derived microR-NAs are differentially expressed in RLL vs RUL under oxygen stress. It may be important to understand the synthesis, secretion and abundance of miRNAs from resident lung Mφ induced by hypoxia, potentially shedding new light on this pathology and leading the way to innovative therapies. Ongoing studies will explore the role of these miRNAs, allow us to better characterize CF lung regional hypoxic inflammatory response and identify key molecules modulating this disease. Objective: To summarize the frequency and treatment of pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) in a multicountry cohort of patients with CF homozygous for the F508del-CFTR gene mutation. Medical record data from patients with CF ≥12 years of age who were not on a CFTR modulator were collected retrospectively for 2011-2014 from 31 CF centers in Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, and Spain. Demographics, clinical characteristics, and resource utilization were obtained for a 12-month baseline period and a follow-up period ranging from 2-36 months. The frequency and treatment of PEx (defined as a mention in the record of a PEx during a hospitalization or outpatient visit requiring nonroutine antibiotic treatment) were assessed descriptively at baseline and in the follow-up period by age (12-17, ≥18 years), lung function (ppFEV 1 ≥70, 41-69, or ≤40), and overall. Results: Data for 523 patients were included; mean follow-up period was 27 months. Baseline mean (SD) age was 24.8 (9.5) years, and mean (SD) ppFEV 1 was 67. 1 (22.9) . The frequency and treatment of PEx in the baseline period are summarized in the Table. The mean PEx rates were 1.3/y in the baseline period and 1.6/y in the follow-up period. The proportion of PEx requiring hospitalization rose from 51.7% to 60.8%, and the proportion of PEx requiring hospitalization or intravenous antibiotics rose from 61.6% to 73.0%. The duration of antibiotic treatment for a PEx was stable (baseline, 18.1 days; follow-up, 19.2 days). In the follow-up period, proportions of patients with ≥1 PEx and rates of PEx were higher among adults (84%; 1.7/patient-year) than adolescents (70%; 1.5/patientyear) and for patients in the ppFEV 1 ≤40 group (86%; 2.0/patient-year) than the ppFEV 1 ≥70 group (70%; 1.1/patient-year). In the follow-up period, the mean (SD; range) length of hospital stay for a PEx was 13.3 (7.4; 1-81) days (data not available for baseline period). Conclusions: The majority of patients with CF homozygous for the F508del-CFTR gene mutation in this study experienced at least 1 PEx annually, and PEx were resource intensive. The rates of PEx suggest an increase over time and were highest among adults and those with advanced disease based on lung function, consistent with a progressive disease. Introduction: Intestinal inflammation is now recognized as a manifestation of cystic fibrosis (CF). The majority of studies in gut inflammation have utilized stool calprotectin as a biomarker of inflammation, with numerous studies reporting significant elevations in stool calprotectin compared to healthy controls. Stool calprotectin levels have been reported to correlate with growth and quality of life questionnaire scores. Ivacaftor is a cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) potentiator that has been shown to improve lung function and reduce pulmonary exacerbations. Ivacaftor has also been associated with considerable weight gain, which may not be solely explained by improved pulmonary status. An improvement in gastrointestinal physiology has been speculated as an alternative explanation. Normalization of intestinal pH and histopathology have been observed while on ivacaftor but its effects on intestinal inflammation have not been fully established. Thus, the aim of this study was to determine whether ivacaftor reduces intestinal inflammation in patients with CF. Method: Calprotectin was measured in stool samples prospectively collected from patients with CF who carried at least one G551D mutation in the Toronto and Sydney Children's Hospital CF Clinics (in Canada and Australia, respectively) at baseline (prior to starting ivacaftor) and while on treatment. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test and Fisher's exact test were used to compare continuous and categorical calprotectin data respectively, at baseline and after starting ivacaftor. Results: Baseline and posttreatment stool samples were obtained from 14 patients (7 children and 7 adults; 36% males) with a median [IQR] age of 17.1 [7.9-34.8] years. Stools posttreatment were collected at a median (IQR) of 5.7 (4.9-6.8) months after starting ivacaftor. There was a significant reduction in stool calprotectin levels from baseline to posttreatment (median .0] vs 82. 3 [19.5-170.7 ] mg/kg, P = 0.016). There was an increase in normal calprotectin levels from 7.1% (1 of 14) at baseline to 28.6% (4 of 14) on ivacaftor based on a calprotectin cutoff of <50 mg/kg; however, this was not statistically significant (P = 0.3). In children, there were significant increases posttreatment in weight z-scores (median [IQR]: 0.5 [-1.2 to 0.9] vs 0.9 [-0.5 to 1.5], P = 0.001). In adults, the BMI increased significantly from baseline to post-treatment ( Introduction: Inhaled antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) distribute broadly into many cell types in the lung where they downregulate gene expression by inducing RNase H dependent degradation of targeted mRNAs. We have evaluated an antisense strategy for the treatment of CF by inhibiting the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC). It has been demonstrated that ENaC hyperactivity leads to mucus dehydration and accumulation in CF patients and increased ENaC levels in lung result in cystic fibrosis-like disease in mice. Mouse models of CF were generated by overexpression of ENaC (Mall M, et al. Nature Med. 2004; 10:487-93) or by deletion of Ned-d4L, the ubiquitin ligase which controls the levels of ENaC on the cell surface in airway epithelial cells (AECs) and has been demonstrated to increase levels of ENaC expression (Kimura T, et al. PNAS. 2011; 108; 8:3216-21) . Objective: To administer ENaC ASOs by inhalation and determine their effectiveness in both genetically modified mouse models and a CF model induced by ASO-mediated knockdown of Nedd4L. Methods: We identified several ENaC specific ASOs and assessed their effectiveness for reducing target mRNA levels in cell culture and mice. The most potent ASOs were then tested by inhalation in CF mouse models. mRNAs for ENaC and several genes involved in mucus production were assessed by RT-PCR. Results: Intranasal administration of two independent ENaC ASOs into Nedd4L KO pups resulted in reduced ENaC mRNA (40-60%) and mucus. In order to study CF endpoints in adult mice, but maintain the phenotype of the Nedd4L knockout mouse, we delivered Nedd4L specific ASOs directly into the lungs of normal adult mice which resulted in 80-90% Nedd4L RNA knockdown, increased goblet cell and mucus accumulation, inflammation and airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR). RNA levels for mucus markers, including Gob5, FOXa3, SPDEF, AGR2 and MUC5B, were all significantly increased by Nedd4L ASO treatment. Aerosol delivery of ENaC ASOs produced dose-responsive mRNA reduction of ENaC in AECs. Pretreatment with ENaC ASOs, down-regulated mucus marker expression, prevented goblet cell and mucus accumulation, inflammation and AHR induced by Nedd4L ASOs. Once prophylactic activity was established with aerosolized ENaC ASOs, the ability to therapeutically reverse the CF endpoints in the Nedd4L ASO-induced model was determined. After establishing the CF phenotype, aerosolized ENaC ASOs were able to reverse the Nedd4L-ASO induced mucus markers and mucus overproduction. In addition, AHR was established in all groups before dosing with ENaC or a control ASO. ENaC ASO was able to reverse the AHR to naïve levels while no effect was observed by the control ASO. The effect of ENaC ASOs in the Nedd4L models was confirmed in βENaC transgenic mice. Conclusion: Inhalation treatment with ENaC ASOs improved disease phenotypes in the Nedd4L ASO-induced model and genetically modified CF lung disease mouse models. Our data demonstrates that antisense inhibition of ENaC in AECs could be an effective approach for the treatment of CF. Introduction: Pulmonary exacerbations (PEs) are important clinical events for cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and are associated with decreased quality of life, accelerated lung disease progression, and increased risk of death. Ataluren induces read-through of premature stop codons, thereby promoting CFTR production in CF patients with a CFTR nonsense mutation. Aim: To investigate the effect of ataluren on exacerbations and lung function in patients with a CFTR nonsense mutation in at least one allele. Methods: A posthoc analysis was conducted on the effect of ataluren on PEs, as defined by the modified Fuchs criteria, in patients not receiving chronic inhaled tobramycin. Results: In patients not receiving chronic inhaled tobramycin (N=146), there were 40% fewer PEs in patients receiving ataluren vs patients receiving placebo (1.42 vs 2.18; p=0.0061). This clinical benefit of ataluren was consistent across all prognostic indicators for disease severity, eg, female gender, P. aeruginosa infection, %-predicted (pp)FEV 1 ≤65%, pancreatic insufficiency status, and CF-related diabetes ( Figure) . Median time to first PE was 281 days for patients on ataluren vs 166 days for placebo. Mean duration of hospitalization was 2.8 days for ataluren vs 8.1 days for placebo. Relative change from baseline in ppFEV 1 showed a significant 5.7% difference between ataluren and placebo (−0.7% vs −6.4%; p=0.0082) and an 8.2% difference in relative ppFEV 1 for patients ≥6 to <18 years old (n=42) (4.9% vs −3.3%; p=0.026). Conclusions: In a posthoc analysis, ataluren significantly reduced PEs in patients with a CFTR nonsense mutation not receiving chronic inhaled tobramycin. This clinical benefit was supported by FEV 1 data. Ataluren shows promise as a potential therapy for the underlying cause of disease in CF patients with a nonsense mutation in at least one allele of the CFTR gene. Introduction: Inhaled mannitol (IM) has been examined in several acute, short-and long-term studies and has been shown to have beneficial effects on lung function, MCC, QOL and sputum properties compared to control. Methods: Multicentre randomised cross-over study assessing the efficacy of 8 weeks treatment with IM 400mg bd compared to placebo (nonrespirable mannitol) in CF subjects aged 6-17 years. The primary endpoint was absolute change from baseline in ppFEV 1 , secondary endpoints included FEF 25-75 and posttreatment sputum weight. Prespecified subgroup analyses included age, rhDNase use, annualized rate of decline in ppFEV 1 and screening ppFEV 1 . Results: A total of 92 subjects were randomised and received study drug. Mean (SD) age was 12 (3.0) years and mean (SD) baseline percent predicted (pp) FEV 1 was 72.2% (11.6); 68.5% were taking rhDNase. There was significant absolute improvement in ppFEV 1 in the IM group: treatment difference with placebo was 3.42% (1.12, 5.71; p=0.004) corresponding to a 4.97% (1.53, 8.42; p=0 .005) relative difference. For FEF 25-75 the treatment difference in the relative change from baseline was 10.52% (2.30, 18.73; p=0.013 ). In the IM group, acute posttreatment sputum weight was significantly higher than in the placebo group (difference 1.33g; p=0.012). In the prespecified subgroups the treatment differences consistently favoured IM with point estimates for all subgroups being consistent with the overall treatment difference.; (rhDNase user: 3.29%, 95% CI 0.28-6.30; rhDNase non-user: 3.92%, 95% CI 0.42-7.42), (6-11 years: 3.78%, 95% CI 0.13-7.43; 12-17 years: 3.35%, 95% CI 0.14-6.55), (decline in ppFEV 1 pa at baseline (<2%) 2.91%, 95% CI -0.26-6.08; decline in ppFEV 1 pa at baseline (≥2%) 3.23%, 95% CI 0.20-6.26), (screening ppFEV 1 >70%: 3.43%, 95% CI 0.81-6.05; screening ppFEV 1 ≤70%: 2.87%, 95% CI -0.74-6.49). Adverse event (AE) numbers were similar between arms; study withdrawals due to AEs were low (IM 2.3%; placebo 1.1%). Serious AEs were less frequent in the IM arm (IM 11.5%; placebo 14.9%). The most common AEs overall and in the subgroups were cough and pulmonary exacerbations. Pulmonary exacerbations were 30% lower in the IM group. Haemoptysis was uncommon (IM 3.4%; placebo 2.3%) and mild. There were no treatment emergent deaths in the study. The study confirms that IM as add-on therapy to optimal care provides immediate and significant benefits in lung function and sputum weight in children and adolescents irrespective of rhDNase use, age or disease severity. AEs were less common in the mannitol group. IM was associated with a reduced incidence of pulmonary exacerbations and the incidence of haemoptysis was low and similar between groups. ( The most common mutation in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), F508del, interferes with transport of the CFTR protein to the cell surface and impairs chloride channel function, leading to disruption of fluid balance in epithelial tissues, most notably the lung. Epithelial sodium channels (ENaC), which are, paradoxically, overactive in CF, are one of the primary proteins responsible for fluid balance in the lung and appear to be partially regulated by CFTR. Thus, CFTR dysfunction may contribute to excessive intracellular sodium transport via ENaC and, secondarily, excessive H 2 O absorption. VX-371 is an inhaled ENaC inhibitor being actively studied in preclinical models and early phase trials. VX-371 was designed to act directly at the respiratory epithelium with minimal systemic exposure. In animal models, VX-371 alone or plus hypertonic saline (HS) produced large and sustained increases in mucociliary clearance. In confocal studies, increases in airway-surface liquid (ASL) height were observed with VX-371 plus HS plus lumacaftor and ivacaftor (LUM/IVA) therapy (Thelin W, Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015:50(S41);265). Multiple Phase 1 studies have shown VX-371 to be well tolerated; a recently completed Phase 2 trial has confirmed the tolerability profile of VX-371 in patients with CF (no restriction on mutation) who were not receiving CFTR modulator therapy. Here, we report additional preclinical findings to support the rationale of adding ENaC inhibition to CF modulator therapy. Methods: The effects of VX-371 with LUM/IVA were evaluated on ASL height and ciliary beat frequency (CBF). Human bronchial epithelia (HBE) F508del-CFTR homozygous cells were treated with VX-371, LUM/ IVA, or the combination of VX-371 with LUM/IVA, using an experimental paradigm designed to best capture the effects of ENaC inhibition on ASL and CBF over 72 hours. Results: VX-371 augmented the effects of the combination of LUM/ IVA on ASL or CBF when compared to LUM/IVA alone. Exposure of F508del/F508del-CFTR HBE cells to LUM/IVA plus VX-371, in the presence of vasoactive intestinal protein, resulted in a 2-fold increase in CBF vs LUM/IVA alone. Additionally, VX-371 in combination with LUM/IVA significantly increased ASL height at 8 and 48 hours when compared to vehicle alone. Conclusion: Success with CFTR potentiators and correctors has enabled further research focused on improving airway hydration and ciliary motility by restoring the balance between ENaC and CFTR. Preclinical studies in F508del HBE cells continue to confirm the value of this multifactorial approach, and early phase trials have confirmed that VX-371 is well-tolerated in healthy volunteers and patients with CF. The study design of an on-going Phase 2 clinical trial utilizing ENaC inhibition with standard of care LUM/IVA therapy will be presented. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. One therapeutic strategy to treat CF is to enhance chloride transport by increasing the amount and function of CFTR at the cell surface using a combination of small molecule CFTR modulators such as CFTR correctors and potentiators. VX-661 is a clinical-stage CFTR corrector that shares structural features with lumacaftor (VX-809). Here we present the nonclinical profile of VX-661, including in vitro pharmacology and in vivo pharmacokinetic characteristics. Methods and Results: The biochemical and pharmacological profile of VX-661 alone and in combination with ivacaftor was investigated in human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells derived from multiple homozygous F508del CF donors (F508del/F508del-HBE). In Western blot studies, 24-hour treatment with 3 μM VX-661 either alone or in combination with 100 nM ivacaftor improved the cellular processing and trafficking of F508del-CFTR as determined by an increase in the mature glycosylated CFTR. In Ussing chamber studies using F508del/F508del-HBE cells derived from six donors, 24-hour treatment with VX-661 alone enhanced chloride transport from a baseline of 2.5% to 8.1% of normal levels with a half-maximal effective concentration (EC 50 ) of 516 ± 42 nM. Co-treatment (24 hours) with 0.1 μM ivacaftor and 3 μM VX-661 further enhanced chloride transport to 15.7% of non-CF airway cells. A minimal response to ivacaftor monotherapy was observed, which is consistent with little-to-no F508del-CFTR at the cell surface in the absence of VX-661. 72-hour treatment of cultured F508del/F508del-HBE cells with 3 μM VX-661 and 0.1 μM ivacaftor also increased fluid transport and ciliary beat frequency to levels greater than those observed with either agent alone. These in vitro data demonstrate that the combination of VX-661 and ivacaftor provides improvement of chloride transport, fluid transport, and ciliary beat frequency in F508del/F508del-HBE cells. This combination was also explored in a panel of cells expressing different mutant CFTR forms, including mutant CFTR forms associated with severe or moderate defects in processing and trafficking, defects in channel gating activity or residual chloride transport. Overall, these in vitro data demonstrated that the combination of VX-661 and ivacaftor improved chloride transport more than either agent alone in cells expressing a wide range of mutant CFTR forms. VX-661 has a favorable preclinical pharmacokinetic profile with low clearance, high oral bioavailability, and good distribution into target tissues. Risk of drug-drug interactions with VX-661 is small since it does not inhibit or induce any major cytochrome P450 enzymes in vitro. Conclusion: Together, these data support continued evaluation of the combination of VX-661 and ivacaftor in clinical trials evaluating outcomes in a range of CFTR mutations. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. Introduction: Inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of CF. We assessed the effects of combination therapy with lumacaftor (LUM), a CFTR corrector, and ivacaftor (IVA), a CFTR potentiator, on biomarkers of systemic inflammation and their relationships with lung function in patients with CF aged ≥12 years homozygous for F508del-CFTR. Methods: Patients from 2 randomized Phase 3 trials of LUM/IVA (TRAFFIC and TRANSPORT) who provided baseline and week-24 blood samples during either study (889/1054 patients, 84%) were included in the present post hoc analysis. Patients were assigned to receive LUM (600 mg qd, n=294; or 400 mg q12h, n=291) plus IVA (250 mg q12h) or placebo (n=304). Percent predicted FEV 1 (ppFEV 1 ), white blood cell (WBC) counts, and levels of calprotectin, C-reactive protein (CRP), immunoglobulin G (IgG), interleukin (IL)-8, and IL-18 were recorded at baseline and study week 24 and analyzed by linear regression. Results: Statistically significant reductions in calprotectin, CRP, IgG, and IL-8 (all P<0.0001) were observed with LUM/IVA vs placebo, in addition to significant improvements in ppFEV 1 . Significant inverse correlations existed at baseline between ppFEV 1 and CRP (P<2e-16), , and calprotectin (P=2e-13) levels, as well as between the change from baseline in ppFEV 1 and that in the same biomarkers (CRP, P=0.02; IL-8, P=0.007; calprotectin, P=6e-7). Statistically significant reductions in monocyte and neutrophil counts were observed in WBC analyses. Conclusions: Improvements observed in ppFEV 1 over 24 weeks of LUM/IVA treatment were associated with reductions in calprotectin, CRP, IgG, and IL-8 levels. These data support an effect of LUM/IVA in ameliorating CF-related inflammation. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. Introduction: Maintenance of adequate airway surface liquid (ASL) and proper functioning of the mucociliary transit (MCT) system in the pathophysiology of CF airway disease is well understood, but until recently these parameters have been impossible to measure in live animals. Our goal is to noninvasively assess ASL and MCT as an outcome measure for developing genetic and pharmaceutical CF airway treatments, and we have developed synchrotron x-ray imaging methods to enable monitoring of these measures of airway surface health. Our methods were developed in mice at the SPring-8 Synchrotron in Japan, but we plan to transition to larger animal models with a view to future use in CF animals. Technique translation to the larger Imaging and Medical Beamline (IMBL) x-ray beam at the Australian Synchrotron has begun. Here we provide an update on the state-of-the-art in in vivo ASL depth and MCT measurement. Methods: While anaesthetised, the nasal airways of normal and CF mice, and the trachea of ventilated normal and β-ENaC mice were imaged at SPring-8. MCT tracking particles (20 μm diameter) were insufflated into the airways prior to imaging, and the effects of airway-rehydrating therapies (eg, hypertonic saline) were assessed after delivery using an Aeroneb vibrating mesh nebuliser. A phase-grid was placed immediately before the trachea, and arranged to cover half the field-of-view, in order to reconstruct an airway surface image from the sample-induced distortions of the grid observed 1 metre downstream, allowing the ASL depth to be calculated. Segments of freshly-excised pig and sheep trachea were imaged at the IMBL. MCT tracking particles (100 μm) were insufflated onto the segments, and an Aeroneb nebuliser was used to deliver aerosolised hypertonic or isotonic saline. MCT rate and ASL depth changes in response to treatment were calculated postexperiment. Results: At SPring-8 increases in MCT and ASL depth were detected in mice following administration of aerosolised rehydrating therapies, with ASL depth changes lasting < 10 minutes posttreatment. This agrees with cell culture studies assessed by optical microscopy. At the IMBL, MCT was visible in all live sheep and pig tracheal segments and beads moved in the direction of preferential MCT, including vertically up the tracheal wall when oriented against gravity. The coherence and flux density at the IMBL does not allow ASL depth assessment to be performed. Discussion: High spatial resolution synchrotron phase-contrast X-ray imaging can reveal the depth of the ASL layer and be used for tracking MCT in live mouse nasal and tracheal airways at SPring-8. We have also demonstrated that the wide beam at the IMBL is suitable for imaging MCT in ex vivo tissue samples. We expect that live imaging of intact pigs is feasible (studies planned for Aug 2016), and noninvasive imaging of MCT in CF pig models may be achievable in the future. Acknowledgements: Supported by the Cure4CF and WCH Foundations, NHMRC and Australian Synchrotron ISAP. 220 PERFLUORINATED GAS MRI DETECTS REGIONAL VENTILATION HETEROGENEITY IN CF Goralski, J.L. 1 ; Akinnagbe, E. 2 ; Charles, H.C. 3 ; Donaldson, S.H. 1 ; Lee, Y. 4 1. Marsico Lung Institute, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 2. Biomedical Engineering, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA; 3. Radiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA; 4. Radiology, UNC, Chapel Hill, NC, USA Rationale: Currently available endpoints for testing of new therapies in CF generally offer only information on lung structure (such as chest radiography and chest CT) or function (spirometry and lung clearance index), but not both. Additionally, current radiographic techniques employed to image the lung require the use of ionizing radiation, which limits the translation to young children and hampers repetitive use of these measures over time. The use of inhaled gas as a contrast agent has greatly improved the suitability of MRI techniques for pulmonary imaging. Enhancement with perfluorinated gas allows for a functional assessment of multiple breath gas kinetics in healthy and diseased lung. Methods: 6 healthy controls (mean FEV1 102%) and 6 subjects with stable CF (mean FEV1 52.7%) underwent perfluoropropane (PFP)enhanced magnetic resonance imaging ( 19 F MRI) using PFP mixed with oxygen in a 79%:21% ratio as an inert, inhaled gaseous contrast agent. Subjects were instructed on a series of breath-holds during which imaging sequences were obtained to study the wash-in and wash-out kinetics of regional ventilation. Safety was monitored via continuous pulse oximetry and end-tidal CO 2 measurements. Spirometry was performed before and after 19 F MRI to ensure no changes in lung function as a result of the study gas inhalation. Results: Signal saturation color maps were created to compare ventilation of subjects with CF to those of healthy controls, including baseline, time-to-maximal signal saturation, and the slope of the wash-in and washout curves. Ventilation heterogeneity was noted in all subjects with CF, more pronounced at lower lung function, whereas relative homogeneity of gas diffusion was observed for normal subjects. The Figure shows a color-mapped comparison of time to maximum wash-in of PFP in a healthy control subject (Panel A; FEV1 126% of predicted) and a CF patient (Panel B; FEV1 37% of predicted). This demonstrates delayed and more heterogeneous contrast gas wash-in, as expected in subjects with airway obstruction, with some regions failing to demonstrate gas signal at all. Conclusions: When paired with 1 H images, 19 F MRI offers simultaneous spatial and functional information about gas diffusion and reflects the heterogeneity of lung ventilation in CF lung disease. No overt safety concerns were noted over 12 studies, including no changes in FEV1 post-MRI. Future studies are planned to study this technique as an outcome measure for the treatment of a CF pulmonary exacerbation. A; Control. B: CF with delayed gas wash-in and slow-filling compartments. Background: Computed tomography studies of infants with CF reveal that progressive structural lung disease is present much earlier than symptoms. Unfortunately, we are severely limited in the tools available to safely evaluate the youngest patients, hampering our clinical ability to intervene on these patients and prevent irreversible damage. Even low-dose CT is of limited utility in this radiation-sensitive population. Digital chest tomosynthesis (DCT) is a commercially available imaging technique that reconstructs image slices from an acquisition of a series of projection images into a pseudo-3D image. The in-plane resolution of DCT can be higher than that of CT, at a significantly lower radiation dose. Scan times, unfortunately, are 5 to 15 seconds, well beyond the normal respiratory cycle of a young patient. We have developed a stationary digital chest tomosynthesis system (s-DCT), which utilizes a stationary gantry with multiple, independently activated x-ray focal spots based on carbon nanotube (CNT) x-ray technology. The key advantage of the system is the potential to perform gated x-ray imaging in which projections can be acquired synchronized to the patient's respiratory cycle. The goal of this first-in-human study is to evaluate the s-DCT system against conventional radiography in adult and pediatric CF patients. Methods: CF patients undergoing clinically indicated chest radiographs were recruited. Patients underwent s-DCT imaging with a 29-pixel CNT linear x-ray source with a 29-cm-long tube. A digital x-ray detector was placed behind the patient; all patients were imaged in a supine position. Imaging time was 10 seconds, performed during a breath hold. Radiation dose is approximately 3.2 microGray (vs. approximately 10 milliGray for CT). Reconstruction was performed with an iterative reconstruction algorithm. Images were reviewed by board-certified radiologists. Results: Twenty patients have completed the single-image study. Image quality as rated by radiologists is significantly higher than conventional radiographs. Confidence in the evaluation for bronchiectasis, nodularity and architectural changes exceeded that of conventional chest radiographs. A full comparison study is planned, including an evaluation of s-DCT versus CXR Brasfield scoring. Conclusions: Stationary chest tomosynthesis has the potential to perform low-dose, high-resolution evaluation of the thorax. We will likely be able to extend the technique to younger patients through the use of gating studies that are not possible with conventional chest tomosynthesis systems. This technology has the potential to provide the early evaluation of the lung fields in asymptomatic children. Introduction: Spyryx Biosciences is developing SPX-101, an inhaled peptide that is an optimized synthetic mimetic of the ENaC-regulating domain of short palate lung and nasal epithelial clone 1 (SPLUNC-1). This peptide has demonstrated significant airways surface liquid (ASL) regulation, restoration of tracheal mucus velocity in a sheep model of CF, and a compelling toxicological profile with no hyperkalemia seen in other ENaC-affecting agents. This safety profile presents a challenge when manufacturing materials for toxicological studies requiring dosing at a maximum feasible dose with the scale of manufacture approaching commercial batch size. Objective: The objective of this study was to optimize a solution formulation of SPX-101 and perform nebulizer performance characterization to support achievement of a maximum feasible dose in inhalation exposure for IND-enabling toxicology studies. Further, development required demonstration of stability and ability to scale to a production scale of over 50 liters. Methods: A formulation stability optimization study was conducted at small scale by compounding SPX-101 at 20 mg/mL in 0.9% NaCl at pH 6, 7 and 7.5. Samples were placed on stability at long term (5°C) and accelerated (25°C/60%RH and 40°C/75%RH) and analyzed by RP-HPLC for impurity profile over 3 months. The SPX-101 delivery rate was determined in an Aerogen® Solo nebulizer at concentrations ranging from 0 to 20 mg/mL. Once an optimal formulation was determined a 57 L batch was compounded, sterile filtered, packaged and released for GLP toxicology. Results: All pH formulations showed good stability at long-term storage conditions with the purity unchanged at 3 months. At accelerated conditions the purity decreased by 2.5% at 25°C and 17.5% at 40°C for all three pH formulations at 3 months. The pH 7 formulation was selected for further development as no difference in stability was observed and this pH would avoid adding to the acidic load of CF airways. The extrapolated shelf life to 90% purity of the formulation was 22 months at 5°C. In the Aerogen® Solo nebulizer, the nebulization rate dropped from 0.7 mL/min at a concentration of 0% SPX-101 (saline alone) to 0.09 mL/min at 20 mg/mL due to the increasing surface action of the formulation. In terms of peptide delivery, a plateau of 1.7 mg (SPX-101)/min was reached above 5 mg/mL. With the formulation selected, 1.5 kg of GMP-grade SPX-101 was prepared with 46% yield and a 57 L sterile batch that met the preliminary drug product specifications was prepared and utilized in GLP toxicology studies. Conclusions: The data generated during the formulation optimization study support a refrigerated solution for inhalation at 20 mg/mL SPX-101 adjusted to pH 7 with a predicted shelf life approaching two years. Nebulization studies supported the conclusion that the maximum feasible dose was delivered during GLP toxicology. The toxicology batch was manufactured at a scale representing as much as 57,000 doses of the potential human dose. In CF patients, the lack of a proper functioning CFTR causes a chronic lung infection that is difficult to treat with conventional antibiotics. Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a common and particularly virulent pathogen that can cause a significant level of morbidity and mortality. Intracellular bacterial colonization of P. aeruginosa in macrophages, mast cells or epithelial cells is particularly difficult to eradicate with antibiotics, even with those that are cell-permeable. Autophagy is a catabolic process that cells use to degrade various defective proteins/foreign pathogens and convert them into useful cellular building blocks such as amino acids and lipids. In CF, it is known that autophagy is impaired and this can further compromise the patient's ability to clear the chronic lung infection. Autophagy activation enables an alternative mechanism to clear the bacterial infection out of cells; and therefore, could potentially be useful when used in combination with anti-infective agents. The fatty acid cysteamine conjugate CAT-5571 is a new chemical entity that can activate autophagy in cultured primary homozygous F508del human bronchial epithelial (hBE) cells at concentrations as low as 0.3 μM. In an in vitro study involving hBE cells that had been infected with P. aeruginosa, a significant reduction in the intracellular bacterial load was observed when cells were pretreated with CAT-5571. The reduction in the CFU was comparable to that observed when similarly infected hBE cells were treated with cytochalasin D, a cell-permeable antibiotic. The bacterial clearance was demonstrated first in an in vivo study using female BALB/c mice that were dosed orally with CAT-5571 for 3.5 days prior to infection with a lethal challenge of P. aeruginosa. CAT-5571 was then evaluated in a chronic P. aeruginosa infection model involving gut-corrected CF F508del/ F508del mice. In this in vivo model of CF lung infection and inflammation, treatment with CAT-5571 resulted in a decrease in bacterial load (82506 ± 36048 without drug to 1657 ± 1406 with drug, n = 7). Although there was no difference in the total white blood cell count in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, there was a shift away from neutrophils (26.44 ± 10 versus 8 ± 3, n ≥ 6) and increased number of macrophages (71 ± 29 versus 89 ± 9, n ≥ 6) all parameters p<0.05, using the analysis of variance between vehicle and CAT-5571 treated animals. CAT-5571 represents a potential new therapeutic for the treatment of CF. The key exposure parameters, AUC and C trough , were substantially enhanced for CTP-656 relative to ivacaftor. The half-life for CTP-656 was approximately 15 hours, supporting development of CTP-656 as a once-daily treatment for cystic fibrosis patients with gating mutations. As part of the Phase 1 clinical development program, the safety, tolerability and steady-state PK profile following multiple-dose administration of CTP-656 was characterized. Methods: The multiple-dose study was a double-blind, placebo-controlled study that assessed 75-mg, 150-mg, and 225-mg doses of CTP-656 administered once-daily for 7 consecutive days. Each cohort enrolled 10 new subjects; 8 subjects received active drug and 2 received placebo (4:1 randomization). All subjects were dosed under fed conditions; a high-fat breakfast was provided on Day 1 through Day 7 approximately 30 minutes prior to dosing. Dose escalation was initiated only after safety and tolerability were found to support proceeding to the higher dose. Pharmacokinetic blood samples were collected at several time points postdose on Day 1 and Day 7, and at 12 and 24 hours postdose on Day 2 through Day 6. The plasma concentrations of CTP-656 and its metabolites, D-M1 and D-M6 were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The steady-state PK profiles for CTP-656, D-M1 and D-M6 were evaluated for the three dose cohorts. Results: CTP-656 showed a dose-proportional increase in exposure with repeated dosing for the 150-mg dose relative to the 75-mg dose. The 225-mg dose showed higher than dose-proportional increase in exposure following 7 days of dosing suggesting saturation of metabolism of CTP-656. Steady-state plasma exposure was achieved by day 5 for all three doses. The average plasma half-life across the three doses of CTP-656 was approximately 18 hours. Contrary to reported values for Kalydeco at steady state, the metabolite exposure profile of CTP-656 after 7 days of dosing showed that the greatest exposure in plasma was to the parent drug. The average parent to metabolite (major metabolite, D-M1) AUC ratio was about 1.5 for the 75 mg and 150 mg doses, and about 2.0 for the 225 mg dose. All three doses were well-tolerated and the safety profile of CTP-656 was similar to that reported for Kalydeco. Conclusions: The repeat dose safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetic profile of CTP-656 continues to support its development as a once-daily CFTR potentiator. Based on the known pharmacodynamic-pharmacokinetic relationship for ivacaftor, the repeat dose study with CTP-656 has provided the necessary data to select potentially effective doses for a Phase-2 clinical trial in patients with gating mutations. Recombinant human DNase I enzymatically cleaves extracellular DNA in the sputa of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, hence, reducing sputum viscoelasticity that accumulates in the lungs of these patients and enabling better sputum expectoration. Actin, a potent inhibitor of DNase I, is found in high concentration in CF patients' sputum and may decrease the enzyme's DNA degradation activity therefore interfering with the effectiveness of inhaled DNase I in the lungs of CF patients. In order to reduce the actin-DNase I interaction and the subsequent inhibition of DNase I activity, Protalix has developed an Actin-Inhibition-Resistant DNase I, or AIR-DNase, by chemically modifying the enzyme. AIR-DNase is Protalix's proprietary, chemically-modified plant cell-expressed recombinant human DNase I, produced in tobacco BY2 cells, and is under development for the treatment of patients with cystic fibrosis, to be administered by inhalation. In vitro and ex vivo studies have shown that AIR-DNase is biologically active, while it exhibits resistance to inhibition by actin in the relevant concentrations. Comparative ex vivo efficacy studies between AIR-DNase I and dornase alfa, a commercially available DNase I produced in CHO cells, show greater efficiency by reducing viscoelasticity and DNA content of CF sputa compared to dornase alfa product. Thus, AIR-DNase has the potential to be a recombinant DNase I preparation with superior activity for treating CF patients based on the chemical modification designed to enhance the enzyme's efficacy in CF patients' sputa. This novel treatment may result in an improved lung function and decreased incidence of recurrent infections in patients. The toxicology studies to support proof of concept studies have been completed, clinical trials in healthy volunteers were completed, patients' clinical trials are planned to initiate during second half of 2016. Background: High levels of inflammation are associated with chronic inflammatory and immune mediated conditions such as CF. CF is associated with exaggerated and prolonged inflammation in the lungs, which contributes to lung injury, fibrosis and loss of lung function. When pulmonary infection is apparent in the CF airways, the adaptive and innate immune response is disproportionate and dysregulated. Even in the absence of clinically apparent infection there is often evidence of inflammation in the CF airways. CF patients show elevated levels of neutrophils in the lung, which have increased neutrophil elastase and myeloperoxidase activity. CF macrophages display spontaneous and exaggerated pulmonary infiltration, and are polarized into the M1 pro-inflammatory phenotype and to a lesser extent into the M2 anti-inflammatory phenotype. Cells of the adaptive immune system, such as T lymphocytes are more abundant in CF airways and produce high levels of inflammatory cytokines. Additionally an imbalance of T lymphocyte subsets may have an important role in the CF inflammatory response. Therapeutic regimens for CF generally involve management of symptoms in an attempt to slow the progression of the disease. However, it is the repeated cycles of inflammation, injury and fibrosis that cause the chronic, life-threatening manifestations that ultimately lead to respiratory failure. Thus, therapies that can target this inflammatory environment and disrupt the destructive cycle of infection, inflammation and fibrosis would have a major impact in preventing the progression of lung disease. Perinatal stem cells have anti-inflammatory properties that make them a promising cell therapeutic approach for treating CF. Hypothesis: We hypothesize that perinatal stem cells are capable of modulating the chronic hyper-inflammatory environment of the CF lung. Methods: Perinatal stem cells were administered to a mouse model of bleomycin-induced lung injury, inflammation and fibrosis 24 hours after injury. Pulmonary inflammation was evaluated 7 days post injury and pulmonary fibrosis 14 days post injury. To evaluate the anti-inflammatory effects of perinatal stem cells on human immune cells, peripheral blood was collected from human cystic fibrosis and non-cystic fibrosis subjects and a series of in vitro immune function assays were performed. Immune cells were isolated from blood samples using an "untouched" magnetic negative isolation and stimulated with antigens to mimic inflammation in vitro. The effect of perinatal cells was tested on lymphocyte proliferation, neutrophil migration and neutrophil enzymatic activity, including myeloperoxidase (MPO) and elastase (NE). Results: Perinatal stem cells significantly reduced neutrophil and macrophage pulmonary migration into the lungs of the bleomycin-injured mouse, and prevented pulmonary fibrosis and loss of lung function. In human samples, administration of perinatal stem cells inhibited lymphocyte proliferation and attenuated neutrophil enzymatic activity. These preliminary data suggest that perinatal stem cell therapy may be a useful immune-modulatory therapy for CF. Ashkenazi, M. 1 ; Sity, S. 1 ; De Boeck, C. 2 ; Efrati, O. 1 1. Sheba Medical Center, Ganey Tikva, Israel; 2. University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Introduction: Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a common condition in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and asthma, characterized by Th2 response, elevated serum eosinophilia and increased total serum IgE. ABPA occurs in 2-25% of patients with CF. Omalizumab is a humanized recombinant monoclonal antibody targeting the high-affinity Fc receptor of IgE and prevents binding of IgE to the immune effector cells mediating inflammation and the hypersensitive response. The aim of our study was to explore the effectiveness of omalizumab to treat ABPA in patients with CF. Methods: A retrospective study was performed in 3 CF centers, 2 in Israel and 1 in Belgium. Inclusion criteria were CF patients with pathologic sweat test and proven 2 mutations. Diagnosis of ABPA was given according to the established criteria. The chosen main outcome parameters were: FEV 1 , BMI, pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) and steroid-sparing effect. Measurements were taken from the last visit before starting treatment as pretreatment and from the last visit on treatment or first visit after stopping the treatment as posttreatment. Results: We describe 9 patients, 6 males and 3 females; 5 from Israel and 4 from Belgium; average age 23 ± 9 years. 8 patients have 2 mutations from class I or II. Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) was confirmed in 7/9 patients. The average treatment time with omalizumab was 13.9 ± 8.6 months. When comparing pre-and post-treatment FEV 1 , only 1 showed an improvement, 4 patients had a stable FEV 1 and 4 (all with CFRD) had a decrease with mean drop of -22.75% pred. None of the females' lung function deteriorated (OR= 0.08, CI 0.002-2.24, NS). Reduction in BMI was recorded in 4 patients, 3 were stable and 2 improved. During treatment, patients experienced a mean of 4 PEx per patient or 0.288 PEx per month of treatment. Females experienced on average 2 PEx and males 5 per patient. Steroid dosage could not be reduced during treatment peroid in any of the patients. Posttreatment IgE levels decreased in 6 patients and increased in 3. None of those with reduced IgE levels showed improvement in any of the outcome parameters; those with elevated levels had better outcome and had no PEx. Conclusions: Patients with ABPA treated with omalizumab did not seem to derive benefit on any of the 4 parameters evaluated. Omalizumab did not seem to improve the course of ABPA. PEx rate was higher than expected. In this small series CFRD and male gender seemed to be associated with a worse ABPA disease course. We conclude decrease in serum IgE during omalizumab treatment was not associated with clinical improvement. Further studies are needed to determine the role of omalizumab in ABPA. Background: The multiple breath washout (MBW) test has advantages over traditional lung function tests, especially for young children with cystic fibrosis (CF). While the MBW test does not require active cooperation from subjects, accurate interpretation of MBW outcomes requires technically correct test performance. To facilitate a standardized approach to the measurement and interpretation of MBW outcomes, MBW core centers have been developed. These MBW centers provide standardized training and certification of MBW operators, supportive feedback, as well as central over-reading of MBW data collected for interventional studies. Here we summarize the experience of the MBW center in Toronto. Methods: All three regional MBW centers have aligned training and certification protocols to complement the standardized operating procedure for the Exhalyzer D (EcoMedics AG, Duernten, Switzerland) MBW device (Jensen R, et al. PLoS. 2013; 8:e56868) . The current prerequisite to become a certified MBW operator to collect data for interventional studies requires attendance at a 2-day hands-on training, as well as 80% success rate for certification tests, to demonstrate competency in testing. To evaluate the success of the training and certification program with respect to interventional study data, the proportion of acceptable tests was calculated by aggregating results for all sites and all interventional studies. Results: To date, 138 operators from 48 sites have attended one of 16 two-day training session in Toronto. 87 participants from 36 sites have been trained in both school age (6+ years) and preschool (3-6 years) MBW testing. 99% of trainees who have submitted certification tests, have successfully completed the certification process for MBW testing in children 6 years and older. Similarly, 92% have been successfully certified for preschool testing. Currently, the Toronto MBW center is reviewing study data from 7 interventional studies; 1660 test occasions have been analyzed to date. Overall, 80.6% of all reviewed MBW tests have been classified as technically acceptable. There was a significant improvement between the success rate of the first study visit (68.6%) and subsequent study visits ((87.2%); p < 0.001) across studies. Conclusions: Overall, the established training and certification protocol has led to a high MBW test success rate for interventional studies. The >80% MBW success rate is comparable to published feasibility data reported for experienced MBW research centers. Continuous feedback from MBW operators will provide further insight into additional training needs. Objective: Identify operational challenges in conducting PABD trials. Design/Methods: We conducted 2 online surveys, one of 87 PABD trial investigators and another of 136 community providers (CP). We also conducted qualitative interviews with 24 parents of children who were invited to participate in clinical research and 12 industry representatives affiliated with PABD trials. Lastly, using the Aggregate Analysis of Clini-calTrials.gov (AACT) database, we identified the number and characteristics of pediatric antibiotic drug trials registered in ClinicalTrials.gov from 2007-2012. Results: Many investigators and CPs said parents were concerned with aspects of clinical research, particularly the number of blood draws and invasive procedures, potential side effects, use of experimental drugs, and logistics. Among parents of newborns, concerns were expressed about being contacted about research too soon after birth or by research staff who were unfamiliar with their child's care. Investigators indicated that having an adequate research administration infrastructure was key to successful trial implementation. PABD trials represented only 0.9% (n=68) of the cohort of interventional and observational pediatric trials (n=7175). PABD trials focused primarily on infections such as otitis media (15/68, 22%) and pneumonia (14/68, 21%). Only 17 (25%) of trials accepted neonates. Conclusions: Development of recommendations to improve the efficiency of PABD trials depends on identifying the challenges faced by all stakeholders. Our results elucidate the need to change so the benefits and risks of a child's participation in research is better communicated to parents and underscores the importance of improving the clinical trial infrastructure. Draft considerations for trial design change will be presented. Draft considerations may include the need to address parent and provider concerns with less burdensome trial designs, the significance of provider support of a clinical trial, and sensitivity training for approaching parents of medically compromised children. Introduction: MMP9 and neutrophil elastase have been implicated in pathological processes in multiple lung diseases, including cystic fibrosis. Neutrophil elastase is inhibited by α1-antitrypsin, and genetic α1antitrypsin deficiency leads to impaired airway function. Methods: Purified MMP9, α1-antitrypsin, and HNE were characterized in vitro, and levels/activity of these three proteins were compared in lung tissue lysates from CF or non-CF patients. α1-antitrypsin cleavage was also assessed in CF patient sputa. Results: Our analysis revealed that MMP9 efficiently proteolyzed α1-antitrypsin in vitro and the resulting proteolyzed α1-antitrypsin was incapable of inhibiting neutrophil elastase. GS-5745, a monoclonal antibody that specifically inhibits MMP9, blocked α1-antitrypsin inactivation by MMP9 in vitro. Using newly developed activity assays, we found that MMP9 and neutrophil elastase activities are both elevated in human lung tissue from cystic fibrosis patients as compared to non-CF controls. α1-antitrypsin species consistent with native and MMP9-cleaved forms were detected in human lung tissue, while only the species consistent with MMP9-cleaved α1-antitrypsin was detected in sputum from CF patients. In the small (n=25) set of human lung tissues analyzed, MMP9 activity correlated with α1-antitrypsin cleavage (Spearman's r s = 0.81). Elastase activity correlated with α1-antitrypsin cleavage (Spearman's r s = 0.80). MMP9 activity also correlated with elastase activity (Spearman's r s = 0.66), consistent with the hypothesis that MMP9 activity inactivates α1-antitrypsin. Conclusions: While MMP9 is not the only protease reportedly capable of inactivating α1-antitrypsin, the activity of MMP9 in CF lung tissue is correlated with the degree of α1-antitrypsin cleavage. Together these findings support the hypothesis that GS-5745 may partially restore α1antitrypsin function via inhibition of MMP9. To determine the impact of human neutrophil elastase (HNE) in cystic fibrosis (CF) patient sputa on degradation and function of GS-5745. Introduction: GS-5745 is a humanized monoclonal IgG4 antibody that is a selective and potent allosteric inhibitor of pro-and active-MMP9. MMP9 is a member of zinc-dependent endopeptidase that degrades extracellular matrix (ECM) during inflammation and wound healing. Increased levels of MMP9 have been observed in the sputa of CF subjects and is considered an important mediator in the pathogenesis of CF. Inhibition of MMP9 activity by GS-5745 thus has the potential to be beneficial for CF subjects. Multiple proteases, including HNE, are reported to be elevated in CF sputa and can digest IgG1. (1) In vitro experiments were performed to determine the stability and function of GS-5745 in CF sputa in the proteolytic-rich environment found in the CF airway. Methods: GS-5745 was incubated for up to 23 hours at 37°C with sputa from CF patients, or purified recombinant HNE, in vitro. Postincubation samples were tested to assess the ability of GS-5745 to bind to MMP-9 and its ability to inhibit MMP9 catalysis using peptide proteolysis assay. Results: GS-5745 was minimally degraded in the presence of CF sputum and recombinant HNE. The digestion resulted in specific molecular weight fragments corresponding to reported digestion at the hinge region, possibly leaving the Fab intact. GS-5745 also did not lose its ability to bind MMP9 or inhibit MMP9 catalysis in CF sputum in the presence of endogenous and spiked HNE Conclusions: These data suggest GS-5745 is fully functional in its ability to bind MMP9 as well as inhibit MMP9 in the presence of endogenous as well as spiked HNE in CF sputa. Background: Chronic airway infection creates intense inflammation that drives CF airway disease. Acute pulmonary exacerbations (APE) punctuate the disease course and cause stepwise decreases in lung function. Biomarkers of inflammation may quantify disease status, provide new predictors of disease outcomes and survival and more precisely and accurately report the results of investigational therapies. We designed a study to identify biomarkers of CF airway disease in patients representative of the national population. Study Design: Randomized prospective observational cohort study of patients with CF who produce sputum. Methods: After IRB approvals, we randomly selected and recruited patients ≥12 years of age that expectorate sputum from accredited CF centers in Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Wyoming. Randomization of stable patients reduced seasonal, center-specific and high-acuity-specific biases. We collect sputum and use REDCap to record clinical data at enrollment, APE, APE follow-up and stable follow-up visits. We report summary statistics of patients recruited during the 1-year enrollment period. Results: We successfully recruited 115 patients. Comparisons between our patients and those in the CF Foundation Patient Registry (CFFPR) for 2011 that produce sputum showed that counts and measurements of gender, age, percent-predicted FEV 1 , weight-for-age z-score, height, pancreatic sufficiency, diabetes and cultures of Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia cepacia complex were not significantly different. Mountain West patients had fewer infections with methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA, 18% vs 30%, p<0.01), more APE (1.6 vs 0.9 per year, p<0.001) and received more treatments with inhaled aztreonam, azithromycin, hypertonic saline and dornase alpha (all p<0.001) but not inhaled tobramycin (p=0.52). Conclusions: Randomized patient recruitment produced a study cohort representative of the US CF population. Mountain West CF providers may be more aggressive with treatments, but confirmation using more recent CFFPR data are needed. Current interpretations of associations between clinical aspects of disease and future conclusions from biomarker discoveries will be securely generalizable to all CF patients that produce sputum. Acknowledgments: Great thanks to the MWCFC research coordinators: N Argel, 15 D Durham, 3 B Glover, 2 C Kopecky, 18 O Molina, 6 K Poch, 16 A Redway, 10 S Sprandel, 4 M Varela, 6 R Yoshikawa. 2 Funding: CF Foundation (LIOU13A0). (Fuchs HJ, et al. N Engl J Med. 1994; 331:637-42) consists of intravenous (IV) antibiotic administration in the presence of ≥4 of 12 respiratory signs and symptoms (increased cough; change in sputum; 10% FEV 1 decline, etc). Changes in health demographics and treatment thresholds since publication of the Fuchs definition, and changes in the demographics of patients volunteering for CF clinical trials, have resulted in an overall reduction in use of IV antibiotic treatments for exacerbations in clinical trials. Both the expanded and modified Fuchs exacerbation definitions have been developed in response to these changes. The expanded definition differs from the original in that any oral, inhaled, and/or IV antibiotics may be used in response to the presence of ≥4 signs and symptoms, and the modified Fuchs definition requires only the presence of ≥4 Fuchs signs and symptoms, irrespective of treatment. Although these three definitions have been employed in various studies, they are seldom, if ever, compared within a single study. We have compared ataluren-associated reductions in exacerbation incidence using the three different Fuchs exacerbation definitions. Methods: A phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of the effect of ataluren on %-predicted FEV 1 and exacerbations was conducted among patients carrying a CFTR nonsense mutation. Post hoc comparisons of ataluren-associated changes in exacerbation incidence as a function of the three Fuchs definitions among patients not concomitantly receiving inhaled aminoglycosides were conducted. Results: In patients not receiving chronic inhaled aminoglycosides, a 35-40% reduction in 48-week exacerbation rates was observed for patients receiving ataluren vs those receiving placebo, irrespective of Fuchs definition used (Table) . This ataluren-associated clinical benefit was found to be statistically significant when using the expanded and modified Fuchs definitions, but not the original Fuchs definition. Conclusions: Differences in the utility of the three Fuchs exacerbation definitions are clearly demonstrated in these analyses. Point estimates for ataluren-associated reductions in exacerbation rate in the population analyzed were comparable across all three exacerbation definitions (rate reduction range 35-40%). Statistical significance was shown with the expanded and modified Fuchs definitions due to the higher frequency of these events (in this case, averaging >1 event per patient) but not with the original Fuchs definition, which had much lower frequency (averaging <0.25 event per patient).  Introduction: Neutrophil elastase (NE) levels are frequently elevated in cystic fibrosis (CF) sputum and correlate with inflammatory markers and measurements of lung impairment such as decreased FEV 1 . NE is therefore considered a potential biomarker of exacerbation however no tools are available to monitor protease levels at home or in the clinic. The routine monitoring/measurement of NE in sputum could assist the proactive management of CF patients by identifying early signs of exacerbation which could facilitate pre-emptive medical intervention to avoid potentially serious complications. ProAxsis has developed an activity-based immunoassay (ABI) for NE quantification that incorporates a ProteaseTag® molecule capable of the rapid and selective binding of active NE. The translation of this ProteaseTag® technology to a point of care (POC) test, in the form of a lateral flow device (LFD), should provide a valuable tool to monitor disease activity. Aim: To develop and validate a prototype LFD that can rapidly detect active NE in airways samples. Methods: Experiments were performed using a prototype LFD, composed of conjugate pad containing the detector component; with appropriate test and control reagents striped onto nitrocellulose membrane. CF Sol/ NE-Tag/running buffer were transferred sequentially to the reaction tube (total volume 100 μL), and left to stand for 15 minutes; after which signal intensity was scored between 0-10. Other closely related proteases ie, cathepsin G (CATG), human airways trypsin (HAT), were also examined to evaluate assay specificity. Results: Following initial quantification using the ABI, ProteaseTag® Active NE Immunoassay (ProAxsis Ltd), a subset of CF sol samples containing differing levels of active NE, were selected for inclusion in the study. LFD analysis revealed an excellent correlation between these two assay platforms; with a signal for NE, detectable in less than 60 seconds. The assay was also found to be highly sensitive with a positive signal noted for biological samples containing ~90 ng/mL of active NE. Specificity analysis revealed negligible cross-reactivity upon testing with proteases such as CATG and HAT. Conclusion: The development of a highly sensitive and specific LFD for rapid detection of active NE in complex clinical samples could prove to be a vital tool in CF management; on account of this device's capacity to measure NE, an established biomarker of infection. It is anticipated that a positive test would prompt such individuals to seek medical attention, to mitigate their risk of exacerbation leading to hospitalisation. Introduction: Neutrophil elastase (NE) is a serine protease released from the azurophilic granules in leukocytes (or neutrophils). Its primary role is to assist in the proteolytic breakdown and destruction of phagocytosed foreign pathogens as part of the normal immune response. However, secreted active NE has been implicated in contributing to a range of inflammatory disorders including rheumatoid arthritis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and cystic fibrosis (CF). ProAxsis has developed a range of ProteaseTags ® which are able to rapidly and selectively bind to active proteases. The incorporation of such ProteaseTags ® within activity-dependent immunoassays enables the quantification of active proteases within biological samples and has resulted in the recent commercialisation of our ProteaseTag ® Active Neutrophil Elastase Immunoassay. Aims: Here we report the application and benefits of NE Ultra, a novel biotinylated ProteaseTag ® targeting NE. Furthermore, we compare it with another commercially available irreversible NE inhibitor MeO-Suc-AAPV-CH 2 Cl in terms of selectivity and stability. Methods: Kinetic evaluation and selectivity profiling of NE Ultra and MeOSuc-AAPV-CH 2 Cl against NE and other proteases, including thrombin, cathepsin G, cathepsin B and chymotrypsin was determined by fluorogenic steady-state enzyme assays. The stability of NE Ultra and MeOSuc-AAPV-CH 2 Cl was compared by overnight incubation in 10% (v/v) serum from CF patients, followed by an NE activity assay. Furthermore, the application of NE Ultra as an activity-based probe (ABP) for the detection of NE in CF sol samples was carried out through SDS-PAGE and electroblotting techniques. Results: NE Ultra and MeOSuc-AAPV-CH 2 Cl showed excellent irreversible inhibition of NE with similar potency displaying k 3 /K i values of 4.08 (± 1.84) x 10 6 M -1 min -1 and 6.68 (± 1.62) x 10 6 M -1 min -1 , respectively. NE Ultra displayed excellent selectivity for NE, having no effect on the activity of other proteases including cathepsin G, thrombin and cathepsin B. In contrast, MeOSuc-AAPV-CH 2 Cl completely abrogated the activity of cathepsin B. In terms of stability, following overnight incubation both NE Ultra and MeOSuc-AAPV-CH 2 Cl displayed inhibitory action against NE, however, MeOSuc-AAPV-CH 2 Cl showed a slight reduction in potency suggesting a lower stability in biological samples. When NE Ultra was examined as an ABP, it enabled streptavidin-mediated detection of NE in CF sol samples, following separation and detection via SDS-PAGE and electroblotting. Conclusion: We report the application of a novel ProteaseTag ® , NE Ultra, as an irreversible inhibitor and potent ABP for NE. This affinity label has a number of advantages over other commercially available irreversible NE inhibitors such as MeOSuc-AAPV-CH 2 Cl, in terms of improvements in stability and selectivity as well as the ability to visualise active NE in clinical samples, when used in combination with a streptavidin-conjugate. NE Ultra has therefore the potential for broad application across laboratory-based CF research. Background: CF is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), an ion channel that regulates the airway surface liquid (ASL). In the current paradigm, the absence of functional CFTR leads to a decreased ASL pH (Coakley RD, et al. PNAS. 2003; 100:16083-8) and reduces ciliary beat frequency (Clary-Meinesz C, et al. ERJ. 1998; 11:330-3) , increases mucus viscosity (Matsui H, et al. JCI. 1998; 102:1125-31) , and impairs innate immunity (Pezzulo AA, et al. Nature. 2012; 487:109-13) . We hypothesize that nebulized NaHCO 3 will restore ASL pH and improve airway function in CF. The objective of this study is to evaluate the safety and tolerability of inhaled NaHCO 3 as assessed by pulmonary function and effects on the airway pH in patients with CF. Methods: Part 1: Safety and tolerability. Individuals with CF received nebulized NaHCO 3 at concentrations of 1.5, 3.375, or 5%. Spirometry and cough frequency was measured pre/post nebulization. Part 2: Effects of inhaled NaHCO 3 . A randomized, double-blind, crossover study was conducted to compare the effects of hypertonic NaHCO 3 to hypertonic saline. Individuals with CF received 2 nebulized doses of 8.4% NaHCO 3 or 7% saline separated by 4 hours. Spirometry, exhaled breath condensate (EBC) pH, and sputum pH were measured. Patients returned 15 days later to receive the alternative solution. Study protocols were approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Pittsburgh. Results: Part 1. Patients nebulized 1.5% (n=16), 3.375% (n=6), and 5% (n=5) NaHCO 3 . One patient with a history of reactive airways was unable to complete the 3.375% NaHCO 3 inhalation due to dyspnea and chest tightness that was relieved with albuterol. Mean FEV 1 was not significantly changed after inhaled NaHCO 3 (mean ΔFEV 1 -4.4±1.04%, range +7 to -15%, n=27). As previously reported, there was a nonsignificant trend of increased cough with increasing NaHCO 3 concentration. Part 2. All patients tolerated inhalations of NaHCO 3 and hypertonic saline (n=10). NaHCO 3 was associated with a decrease in FEV 1 after one dose (mean ΔFEV 1 -6.0±5.5%, range +2.5 to -15.9%, n=10, p=0.008). 3 subjects had a decrease of >10% in FEV 1 . FEV 1 did not statistically change after saline (mean ΔFEV 1 -2.6±11.8%, range -17.4 to 30.3%, n=10, p=0.46). FEV 1 decreased >15% in one patient in each group. Not all patients were able to produce sufficient sputum for analysis. No statistically significant changes were noted in the pH of EBC or sputum after 2 doses. NaHCO 3 : EBC pH +0.50±1.4 (n=9, p=0.31) and sputum pH +0.45±0.51 (n=5, p=0.12). Saline: EBC pH -0.15±1.2 (n=7, p=0.76) and sputum pH -0.13±0.14 (n=5, p=0.09). All p values reported were by paired t-test. Discussion: We have shown that acute nebulized 1.5-8.4% NaHCO 3 is safe and well tolerated in individuals with CF. Only 1 of 37 patients discontinued administration due to bronchospasm. NaHCO 3 inhalation was associated with a decrease in FEV 1 , similar to what has been observed with other inhaled hypertonic agents (Robinson M, et al. ERJ. 1999; 14:678-85) . The low sample size limited our ability to definitively assess changes in EBC and sputum pH. Further investigations are necessary to assess whether long-term inhaled NaHCO 3 improves lung function in CF. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene, the most frequent of which is F508del-CFTR. CF is characterized by hyper-secretion of proinflammatory chemokines into the airway lumen. Consequently this induces the highly inflammatory cellular phenotype typical of CF, and subsequent fibrosis causing airway destruction, leading to morbidity and mortality. We have previously reported that miR-155 is up-regulated in cystic fibrosis lung epithelial cells. However, the molecular mechanism by which miR-155 regulates the manifestations of the disease phenotype of CF is not well understood. Here we report that the regulatory associated protein of mTOR, complex 1 (RPTOR) is a novel target of miR-155 in CF lung epithelial cells. The suppression of RPTOR expression and subsequent activation of TGF-β signaling resulted in the induction of fibrosis by up-regulation of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) in CF lung epithelial cells. Thus, we propose that miR-155 can regulate fibrosis of CF lungs through the RPTOR-TGFβ-CTGF axis. These mechanisms are potential targets for CF therapy. is characterized by small airway mucus obstruction that is associated with accelerated loss of lung function and mortality. Cigarette smoking causes reduced cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) activity and enhanced mucus expression, leading to impaired mucociliary clearance. Patients with COPD without CFTR mutations have reduced CFTR activity that is independently associated with chronic bronchitis. The CFTR potentiator, ivacaftor, is approved for CF and also augments the function of wild-type CFTR, including airway epithelium with acquired CFTR dysfunction. To test whether CFTR potentiation might be helpful in COPD, we conducted a pilot study to determine the safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of ivacaftor in COPD patients with chronic bronchitis. Methods: Twelve active or former smokers with COPD and chronic bronchitis were enrolled in a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot trial to investigate the effect of ivacaftor on CFTR function, patientreported outcomes of bronchitis symptoms, and ivacaftor pharmacokinetics after 14 days of treatment and prepare for subsequent studies. Results: Patients were randomized in a 2:1 fashion (ivacaftor:placebo). Baseline characteristics were well-matched between the arms, although mean sweat chloride was lower than anticipated. Ivacaftor was welltolerated and no serious adverse events were attributed to study drug. After 14 days of treatment, patients receiving ivacaftor exhibited nonsignificant improvements in CFTR function as detected by improved sweat chloride (-8.0 ± 4.4 mmol/L ivacaftor vs. -2.0 ± 1.5mmol/L placebo, compared to baseline, ±SD, P=0.38) and nasal potential difference (-4.9 ± 3.9 mV ivacaftor group vs. +1.0 ± 6.4 mV placebo, compared to baseline, P=0.56). Subjects receiving ivacaftor had nonsignificant improvements in symptoms detected by the Breathlessness, Cough, and Sputum Scale (BCSS) that exceeded the MCID of 1 unit (mean change of -2.1 ± 0.9 ivacaftor vs +2.0 ± 2.2 placebo, compared to baseline, p=0.11). Subjects with diminished CFTR function at baseline had the most robust response. There was no meaningful change in spirometry. Pharmacokinetics revealed stable ivacaftor levels with an AUC that mirrored experience in CF. All patients had complete CFTR sequencing to detect genetic CFTR defects. The largest responder in the ivacaftor group was a heterozygote for a synonymous CFTR variant. Conclusions: Ivacaftor is safe and well-tolerated in patients with COPD and exhibited predicted pharmacokinetics. There were nonsignificant improvements in CFTR activity and respiratory symptoms with ivacaftor treatment. The mean change in NPD and sweat chloride suggests improved wild-type CFTR activity (~20%). These results set the stage for longer trials to determine the effects of CFTR potentiation on clinical outcomes in patients with chronic bronchitis in an appropriately powered study enriched in patients with more profound CFTR dysfunction at baseline. Supported by NIH. Background: Pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) are common events that punctuate the clinical course of CF, and are associated with significant morbidity and mortality. At present, there is a paucity of markers to guide PEx management decisions. Early changes in clinical parameters such as symptoms and lung function are inadequate to discriminate treatment responders vs nonresponders leading to delays in the clinical recognition of treatment nonresponse. To identify blood-based biomarkers that change early in the course of PEx treatment and that are predictive of response to therapy. Methods: 25 PEx from 22 adult CF patients hospitalized for intravenous (IV) antibiotics were included. Bedside spirometry, the CF respiratory symptom diary (CFRSD) and serum/plasma samples were collected within 24 hours of initiating IV antibiotic therapy (day 0), day 5, day 10, and treatment completion. Chronic respiratory infection symptom score (CRISS) was derived from the CFRSD. Three definitions of PEx treatment nonresponse were employed: 1) FEV1 definition -< 10% relative improvement in FEV1 from the beginning to end of treatment; 2) CRISS definition -CRISS score decrease of less than the median (< 23 points) from beginning to end of treatment; 3) composite definition -defined as one or more of the following: failure of FEV1 % predicted to recover to 90% of best in prior 6 months by the end of antibiotic therapy, prolonged antibiotic therapy ≥ 21 days, or switch of antibiotics due to poor clinical response. Semi-targeted proteomic analysis was performed on the plasma with multiple reaction monitoring -mass spectrometry (MRM-MS) and 92 unique proteins were measured. Mesoscale Discovery (Carlsbad, CA) was used to measure serum levels of four additional proteins (IL-6, IL-8, TNF-alpha, calprotectin). Protein panel classifiers were created using elastic net and the classifier with the highest leave one out cross validation AUC was presented. Results: Several blood proteins changed in abundance from beginning to end of exacerbation but few changed early (day 0 to 5) and were capable of discriminating between treatment responders vs nonresponders. A panel consisting of relative changes in monocyte differentiation antigen CD14 and heparin cofactor 2 levels demonstrated the best performance in predicting treatment nonresponse according to the FEV1 definition, with an AUC of 0.89 (Sn 100%, Sp 67%). A panel consisting of absolute changes in fibrinogen beta and gamma chain levels demonstrated the best performance in predicting treatment nonresponse according to the CRISS definition, with an AUC of 0.80 (Sn 100%, Sp 50%). No protein panels performed well at predicting treatment nonresponse according to the composite definition. Conclusion: Using MRM-MS and immunoassays, we identified several promising blood-based protein panels that, when measured serially early in the course of a PEx, can be used to predict treatment nonresponse. Future studies are planned to validate these results. Funding Source: CF Canada. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is realizing the promise of personalized medicine. Recent advances in drug development that target CFTR directly result in lung function improvement, but variability in response is demanding better prediction of outcomes to improve management decisions. The genetic modifier SLC26A9 contributes to disease severity in the CF pancreas and intestine at birth; here we assess its relationship with disease severity and therapeutic response in the CF lungs. Methods: SLC26A9 association with lung disease severity was assessed in individuals from the Canadian and French CF Gene Modifier consortia with gating mutations and in those homozygous for Phe508del. Variability in response to a CFTR-directed potentiator therapy, attributed to SLC26A9 genotype, was then assessed in Canadian CF patients with gating mutations. Finally, primary airway cell cultures were used to determine if SLC26A9 genotype displays differential modification of Phe508del CFTR function upon treatment with a CFTR corrector. In CF individuals with gating mutations that retain cell-surface localized protein we show that SLC26A9 modifies lung function while this is not the case in individuals homozygous for Phe508del where cell surface expression is lacking. Treatment response to ivacaftor, which improves channel opening probability in patients with gating mutations, shows substantial variability in response that can be explained by SLC26A9 (p=0.0006). Notably, when homozygous Phe508del primary bronchial cells are treated with a drug to restore surface CFTR, SLC26A9 likewise modifies treatment response (p=0.02). Summary: Our findings indicate that SLC26A9 airway modification requires CFTR at the cell surface, and that common variation at SLC26A9 could predict response to CFTR-directed therapeutics. Introduction: CF is characterized by an oxidant/antioxidant imbalance and oxidative stress which may play a significant role in the pathophysiology of CF lung disease. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of an oral antioxidant-enriched multivitamin supplement on antioxidant levels, markers of inflammation and oxidative stress, and clinical outcomes. Methods: In this multicenter, randomized, double-blind, controlled trial, pancreatic insufficient CF subjects 10 years of age and older with an FEV1 between 40-100% predicted were randomized to 16 weeks of an antioxidant-enriched multivitamin (n=36, mean age 22.3 y, mean FEV1 73.4 %pred) or control multivitamin without antioxidants (n=37, mean age 22.9 y, mean FEV1 74.8 %pred). Safety and tolerability were assessed. Changes in systemic antioxidant levels (β-carotene, CoQ10, γ-tocopherol, lutein, lycopene, erythrocyte glutathione peroxidase activity), systemic and sputum markers of inflammation and oxidative stress [systemic markers: WBC counts, hs-CRP, calprotectin, serum amyloid A, myeloperoxidase (MPO), malondialdehyde, protein carbonyls, total antioxidant capacity; sputum markers: MPO, free neutrophil elastase activity, A 1 AT, SLPI, IL-8, TNF-α, 8-iso-PGF 2a , 8-OHdG], and clinical outcomes (pulmonary function, anthropometric measures, pulmonary exacerbations) were evaluated. Results: Change in sputum MPO concentration over the 16-wk treatment period, the primary efficacy endpoint, was not significantly different between the antioxidant-supplemented group and the control group. Model-based estimates of the difference between groups for 16-wk change in log10 sputum MPO were -0.17 ng/mL (95% CI= -0.513, 0.173, p=0.325). While systemic antioxidant levels (β-carotene, CoQ10, γ-tocopherol, lutein) significantly increased in the antioxidant-treated group (p<0.001 for each), there were no significant changes in any of the systemic and sputum markers of inflammation and oxidative stress. Whereas lung function and growth endpoints did not differ between the groups at 16 weeks, the antioxidant-treated group had a lower risk of time to first pulmonary exacerbation requiring antibiotics than the control group (hazard ratio=0.50, 95% CI= 0.25, 0.98, p=0.044). The adverse-event incidence and tolerability were similar between the groups. Conclusions: Antioxidant supplementation, which was safe and well tolerated, led to increased systemic antioxidant levels without significantly impacting inflammation and oxidative stress. Increased time to first exacerbation was the only clinically relevant improvement observed in the antioxidant-treated group. CFFT supported; acknowledging TDN sites, CF patients and families. PROSPECT is a two-part multicenter PROSPECTive, longitudinal study of CFTR-dependent disease profiling in CF to explore biomarkers, clinical, and physiological characteristics across various degrees of CF severity. Biospecimens and clinical data are being collected to better understand the molecular mediators and profiles that characterize specific levels of CFTR activity, and gain important information on biomarkers to track their relationship to CFTR activity and restoration. This abstract presents the study design and characteristics of recruited subjects in Part A. Methods: Healthy non-CF controls ≥12 years of age (Cohort 1) will be compared to two CF cohorts defined by CFTR genotype, one with at least one partial function CFTR variant (Cohort 2, less severe disease), the other with two mutations with absent CFTR function (Cohort 3, more severe disease). Cohort 1 subjects are being studied twice over a 14-day period. Cohort 2 and 3 CF subjects complete up to 3 visits over 3 months. Assessments include history, spirometry, clinical laboratory and sweat chloride measurements, and biomarker measurements in sputum, blood, urine, and stool samples. All subjects are contributing biospecimens to the CFFT Biorepository. Subsets of CF subjects are undergoing intestinal pH measurements and nasal epithelial cell procurement. Results: To date, partial-function CF subjects (Cohort 2, n=22), absent-function CF subjects (Cohort 3, n=143) and 73 healthy controls have been enrolled. The baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of each cohort are displayed in the Table. All Cohort 1 participants have completed 2 study visits, while 20/22 Cohort 2 subjects and 136/143 Cohort 3 subjects have completed 2 or more study visits. Mean sweat chloride concentrations are significantly different across the 3 cohorts: Cohort 1: 22.6 mmol/L (SD 10.8), Cohort 2: 87.5 mmol/L (SD 12.5), Cohort 3: 100.8 mmol/L (SD 9.3) (p<0.001 for each pairwise comparison between cohorts). Among the CF cohorts, the within-subject variance is less than the between-subject variance (Cohort 2: 5.8 mmol/L vs 11.5; Cohort 3: 5.0 vs 7.0). Conclusions: PROSPECT is successfully enrolling healthy non-CF controls and CF subjects with different CFTR genetic severities. Sweat chloride clearly distinguishes these cohorts and reflects underlying CFTR activity. PROSPECT data and biospecimens may yield additional biomarkers that discriminate levels of CFTR function in different organs and prove useful in defining biological phenotypes to facilitate personalized therapeutic approaches in CF. Supported by CFFT; acknowledging TDN sites, CF patients and families. Introduction: We have recently described a lower muscle oxygen extraction (O 2 Ex) during exercise in patients with CF compared to controls which may contribute to reduced exercise capacity. Sildenafil, a phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, has been used to improve exercise capacity in other patient populations; however, the effects of sildenafil on muscle O 2 Ex during exercise in CF are unknown. Purpose: This study sought to test the hypothesis that sildenafil will improve O 2 Ex during maximal exercise in patients with CF. Methods: Eleven patients with CF (6 males and 5 females; 23 ± 10 years) volunteered for this study. An incremental exercise test to exhaustion was performed on a cycle ergometer using the Godfrey protocol to determine exercise capacity (VO 2 peak) at baseline and following four weeks of sildenafil treatment (20 mg, TID). Signal-Morphology Impedance Cardiology (PhysioFlow) was used to monitor hemodynamic measurements both at rest and during maximal exercise (max) before and after treatment with sildenafil. O 2 Ex was determined using a derivation of the Fick equation and exercise factor was calculated as the ratio between cardiac output and O 2 consumption. Results: No significant differences in resting or maximal cardiac output (rest, p=0.686; max, p=0.569) or arterial saturation (rest; p=0.812; max, p=0.308) were observed following treatment. Controlling for fat-free mass, no differences (p=0.817) in resting O 2 Ex were observed between pre-and posttreatment (24 ± 2% vs 25 ± 2%). However, O 2 Ex during maximal exercise was significantly (p=0.029) higher after sildenafil (67 ± 2%) compared with before treatment (59 ± 1%). Significant correlations were identified between maximal exercise O 2 Ex and both VO 2 peak (r=0.423, p=0.021) and diastolic blood pressure (r=0.453, p=0.045). In addition, exercise factor was significantly associated with baseline pulmonary function (FEV p=0.041; p=0.031) . Conclusion: For the first time, we have documented that four weeks of sildenafil treatment improves muscle O 2 extraction during maximal exercise in patients with CF. An increase in O 2 extraction may contribute to improvements in exercise capacity in this population. Future studies are warranted to investigate the long term effects of sildenafil on the sustained improvement in O 2 extraction in CF. Supported in part by NIH/NIDDK R21DK100783 (RAH). Objective: To assess real-world disease burden among patients in Canada with CF ≥12 years old and homozygous for F508del-CFTR who were not on a CFTR modulator. Methods: Demographics, clinical characteristics, and resource utilization were obtained retrospectively (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) from medical records at 4 CF clinics for a 12-month baseline period and a 2-to 36-month follow-up period. Descriptive analyses were performed by age (12-17, ≥18 years), average baseline lung function (ppFEV 1 ≥70, 41-69, or ≤40), and overall. Pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) were defined as those mentioned in the record during a hospitalization or outpatient visit requiring nonroutine antibiotic treatment. Results: Data from 139 patients were included. The Table shows baseline patient characteristics. All patients had ≥1 comorbidity at baseline, most commonly pancreatic insufficiency (84%) and nasal polyps (37%). In the follow-up period (median, 28 months), 63% of patients had a newly emergent comorbidity, including 9% newly diagnosed with impaired glucose tolerance, 6% with CF-related diabetes, and 6% with depression. Mean PEx rate was 1.0/patient-year at baseline vs 1.4 at follow-up. In the follow-up period, proportions of patients with ≥1 PEx and rates of PEx were higher among adults (89%; 1.7/patient-year) than adolescents (55%; 0.9/patient-year) and among patients in the ppFEV 1 ≤40 group (89%; 1.7/ patient-year) than the ppFEV 1 ≥70 group (66%; 1.0/patient-year). In the follow-up period, 56% were hospitalized for any reason (mean length of stay, 12.6 days), and patients had a mean 5.6 outpatient visits/year. In the baseline period, 66% of patients were using antibiotics, 66% asthma medications, and 54% mucolytics; percentages in the follow-up were 96%, 84%, and 76%, respectively. Conclusions: Together, these results suggest that patients in Canada with CF who are homozygous for the F508del-CFTR mutation have a considerable, progressive burden of illness that leads to increased resource utilization as the patients age and as the disease progresses. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. a Lung function, calculated using the Global Lungs Initiative equation, was not calculable for all patients. Cystic fibrosis is characterized by an ion channel abnormality that produces airway surface liquid (ASL) volume depletion and mucus hyperconcentration, resulting in thick, adherent airway mucus plugs that are resistant to mucociliary and cough clearance. Experimentally, ASL depletion and mucus hyperconcentration have been generated in Scnn1b-transgenic (Scnn1b-Tg) mice by airway-targeted overexpression of the epithelial Na + channel β subunit (βENaC, encoded by the Scnn1b gene). Expression of the Scnn1b transgene causes airway surface dehydration with a consequent increase in mucus concentration, which leads to osmotic compression of cilia and mucus adhesion. Lung pathology in Scnn1b-Tg mice is characterized by airway mucus obstruction, inflammation, and susceptibility to spontaneous bacterial infections, recapitulating the main features of CF lung disease. The importance of hyperconcentrated mucus in the pathophysiology of CF lung disease led us to use the Scnn1b-Tg mouse as an in vivo model to test the efficacy of various mucus-mobilizing agents. Our efforts have focused on the action of reducing agents, based on the rationale that reducing the molecular weight (MW) of mucin polymers by cutting intermolecular disulphide-bonds is predicted to: 1) reduce the viscous and elastic moduli of mucus gels, and 2) increase the ability of mucins to diffuse out of swelling gels, thus aiding transport of mucus plugs out of the lung. Preliminary experiments were performed using a nose-only aerosol delivery system adapted to deliver very small volumes (≤10 μL/min) of polydisperse particles (≤ 4 μm). Analysis of aerosol deposition fraction using 200 nm fluorescent latex beads indicated that less than 0.05% of the total number of beads in the generator were deposited in the lung of wildtype (WT, C57BL/6N) mice. Nonetheless, agarose Western blot analysis of BAL harvested from Scnn1b-Tg or WT mice after aerosolization of a single dose of a proprietary reducing agent (Rx) indicated a significant decrease (~50%) in high MW Muc5b polymers, as compared to mice aerosolized with iso-osmotic vehicle. As mucus plugs in Scnn1b-Tg mice airway are easily detectable histologically, the effect of Rx treatment was also assessed morphometrically (intraluminal AB-PAS positive area). We demonstrated the feasibility of this approach in studies involving aerosolization of Rx to Scnn1b-Tg mice, where we observed a dose-dependent reduction in the lung mucus content (i.e., vehicle 0.188 ± 0.025 mm 2 /lung n=21; ~5 mM deposited Rx 0.162 ± 0.023 mm 2 /lung n=8; ~10 mM deposited Rx 0.059 ± 0.012 mm 2 /lung n=9 mean ± SEM). Notably, preliminary experiments testing the efficacy of the benchmark mucolytic N-acetylcysteine (NAC) suggest that this compound, dosed at the same concentration as active Rx (10 mM), is ineffective at promoting mucus plug clearance in Scnn1b-Tg mice, mirroring poor efficacy of NAC in the clinic. Cumulatively, these data indicate that we have developed a clinically relevant platform to perform initial testing for efficacy/toxicity of mucus-mobilizing agents. Introduction: Progressive lung disease due to mucociliary dysfunction remains a problem in cystic fibrosis (CF). Inflammation usually associated with CF airway disease reduces chloride secretion by a decrease in BK conductance that otherwise provides the driving force for secretion. Thus, anti-inflammatory CF therapy is an important of CF care. Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) have potent anti-inflammatory properties. We investigated the effects of losartan on mucociliary dysfunction in vitro and in vivo. Methods: CFBE cells were obtained from homozygous F508del individuals at transplant or by LifeCenter Northwest with IRB approval. Cells were redifferentiated at the air-liquid interface. Inflammation was induced with TGF-β1 (5-10 ng/mL, 24 h), a cytokine associated with worse pulmonary outcomes in CF. BK channel activity, airway surface liquid (ASL) volume, and ciliary beat frequency (CBF) were measured as published. For in vivo experiments, the Mount Sinai Medical Center IAUAC approved the tracheal mucus velocity (TMV) studies. Sheep were challenged either 1) on three consecutive days with CFTRinh172 (10 mg/3 mL) and then 2 h later with human neutrophil elastase (HNE, 2380 mU/3 mL) and TMV measured up to 96 h; or 2) on one day with CFTRinh172 and 2 h later with TGF-β1 (25 μg/3 mL) and TMV measured for up to 24 h. Results: In CFBE cells, treatment with 10 μM losartan rescued TGF-β1-induced reductions in BK activity (by downregulating its γ subunit LRRC26), ASL volume and CBF. To assure in vivo relevance, sheep were challenged with aerosolized CFTRinh172 and HNE for 3 consecutive days, resulting in TMV reduction that persisted for 2 days after cessation of challenge. Losartan given by inhalation on day 3 (50 mg) reversed mucociliary dysfunction and kept transport normal for the next 2 days. Losartan also reversed TMV reductions in response to CFTRinh172 and TGF-β1 (see Figure) . Conclusions: These results show that inflammatory mediators reduce alternative chloride transport in CF cells, resulting in dysfunction of parameters that govern mucociliary clearance in vitro and of TMV in vivo. Losartan can overcome these inflammatory conditions and lead to a sustained recovery of ASL volume in vitro and TMV in vivo. These results set the stage for a clinical trial using ARBs in CF patients. Tracheal mucus veolcity (TMV) in sheep.  Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients are frequently colonized by nonmucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa. However, with time, these adapt to the CF lung by mutating to the mucoid form; which is strongly associated with increased morbidity. Colistin is frequently prescribed as an inhalation therapy for these patients, but acquisition of resistance has recently been reported. OligoG CF-5/20, a low molecular weight sodium alginate oligomer derived from seaweed, has previously been shown to disrupt P. aeruginosa biofilm formation (Powell LC, et al. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014; 50:483-92) and disrupt mucin crosslinks within biofilm networks, which significantly reduces CF sputum viscoelasticity (Pritchard MF, et al. Mol Pharma. 2016; 13:863-72) . Methods: In this study, we investigated the ability of OligoG CF-5/20 to potentiate the antimicrobial properties of colistin against established pseudomonal biofilms. The effect of growth media on this in vitro testing was explored using synthetic artificial sputum (AS) medium and standard Mueller Hinton (MH) broth. Growth curves and quantitative analysis of mucoid pseudomonal biofilms treated with colistin (0.2 μg/mL) and/or Oli-goG CF-5/20 (2-20 mg/mL) were conducted in both media. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was employed to visualize biofilm disruption, and further quantified using COMSTAT image analysis. Scanning electron microscope images of established biofilms were taken comparing nonmucoidal and mucoidal strains treated with colistin (16 μg/mL) ± OligoG CF-5/20 (20 mg/mL). The interaction of the OligoG CF-5/20 with the pseudomonal alginate and the expression of quorum-sensing (QS) molecules was studied using circular dichroism and liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry. Results: Biofilm morphology when grown in AS medium was characterized by dense, spherical microcolony formation. Colistin/OligoG CF-5/20 combination therapy induced a marked increase in disruption of established biofilms following treatment in both MH broth (P<0.05) and AS medium. The spherical microcolonies (in AS medium) were associated with a decreased efficiency of colistin, which was reversed and potentiated in co-treatment with OligoG CF-5/20 in the established biofilm model. Mechanistic studies revealed a reduction in QS signaling of 3-oxo C12-AHL when treated with OligoG CF-5/20 (P<0.05), whilst levels of C4-AHLs remained unchanged (P>0.05). Conclusions: These data demonstrate that the tight microcolony formation typically found within the CF lung (but not observed in conventional in vitro growth conditions), confers resistance to antibiotic treatment. These data support the use of OligoG CF-5/20 to potentiate antibiotic therapy. Supported by European Social Fund, and AlgiPharma AS. Background: Lung clearance index (LCI) represents pulmonary ventilation inhomogeneity (VI) and is more sensitive than spirometry at detecting early lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF). However, LCI provides only a global measurement of VI and does not provide insight into regional disease. Pulmonary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using hyperpolarized xenon-129 ( 129 Xe) gas can regionally quantify VI by measuring the percentage of unventilated lung volume (ventilation defect percent; VDP). (1) The aim of this study was to compare spirometry, LCI and VDP in a pediatric population of healthy participants and participants with CF. Methods: As part of an ongoing study to validate 129 Xe-MRI as an outcome measure in CF, 5 healthy participants and 10 with CF, aged 8-18, were recruited. LCI was measured using the Exhalyzer D ® (EcoMedics AG). Pulmonary 129 Xe-MRI was performed on a 1.5T MRI scanner (GEHC) and VDP was calculated as the unventilated lung volume divided by the total thoracic cavity volume. Spirometry was performed according to the American Thoracic Society guidelines. Results: Compared to healthy controls, participants with CF had a significantly higher VDP (p=0.008) and LCI (p=0.003) with no significant difference (p=0.14) in the forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV 1 ) between the two groups ( Figure) . There was a strong correlation (r 2 =0.90) between measured LCI and VDP. Discussion: Measurement of VDP using 129 Xe-MRI is feasible in a pediatric population and VI quantification using this technique correlates closely with LCI. 129 Xe-MRI and LCI could detect differences between healthy and CF participants, while conventional spirometry could not. Thus, VDP could be a marker of early lung disease in CF and could provide a sensitive, radiation-free modality to monitor the progression and response to treatment in these patients. Pulmonary inflammation in cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with an exaggerated neutrophilic response which leads to lung damage and subsequent respiratory failure. Effective treatment of the underlying chronic inflammation is needed. Activin A is a key modulator of the inflammatory cascade and its levels correlate with reduced respiratory function in CF patients (Hardy CL, et al. Immunol Cell Biol. 2015; 93:567-74) . Follistatin, a naturally occurring glycoprotein, is an effective inhibitor of activin activity. Its effect on modulating inflammation in CF was assessed using Scnn1b-Tg mice, which recapitulate the hallmarks of CF lung disease and exhibit elevated activin A levels in lung tissue. Recombinant human follistatin 288 (rhFST288, FST) administered intranasally every second day for 3 weeks to Scnn1b-Tg mice significantly reduced airway neutrophils, mucus production and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid levels of activin A and inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1α, IL-1β, G-CSF, MCP-1, MIP-1α and MIP-1β. Lung tissue expression of profibrotic genes (Tgfb1, Pdgfa and Pdgfb) and genes coding for collagen (Col13a1, Col4a1, Col4a2, Col4a4, Col6a1) were reduced, while expression levels of protective protease inhibitors, including Serpina3 and Serpinb6 orthologs, were increased with FST treatment. Collectively, the data show that FST modulates neutrophilic airway inflammation and has the potential to regulate genes involved in tissue damage and repair. The data support the therapeutic application of FST to treat CF lung disease. PB01 is a new orally inhaled therapeutic preparation of recombinant human follistatin 288 (rhFST288). Safety and toxicology studies in rats and cynomolgus monkeys showed that single and multiple inhaled daily doses of PB01 (8-400 μg/kg) over 14 days were well tolerated and there were no significant adverse effects on respiratory parameters, locomotor activity, or the cardiovascular system. In addition, there were no adverse changes in clinical pathology parameters and no tissue and organ pathology. Pharmacokinetic analysis of PB01 in serum indicated minimal systemic exposure after inhalation. A first-in-human Phase 1 clinical trial on the safety and pharmacokinetic effects of PB01 in healthy male participants has commenced (ACTRN12615000984594). Results from the single ascending dose study show that PB01 was well tolerated by the participants. There were no serious adverse events and all reported adverse events were considered mild. There was no dose-limiting toxicity, and no clinically significant changes in laboratory assessments, vital signs, 12-lead ECG, pulmonary function test and physical examination from baseline, for any PB01 treatment group. A multiple ascending dose study has completed with results expected by July 2016. A second Phase 1 clinical study to assess the pharmacodynamic effects of PB01 on lung inflammation is planned.  Introduction: Two new versions of the beta-sweat secretion test focusing on the defective CFTR-dependent beta-adrenergic pathway have been recently developed with claimed advantage of having sufficient sensitivity to quantify half CFTR function in heterozygous and in atypical CF and to measure efficacy of novel therapies. Rates of water evaporation (kg water/hr/m 2 ) and of volume of sweat droplets (nL/min) were measured in an apparently healthy female, 61 years, following originally reported protocols of evaporimetry and bubble test. Results: Cholinergic phases were normal (maximal evaporimetric response 5 min after intradermal injection of carbachol: 95.1 kg water/hr/m 2 and volume rate of droplets obtained 10 min after methacholine injection: 1.8 nL/min). However beta-adrenergic (isoprenaline plus aminophylline) responses, evaluated in the presence of atropine to inhibit the prior cholinergic stimulation, were abolished (β-adrenergic to cholinergic ratio: 0 and 0.7% for evaporimetry and bubble test respectively), eliciting a diagnosis of CF. The results were confirmed by repeating each test at least twice. History of current medications possibly interfering with the pharmacological agents used during the tests revealed long-term (>12 years) treatment of a well-controlled primary angle closure glaucoma consisting of a daily topical use of beta-blocker carteol 2% (1 drop/left eye). There are no apparent symptoms of beta-blocker intoxication (heart rate: 66 beats per min, regular sinus rhythm, no asthma symptoms). Sweat chloride concentration determined after pilocarpine iontophoresis using a coulometric method was 24 mmol/L Cl -. Conclusions: The two new versions of the beta-sweat secretion test are very sensitive to quantify the beta-adrenergic contribution of the sweat secretion. Beta-blocker treatment, even at topical use, leads to false-positive results. Much attention should be paid to the use of current medications that may interfere with the pharmacological steps of the tests. Supported by the Belgian CF Foundation. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common life-limiting autosomal recessive disorder amongst Caucasians. CF is a genetic disorder that affects mostly the lungs but also the pancreas, liver, kidneys and intestine. Long-term issues include difficulty in breathing and coughing up sputum, resulting in extracellular DNA accumulation in the sputum and frequent lung infections. Patients exhibit lung disease consistent with failure of the innate airway defense mechanisms. Mucus represents the main barrier between the airway epithelium and the external environment and is, thus, the primary defense mechanism of the airways. Airway mucus dehydration seems paramount in the initiation of CF lung disease. Pulmonary disease is the major cause of morbidity and mortality in CF patients. Recombinant human DNase I enzymatically cleaves extracellular DNA in the sputa of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, hence, reducing sputum viscoelasticity that accumulates in the lungs of these patients, thus enabling better sputum expectoration. Actin, a potent inhibitor of DNase I activity, is found in high concentration in CF patients' sputum and may decrease the enzyme's DNA degradation activity therefore interfering with the effectiveness of inhaled DNase I in the lungs of CF patients. Protalix has developed a chemically modified plant cell-expressed Actin-Inhibition-Resistant DNase I, or AIR-DNase, to be administered by inhalation. This is a report of the results of a phase I randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, single-ascending-dose and multiple-ascending-dose study designed to evaluate safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of inhaled AIR DNase in 18 healthy volunteers, and an interim report of a phase IIa, proof-of-concept, open-label study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics and exploratory efficacy parameters of AIR DNase™ in patients with cystic fibrosis previously treated with Pulmozyme®. Background: GLPG2222 (GLPG2222/ABBV-2222) is a novel cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) corrector in clinical development for the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF). In cellular assays, GLPG2222 was shown to be a potent corrector, partially restoring F508del CFTR cell surface expression when using a CFBe41o-cell line harbouring HRP-tagged F508del CFTR. In primary bronchial epithelial cells derived from patients homozygous for F508del, the combination of GLPG2222 and a CFTR potentiator restores the function of F508del CFTR and exhibits potent activity with an EC 50 <10nM. GLPG2222 represents one component of a future potentiator/corrector(s) combination therapy targeting a broad CF patient population. Methods and Objectives: This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled first-in-human study was designed to assess the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetic properties of GLPG2222 in healthy volunteers. The study consisted of two parts: the first part assessed single ascending doses (SAD) of 50 mg qd to 800 mg qd administered in two alternating cohorts of 8 subjects. The second part assessed multiple ascending doses (MAD) of 150 mg qd to 600 mg qd in three sequential cohorts of 8 subjects whereby doses are administered for 14 days. Subjects were randomized in a 3:1 ratio (active versus placebo). 40 healthy subjects were included. The safety and tolerability evaluation consisted of adverse events, clinical laboratory parameters, physical examination, vital signs and ECGs. Plasma and urine pharmacokinetics of GLPG2222 were determined. Results: We report preliminary results of this phase I study (follow-up of the last cohort in the MAD part was still ongoing at the time of submission). Over the dose ranges tested, GLPG2222 was not associated with any serious adverse events (SAEs) or premature discontinuation due to adverse events. Based upon blind data, the following adverse events (AEs) were reported to be at least possibly related to GLPG2222: headache, flushing, asthenia, fatigue, gastroenteritis, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, thirst, abdominal discomfort and pruritus; all were considered mild. Clinical laboratory parameters, physical examinations, vital signs and ECGs did not show any clinically relevant findings. GLPG2222 given as oral liquid formulation in fed state was rapidly absorbed (median tmax = 1-3.5h) and eliminated with a mean apparent t 1/2 of about 15h. GLPG2222 exposure (C max and AUC) increased dose proportionally between 150 and 300 mg and slightly more than dose proportionally between 300 and 600 mg. Steady state was reached within 2 days. Conclusions: The preliminary results of this first-in-human study demonstrate GLPG2222 to be safe and well tolerated administered for 14 days up to 600 mg qd in healthy subjects. Full safety and PK data will be presented at the conference. These findings support GLPG2222 to be further developed for the treatment of subjects with CF. De Boeck, C. 1 Background: GLPG1837 is a novel cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) potentiator in clinical development for the treatment of cystic fibrosis. GLPG1837 has shown to be safe and well tolerated after 2 weeks of dosing up to 800 mg orally twice daily in healthy subjects. In vitro assays on S1251N CFTR showed GLPG1837 to open this dysfunctional channel with a high potency. Together, these results suggest GLPG1837 could be beneficial to CF patients harbouring the S1251N mutation. Methods and Objectives: SAPHIRA2 is a phase IIa, open-label, multicentre study designed to evaluate two doses of GLPG1837 (two weeks of dose 1, followed by two weeks of dose 2). Primary study objective is to evaluate safety and tolerability. Secondary outcome parameters include sweat chloride concentration as pharmacodynamic biomarker and pulmonary function. In addition, we explore the correlation of biomarker change and GLPG1837 plasma exposure. Main study inclusion criteria are: CF and S1251N mutation on one allele; age ≥ 18 years; FEV 1 ≥ 40% of predicted normal. For subjects treated with ivacaftor, a 7-day washout prior to start of first dose of GLPG1837 is required. At least 6 subjects will be included in the study. Results: At the time of submission of the abstract, the study is still ongoing: 7 subjects have been screened, 5 subjects have been enrolled and 4 subjects have completed the study. To date, no unexpected safety signals have been detected and the study is continuing as planned. The current projection is to complete enrolment by end of June 2016. Consequently, we expect top-line results to become available by September 2016. Conclusions: Pending results. Background: Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) is a potentially useful outcome measure for clinical trials in children with CF but its use is limited by variations in approach in different centres. First lavages (the airway component) are frequently used for culture, and in many institutions, subsequent lavages (distal/alveolar fractions) are used for measurement of inflammation. Pooling of BAL offers the opportunity to gather a homogenous sample of greater volume with a greater representation of the proximal airway component. We sought to determine if pooling of all lavage fractions adversely affected the relationship between infection and inflammation in BAL compared to a standard approach of using first lavages for culture and subsequent lavages for inflammatory markers. Results: 53 children with CF (mean age 4.5 years range 1-12) and 32 controls (mean age 4.3 years range 1-11) were recruited. Of 234 culture results in 85 samples, 192 (82%) showed concordance between the first and pooled lavages in terms of identification of organisms. Of these 192, semiquantitative culture results were similar in 186 and differed in 6 (4 greater growth in pooled lavage and 2 greater in first lavage). Of the 42 instances where culture results differed, in 8 cases (3.4%) this represented a known pathogen (4 cases where it grew in first lavage alone, and 4 in the pooled lavage alone). ROC curves demonstrated similar efficacy of pooling and first lavage as diagnostic tools for detection of known pathogens. Bland Altman analysis demonstrated strong agreement between the two methods in terms of detection of inflammation when infection was present. Neutrophil elastase (NE) was detected in 28 samples and undetected in 57. In 4 cases NE was detected in pooled lavage where it was undetected in standard lavage. Mean levels of interleukin-8 (IL-8) were higher in the pooled samples (4776pg/mL) compared to standard lavage (2820pg/mL), showed a greater spread of values and were better able to discriminate between CF and control and between those with and without infection in BAL (not statistically significant). Conclusion: Pooling of BAL allows for the collection of larger volume samples without adversely affecting the relationship between infection and inflammation, and may be better suited to detecting changes in inflammation as a result of treatment interventions. Bechetoille, C. 2 ; Jubeau, L. 2 ; Juarez-Perez, V. 2,1 1. Stragen, Lyon, France; 2. Alaxia SAS, Lyon, France Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is no longer considered a childhood disease. In developed countries, the median survival rate is about 40 years old. This epidemiological change contributes to the emergence of pathogens difficult to treat during the disease evolution. ALX-009 is a fixed combination of two endogenous compounds of the innate immune system, OSCNand lactoferrin (LF), both reduced in CF patients. OSCNdisturbs the cell machinery while LF either acts as iron chelator and/or by direct interaction with bacterial membranes. The combined effects of OSCN -/ bovine LF (bLF) may offer an innovative multitarget strategy to fight resistant pathogens. Material and Methods: ALX-009 was assayed against 79 Achromobacter xylosoxidans (AX), 146 Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC), 20 Burkholderia spp (BSp) and 20 multidrug resistant (MDR) Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PaMDR) clinical isolates. Determination of minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) was performed with the broth microdilution method adapted from the CLSI guideline M07-A9. Time-kill experiments were performed for each species/group by microdilution method as described in the CLSI guideline M26-A, at time points 0, 2, 4, 6, and 24 h with a fixed combination of 80μg/mL OSCNand 4mg/mL bLF. Compound interaction was assayed with a two-dimensional checkerboard test with the broth microdilution method and FIC indexes were calculated. The efficacy of ALX-009 in the presence of complex matrices was tested for biofilms, with the MBEC device, and for sputum (10% w/v), with time-kill assays. Results: ALX-009 is able to inhibit the growth of 100% (n=316) of the bacterial strains tested. Susceptibility ranking based on median MIC values is PaMDR < AX < BSp < BCC. For OSCN -, the MIC median value is 58μg/mL and the MIC range was 12-157μg/mL for the whole series. Despite being generally accepted as bacteriostatic, under the CLSI standardized conditions, bLF inhibits the growth of only 8% (26/316) of strains with a MIC median value of 32mg/mL and a MIC range of 0.25 to 96mg/mL. However, checkerboard analyses showed that bLF interacts positively with OSCN -: its presence reduces the OSCNrequired to inhibit bacterial growth by about 25% (average value) when compared with the MIC values of OSCNalone. The FIC indexes were between 0 and ≤1 for 48% (152/316) isolates. This positive interaction of bLF on the OSCNkilling properties was confirmed by the time-kill experiments: presence of bLF hampers or limits the regrowth of bacteria that may occur with OSCNalone 24h after exposure. Comparison of the MIC values of ALX-009 in planktonic cultures with its minimal biofilm inhibitory concentrations or its MIC value in presence of 10% sputum demonstrates a minimal variation of activity of 0.4 fold for biofilms and an unchanged activity of the combination in the presence of sputum. Conclusion: Taken together, the results confirm the therapeutic potential of ALX-009 against emergent pathogens among the CF population: ALX-009 is a broad-spectrum antibacterial product that preserves its killing capacities in complex biological matrices. ALX-009 may contribute to the future management of lung infections caused by emergent and multiresistant bacteria in CF patients. Introduction: New surrogate parameters are required to assess effects of CFTR modulators, as FEV1 provides restricted sensitivity. Assessment of inflammation in epithelial lining fluid (ELF) is most interesting but lower airway sampling by BAL is limited by invasiveness. In CF upper airway mucosa equally reveals defective CFTR channels, frequently causing chronic rhinosinusitis in CF. The aim of the present study is to assess the potential to discriminate CFTR modulator effects in ELF non-invasively sampled from the upper airways by nasal lavage (NL). Methods: 10 CF patients with a G551D mutation receiving a new ivacaftor (IVA) therapy and attended at the Jena and Innsbruck University CF Centers were included in the prospective study. NL was performed instilling 10 mL of isotonic saline into each nostril with reclined head and closed soft palate. Secretions were collected in a sterile beaker after anteflection of the head. Patients were trained to perform NL sampling at home up to every second day prior and during new IVA therapy. At home secretions were immediately frozen and transferred on ice to the centers and stored at -80°C until assessment of inflammatory mediator concentrations by ELISA (neutrophil elastase (NE)) and multiplexed immunoassays (interleukins (IL)1ß, IL6, IL8). Results: Altogether, 345 NL samples were longitudinally collected from 10 included patients, before and during treatment with IVA. In comparison to NL levels before IVA treatment IL-6 and IL-8 declined by mean from 7.96 pg/mL to 4.64 pg/mL (p=0.020) (1.71 fold) and 634.75 pg/mL to 89.12 pg/mL (p=0.049) (7.12 fold), respectively. Whereas IL1ß and NE appeared to reduce (2.8 to 1.48 pg/mL respective 445.99 to 433.81 ng/mL) these changes were not significant. As in published studies, IVA improved sweat chloride, lung function and body weight in most patients. Conclusion: For the mediators IL6 and IL8, serial home-based sampling of ELF from the upper airways by NL revealed a significant decrease during newly introduced treatment with IVA. For all included patients this novel approach appeared suitable when combined with direct freezing. The noninvasive method is promising for assessment of therapeutic effects of CFTR modulators on airway inflammation. Method to obtain nasal lavage fluid (2 x 10mL of NaCl 0.9%) In cystic fibrosis, loss of CFTR, combined with hyperactivity of ENaC, leads to mucus dehydration and a decrease in airway surface liquid (ASL) height. In healthy lungs, short palate lung and nasal epithelial clone 1 (SPLUNC-1) is secreted by airway epithelia and is a key negative regulator of ENaC. As the effects of SPLUNC-1 are attenuated at acidic pH, the protein fails to negatively regulate ENaC in the CF lung. Previous work has identified an 18-amino acid residue (S18) of the SPLUNC-1 N-terminus that demonstrates regulation of ENaC. Since S18 is unstable in the proteolytic environment of the CF lung, it is not suitable as a therapeutic in CF but provides the basis for the generation of optimized therapeutics. Objective: The objective of this work was to design and validate a novel therapeutic based off S18 which was suitable for treatment of cystic fibrosis. The desired compound would be effective in regulating ASL height and amiloride sensitive current in vitro while also regulating mucus hydration in vivo in the presence of CFTR inhibition. Methods: Human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) derived from healthy and CF lungs were treated with SPX-101 and ASL height and amiloride-sensitive current were determined. To test the in vivo effects of SPX-101, sheep were treated with CFTRinh172 followed 4 hours later by nebulization of placebo or SPX-101 in the presence or absence of hypertonic saline. Tracheal mucus velocity (TMV) was measured hourly for 8 hours. Results: Sequence optimization produced SPX-101, an analog of S18, which demonstrated a ~50,000 fold increased potency in regulating ASL height compared to the parent peptide. Moreover, SPX-101 significantly inhibited amiloride-sensitive currents in both normal and CF-derived HBECs in the subnanomolar range. To test the in vivo effects of SPX-101, sheep were delivered SPX-101 or placebo via nebulization after CFTRinh172. SPX-101 treatment in CFTR-inhibited animals showed a dose-dependent restoration of TMV. Observed increases in TMV were independent of hypertonic saline, suggesting the effects of SPX-101 are more potent than current therapeutics. Conclusions: SPX-101 is a potent regulator or ENaC capable of regulating mucus hydration in vitro and in vivo. Introduction: CFTR affects electrolyte transport in many organs including the gastrointestinal (GI) system, resulting in pancreatic insufficiency, nutritional malabsorption, and significant reductions in GI motility, altering the fecal microbiota and causing mucus adhesion. Distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS) and meconium ileus (MI) due to highly viscous and adhesive intestinal mucus affect many CF patients and cause substantial morbidity and decreased quality of life. We previously showed that the novel and unique biopolymer poly (acetyl, arginyl) glucosamine (PAAG15A), a polycationic polysaccharide that inter-digitates with human mucus and interacts with purified mucin to normalize their structure, decreased the viscosity, elasticity, and adhesivity of CF airway mucus, substantially improving mucociliary transport. We have also shown that a related polymer, PAAG11D, prevented the incidence of DIOS in CFTR -/mice, significantly improving survival and growth. We have turned to the CFTR -/rat to investigate whether PAAG11D can prevent the development of DIOS and also treat documented obstruction. The rat will allow us to evaluate endpoints including diagnostic imaging. A DIOS treatment study is in progress. Methods: In a natural history study, intestine from CFTR -/rats euthanized at 3 or 4 weeks was collected for gross pathology and histopathologic analysis. Stool and serum were collected for ongoing evaluation of inflammation. For the prevention study, due to the early onset of DIOS, CFTR -/rats at 2 weeks of age were randomized and administered PAAG (40 mg/kg/d) by oral gavage once daily (or Golytely or vehicle control) for 21 days while on a regular diet. Body weights and general health were monitored daily. Results: Evaluation of CFTR -/rats at 3 and 4 weeks determined DIOS occurs as early as 2 weeks of age, indicating that intervention is needed at an earlier age than observed in our CFTR -/mice studies. With early PAAG11D treatment, survival was improved and gross examination of intestine displayed obvious obstruction due to DIOS in untreated control rats, compared to healthy-appearing intestines in PAAG11D-and GoLytely-treated CFTR -/rats. Histological evaluation of intestine of control rats indicated epithelial cell sloughing and crypts dilated with adherent mucus. There also appeared to be increased bacterial load and prominent mucosal inflammation. Conclusions: Currently, no treatments are intended to address the underlying adhesive properties of CF mucus that cause impacted mucus, stool, and associated inflammation, representing a significant unmet medical need. CFTR -/rats develop DIOS as early as 2 weeks of age. Intervention with the novel biopolymer PAAG11D prevented the development of DIOS in CFTR -/rats, improving survival and growth. These data provide a strong basis to evaluate the effect of PAAG11D and other anti-adhesive mucolytic therapies on CF intestinal disease in humans. Introduction: Forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) can be used to measure individual CFTR residual function. The aim of this study is 1) to compare CFTR residual function in intestinal organoids with current diagnostic tools sweat chloride concentration (SCC) and intestinal current measurement (ICM), and 2) to validate the predictive capacity of this model for clinical outcome parameters in infants with CF. This study is part of the HIT-CF program. Methods: In the CF clinics of the University Medical Center Utrecht and Erasmus MC Rotterdam, infants with CF who are identified by newborn screening, are enrolled in a monitoring protocol, which is pioneered by the Australian CF research group (AREST-CF). This protocol includes biannual bronchoscopy with collection of BALF and chest CT, starting at the age of 1. At the age of 1 year patients also undergo a rectal biopsy for ICM. After performing ICM, organoids are cultured from the residual materials and FIS is measured. Severity of CF lung disease is scored using a PRAGMA score method which reflects bronchiectasis, bronchial thickening, air trapping and mucus plugging. Results: CFTR measurements and clinical parameters of 17 infants with 12 different genotypes are analyzed. FIS correlates with ICM and SCC, r = 0.78 and -0.64, respectively, both p< 0.01. Children with high FIS values have lower values of IRT (immunoreactive trypsinogen), are more often pancreatic sufficient and have lower CT PRAGMA scores at age of 1 year when compared to children with lower FIS values: 165 (134-213) versus 123 (79-141) μg/mL, p 0.05; 100 versus 22%, p 0.02 and 0.89 (0.62-2.85) versus 3.81 (1.76-7.62)% disease, p 0.03, respectively. High versus low SCC is only significant related to fecal elastase values (p< 0.01), while ICM has no relation with any clinical parameter. Conclusions: FIS of intestinal organoids correlates well with currently established CFTR-dependent biomarkers SCC and ICM. Stratification for FIS appears to better identify subgroups that differ in pulmonary and gastrointestinal clinical outcome parameters when compared to SCC or ICM. Introduction: Forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) of intestinal organoids can be used to measure individual CFTR residual function. The aim of this study is to analyse relations between FIS and clinical outcome parameters in adults with CF with homozygous F508del mutations. This study is part of the HIT-CF program. Methods: Multicentre observational study. During a study visit subjects underwent a rectal biopsy as well as chest CT and pulmonary function tests. Relevant diagnostic and clinical parameters were collected from all outpatient visits during the five years before the study visit and at the age of 12. Forskolin-induced swelling (FIS) is measured in cultured intestinal organoids as parameter for CFTR activity. Results: Data of 38 patients with CF were collected and analysed. Subjects whose organoids demonstrate higher FIS values (n=19) versus lower FIS values have higher BMI (19.6 (17.9-22.5) versus 18. 2 (16.4-19. 2) kg/ m2, p = 0.008), and tend to have lower Crispin-Norman scores at chest X-ray (18.0 (11.5-20.5) versus 21.5 (17.3-23.8), p = 0.059) and higher mean FEV1 during the last year (2.6 (2.1-3.2) versus 1.9 (1.3-3.0) ltr, p = 0.08). Conclusion: Preliminary data suggest that FIS of intestinal organoids can define clinically distinct subgroups in adult homozygous F508del subjects, implicating CFTR residual function as modifier of disease in subjects with identical CF-causing mutations. In-frame premature termination codons (PTCs) comprise 11% of all disease-associated mutations. Translation of PTC-harboring mRNAs generates truncated proteins that are unstable and/or lack normal function. Drugs have been identified that suppress translation termination at a PTC to restore full-length protein (also referred to as readthrough of the PTC). A subset of aminoglycosides has been shown to induce PTC readthrough, but the amount of full-length protein generated by these drugs has not been sufficient to correct the phenotype of many diseases, including cystic fibrosis (CF). Furthermore, aminoglycoside toxicity limits their long-term clinical use. In addition, PTCs also frequently elicit nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). NMD is a conserved mRNA surveillance pathway that preferentially degrades PTC-containing mRNAs, thereby diminishing the pool of mRNAs available for translation and PTC readthrough. Most current compounds induce PTC suppression or mediate NMD inhibition alone, although a few have the capacity to mediate both responses to some extent. The goal of this study is to develop a reporter system that will allow us to systematically identify new compounds with the ability to simultaneously induce PTC suppression and reduce NMD, which would provide the optimal therapeutic potential for CF patients. Here, we describe the development and characterization of NanoLuc luciferase-based dual RT/NMD reporters as well as NMD-only and RTonly control reporters in Fischer rat thyroid (FRT) cells. The response of these reporters to PTC suppression and NMD inhibition was tested by the treatment of cells with a variety of PTC suppressors and NMD inhibitors both individually and together. Our results show that NMD inhibition alone increased the NanoLuc luciferase activity and the mRNA abundance expressed from the dual RT/NMD reporter by 1.5-4 fold. Treatment with a variety of readthrough drugs increased NanoLuc activity 2-50 fold. Importantly, the combination of NMD inhibitors and readthrough drugs increased NanoLuc activity by as much as 700-fold (depending on the PTC context and the cell line). The synergistic effect of combining NMD inhibition with readthrough observed with the dual RT/NMD reporter was not seen in the NMD-only and RT-only controls. These results demonstrate that this new NanoLuc luciferase-based RT/NMD reporter system can be used to simultaneously monitor both NMD inhibition and PTC suppression. We anticipate that the use of this system will allow the identification of new, more effective compounds for the treatment of CF in patients that harbor PTCs. Introduction: Lumacaftor and ivacaftor combination therapy is expected to debut in the Netherlands in 2016 as standard care for patients above 12 years of age who are homozygous for the p.Phe508del mutation. It is known that drug responses to this therapy may vary significantly and it is not clear yet which patients will benefit most. Recent developments enable us to assess the effects of CFTR-modifying drugs in vitro with a functional CFTR assay using patient-derived intestinal organoids (Dekkers JF, et al. Nat Med. 2013; 19:939-45) . This assay may facilitate future personalized medicine approaches, by predicting clinical responses based on the effects on the function of CFTR p.Phe508del mutant proteins in organoids. The objective of this project is to evaluate the clinical response to treatment with lumacaftor/ivacaftor in patients with homozygous p.Phe508del mutations and to assess the in vitro-in vivo correspondence of this response. This project is part of the HIT-CF program. Methods: We aim to measure treatment effects of two times daily 200/125 mg lumacaftor/ivacaftor therapy after six months of treatment in one hundred and sixty p.Phe508del patients. To evaluate the clinical response, baseline measurements are performed, including quality of life (CFQ-R), lung function (FEV 1 , expressed as % predicted), body mass index (BMI), sweat chloride concentration (SCC) and rate of pulmonary exacerbations during the preceding period of six months. Concurrently intestinal stem cell cultures will be derived from rectal biopsies, and tested for therapy-induced activity of the CFTR protein. Subsequently in vitro-in vivo correspondence of treatment will be evaluated. Results: Currently baseline measurements have been performed in 158 patients. The median age is 23 years (IQR 16-29) and 52% of the patients are male. The measurements show a large variability in disease severity. The median score of the CFQ-R respiratory domain is 72.2 (IQR 55.6-83.3), FEV 1 71% predicted (IQR 55-86), BMI 20.3 kg/m 2 (IQR 18.6-22.1) and SCC 95 mmol/L (IQR 89-101). Preliminary data of in vitro organoid CFTR responses to lumacaftor/ivacaftor show quite variable responses in individual patients. Updated results will be presented at the conference. Conclusion: The results of this project will facilitate personalized medicine approaches for lumacaftor/ivacaftor combination therapy in homozygous p.Phe508del patients with CF, by validating the predictive capacity of drug testing in intestinal organoids in vitro. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is characterised by neutrophil-dominated airway inflammation, in part attributable to the potent chemotactic agent interleukin-8 (IL-8). High levels of both neutrophil elastase (NE) and IL-8 have been found in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of patients with CF. Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is an acute phase protein that possesses both immune regulatory and anti-inflammatory properties. This glycosylated protein is posttranslationally modified via the addition of Nglycosidically linked oligosaccharides such as sialic acid, giving rise to different glycoforms. The aim of this study was to investigate the ability of AAT versus AAT with increased sialylation (sAAT) to inhibit IL-8 signaling. The biological consequence of the AAT-induced inhibition was investigated at the level of neutrophil chemotaxis. Methods: BALF was obtained from patients with CF (n=16) or healthy controls (n=10). The level of IL-8 in BALF was quantified via ELISA. The active level of NE in CF BALF was quantified by a specific fluorescence resonance energy transfer substrate (FRET). AAT was purified from human plasma using Alpha-1-Select Resin. AAT glycoforms were determined by isoelectrical focusing. The ability of AAT or sAAT to inhibit NE (500nM) was determined via FRET. The ability of sAAT or AAT (5μg/mL) to bind IL-8 (10ng/mL) was determined by slot blot. Neutrophil chemotaxis in response to IL-8 (10ng/mL) in the presence of AAT or sAAT (1mg/mL) was measured in a Boyden chamber. Statistical significance was obtained by Student's-t test, Mann-Whitney test, or one-way ANOVA followed by a post hoc Bonferroni test. Ethical approval was granted from Beaumont Ethics committee. Results: Ex vivo analysis demonstrated significantly higher levels of IL-8 in BALF of patients with CF compared to healthy controls (n=10, p=0.04). The active level of NE found in CF BALF ranged from 2.03 -18.17nM (n=6). Results of FRET analysis demonstrated no significant difference in the anti-NE capacity of AAT compared to sAAT (n=3, ns). Slot blot analysis revealed that sAAT bound higher levels of IL-8 compared to AAT (n=6, p=0.002). The neutrophil chemotactic index in response to IL-8 was significantly reduced in the presence of sAAT in comparison to AAT (n=3, p<0.001). Conclusion: In conclusion, this study demonstrates the altered binding capacity of sAAT, as sAAT binds IL-8 to a greater extent than AAT. By binding this CXC chemokine sAAT modulates neutrophil migration. The results of this study indicate that sAAT can inhibit IL-8 signaling and further justifies the use of this glycoform of AAT with increased sialic acid residues as an effective aerosolised treatment for CF. This study was funded by SFI, grant number 11/RFP/BMT/3094. . We sought to determine rates of adverse events and discontinuation at our cystic fibrosis center. Methods: Observational analysis of the 451 adult and pediatric (n = 234, 217) patients in the Vanderbilt University Medical Center cystic fibrosis clinic was performed. Patients were analyzed based on their eligibility to receive lumacaftor-ivacaftor. The medical records of patients who had received the medication were reviewed to determine the date of medication initiation as well as any adverse events experienced. Lastly, records were analyzed to determine if and why the medication had been discontinued. Data were collected through 05/05/2016. Results: Lumacaftor-ivacaftor was initiated in 25 adults and 9 children (n=34). Of these, 85.3% (n = 21 adults, 8 children) experienced an adverse event, and 23.5% (n = 4 adults, 4 children) experienced a serious adverse event. The most common adverse event was infectious pulmonary exacerbation in 16/29 patients (55.1%) requiring oral or IV antibiotics. Other common adverse events included chest tightness in 9/29 patients (31.0%), diarrhea in 3/29 (10.3%), abdominal pain in 3/29 (10.3%), and dyspnea in 3/29 (10.3%). Medication was discontinued in 29.4% (n = 8 adults, 2 children) of patients due to adverse events. Of those who discontinued, the average duration of therapy was 72.0 (±55.5) days. The most serious adverse event in our clinic population was respiratory failure which occurred on two instances in the same patient both within 24 hours of initiating/reinitiating lumacaftor-ivacaftor therapy. Conclusions: This report of our single-center experience describes tolerance of lumacaftor-ivacaftor in both adult and pediatric patients outside of a randomized controlled trial. We report similar rates of adverse and serious adverse events to the TRAFFIC and TRANSPORT studies; however, we report a much higher discontinuation rate. This difference may relate to medication use by patients in our center whose characteristics deviate from those studies' inclusion/exclusion criteria. It is also possible that both a participant bias among study subjects towards continuation, as well as the process of clinical decision-making outside of a research study environment, may contribute to these observed differences in discontinuation rates. The volume and composition of the airway surface liquid (ASL), a thin layer of fluid covering the luminal (apical) surface of the airway epithelium, are important in maintaining ciliary function, mucociliary clearance, and antimicrobial properties of the airway. In CF, these homeostatic mechanisms are impaired, leading to a dehydrated and acidic ASL. ASL volume depletion in CF is secondary to defective anion transport by CFTR. Abnormal CFTR-mediated bicarbonate transport creates an unfavorable, acidic environment, which impairs antimicrobial function and alters mucus properties and clearance. These disease mechanisms create a disordered airway milieu, consisting of thick mucopurulent secretions and chronic bacterial infection. We previously reported that aerosol brevenal, a natural product produced by the dinoflagellate, Karenia brevis, augments wholelung mucociliary clearance and its surrogate marker, tracheal mucus velocity (TMV), when nebulized to sheep with diminished CFTR activity due to aerosol challenge with CFTRinh-172 or CFTRinh-172 with human neutrophil elastase. Brevenal is a potent voltage-sensitive sodium channel (VSSC) inhibitor (10 -8 ), not yet known to be expressed in epithelial cells. Brevenal does not affect ENaC or CFTR, suggesting it may alter the function of other ion transporters to affect ASL depth and augment mucus clearance. Here, we used one-micron resolution optical coherence tomography (μOCT) to examine the effect of brevenal on ASL depth in CF primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells homozygous for F508del. At 24 hours, brevenal-treated (1 μM, basolateral) cells exhibited significantly higher ASL depth (11.02 ± 1.3, P<0.001) vs vehicle control (7.66 ± 0.6), and compared favorably to treatment with positive control (9.30 ± 0.3) corrector-potentiator therapy (lumacaftor (VX-809, 3 μM) and ivacaftor (VX-770, 10 μM)). Augmented ASL depth was not observed at 6 hours, reflecting the kinetics of this pathway. Compared to baseline, the change in ASL depth at 24 hours with brevenal treatment was 4.00 ± 1.2 (P<0.05) vs 1.62 ± 0.7 (P=NS) with vehicle control and 3.54 ± 0.4 (P<0.001) with lumacaftor-ivacaftor. Brevenal had no effect on ciliary beat frequency (-0.17 ± 0.3 Hz) after 24 hours. Analysis of changes in mucociliary transport are in progress. Overall, these results indicate that brevenal augments ASL depth without altering ciliary beating in F508del primary HBE monolayers, and is active even when added to the basolateral compartment. This partially explains how brevenal augmented mucociliary transport in sheep, and suggests the need for further mechanistic studies to determine its molecular target. If confirmed, VSSC inhibitors may be a therapeutic target to augment ASL depth in CF. Brevenal may be beneficial as an adjuvant therapy to improve ASL depth and mucociliary clearance in CF patients. Poor airway clearance associated with abnormally viscoelastic airway mucus is an important target for CF therapy. Airway mucins are unusually cysteine (Cys)-rich and show increased intra-and inter-molecular disulfide bonding under oxidizing conditions. However, systemic or inhaled mucolytic agents such as N-acetyl Cys are general reductants that exhibit poor clinical efficacy, as well as off-target toxicity and low tolerability. Replacement with more potent and disulfide-specific enzymatic reductants has the potential to create pharmacologically superior drugs. Human thioredoxin-1 (Txn) is a highly selective disulfide bond-reducing enzyme normally secreted into the airway with strong activity on CF sputum viscoelasticity at micromolar concentrations. To optimize Txn as an inhaled agent, we engineered a nonsystemic thiol-trapping variant (ORP-100S, Theradux™) to enable stable, covalent linkage to mucin disulfide bonds. Theradux and native Txn both have unusually low Cys thiol pKa (6.3), thus increasing disulfide-reducing activity several 1000-fold vs classical thiol agents (pKa 8.7 -9.5), which are largely inactive in vivo in the neutral-to-acidic CF airway. Previously, we demonstrated that Theradux 1) does not induce inflammation in rats on aerosol inhalation in vivo or in human cells in vitro, and 2) normalizes the viscoelasticity of expectorated human CF sputum to a greater degree than native Txn or other thiol agents. We therefore hypothesized that Theradux will improve mucus transportability. To evaluate this, we used primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) monolayers to examine mucus transportability in situ following 3-h treatment with Theradux (1 mM) vs DTT (1.6 mM) and PBS control via one-micron resolution optical coherence tomography (μOCT). Theradux-treated cells exhibited increased mucociliary transport (2.18 ± 0.3 mm/min, P<0.01) vs PBS (0.05 ± 0.007 mm/min) that exceeded the effect of DTT (1.41 ± 0.1 mm/min). Ciliary beating also was increased with Theradux treatment (13.87 ± 0.4 Hz, P=0.06), as observed with DTT (16.17 ± 0.8 Hz) but not vehicle control (10.62 ± 1.1 Hz). Both viscous and elastic moduli of CF HBE mucus were reduced following treatment ex vivo with 1 mM Theradux, and analysis of changes in viscosity in situ are in progress. These results indicate that reducing disulfide bonds by Theradux increases mucus transportability, and suggest that Theradux may be a potential CF treatment by acting as an efficacious modifier of excess mucin viscoelasticity while optimized for activity across a broad airway pH microenvironment. Nonsense mediated mRNA decay (NMD) operates with variable efficiency and does not completely degrade all transcripts containing nonsense mutations. We have tested the hypothesis that nonsense mutations vary in their effect on mRNA stability and protein synthesis and that this information can be used to inform treatment. First, we determined mRNA and protein characteristics of 18 nonsense mutations selected from exons 22, 25, 26 and 27 of CFTR. We have utilized expression minigenes that contain full-length or abridged introns into the plasmid containing CFTR cDNA. We observed significant reduction in CFTR transcript generated from 14 mutations. Protein processing in Flpin 293 cells revealed that 2/9 mutant proteins from exon 22, and 7/9 from exons 25-27 were core glycosylated; while 7/9 from exon 22 and 2/9 from exons 25-27 were complex glycosylated. Localization studies in polarized MDCK cells revealed that core-glycosylated truncated proteins were cytosolic in distribution; while complex-glycosylated truncated proteins had both basolateral and apical distribution. Second, residual CFTR function retained by the truncation mutations (n=11) was determined by short-circuit current (Isc) measurements in MDCK Flp-in stable cell lines. Truncation mutations fell into three broad groups: (A) Four mutations (eg, R1158X) that produced core-glycosylated protein generated currents <1%; (B) Five mutations (eg, S1196X) that synthesized truncated glycosylated protein generated currents 1-5%; and (C) Two mutations in the very last exon (eg, S1455X) generated currents >35% of WT CFTR. Next, we evaluated whether CFTR truncated proteins can be corrected and/or potentiated. Isc values relative to WT after a combination treatment of VX-809 (3 μM/48 h) and VX-770 (10 μM/acute) showed: No improvement in R1158X from group A, 25.2±3.4% in S1196X from group B, and 61.2.5±5.1% in S1455X from group C. Lastly, we tested the role of NMD inhibition in the final outcome of corrector and potentiator therapy. R1158X didn't show any improvement in chloride transport after 18 h treatment with either caffeine (10 mM) or azacytidine (1.56 μM). Interestingly, both caffeine and azacytidine in combination with VX-809+VX-770 resulted in 43.5±5.1% and 37.5±3.9% increase respectively in Isc values of S1196X. Taken together, nonsense mutations that permit translation of stable glycosylated proteins can be corrected and /or potentiated to therapeutic levels. Their response to the small molecule corrector and potentiator treatments is further augmented by NMD inhibition. This work was supported by the CFF, MDBR and NIH. Great progress has been made in the development of disease modifying therapies for cystic fibrosis (CF). Ivacaftor and lumacaftor not only provide proof-of-concept for CFTR as a therapeutic target, but they also deliver first-in-class medicines for more than 50% of CF patients. Nonsense or premature termination codon (PTC) mutations are found on at least one allele in approximately 10% of CF cases overall. There is an urgent unmet need of therapeutic development for CFTR mutations in this class. We have developed high-throughput screening assays for CFTR nonsense mutation readthrough modulators based on the trafficking of CFTR. A reporter, horseradish peroxidase (HRP), is fused into an extracellular loop of CFTR. Such construct allows a robust readout for CFTR at the cell surface. Stable cell lines expressing the CFTR-HRP fusion proteins have been generated in FRT cells. Three assays have been developed representing CFTR PTC mutants Y122X, G542X, or W1282X. Y122X results in a UAA (ochre) stop codon, while both G542X and W1282X mutations are UGA (opal) stop codons. In the HTS assays existing readthrough modulators, such as geneticin (G418) and gentamicin, increase the reporter signal in a dose-dependent manner. Approximately eighty thousand compounds have been screened on two PTC mutants (Y122X and W1282X) of CFTR. The hit rates at the cutoff of 50% over vehicle are 1.9% and 1.4% for CFTR Y122X and CFTR W1282X, respectively. The overlap of the two hit sets at this stringent hit threshold is relatively small, about 20% of the hits from Y122X screen were hits also in the W1282X screen. The overlap increases to ~50% if compounds are included that in the second screen achieve only the least stringent hit criterion, ie, HRP activity greater than three standard deviations above the mean of the negative control. Current efforts aim to identify readthrough agents that are efficacious for multiple PTC mutations of CFTR. Hit confirmation in the original screening assays is almost complete. Hit profiling in three assays, representing Y122X, G542X, and W1282X mutations of CFTR, will help identify hits with pan-PTC efficacies. Given that essential cellular processes involved in translation are potentially impacted in the readthrough of PTC mutations, we also test the hits for cytotoxicity. Our initial results demonstrate a high hit confirmation rate with complex hit profiles due to the apparent differential allelic preference. Full-length readthrough products of CFTR have been detected when FRT cells expressing CFTR Y122X were incubated with a hit compound. Ongoing hit analysis, by means of analyzing readthrough protein products and mRNA levels, targets clustering confirmed hits and will cast light on mechanism-of-action and therapeutic potential of the hits. This study was intended to characterize features of molecular pathogenesis related to W1282X CFTR protein folding and channel gating. Based on expression protocols using isogenic Flp-In ™ -derived Fischer rat thyroid (FRT) cells, W1282X (truncated) protein levels were markedly diminished compared to wild-type, and partially rescued by chronic treatment with VX-770 and VX-809. Prolonged incubation with G418 accentuated increases in both W1282X mRNA and protein, in a fashion unrelated to translational readthrough. In addition, W1282X protein could be increased with proteasome inhibitors ALLN or MG132, demonstrating importance of proteasomal degradation of the truncated mutant. In order to determine amounts of W1282X CFTR at the cell surface under various conditions, a horseradish peroxidase (HRP) tag was inserted on an externally directed segment of W1282X CFTR. Cell-based chemiluminescence and FACS were then performed to monitor surface expression of CFTR-HRP following exposure to correctors and/or potentiators. Chronic treatment with VX-809 marginally increased the HRP signal. However, combined treatment with VX-809 and VX-770 resulted in marked enhancement of HRP by 30-or 27-fold in the presence or absence of G418, respectively. Flow cytometry supported these findings, indicating that CFTR W1282X-HRP traffics minimally to the cell surface, but can be augmented when CFTR modulators are given in combination. We and others have reported previously that W1282X CFTR maintains low level residual function as an ion channel. Ussing chamber studies demonstrate that treatment with either VX-770 or VX-809 acutely induces activation. We also show that W1282X CFTR exhibits a significant channel gating defect, and activity in the membrane patch can be substantially increased by VX-770 or curcumin. Taken together, our results suggest that CFTR truncated at position 1282 leads to protein that is poorly functional. We speculate that absence of the carboxy terminal PDZ domain and/or portions of NBD2 that participate in domain swapping may confer defects in overall stability. Small molecules developed to address the W1282X mutation may therefore be required to: 1) improve mRNA stability, 2) enhance protein maturation, and 3) overcome abnormal channel gating. This is in addition to promoting readthrough of the nonsense codon. In summary, our evaluation provides a framework for drug discovery relevant to W1282X and other prematurely truncated In-frame premature termination codons (PTCs) account for 11% of all disease-associated mutations. PTC suppression therapy utilizes small molecules that suppress translation termination at PTCs to partially restore synthesis of full-length proteins. PTC suppression is mediated by base pairing of a near-cognate aminoacyl-tRNA with a PTC. However, little is known about the identity of the amino acids inserted during PTC suppression in mammalian cells, or how the sequence context surrounding PTCs influences amino acid incorporation. Here we used a reporter system to determine the amino acids inserted at the CFTR-G542X and CFTR-W1282X PTCs (both UGA codons) in the context of their natural three upstream and downstream CFTR codons during G418-mediated suppression. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS-MS) revealed that leucine (58%), cysteine (38%) and tryptophan (4%) are inserted in the CFTR-W1282X context following UGA suppression. Interestingly, these amino acids and their proportions are significantly different from those identified following suppression of the CFTR-G542X UGA mutation, which are cysteine (44%), tryptophan (36%) and arginine (20%). These results demonstrate for the first time that the local sequence context plays a key role in determining the amino acids inserted during PTC suppression (and their relative proportions). We found that some of the variants generated by suppression exhibit reduced CFTR maturation and activity compared to wild-type CFTR. Both a CFTR corrector (VX-809) and potentiator (VX-770) enhanced activity of many of the variants induced by G418-mediated suppression. These results suggest that PTC suppression in combination with CFTR modulators may be beneficial for the treatment of CF patients with PTCs. We are in the process of validating reporters to determine the amino acids that are inserted during suppression of the CFTR-R553X and CFTR-R1162X PTCs and their effect on CFTR function. In addition, we are also constructing reporters to examine suppression at other PTCs that have been identified in CF patients. These studies provide important mechanistic details of PTC suppression to aid the selection of more effective drugs that are tailored to specific CFTR nonsense mutations. Rationale: Almost half of all CF patients experience some form of intestinal obstruction during their lifetime including meconium ileus, distal intestinal obstruction syndrome or the less severe but underdiagnosed constipation. Current treatments vary in the degree of effectiveness from patient to patient and new therapies are necessary. Linzess, a novel drug used the treatment of irritable bowel syndrome with chronic constipation, has not been widely prescribed in CF patients to treat intestinal issues since activation of CFTR is thought to be the main mechanism of action. The aim of this study was to test the effectiveness of Linzess in treating intestinal obstructions in CF and if effective, identifying the CFTR-dependent or CFTR-independent mechanism of action. Methods: Linzess increases intestinal luminal water content as an agonist for the guanylate cyclase C receptor, increasing cGMP and activating CFTR. To test for activation of mutant CFTR at the epithelial membrane, intestines from CF mice carrying the F508del mutation were utilized to test for improvements in CFTR activation, intestinal motility, intestinal fluid transport, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and intestinal histology. Intestines from CF mice carrying a null Cftr allele were also utilized to test for possible CFTR-independent mechanisms of improving the CF intestine. Results: Intestinal short-circuit current (I sc ) indicating CFTR function was measured in Ussing chambers utilizing intestinal sections from wild-type (WT) and F508del mice. After exposure to Linzess (10μM), WT intestines displayed significant increases in I sc (35 μA/cm 2 ) while F508del intestines displayed no increase in I sc . CF mice display significantly slowed intestinal transit compared to WT mice (2.82±0.27 vs 6.16±0.32 geometric center of fluorescence (GCF); P<0.05). After one exposure to Linzess (50μg/kg) both F508del and null CF mice displayed significantly improved intestinal transit (5.74±0.41 and 5.16±0.39 GCF respectively; P<0.05 compared to untreated CF). Studies are ongoing to investigate additional aspects of intestinal CF improvement such as intestinal fluid transport, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and intestinal histology. In addition, 7 out of 10 CF patients at our CF center who have received the FDA-approved Linzess have reported improved intestinal symptoms. Conclusions: Linzess is effective in improving CF intestinal manifestations through a CFTR-independent mechanism. Intestines from CF mice carrying either the F508del or null Cftr alleles displayed improved intestinal transit and increased fluid retention. Initial studies suggest that Linzess may block intestinal sodium absorption in the CF intestine improving the CF intestinal environment and possibly decreasing intestinal obstructions. Background: Progression of CF lung disease is induced by episodic infectious events called acute pulmonary exacerbations (PEx). These episodes indicate either acquisition of new bacterial infection or a change in the density of previously colonizing bacteria. PEx are poorly defined and difficult to diagnose in the setting of chronic inflammation. Currently, there is no biochemical test to diagnose CF pulmonary exacerbations and no consensus diagnostic criteria for what constitutes an exacerbation. Neutrophil CD64 expression is highly specific to acute infection, even on a background of chronic inflammation, and is diagnostic of acute bacterial infection in subjects with sepsis and rheumatoid arthritis. We hypothesized that a quantitative flow cytometry assay to measure CD64 expression directly off circulating CF neutrophils could sensitively predict acute exacerbations and reflect neutrophil phagocytic activity at the time of acute exacerbation. Methods: CF patients in baseline health and diagnosed with PEx were enrolled under an IRB approved protocol. PEx patients were diagnosed based on current CFF guidelines by a faculty member of the Colorado Adult CF Program. Blood samples from CF patients and healthy controls were stained with CD64 and CD14 antibodies. CD64 expression on neutrophils was quantitated utilizing Quantum MESF beads in a FACSCanto II at a CAP/CLIA, ISO5189 certified laboratory in National Jewish Health. Phagocytosis activity of isolated neutrophils was measured with the Cyto-Select phagocytosis assay (Cellbiolabs, CA), under baseline and interferon stimulated conditions. Cytochalasin D was used as the phagocytosis-inhibitor control. Superoxide anion generation by neutrophils was measured by the reduction of cytochrome C. Results: To date, CD64 measurements in 79 patients (39 baseline and 40 PEx) and 10 healthy non-CF subjects have demonstrated differences between the expression of CD64 in PEx and baseline patients (p<0.05), as well as PEx patients and healthy non-CF subjects (p<0.005). When comparing ability to phagocytose heat-inactivated E. coli, circulating neutrophils in PEx patients showed significant differences when compared to CF patients at baseline (n=17, p<0.05). PEx neutrophils also demonstrated reduced capacity to generate superoxide anion, when compared to CF subjects in baseline health. Conclusions: Neutrophil CD64 is a promising candidate in the diagnosis of pulmonary exacerbations. The test can be run on only 100 μl of whole blood and results are available within 24-48 hours, from a CAP/ CLIA, ISO5189 certified laboratory. Circulating CF neutrophils at the time of exacerbation, and differences in oxidative burst and phagocytosis activity are directly assayable from peripheral blood. Study supported by the Colorado Bioscience Discovery Evaluation Program. Abnormal airway smooth muscle (ASM) function is thought to contribute to airway hyperreactivity. In cystic fibrosis (CF), airway hyperresponsiveness has been frequently reported and suggests that an altered ASM physiology may contribute to CF airway disease. We have previously shown that the newborn CFTR-/-pig displays ASM abnormalities prior to the onset of inflammation or infection including increased basal tone, increased bronchodilator response, and decreased calcium reuptake. The goals of this study were to: 1) identify whole genome transcriptional and proteomic changes in porcine CF ASM prior to airway inflammation and infection, 2) investigate whether specific pathways are associated with CF airway reactivity, and 3) determine if the CF pig ASM transcriptome can be used to identify potential ASM therapeutics for CF and other airway narrowing diseases. Total RNA sequencing of newborn non-CF and CF ASM revealed differential and significant changes in muscle contraction related genes, ontologies, and pathways. High-throughput ELISA protein comparisons between non-CF and CF ASM cells revealed complementary pathway dysregulation. The genomic and proteomic signatures were used to perform pathway analysis. Large-scale changes in transcript, protein abundance, and phosphorylation status were significantly different in PI3K/AKT and MAPK controlled pathways in CF samples. PYK2, a calcium-sensitive tyrosine kinase known to be an upstream regulator of both PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways, showed increased phosphorylation status suggesting increased activity. We then used a small molecule inhibitor of PYK2 to test whether blocking PYK2 activation could alter airway contractility. Wild-type precision cut lung slices pretreated with the kinase inhibitor demonstrated decreased airway narrowing in response to cholinergic stimulation compared to DMSO controls. Additionally, pretreatment with the compound in isolated wild-type smooth muscle strips diminished force production and decreased myosin light chain phosphorylation. These studies show that loss of CFTR in ASM causes genome-wide transcriptional and proteomic changes, including expected alterations in muscle contraction transcripts and proteins. Analysis of transcriptional and proteomic changes revealed significant dysregulation of PI3K/AKT and MAPK pathways suggesting a basis for changes in contractile machinery, cytoskeletal arrangement, and transcription factor activity. Additionally, we were able to identify a novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor that can modulate ASM function. By recognizing the newborn CF pig as a model of ASM hyperreactivity absent inflammation, we can enhance our molecular understanding of ASM biology and pathophysiology in addition to discovering novel therapeutics for airflow limitation. Supported by American Asthma Foundation. Background: Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) catalyzes the conversion of tryptophan (T) to kynurenine (K). Elevated levels of IDO have been detected in association with respiratory diseases, including cystic fibrosis (CF). The increased level of IDO activity during infection is believed to be due to the host cells and the pathogen(s). The increased levels of IDO modulates the immune response against microbial pathogens in chronic infections, including respiratory diseases such as CF. Since active infection in CF patients is associated with exacerbation (EXBN) we hypothesized that elevated levels of IDO would be detected in the plasma of CF patients during an EXBN. The primary objective of this study was to examine the level of IDO activity by determining the relative amounts of K and T in plasma of CF patients with and without EXBN. Methods: Heparinized blood was collected from control (CONT) and EXBN CF patients. Plasma was collected, treated with trichloroacetic acid and the clear supernatant was used to determine K and T levels. K and T were separated on a C18 RP column (4.5 mm x 150 mm) using a Shimadzu HPLC system (mobile phase: 15 mM acetic acid-sodium acetate (pH 4.0) with 2.7% acetonitrile, 1.0 mL/min). HPLC grade K, T and 3-nitro-L-tyrosine were used as external and internal standards. K (360 nm) and T (278 nm) were detected using a UV detector. The K and T levels were determined from standard curves. The K/T ratio which represents the relative activity of IDO was calculated from the K and T levels for each patient. Results: Detectable levels of K and T were observed in 14 patients each in either CONT or EXBN groups. The mean K levels in the CONT and the EXBN patients were 1.29±0.17 μM (range 1.01-1.70 μM) and 1.47±0.55 μM (range 1.02-3.08 μM), respectively. Similarly, the mean T levels in the CONT and the EXBN patients were 21.38±5.72 μM (range 12.60-36.34 μM) and 17.38±6.72 μM (range 6.55-30.03 μM), respectively. The mean K/T ratio for the CONT and the EXBN patients were 0.0359±0.0115 (range 0.0213-0.0585) and 0.0556±0.0341 (range 0.0221-0.1346), respectively. A comparison of the K/T ratio for the CONT and the EXBN patients showed that it is significantly higher (p=0.0504) in the EXBN patients. Conclusions: The K/T ratio which represents the relative activity of IDO was significantly higher in CF patients with EXBN compared to non-EXBN patients. The plasma level IDO activity has the potential to be used as a biomarker for the onset of EXBN in CF patients. (2):175-84). In our initial analysis of whole lung MCC by gamma scintigraphy we were unable to determine whether MCC was improved only in the previously well-ventilated regions of lung or whether improved ventilation following treatment may have also allowed for enhanced MCC from lung regions where particles could not previously deposit. Methods: More recently we applied new analytical methods for determining heterogeneity of deposition and time-dependent retention on a pixel-by-pixel basis at two participating sites (UNC and JHU) where fiducial markers were used to accurately align the gamma scintigraphy images. At baseline and 1 month after beginning treatment with ivacaftor in CF patients with the G551D mutation (n=13), deposition and retention images were obtained immediately following inhalation of radiolabeled particles (Tc99m-sulfur colloid, 5μm MMAD) under controlled breathing conditions, and after 60 minutes of particle clearance. Results: We found improved homogeneity of deposition, ie, decreased regions of higher (hot) and lower (cold) particle deposition in the lungs (Bennett WD, et al. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2015; 28:211-8) , following ivacaftor treatment; mean number ratio (NR) of hot pixels relative to lung size decreased from 0.14 to 0.09 (p=0.005) and mean NR of cold from 0.23 to 0.19 (p=0.001). Both NR of hot and cold pixels were significantly correlated with FEV1%pred for all subjects pre-and postivacaftor treatment. In other words, following ivacaftor treatment there were 1) fewer sites of obstruction associated with particle deposition by impaction (ie, decreased hot regions); and 2) recruitment of previously unventilated lung units during particle inhalation (ie, decreased cold regions). Whole lung clearance was improved following treatment, mean clearance through 60 min = 10 vs 25% (p < 0.05). Pixel-level analysis of clearance showed that the fraction of noncold pixels clearing greater than 30% at 60 min was increased from 0.13 to 0.32 (p=0.002), indicating recruitment of more fast-clearing regions with ivacaftor treatment. Conclusions: Ivacaftor treatment in CF with the G551D mutation improves 1) homogeneity of particle deposition, likely due to improved regional ventilation; and 2) clearance from a greater fraction of the whole lung, findings that may enhance understanding of the mechanism of action for ivacaftor. Furthermore, the image analysis methods used here may provide more sensitive measures of changes in deposition and mucociliary clearance associated with therapeutic intervention in patients with airways disease. Supported by CF Foundation and NIH P01 HL108808. Introduction: Nasal potential difference (NPD) measurements are believed to reflect in vivo function of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein. NPD showed significant changes in ivacaftor-treated G551D patients in phase 2 clinical trials. Nasal cell culture techniques are being used as a new model system to predict clinical responses to CFTR-modifying drugs. Objective: To compare the ivacaftor-induced change in NPD in G551D patients to the ivacaftor-induced change in CFTR-mediated currents in nasal cells generated from the same patients. Method: NPD was performed at baseline and 6 months following start with ivacaftor treatment in 8 CF patients (G551D/F508del (4), G551D/E585X (1), G551D/Unknown (2), G178R/F508del (1); age range 11-52 years). The voltage response to perfusion with a chloride-free and isoproterenol containing solution was used as functional CFTR read-out (ΔIso/Cl-free, best response of both nostrils). At our centre ΔIso/Cl-free is considered normal when <-12mV, abnormal when >-7.7mV and intermediate for results between -7.7 and -12mV (Keenan K, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2015; 14:310-6) . Nasal cells were obtained from nasal brushing of 9 CF patients at baseline (+ G551D/F508del (2)), expanded and then grown in air-liquid interface. CFTR-mediated currents were measured as forskolin-induced currents (Ieq-FSK) following ENaC inhibition in Ussing chambers. For 7 CF patients NPD and nasal cell function were available. Results: Following 6-months treatment with ivacaftor, the ΔIso/Cl-free response changed by a mean of -8.54mV, 95% confidence interval (CI) -13.5; -3.6, p=0.005 (paired t-test). At baseline ΔIso/Cl-free results of all 8 patients were within the CF diagnostic range. Ivacaftor treatment increased the ΔIso/Cl-free response of one patient to healthy control range (-18.4mV in a G551D/F508del patient) and of another patient to the intermediate range associated with a CFTR-related disorder (-10.4mV in a G551D/Unknown patient). In nasal cell cultures addition of VX-770 (ivacaftor) increased Ieq-FSK by mean, -2.8 μA/cm 2 , 95% CI -4.5;-1.1 μA/cm 2 , p=0.005 (paired t-test). Ieq-FSK response to ivacaftor in nasal cells did not correlate with the ivacaftor-induced changes in NPD (p=0.7). Conclusion: Both NPD and nasal epithelial cells display significant changes to ivacaftor, but responses were variable in individual CF patients. Absence of correlation between these tests may be explained by differences in methodologies to assess CFTR function, small sample size as well as by the impact of adherence to ivacaftor therapy on the NPD results. The study was partly funded by Vertex Pharmaceuticals. The prevailing hypothesis to explain the pathogenesis of CF lung disease links dysregulated ion transport to the eventual disruption of mucociliary clearance (MCC). Accordingly, we have been using gamma scintigraphy following controlled inhalation of radiolabeled particles to characterize MCC in CF (Donaldson SH, et al. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2007; 4:399-405) . Recently we have attempted to improve our methodologies to allow better assessment of MCC from regions of the lung affected in early CF lung disease, the small airways and the apical lung regions. In healthy subjects we have shown that large particles (9.5 μm) inhaled very slowly (0.08 LPS) (SILP method) bypass the extrathoracic airways and more efficiently deposit in the bronchial airways when compared to standard tidal breathing (0.5 LPS) of 5 μm particles (TB method) (Zeman KL, et al. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2010; 23:363-9) . Finally, we hypothesized that having CF patients inhale the radioaerosol in the supine position, to remove the gravitational dependence of ventilation to the base of the lungs, would enhance our ability to measure MCC from the lung apices. Methods: Two groups of adult CF patients (n=14 for each) inhaled radioaerosol using either the SILP or TB method followed by gamma camera imaging over a period of 24 hours. A subgroup of the SILP group (n=9) was studied twice such that a baseline measure of MCC was compared to that measured with a 7% hypertonic saline (HS) challenge performed between 90 min and 6 hours after radioaerosol inhalation, when the majority of residual tracer is expected to be in the small airways. In a second small group of patients (n=6) MCC and regional deposition was measured following SILP inhalation in a sitting vs supine position. Results: Under baseline conditions the change in clearable fraction associated with small airway clearance, 90min-24h post radioaerosol deposition, was greater for the SILP vs TB method, 0.15+/-0.09 vs 0.08+/-0.07, p<0.05. Using the SILP method we found HS challenge dramatically enhanced small airway clearance (% clearance between 90 min and 6 hours) by 3-fold, 8.4+/-4.6 baseline vs 25.2+/-7.8 HS (p < 0.001). Furthermore the HS challenge increased the small airway clearable fraction from 0.15 to 0.22 (p= 0.07) in this subgroup of patients. Finally we found that there was no change in apex/base deposition of radioaerosol when inhaled sitting vs supine inhalation (0.22+/-0.09 vs 0.24+/-0.13 respectively). Neither was there a difference in MCC for the two different inhalation positions. Conclusions: The SILP method provides a greater signal for measuring small airway clearance from CF lungs than the TB inhalation method. During the period we defined as being dominated by small airway retention, both clearance rate and clearable fraction were dramatically enhanced by acute HS treatment. Finally, inhalation with the SILP method in the supine position did not target more of the radioaerosol to the apical lung regions to allow better measure of MCC from this region. Overall these data suggest that the SILP method is superior to the existing TB method for testing of therapeutics aimed at enhancing MCC from the small airways in CF. Supported by the CF Foundation. Despite the multisystem approach to treating cystic fibrosis (CF), there are few recommendations or screening programs specifically addressing CF oral health. Various CF treatments can affect oral health, including regular high calorie snacks/supplements, inhaled treatments, antibiotics, and surgeries. Oral findings such as dental caries and enamel defects may be a result of CF disease and/or treatments. Only 2 US studies have reported oral health in CF patients, both in the late 1970s. Our aim is to report the oral health status of CF patients at a US CF center. Methods: A cross-sectional sample of 20 CF patients from the Children's Hospital of Wisconsin CF Center were enrolled, aged 6-18 years old (mean 12.2 years). Dental caries, enamel defects, plaque and gingivitis were assessed by two calibrated pediatric dentists using a WHO probe, mirror and artificial light. Age, gender, medical history, treatments/surgeries and oral health behaviors were collected by questionnaire. Oral health assessment included a.) dental plaque via Greene-Vermillion Oral Hygiene Index, b.) gingivitis via Community Periodontal Index of Treatment Needs (GI-s), c.) enamel defects via Developmental Defects of Enamel Index, d.) dental caries via Decayed-Missing-Filled Teeth Index (DMFT) with International Caries Detection and Assessment System II criteria. Results: In the CF children, 25% had caries experience whereas 35.4% of children 6-18 years old nationally have caries experience. The CF sample had a DMFT of 0.70±1.53 which is considered considerably lower than the national mean of 1.5±1.00. On average 33.89%±13.95 of CF patients' teeth had dental plaque, and 85% of them had gingivitis. Also, 50% had some type of enamel developmental defect, much higher than generally reported in healthy children. All of the defects occurred in permanent teeth and most commonly in the first permanent molars and upper central incisors, which are formed in the first year of life. Regarding oral health behavior, 90% of the patients reported that they brush at least once a day, 65% reported consuming sugary snacks more than twice a day, and all of them visit the dentist 1-2 times yearly. Conclusions: These results suggest that CF patients have lower dental caries prevalence, regardless of their frequent snack consumption. The etiology may be related to inhaled/oral antibiotic usage, oral cleaning practices after inhaled medications, and their regular dental care. There may be selection bias as our cohort were seen by a dentist regularly, however this frequency is similar to that otherwise reported. Despite this, half of these patients may present with dental defects, especially on teeth developing during the first year of life. These defects may be related to CF disease, treatments, or surgeries. Defects can lead to aesthetic issues, tooth sensitivity, and loss of tooth structure, which can beget pain, need for restorative treatments (ie, crowns), or tooth loss. Next steps include further analysis into these trends and their association with CF disease and treatments. In early studies in mice, resistin was identified as an adipokine promoting insulin resistance and inflammation. However, in humans resistin is made primarily by polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs). Consistent with its dual role as a metabolic and inflammatory mediator, human resistin is found in abnormal levels in metabolic disorders and in disorders linked to PMN-driven inflammation. Cystic fibrosis (CF) combines PMN-dominated airway inflammation with profound metabolic anomalies. Consistently, resistin is elevated in the plasma and airway fluid of CF patients compared to healthy controls (HC). Clinically, sputum resistin levels correlate negatively with CF lung function. Here, we further probed the resistin signaling cascade in CF airways. Methods: Blood and sputum PMNs from adult CF patients were analyzed by flow cytometry for surface expression of resistin and of its recently identified receptor, adenylyl-cyclase associated protein 1 (CAP1). In addition, HC blood PMNs were stimulated in vitro with latrunculin B (LB) and the formyl peptide fMLF to induce primary granule exocytosis, after which they were analyzed for surface expression of resistin and CAP1 by flow cytometry, and resistin levels in the extracellular fluid were measured by ELISA. Additionally, we obtained bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) from CF infants and airway resistin levels were measured by ELISA at this earlier stage of disease. Results: CF sputum PMNs express significantly higher resistin and CAP1 surface expression than blood PMN, concomitant with previously observed high primary granule release (evidenced by high surface CD63 expression). In vitro, primary granule exocytosis of PMNs induced by LB + fMLF leads to high surface CD63 expression, but also to higher surface expression of resistin and CAP1, consistent with in vivo results. LB and FMLF stimulation of PMNs also led to resistin accumulation in the extracellular fluid. Finally, we measured significant resisitin levels in CF infant BALF, suggesting that this mediator is not just present at the chronic stage of the disease, but also early in the process. Conclusions: Our results suggest that (i) live CF airway PMNs express both cell surface resistin and CAP1, which may mediate cell-cell-signaling; (ii) PMNs likely serve not only as a target for resistin but also as a source since induction of primary granule exocytosis leads to resistin release; (iii) resistin may serve as a marker not only of chronic, but also early CF airway disease, as evidenced by its presence in BALF from CF infants. The therapeutic effect of direct potentiation of CFTR (ie, functional Class III and IV CFTR mutations) has previously been demonstrated with ivacaftor. These findings support the notion that a CFTR potentiator can yield clinical benefit in CF patients who have selected genotypes. Defining inclusion and exclusion criteria based on the CFTR genotypes' functional class for a clinical trial with a CFTR potentiator relies, in part, on predictability of preclinical electrophysiology experiments. Here we test the activity of QBW251, a novel CFTR potentiator on functional Class III and Class IV CFTR mutations expressed in Fischer Rat Thyroid (FRT) cells and assess the correlation in potency to clinical efficacy in patients carrying the same CFTR mutations. Methods: 1) In vitro, short circuit current (Isc) measurements were carried out in FRT cells with stable expression of CFTR mutations. These cells were seeded onto Snapwell inserts, cultured for 7-12 days at 37°C. For testing, inserts were mounted in vertical diffusion chambers, bathed apically and basolaterally with 5 mL physiological salt solution. Inserts were voltage clamped to 0 mV, and change in Isc was recorded following forskolin and subsequent CFTR potentiator treatment. EC 50 values were generated by measuring the mean delta change from forskolin baseline (n= 4-12). 2) Clinical trial: CF patients who carried at least one of 19 gating or residual function mutations were randomized to receive QBW251 (150 mg bid or 450 mg bid) or placebo for 2 weeks. An interim analysis was conducted after 40 patients completed 2 weeks of therapy; and pharmacodynamics endpoints, FEV1 and sweat Clwere assessed. Results: QBW251 was active in the class IV mutations R117H (EC50 = 0.15 uM), D1152H (EC50 = 0.06 uM) and R347H (EC50 = 0.7077 uM). QBW251 was also active when tested on cells expressing the Class II mutations S549N (EC50 = 0.1757 uM) and R352Q (EC50 = 0.1837 uM). In CF patients, QBW251 demonstrated improvement in FEV1 and sweat Clin patients carrying R117H, D1152H and R352Q, and S549N, R117H and R352Q mutations, respectively. Conclusions: The in vitro (Isc) data demonstrate that QBW251 is a potent CFTR potentiator across different functional classes of CFTR mutations. The Isc in vitro data translated to clinical efficacy in CF patients carrying the same CFTR mutations. These findings support further assessment of QBW251 in other class III and IV mutations to elucidate its therapeutic potential. We have shown that CF subjects have a somewhat lower lung water density at FRC and a significantly higher lung water density at TLC when compared with normal controls. We interpret these findings to reflect the presence of excess fluid from biofilm accumulation and other pathologies leading to increased density at TLC and also of air trapping in the lung periphery resulting in decreased density at FRC. Our preliminary data show that the ratio of the median lung water density at FRC to that at TLC, the mFLD ratio, was significantly smaller in CF patients than in controls. The goal of this study is to demonstrate that lung abnormalities in CF can be spatially identified by changes in the mFLD ratio when compared to a regional probabilistic library of the mFLD ratio in controls, and that the technique is able to capture the efficacy of therapy. Methods: MRI and spirometric data were collected in 18 controls (9F/9M, age = 37±12, FEV 1 = 94±8%) and at 2 time points for a female (aged 39 y) with stable CF disease, and a male (aged 26 y) with CF at the onset of a severe exacerbation. Fractional lung water density (FLD) was acquired in duplicate for the entire lung in a 1.5T MRI both at FRC and TLC. The median FLD (mFLD) was calculated for 18 regions in the left and right lung (36 total regions) at both lung volumes. The 36 regions were designated as follows: 1) each lung was equally divided into a medial and a lateral section; 2) each section was then divided into 9 regions by superimposing a 3×3 grid onto the lung section. For both CF subjects, regional t-scores of the mFLD ratio were then calculated and compared against control data using the Crawford-Howell t-score methodology (J Clin Exp Neuropsychol.1998; 20:905) . A t-score of -1.0 indicates the mFLD ratio was one standard deviation (1SD) below the control average (abnormal mFLD ratio). Regional change in t-scores between time points was also calculated. A Δt-score of 1.0 indicates the mFLD ratio for the specified region increased (eg, improved) by 1SD of the control population. Results: Lung function remained stable for CF subject A between MRI scans (Fig A) . CF subject B (Fig B) had a very positive response to therapy as indicated by an 18% improvement in FEV 1 at his second visit. Regional t-scores and Δt-scores for all 36 regions are presented for both CF subjects. For CF subject A, the change in the mFLD ratio remained relatively stable between time points. For CF subject B, the mFLD ratio improved for most regions in the left lung, and several regions in the right lung. Conclusion: These results indicate that the mFLD ratio may have the sensitivity to regionally identify and monitor lung abnormalities in CF. Marich, C. 1 ; Lord, J. 1 ; Dasenbrook, E.C. 2 ; Flume, P.A. 3 ; Jouhikainen, T. 1 1. Savara Inc., Austin, TX, USA; 2. Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA; 3. MUSC, Charleston, SC, USA Background: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase II study was performed with a novel inhaled dry-powder vancomycin (AeroVanc) for the treatment of persistent MRSA lung infection in 87 CF patients. Pharmacokinetics were evaluated in a subgroup of 27 subjects (13 active, 14 placebo) using sputum and plasma vancomycin concentrations. Only vancomycin-treated subjects are presented below. Methods: AeroVanc was administered for 28 days at two dose levels, 32 mg and 64 mg bid, using a reloadable capsule inhaler. Short-acting bronchodilator pretreatment was administered 10-30 min prior to study drug. Sputum and plasma samples were taken as follows: Predose, and 0.25, 1, 2, and 4 h postdose on Days 1, 7, and 28. The samples were analyzed using validated LC/MS methods with LLOQ of 10.0 ng/mL and 0.5 μg/g for the plasma and sputum methods, respectively. Results: Plasma vancomycin concentrations increased after dosing, and the median T max was approximately 1 h for all administrations. The mean C max values for each dose group were dose proportional, and similar among visits, 0.27-0.32 μg/mL in the 32 mg bid group, and 0.44-0.69 μg/mL in the 64 mg bid group. The mean accumulation ratios of C max and AUC 0-4 were 1.13-1.38 in the 32 mg bid group, and 0.64-1.00 in the 64 mg bid group, indicating no notable drug plasma accumulation over time. Sputum vancomycin concentrations increased rapidly after dosing, and the median T max was 0.25 h for all administrations in both dose groups. Mean C max and AUC 0-4 increased over progressive visits. The mean accumulation ratios of C max and AUC 0-4 were 3.6-6.5 for the 32 mg bid group, and 2.1-3.1 for the 64 mg bid group, indicating significant drug sputum accumulation. After a single 32 mg dose of AeroVanc, the mean of the sputum vancomycin average concentration over four hours (C avg0-4 ) was 48 μg/g, and increased to 162 and 206 μg/g after 7 and 28 days of bid dosing, respectively. After a single 64 mg dose of AeroVanc, the mean C avg0-4 was 71 μg/g, and increased to 358 μg/g and 247 μg/g after 7 and 28 days of BID dosing, respectively. All C avg0-4 exceeded the MIC of vancomycin for MRSA of 2 μg/mL. C trough levels at Days 7 and 28 were significantly greater than the MIC. C trough /MIC ratio values were 37 and 41 in the 32 mg bid group at Days 7 and 28 respectively, and were 59 and 50 in the 64 mg bid group at Days 7 and 28, respectively. AUC 0-12 was conservatively estimated for multidose administration by imputing a 12-h concentration from the trough value for that particular visit. With this estimate, AUC 0-12 /MIC ratios (units h*μg/g/μg/mL) were 549 and 741 in the 32 mg bid group at Days 7 and 28, respectively, and were 1230 and 829 in the 64 mg bid group at Days 7 and 28, respectively. Conclusions: Plasma and sputum vancomycin concentrations were generally dose proportional. There was no apparent plasma vancomycin accumulation over time, but significant sputum vancomycin accumulation was observed. Consistent vancomycin sputum concentrations high above MIC were observed at both dose levels with minimal systemic exposure after multi-dose administration. Supported by: NIH/NHLBI and CFFT. Recent clinical trials using cystic fibrosis (CF, F508del/F508del) patients studied the combination of a CFTR corrector (VX-809) and potentiator (VX-770) for improving CFTR folding, trafficking, and channel gating, leading to the approval of Orkambi™. Although overall effects on lung function (eg, FEV 1 ) were statistically significant; they were modest, suggesting the need for additional therapeutic approaches with an alternative mechanism of action. Therefore, we measured the enhanced in vitro effects of a S-nitrosoglutathione reductase inhibitor (GSNORi, N91115) on modulating CFTR when added to a CFTR corrector (VX-809 or VX-661) + CFTR potentiator (VX-770) by; 1) measuring CFTR activity in primary human CF (F508del/F508del) airway epithelial (HAE) cells by Ussing chamber analysis and; 2) quantifying plasma membrane (PM) CFTR protein expression and turnover in a CFBE41o-cell line. First, although addition of N91115 to chronic CFTR corrector + potentiator resulted in a comparable level of initial forskolin-mediated CFTR activation in Ussing chambers, the addition of N91115 appeared to "stabilize" the level of CFTR activity up to the time of inhibition by CFTR inh 172. A positive change in slope was also observed reflecting sustained N91115-mediated CFTR activity. Area under the curve (AUC), measured as total net chloride secretion from CFTR activation to inhibition, also demonstrated a significant improvement with the addition of N91115 versus corrector + potentiator alone. Moreover, when N91115 was added to chronic CFTR corrector + acute CFTR potentiator, a further increase in potentiator-mediated short circuit current (I sc ) as well as an increase in total potentiated CFTR (CFTR-stimulated AUC) was observed. The I sc that was inhibited by CFTR inh 172 was also significantly greater in CF HAE cells treated with N91115 + corrector versus corrector alone, further suggesting an additive increase of CFTR activity with N91115. Second, expression of CFTR at the plasma membrane (PM) was measured by On-Cell Western analysis in CFBE41o-cells expressing an F508del-3HA tag on an extracellular loop of CFTR. We observed a significant increase in PM CFTR expression when N91115 was added alone as well as in addition to a CFTR corrector. When cells were treated with chronic CFTR corrector + potentiator, a significant decrease in PM CFTR was observed. However, this decrease in PM CFTR expression was significantly reversed back to corrector treated levels alone with the addition of N91115. Furthermore, PM CFTR turnover (CFTR remaining at the PM up to 3 hours) was significantly improved when N91115 was added to a CFTR corrector, or CFTR corrector + potentiator, demonstrating increased PM CFTR stability. Currently, additional in vitro studies are ongoing to explore the effects of GSNORi on wild-type CFTR expression, function, and stability. Overall, this preclinical data provides evidence for the utilization of an additive therapy approach using N91115 to stabilize corrected and potentiated CFTR at the plasma membrane of CF patients. The mechanisms responsible for ivacaftor-mediated lung function improvement remain incompletely understood. We are studying the relationships between infection, inflammation, and lung function in 12 Irish CF subjects with G551D mutations treated with ivacaftor. Here we report on 3 years of data from these subjects, 8 of whom had chronic P. aeruginosa (PA) infections. As seen by others, ivacaftor rapidly improved lung function, significantly increasing FEV 1 within 2 days. Notably, sputum PA density also declined rapidly (mean reduction 1.6 log 10 at 7 days, p<0.01), and total bacterial density decreased to a lesser extent. Sputum PA density continued to decline at 90 and 210 days; however, no subjects became PA culturenegative, even those with low initial sputum PA densities. PA isolated from each subject at 1 year was clonally-related to the subject's pretreatment isolates, indicating persistent, rather than re-infection. Improvement in lung inflammation was noted by 1 week of treatment, with decreases in sputum IL-8, IL-1β, and neutrophil elastase reaching statistical significance (p = 0.004, 0.0002, and 0.02, respectively). Interestingly, PA sputum density began to rebound after 400 days of ivacaftor treatment, with increases in CFUs noted between 400 and 1000 days (p<0.0001). However sputum inflammatory biomarkers continued to decline after day 400 (p <0.01), and FEV 1 measurements showed a trend towards further increases (p = 0.08). We sought correlations between changes in lung function, infection and inflammation. We found that reductions in PA relative abundance, reduction in total bacterial density, and increases in microbial diversity at day 7 significantly correlated with FEV 1 increases at day 7. We also identified possible indicators of long-term benefits from ivacaftor. The rate of change in FEV1 post-ivacaftor trended towards correlation with reductions in PA CFUs at day 7 (p = 0.085), and correlated significantly with reductions in PA CFUs at day 400 (p< 0.005). Reductions in sputum IL-1β on day 7 also showed a correlation trend with increased FEV 1 at 1 year (p = 0.051). In PA-positive subjects, the microbiologic parameters that correlated with increased lung function (PA density, PA relative abundance, total bacterial density, and microbial diversity) are interdependent: a change in one parameter can change the others. Notably, PA density changed more than total bacterial density, and the absolute abundance of measured non-PA organisms did not increase. Thus, PA density was likely the primary microbiological parameter changed by ivacaftor. These results demonstrate that ivacaftor can reduce PA density and inflammation in chronically infected CF patients, although PA density may rebound after 1 year. The correlations between reduced PA density and improved FEV 1 raise the possibility that PA clearance contributes to post-ivacaftor increases in lung function. A Vertex unrestricted grant supported specimen collection. Anti-inflammatory medications improve lung function and decrease symptoms in CF patients; however, side effects limit their use, and improved medications are needed. Gallium nitrate has been proposed as a novel treatment for CF patients with chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) airway infections, as it has antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory effects in vitro. In a phase 1b clinical trial, we found that intravenous gallium treatment improved lung function in CF patients with chronic PA infections. Gallium also decreases mortality in murine PA lung infections. However it remains unclear whether the therapeutic effects of gallium are due to its antimicrobial or anti-inflammatory activity (or both), as gallium-induced reduction in bacterial density could decrease pulmonary inflammation. Here we used two approaches to investigate gallium's anti-inflammatory activity, independent of its antimicrobial effect. First, we treated mice with gallium and then exposed them to heat-killed PA, and we found that gallium-treated mice developed less lung injury than untreated controls. We also investigated gallium's effects on human monocyte derivedmacrophages (MDMs) exposed to LPS + IFNγ ("M1" stimuli). Microarray analysis demonstrated that gallium attenuated expression of a large subset of M1 pro-inflammatory genes, but had minimal effects on unstimulated MDMs, and MDMs stimulated with IL-4, a cytokine that triggers "M2" macrophage phenotypes. Flow cytometric analyses revealed that gallium also attenuates expression of M1 macrophage surface markers. Our findings also suggest mechanisms by which gallium may dampen LPS-induced macrophage inflammation. Gallium treatment of LPS-stimulated macrophages increased transcripts of IL-10, a cytokine that lessens macrophage inflammation in an autocrine fashion. Gallium also induced lipocalin 2 (Lcn2, also known as NGAL) gene expression. Lcn2 has been shown to block LPS-induced pro-inflammatory macrophage phenotypes, and shift macrophages to reparative and anti-inflammatory phenotypes. These data suggest that gallium may suppress inflammation induced by stimuli present in CF airways, and that improvement in CF patients' lung function following intravenous gallium treatment may have resulted in part from dampening of airway inflammation. Objectives: To report on single-center clinical experience initiating Orkambi® therapy in CF adult patients. Methods: A retrospective review of all adult CF patients (154) followed at our CF center between January 2015 and April 2016 identified 71 patients (46%) homozygous for CFTR F508del mutations. Of those eligible (56), 46 patients (82%) initiated Orkambi® therapy at the approved dose. Using chart-based data, the following parameters were measured before and after initiation of therapy: respiratory symptoms and signs, physical exam data, vital signs, pulmonary function tests, liver enzymes (AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase), discontinuation of therapy (and reason), adverse events (AEs), serious AEs and unplanned antibiotic use. Change in pulmonary function = highest forced expiratory flow in 1 second (FEV1) on Orkambi® -highest FEV1 in the 12 months before starting therapy. Change in BMI = highest BMI on Orkambi® -highest BMI in the 12 months before starting therapy. Patients were excluded from analysis if Orkambi® was continued after initiating therapy during a clinical trial (5 patients) or had lung transplant prior to approval (10 patients). Results: Of 46 eligible CF patients who started Orkambi®, 38 (82.6%) continued on therapy for a mean of 6.24 months. The FEV1% predicted increased by a mean of 1% (absolute) in patients continuing medication. In 17 of those patients (44%) there was a 5% (absolute) and 8% (relative) increase in FEV1. The FEV1% predicted decreased by 3% (absolute) and 4% (relative) in 21 patients (55%) who continued on therapy. The BMI in 20 patients (52%) who continued therapy increased by 1.17 compared to pretreatment values. 8 patients (17%) discontinued therapy. The mean duration of treatment before discontinuance was 1.66 months and the reasons for discontinuance include worsening respiratory symptoms, headaches, rash, fatigue, muscle aches, transaminitis and lung transplant. Among patients discontinuing due to worsened respiratory symptoms/signs, the most common symptoms (4 patients) included chest tightness, increased cough, dyspnea and pulmonary exacerbation. These symptoms occurred as early as 2 days after starting therapy. 4 patients who discontinued therapy were re-challenged with full or half dose Orkambi® with return of side effects. Serum levels of liver enzymes were not different before and after initiating Orkambi® in most patients (n=44). In 2 patients, transaminases increased; one had to discontinue therapy. The BMI did not change or worsen by 0.70 in 18 patients posttreatment. Conclusion: These data confirm the results of clinical research trials by indicating that Orkambi® was safe and well-tolerated in most (82%) of eligible CF patients who started the medication. Importantly, institution of Orkambi® in adult CF patients was associated with a mean improvement in FEV1 of 5% predicted in 44% of patients who continued on therapy. Not every patient on Orkambi® had improvement in FEV1 or BMI. Future directions: Adding CF centers to gain multicenter clinical experience with Orkambi®. Identify patient characteristics and comorbidities that could predict who will respond favorable to medication. Introduction: Acute pulmonary exacerbations (APE) are associated with progressive lung function decline and increased mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF). The role of pulmonary vascular disease in APE is unknown. We investigated the association between pulmonary artery enlargement (PA:A>1), a computed tomographic (CT) marker of pulmonary vascular disease, and prospective APEs. Methods: We analyzed clinical, CT, and prospective exacerbation data in a derivation cohort of 74 adult CF patients, measuring the PA:A at the level of the PA bifurcation on axial CT images. We then replicated our findings in a validation cohort of 190 adult CF patients. Patients were separated into groups based on the presence or absence of a PA:A>1 and were followed for 1 year in the derivation cohort and 2 years in the validation cohort. The primary endpoint was developing ≥1 APE during follow-up. Linear and logistic regression models were used to determine associations between clinical factors, the PA:A ratio, and APE. We used Cox regression to determine time to first exacerbation. Results: PA:A>1 was present in n=37 (50%) of the derivation and n=89 (47%) of the validation cohort. In the derivation cohort, n=50 (68%) had ≥1 exacerbation at 1 year and n=133 (70%) in the validation cohort had ≥1 event at 2 years. PA:A>1 was associated with exacerbations in the derivation (OR 3.49, 95%CI 1.18-10.3, P=0.02) and validation (OR 2.41, 95%CI 1.06-5.52, P=0.04) cohorts when adjusted for covariates. Time to first exacerbation was shorter in PA:A>1 versus PA:A<1 in unadjusted analysis (Figure) . PA:A>1 was associated with younger age in both cohorts and with elevated sweat chloride (100.5±10.9 vs 90.4±19.9mmol/L, P=0.02) in the derivation group and in the small number of individuals in the validation cohort with sweat chloride available (n=27; 105.9±24.7 vs 88.2±23.1, P=0.057). Conclusions: PA enlargement is prevalent in adult CF patients and is associated with CFTR function and acute pulmonary exacerbation risk in two well-characterized cohorts. Rationale: CF lung disease features massive neutrophil recruitment into the airways in response to Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and increasingly Mycobacterium abscessus. Once chronic infections are established, the CF neutrophil is largely ineffective in eradicating the bacteria, and contributes to worsening inflammation and tissue injury. The CFTR modulator ivacaftor/lumacaftor (Orkambi) is approved for the treatment of people with CF homozygous for ΔF508 and results in decreased frequency of pulmonary exacerbations. Potentiation of the G551D mutation with ivacaftor results in normalization of neutrophil killing. However, the effects of Orkambi on neutrophil function in ΔF508 homozygous patients is not known. Methods: CF blood neutrophils were isolated prior to initiation of Orkambi, and at one month and 3 to 6 months of treatment. Systemic markers of inflammation and neutrophil responses contributing to successful bacteria killing, including degranulation of antimicrobial proteins, were assessed by flow cytometry following incubation of CF or healthy control neutrophils with S. aureus, P. aeruginosa and M. abscessus. Time to maximum chemotaxis and amount of chemotactic cells migrating to bacterial stimuli were analyzed. Changes in clinical parameters including FEV 1 , BMI and neutrophil blood count were assessed. All studies were approved by the National Jewish Health IRB. Results: While FEV 1 and BMI did not change significantly after 1mo or 3 to 6mo of Orkambi treatment, blood neutrophil count and CRP decreased significantly by 36 and 46%, respectively within 1 month of treatment (p<0.02). Plasma IL-6 concentration decreased by 50% within 1mo of treatment while IFN-γ decreased by 68% after 3 to 6mo of Orkambi (p<0.05). Neutrophil degranulation in response to all bacteria tested was reduced to 42% of healthy control levels in CF neutrophils before Orkambi and increased to 60% following 1mo of Orkambi. Chemotaxis to S. aureus was not different between healthy control and CF neutrophils before Orkambi treatment, however, following treatment chemotaxis was significantly delayed. Neutrophil chemotaxis towards culture supernatant from M. abscessus was delayed by 20% in CF neutrophils before Orkambi compared to healthy controls (p=0.01) and unchanged by Orkambi treatment. For all bacterial stimuli tested, the percentage of chemotactic cells was similar in healthy controls and CF neutrophils before Orkambi, but reduced by 20% following treatment (p<0.04). Conclusions: Together these findings indicate that Orkambi reduces systemic inflammation in CF patients. Improved neutrophil degranulation in response to various bacteria could be a nonspecific anti-inflammatory effect. However, observed changes in chemotaxis do not correlate with the other observed results and indicate a direct effect of Orkambi on neutrophil function. This warrants further investigation, especially as neutrophil responses to different bacterial species appear selectively affected by Orkambi treatment. Despite no significant improvement in overall lung function and BMI in our patient cohort, Orkambi may enhance the innate response to bacteria, contributing to the reported reduction in frequencies of pulmonary exacerbations. Supported by the CFF and the CCTSI. The epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) is a key regulator of airway surface liquid (ASL) height that is activated by proteases in the lung and has been implicated in cystic fibrosis pathology. Several companies have attempted to target ENaC with small molecule inhibitors without success. Most of these compounds failed in early clinical development due to systemic uptake that induced hyperkalemia due to inhibition of ENaC. We have identified a novel peptide known as SPX-101 and have demonstrated effective regulation of ASL height and restoration of CFTR-mediated inhibition of mucus clearance in an ovine model. Our aim was to determine if SPX-101 would be better tolerated than small-molecule ENaC inhibitors and would be safe in toxicology studies. Methods: Acute toxicology studies were completed with SPX-101 delivered to rats and canines by intravenous injection and nebulization. Repeat dose toxicology studies were completed with SPX-101 delivered by nebulization for 7-or 28-days with full analysis of behavior, clinical chemistry, hematological profiles, and both macro-and microscopic histopathology. Safety pharmacology studies to evaluate SPX-101 effects on cardiovascular and respiratory function as well as genotoxicity and hERG inhibition were also performed using a combination of intravenous and inhalation administration. Anti-drug antibody development was assessed by ELISA. Results: SPX-101, an analog of SPLUNC-1 is ~50,000 fold more potent than the natural ENaC inhibitory peptide in restoring ASL height in CF-HBECs and can be effectively delivered to the lung by nebulization. Acute intravenous dosing of rats up to 2,000 mg/kg and canines up to 50 mg/kg showed no adverse effects with no changes in the heart rate, blood pressure, ECG, or serum electrolytes. Intravenous SPX-101 displayed linear pharmacokinetics with T1/2 = 10 min at all doses. Toxicological testing with SPX-101 delivered by nebulization into rats and dogs for 7-and 28-days showed no adverse toxicological findings at lung-deposited doses of up to 24 and 8 mg/kg/day, respectively. Low systemic exposure of SPX-101 was found and no hyperkalemia occurred. No significant inhibition of hERG was observed at doses up to 1 mM and no genotoxic effects were found. SPX-101 was also free from any changes in respiration or cardiovascular parameters from either intravenous or inhaled administration. No anti-SPX-101 antibodies were detected following 60 days of treatment by intraperitoneal or intranasal administration. Conclusion: These data suggest that SPX-101 is a novel ENaC inhibitory peptide that is efficacious in models of CF with extremely low toxicity suggesting that SPX-101 may be a viable therapeutic for the treatment of CF lung disease with low potential for renal side effects exhibited by previous small molecule ENaC inhibitors. (Orkambi®) is the second FDA approved CFTR modulator available in the United States. In the landmark TRAFFIC and TRANSPORT, 1108 CF patients with cystic fibrosis homozygous for the Phe508del CFTR mutation with an FEV1 40-90% predicted received study drug. Overall subjects had a modest improvement in absolute FEV1 with a mean change of 2.6% to 4% across the two dose groups with a significant decline in need for IV antibiotics from 45% to 56% across the two dose groups. The drug was well tolerated with only 4.2% of the subjects of the subjects randomized to Orkambi® who discontinued the drug due to adverse events. However, the studies included few CF patients with lung function less than 40% or significant liver disease. Objective: Prospectively evaluate safety and efficacy of Orkambi® in a real world population of CF adults including patients with FEV1 <40% and significant liver disease. Methods: We have 55 adult CF patients with the Phe508del mutation in our adult center. Patients were offered therapy with Orkambi® if they agreed to be adherent with therapy and lab monitoring. We review data available on 29/55 patients who have provided their informed consent up to this point. Results: Chest tightness was the most common side-effect with 13/29 experiencing chest tightness. 5/29 discontinued therapy due to chest tightness. There were 4 patients who experienced severe chest tightness requiring admission. All were treated with IV antibiotics, IV steroids, and increased airway clearance as for a pulmonary exacerbation and 3/5 patients have remained on Orkambi® long-term. Of the consented patient group, 6/29 had FEV1 less than 40% at initiation of Orkambi®. Of the 6 subjects, 1 had to discontinue therapy due to chest tightness and 5 remain on therapy, with 2/5 on a reduced dose. There were 2 patients with cirrhosis of the liver started on Orkambi®. Patients were monitored closely with liver function monitoring 1 week, 1 month and 3 months after initiation of therapy. All subjects tolerated it well with a trend toward improved liver function and no evidence of liver toxicity. Of the 2 patients, one is on a reduced dose due to chest tightness symptoms. Of the 29 consented adult CF patients initiated on Orkambi®, 24 remain on therapy with 5 discontinuations due to chest tightness. Dosing reductions were utilized in patients with liver disease and in patients experiencing chest tightness and 2/24 patients remain on a reduced dose. Lung function and exacerbation frequency will be analyzed when all the patient group has completed 6 months of therapy. Conclusion: Orkambi® was initiated in a "real" adult CF center population including patients with FEV1<40% and patients with significant CF liver disease. Chest tightness was seen as a side-effect much more commonly than was seen in the trial with 13/29 (45%) of the patients reporting chest tightness and 5/29 (17 %) discontinuing the drug due to this side-effect. Most patients with FEV1 <40% (5/6) and patients with cirrhosis (2/2) were able to tolerate the drug with at least perceived benefit. Overall impact on lung function, weight, and frequency of exacerbation is under study. Walker, S.D.; Henry, B.; Sueblinvong, V.; Hunt, W.R. Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA Background: Lumacaftor/ivacaftor (LUM/IVA) was approved for use in CF patients homozygous for delF508 in July 2015. We sought to examine how well adopted this treatment was by our clinic as well as whether patients showed benefits similar to those seen in the Phase 3 study of this drug. Methods: We reviewed our center's patient registry to identify patients homozygous for delF508 and their FEV1 and BMI data for the last two years. Reasons for patients not using LUM/IVA were obtained from the patients' primary pulmonologist. Start dates for LUM/IVA came from patient assistance program data on delivery and refills. Results: A total of 103 patients homozygous for delF508 who have not undergone lung transplant were included for analysis. Fifty-four have been prescribed LUM/IVA (52%). Of those not prescribed the drug, the most common reasons were patients being lost to follow-up (n=19; 39%), patients declining to start (n=8; 16%), and patients who have not undergone a baseline eye exam or those with high FEV1 (both n=5; 10%). Eight patients (15%) stopped LUM/IVA due to chest tightness and/or decline in FEV1. Of 29 patients who have been on drug for 3 months, FEV1 improved in 14 (48%), though overall there was no improvement in absolute FEV1. Twenty-two of 32 patients had an improvement in BMI, though this was not statistically significant (21.6 v. 22.1; p=0.55 ). There appears to be a trend of decrease in exacerbation rate, though patients have not been on drug long enough to allow adequate comparison. Discussion: Only close to half of eligible patients have been prescribed LUM/IVA in our clinic so far. Medical indications were uncommon reasons for withholding prescription, with the majority arising from patient choice and poor patient follow-up. Five patients with FEV1>100% predicted and mild symptoms were not prescribed drug. Comparing real-world use versus the Phase 3 study, there has not been an overall change in FEV1 in our patients, though there does seem to be a robust decrease in pulmonary exacerbation rates. Our dropout rate is markedly higher than in the study. All patients who withdrew from use cited chest tightness and worsened dyspnea as side effects. Interestingly, there has been a majority of patients who have had an improvement in BMI at 3 months, which was not seen in the randomized trial, though this is not statistically significant yet. We speculate this may be due to increased fat calorie consumption due to the drug absorption requirements. Conclusion: LUM/IVA has not been widely used in the eligible population, mostly due to patient behavior. Patient response is heterogenous, with some noting significant benefits, and with a high rate of drug cessation due to side effects. Introduction: More than 80% of mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF) is due to respiratory failure. Although lung compromise is frequently associated with chronic bacterial infection, eg, Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), no single factor predicts the extent of lung damage in CF. To elucidate other causes, we studied the nature of autoimmunity in CF, in the context of neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation and PA infection. Methods: Autoantibody reactivity to bactericidal permeabilityincreasing protein (anti-BPI IgG), carbamylated proteins (ACarPA), and citrullinated proteins (ACPA) in CF patients (n=38) was compared with that in sera from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients (n=50), given the association of airway inflammation with ACPA induction in RA. Reactivity to a recombinant BPI C-terminus fragment was also evaluated in CF sera. The antibody titers obtained by ELISA were studied in relation to percentage forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1%), bacterial colonization by sputum culture, and CFTR mutation status. Autoantigens in the NETs and their posttranslational modifications were evaluated by immunocytochemistry. BPI cleavage during NETosis was studied by immunoblot following treatment with wild-type PA strains (PAO1 and PA14) and their PA elastase deficient counterparts (ΔlasB, ΔdlasR). Results: Even though BPI, carbamylated proteins, and citrullinated proteins are all localized in the NETs, our data show that 42% of CF patients have anti-BPI autoantibodies, but less than 8% present with ACPA. In contrast, ACPA-positive RA patients (94%) exhibit no reactivity with BPI. Interestingly, ACarPA are found in both the CF (40%) and the RA (28%) cohort, but do not correlate with anti-BPI IgG titers. Contrary to ACPA and ACarPA, autoantibodies against BPI recognize the C-terminus of BPI in the absence of posttranslational modifications, ie, citrullination, carbamylation, or iso-aspartylation. The presence of anti-BPI autoantibodies and ACarPA correlates with diminished lung function in CF patients as well as with the presence of PA on sputum culture. Interestingly, PA treatment of neutrophils results in PA elastase-mediated BPI cleavage during NETosis. Conclusions: In this first-ever study of autoimmunity in an adult United States CF cohort, we demonstrate that autoreactivity to BPI reflects diminished airway function, in the context of PA infection and a specific CFTR genotype. Moreover, our studies identify a role for PA elastase in the development of anti-BPI autoimmunity and provide a link between PA clearance and respiratory failure in the context of autoimmunity in CF. Introduction: Aminoglycosides (AGs) and glycopeptides are antibiotics essential for treating life-threatening respiratory infections in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Side effects of these medications have been linked to causing hearing or kidney issues. The goal of this study was to examine the effects of cumulative intravenous (IV) AG and/or glycopeptide dosing on hearing status in patients recruited from the Oregon Health & Science University adult and pediatric CF centers. Methods: Hearing thresholds were measured from 0.25-16.0 kHz in 102 participants (ages 15-63 years) with CF. Participants were categorized into four groups (ie, quartiles) based on their lifetime exposure to IV antibiotics defined by the total number of doses as calculated by body mass. These groups were ranked from the lowest (quartile 1) to highest (quartile 4) number of cumulative lifetime doses. An additional analysis was conducted that accounted for frequency of dosing per day. Results: Logistic regression modeling was used to obtain the odds of permanent sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) by quartile of cumulative IV dosing, after adjusting for gender and age at the time of study participation. Participants in the normal hearing group were significantly younger than those with SNHL. When accounting for this age difference, participants in the highest exposure quartile were more likely to have permanent SNHL. This effect remained statistically significant when taking into account the frequency of dosing per day. There was considerable variability of hearing losses among subjects within each dosing quartile. Conclusions: There was a significant age effect between groups for normal hearing versus ears with SNHL. Cumulative IV antibiotic dosing may have a significantly negative effect on hearing sensitivity in participants with CF, independent of gender and age. Variability in hearing losses within each quartile may suggest a genetic predisposition to drug susceptibility on hearing. DNA-based analyses of cystic fibrosis (CF) airway microbiota have challenged ideas about the etiology of CF infections. Two notable findings are: 1) In early CF lung disease, the microbial DNA within samples typically derives from diverse collections of microbes that are not considered conventional CF pathogens; and 2) In established disease (when conventional CF pathogens dominate) non-conventional pathogens are often still identified, although in lesser quantities. However, these findings are complicated because airway samples transit through the oropharynx where non-conventional pathogens are highly abundant. In addition, collection devices (e.g. bronchoscopes) and analysis reagents harbor microbial DNA. To address these problems, we collected CF bronchoalveolar lavage samples (a total of 190 samples from 22 subjects) after endotracheal tube intubation to attempt to bypass oropharyngeal organisms. We also included control samples to identify contamination from reagents, bronchoscopes, and the oropharynx. Finally, young children with mild CF lung disease were studied to increase chances of collecting samples before conventional pathogens dominated. Bronchoalveolar lavage was sequentially performed in four pre-determined lower airway sites and an additional site(s) based on clinical or radiographic evidence of disease. Quantitative PCR measuring total bacterial 16S rRNA gene abundance suggested that lavage samples could be categorized as coming from areas with "established" or "nascent" infection, based on the bacterial burden present. At "established" infection sites, 16S rRNA gene sequencing showed conventional CF pathogens dominated, and a relatively small fraction of microbial DNA mapped to non-conventional pathogens. In contrast, lavages from "nascent" infection sites contained DNA from a diverse collection of non-conventional pathogens, consistent with emerging views of the early-infection CF microbiome. Notably, the microbial DNA profiles from "nascent" infection sites differed markedly from oropharyngeal samples, suggesting that endotracheal intubation effectively bypassed upper airway contaminants. However, "nascent" sites contained similar microbial DNA densities and profiles as control washes from bronchoscopes performed before the procedure. These findings suggest that the microbial DNA identified at "nascent" infection sites were likely contaminants. The findings highlight the need for careful sampling and control specimens when DNA-based methods are used to study human infections. using whole genome sequencing and detailed epidemiological analysis of a cohort of patients attending a UK CF centre, we found strong evidence for transmission between patients. We sought to determine the global population structure of M. abscessus infecting CF patients. Methods: We carried out whole genome sequencing on a global collection of 1,080 clinical isolates from 517 patients attending CF clinics in the UK, Ireland, Denmark, Australia and North America. To assess the clinical consequences of this genetic diversity, cell-based and in vivo assays were carried out on a selection of strains and clinical data were collected where available. Results: Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the majority of infections are from densely clustered M. abscessus genotypes with low levels of diversity, indicating a high level of human-associated spread. Moreover, we identified three recently emerged dominant circulating clones that are globally disseminated. These clones were associated with chronic infection, increased phagocytic uptake and increased intracellular survival in macrophages. Within patients we found evidence of significant genetic diversity and evolutionary adaptation through the processes of convergent evolution and hypermutation, demonstrating the propensity of M. abscessus to evolve from an environmental organism into a transmissible human pathogen. Conclusions: Transmissible clones of M. abscessus are circulating globally amongst CF patients. Worryingly, we found that these clones are associated with worse clinical outcomes and increased levels of virulence. Staphylococcus aureus is the most prevalent bacterial species isolated from the airways of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients during childhood, while Pseudomonas aeruginosa is predominantly isolated from adults with CF. We recently characterized P. aeruginosa biofilm growth on primary CF airway epithelial cells (AECs) and observed enhanced biofilm formation during co-infection with respiratory viruses (Hendricks MR, et al. PNAS. 2016; 113:1642-7) . We hypothesize that infection with respiratory viruses alters microbial community dynamics in the CF airways, affecting the balance between S. aureus and P. aeruginosa populations. The goals of this work are: 1) to compare S. aureus biofilm growth on CF and non-CF AECs, and 2) to study the dynamics of S. aureus infection alone and during co-infection with P. aeruginosa and respiratory viruses. Initial studies showed a 3-log increase in S. aureus on immortalized CF bronchial AECs over 24 hours, and confocal microscopy revealed biofilm-like clusters of bacteria on AECs. Measuring expression of biofilm and planktonic marker genes using quantitative real-time PCR confirmed S. aureus exists in a biofilm state on CF AECs. To learn if S. aureus biofilm growth differs at distinct sites in the respiratory tract, biofilm assays were performed on well-differentiated primary CF and non-CF bronchial, nasal, and sinonasal AECs. Infection of all non-CF cell types resulted in a decrease in viable S. aureus over time. However, while CF nasal and sinonasal AECs showed killing activity towards S. aureus, CF bronchial AECs supported S. aureus growth. A similar trend in anti-S. aureus activity was observed in growth assays utilizing airway surface liquid collected from primary AECs. Current studies are evaluating the airway surface liquid pH of CF and non-CF bronchial cells to determine if pH dysregulation is a factor impacting the ability of CF bronchial AECs to kill S. aureus. In initial co-infection experiments with S. aureus and P. aeruginosa on CF bronchial AECs, S. aureus biofilms grew during co-infection with P. aeruginosa. However, when co-infected with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), P. aeruginosa growth increased dramatically, while S. aureus growth decreased. Live-cell imaging experiments evaluating biofilm formation on CF bronchial AECs under flow conditions showed both species of bacteria in close association within biofilms on AECs, and in the presence of RSV co-infection, P. aeruginosa dominated growth. Ongoing experiments are investigating how specific host antimicrobial mechanisms utilized during viral-bacterial co-infections might skew the microbial communities in the CF airway. Background: CF results in chronic lung infections with frequent exacerbations of symptoms. Changes in microbial community dynamics are believed to be responsible for CF exacerbations. Preliminary evidence indicates that anaerobes and their fermentative metabolism are associated with exacerbation development in CF. We hypothesized that mucus pH drives these dynamics and tested this using a culture microcosm of the lung. Methods: We used the novel WinCF microbial culture system (Quinn RA, et al. ISMEJ. 2015; 24:1024-38) , which is designed to mimic the conditions of a CF plugged bronchiole. Mucus samples from 18 CF and 6 non-CF patients were inoculated into WinCF with mucus media buffered at different pH (5-8.5) . Bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metabolomics were used to determine how pH affected the community. Mathematical modeling was used to test the observed microcosm dynamics. Results: There were 2 separate microbial communities driven by pH effects. At lowered pH, an anaerobic community dominated, while at higher pH, Pseudomonas aeruginosa thrived. Antibiotic pressure disrupted this pH-based structure by killing anaerobes but not P. aeruginosa. Metabolites produced by P. aeruginosa were also altered by media pH. Mathematical models supported this pH-driven community dynamic, but also revealed that the radius of a bronchus has a significant impact. Wider lung bronchi create room for anaerobic fermentation leading to a higher rate of community flux. Incorporating periodic antibiotic treatment for exacerbations into the model resulted in a cyclic dynamic, where anaerobes are killed and P. aeruginosa thrives, then anaerobes reestablish after antibiotic pressure subsides. Conclusions: This study supports the observation that CF exacerbations are associated with a bloom of fermentative anaerobes at lower mucus pH. Antibiotic pressure destroys anaerobes setting up a cyclic dynamic with P. aeruginosa. This cycling microbial system is likely crucial to CF disease progression and clinical outcomes. Typical response of sputum culturing in different media pH. Background: The immune response to Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in the cystic fibrosis (CF) lung is characterised by neutrophildominated inflammation, which is incompletely effective at clearing infection and causes lung tissue damage, ultimately resulting in respiratory failure. To combat bacterial infection, neutrophils produce the potent oxidant hypochlorous acid (HOCl) or bleach, which is generated by myeloperoxidase, an enzyme that accounts for ~5% of neutrophil protein. The importance of HOCl in bacterial killing in the CF lung and the ways in which P. aeruginosa defends itself against HOCl are poorly understood. Objective: To identify mechanisms used by P. aeruginosa to protect itself against HOCl. Methods: We screened 712 regulatory gene mutants from a P. aeruginosa transposon library for altered HOCl susceptibility (Liberati NT, et al. PNAS USA, 2006; 103:2833-8) . Growth in the presence of a sublethal concentration of HOCl (300 ppm) was followed by recording optical density (600 nm) over 24 hours (n=3 for each mutant). Results: The screen identified 12 HOCl-resistant and 16 HOClsensitive mutants with consistent phenotypes. These strains had mutations in genes encoding regulators with roles in controlling antibiotic resistance, catabolite repression, motility, methionine biosynthesis and quorum sensing. Interestingly, mutants of genes homologous to E. coli HOCl-sensing regulators (RclR, HypT and NemR) did not display altered susceptibility to HOCl. A mutant in mexT, which encodes a positive regulator of the multidrug efflux pump operon, mexEF-oprN, was sensitive to HOCl, no growth was observed after 24 hours. A mutant in ampR, which encodes a global regulator found to negatively regulate mexEF-oprN displayed HOCl resistance, as it exited lag phase 6 hours earlier than wild type (WT). Additional screening of strains with mutations in mexE and mexF for growth in the presence of HOCl identified an 8-9 and 5-8 hour delay, respectively, in exiting lag phase compared to WT, indicating HOCl sensitivity. P. aeruginosa clinical isolates from chronic CF lung infection have been identified with mutations in ampR or mexT, suggesting a potential role for these regulators in adaptation (Diaz Caballero J, et al. mBio, 2015; 6:e00981-15 ). Furthermore, mutants of cbrA and cbrB, which encode a two-component system that regulates carbon and nitrogen utilisation were resistant to HOCl, indicated by a rapid onset of growth compared to WT. CbrAB negatively regulates the global regulator crc via the small RNA crcZ, and a mutant in crc was sensitive to HOCl, no growth was observed after 24 hours. In addition to further investigations into HOCl protective mechanisms, the mutants identified are being used in assays to test the hypothesis that HOCl is crucial for neutrophil-mediated killing of bacteria in the context of CF infection. We have successfully identified a number of HOCl-resistant and HOCl-sensitive mutant strains. These data suggest that P. aeruginosa uses different HOCl protective mechanisms to E. coli and the Mex-EF-OprN efflux pump is potentially important in protection against HOCl. Rationale: The underlying defect in the cystic fibrosis (CF) airway leads to defective mucociliary clearance and impaired bacterial killing, resulting in endobronchial infection and inflammation that contributes to progressive lung disease. Little is known about the respiratory microbiota in the early CF airway and its relationship to inflammation. Objective: To examine the bacterial microbiota and inflammatory profiles in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and oropharyngeal secretions in infants with CF, and investigate associations with the prophylactic antibiotic use. Measurements and Main Results: Infants with CF from two US and two Australian centers were enrolled in a prospective, observational study examining bacterial and inflammatory profiles of the upper and lower respiratory tract. Thirty-two infants underwent bronchoalveolar lavage and oropharyngeal sampling at a mean age of 4.7 months. Bacterial communities were assessed by 16S qPCR and amplicon sequencing; bacterial density (load) and diversity were measured. Lavage samples were analyzed for inflammatory markers (IL-8, unbound neutrophil elastase, absolute neutrophil count (ANC)). Shannon diversity strongly correlated between upper and lower airway samples from a given subject, though community compositions differed. Microbial diversity was significantly lower in younger subjects and in those treated with daily antstaphylococcal prophylaxis. In lavage samples, reduced diversity correlated strongly with lower IL-8 and ANC. Conclusions: In infants with CF, reduced bacterial diversity in the upper and lower airways was strongly associated with the use of prophylactic antibiotics and younger age at the time of sampling; less diversity in the lower airway correlated with lower inflammation on bronchoalveolar lavage. Our findings suggest modification of the respiratory microbiome in infants with CF may reduce airway inflammation, though further study is needed. Shannon diversity in lavage (L) and oropharyngeal (R) samples from infants taking antibiotic prophylaxis (in red) vs not (blue) Objectives: Respiratory microbial composition in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is different from that in healthy individuals. Because of direct effects of the CFTR mutation on lung defense and frequent use of antibiotic treatment, CF patients are prone to become carriers of specific pathogens such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia species. A previous study showed that CFTR-modifying treatment with ivacaftor in patients with Class III CFTR mutations, decreases the burden of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Hoen AG, et al. J Pediatr 2015; 167:138-47) . We studied the effect of ivacaftor treatment on the composition of the respiratory microbiome. This study was part of the HIT-CF program. Materials and Methods: In 15 patients with an S1251N gating mutation that started treatment with ivacaftor, nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal and sputum samples were obtained before start of treatment and eight weeks after start of treatment. After nine months of treatment additional samples will be taken. All samples were sequenced using 16S rRNA-based sequencing and analyzed for microbial composition. Results: A total of 72 samples were obtained in this study. Mean age (SD) of patients was 15.6 (± 6.7) years. In the nasopharyngeal samples, Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium and Pseudomonas aeruginosa were most abundant. After eight weeks of treatment Pseudomonas aeruginosa was less abundant, however this difference was not statistically significant. In the oropharyngeal samples, Streptococcus was most abundant. In the sputum samples, Pseudomonas aeruginosa was both before and eight weeks after treatment most abundantly present, together with Streptococcus, Veillonella and Prevotella. No statistical differences between samples before and eight weeks after treatment were found. Conclusion: In these preliminary data we did not observe significant changes in respiratory microbiome after eight weeks of treatment with ivacaftor in patients with S1251N gating mutations. Data at nine months of follow-up will be collected and analyzed in the next three months and will be presented at the conference. Heirali, A. 1 ; Acosta, N. 1 AB, Canada; 2. Univ. of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 3. Univ. of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada; 4. Univ. of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; 5. McMaster Univ., Hamilton, ON, Canada Introduction: AZLI is an inhaled antibiotic (Abx), cycled in a 28-day "on/off" fashion, used to treat chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections in CF. Whereas aztreonam is considered to have a spectrum of activity limited to aerobic gram-negative organisms based on levels achieved parenterally, AZLI achieves extremely high concentrations potentially extending its spectrum of activity. We hypothesized that AZLI is active against organisms within the CF lung microbiome thereby exerting a portion of its clinical benefit. Accordingly, we sought to determine if there are shifts in the CF microbiota during a single cycle of therapy. Methods: From a planned cohort of 40 adult CF patients from four clinics, 28 patients receiving AZLI have been assessed. After 14 days off any inhaled Abx, participants began a 28-day cycle of AZLI followed by a 28-day off cycle/or 28 days of tobramycin solution (TIS). Sputum was collected on days 0 (off ABx),14, 28 (on AZLI) and 42, 56 (off AZLI +/on TIS). Clinical data including CF-respiratory symptom diary (CFRSD) and lung function were collected at each time point and correlated with microbiome data. DNA was extracted from 142 sputum samples and the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was sequenced using Illumina MiSeq. Microbiome analysis was performed in R. Results: Cohort demographics in the initial cohort were as follows; ΔF508 homozygous 57%, pancreatic insufficient 86%, median age 38.5 (IQR 29.7-43.8), BMI 21.5 kg/m 2 (20. 4-22.3) , FEV 1 % predicted 44. 5 (31.3-61.5) . Most (86%) received AZLI as their sole inhaled ABx, although 14% received TIS during the off cycle. By day 28 patients had a significantly improved CFRSD (p= 0.02) and a median improvement in FEV 1 of 0.1 L. There were no significant differences in alpha-and beta-diversity measures in samples collected on days 0 vs 28 suggesting limited community-wide differences in the CF microbiota due to cycled AZLI therapy. Significant differences were observed in Bray-Curtis measures between individual patients (p=0.001) and based on site, suggesting samples may cluster based on patient and geographical location. How the structure of the microbiome at treatment initiation correlates with clinical response is currently being pursued. Discussion: Patients exhibited clinical improvements on AZLI. Significant changes in the microbiome were not observed after the initiation of AZLI suggesting the CF microbiota is relatively resilient to inhaled Abx. Additional studies analyzing shifts in the CF microbiome of the complete patient cohort may provide information as to whether AZLI treatment causes successive changes in the microbiome and/or could be used to optimize therapy. (Parkins MD, et al. J Clin Microbiol. 2014; 52:1127-35; FowerakerJE, et al. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2005; 55:921-7) . Indeed this results in profoundly heterogeneous populations of PA isolates that differ markedly with respect to colony morphology, antibiotic resistance and virulence potential. Whether dynamics in this diverse population of infecting PA exist -potentially influencing the occurrence of an exacerbation and/or treatment response is heretofore unknown. The major barrier in understanding flux in PA population dynamics relates to finding a convenient method by which to collect regular samples. Serial home collection and storage of frozen sputum followed en masse by thawing and recovery of isolates offers the potential to overcome this limitation. However, freezing is known to result in a relative reduction in PA population density. This project aimed to determine if specific subpopulations of PA were disproportionally killed by freezing. Methods: Sputum was collected from 10 CF patients with chronic PA infection. Half was processed immediately and serial diluted onto MacConkey agar (MAC). 88 isolates were randomly selected from each sample and termed the immediate community (IC). Half the sputum sample was frozen in a home freezer for 7 days, thawed and processed in the same fashion and termed the frozen community (FC). Isolates were screened against antibiotics (aztreonam and ciprofloxacin) and virulence factors (rhamnolipid, protease, siderophore and hemolysis) to understand effects of freezing on sub-population composition. Results: From 10 patients 1760 PA were screened (50% IC, 50% FC). Freezing resulted in a reduction in PA density of 10 2 -10 5 CFU/mL. All patients had the same colony morphology growth before and after freezing. Marked phenotypic diversity was noted in both IC and FC. All patients had statistical differences in at least one (of four) virulence factor assessed between IC and FC, with at least one (of four) virulence factor being no different. However, no consistent pattern was observed with some samples having IC with higher virulence potential then FC and others lower. None of the patients were observed to have statistical differences in proportions of resistant isolates between FC and IC. However, again no consistent pattern was observed. Interpatient analysis comparing proportions of resistant isolates amongst the entire collection showed no statistical difference between FC and IC; aztreonam (p= 0.55) and ciprofloxacin (p=0.28). Discussion: Virulence factor production and antibiotic resistance in a population of PA causing chronic CF lung infections is heterogeneous, and phenotypic diversity is underestimated if only one or a few colonies are analyzed. While variability in IC and FC samples were observed, no evidence of killing a specific subpopulation of PA by freezing was observed. Our study suggests home collection may pose a viable means by which to understand PA population flux in CF lung disease. Introduction: CF affects many systems in the body, but the characteristic symptom that dramatically reduces quality of life is associated with the accumulation of mucus in the lungs. In the long term, this static mucoid environment gets colonized by a diverse community of microbes, viruses and fungi, therefore, becoming a reservoir for infection and requiring chronic treatment with antibiotics. Generally, the choice of antibiotic is not targeted and in many cases is administered after the infection has advanced. In addition to long-term side effects of these drugs, eventually antibiotic resistant bacteria and fungi can take hold and complicate further treatment. Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGEN), in collaboration with the University of Arizona, has initiated a study to track changes in the microbial and fungal community over time in patients with CF. The purpose of this study is to better understand the CF pulmonary microbiome over time and determine if emerging pathogens and antibiotic resistance can be detected prior to exacerbation. A primary goal of the study is to develop and evaluate personalized, targeted microbiome assays for rapid characterization of a patient's current pulmonary community. These prototype diagnostics could potentially be used to advise treatment that is personalized and timely. Methods: After obtaining consent, adult subjects (≥ 18 years old) were enrolled in a year-long observational study. The study involves monthly sputa collections from up to 13 patients over the course of one year. The sputa samples were analyzed for 16S rDNA and Whole MetaGenome Sequence (WMGS) community analysis. In addition, the sputa samples were evaluated through TGEN's Next-Gen Antimicrobial Resistance Detection (N-GARD) assay, profiling the personalized microbial community in these samples through amplicon sequencing. Results: Preliminary 16S analysis (samples from 2 to 6 time points for 6 patients) revealed high relative abundances of many of the common pathogens associated with CF, including Pseudomonas, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Haemophilus, and Enterobacteriaceae with variation among patients and among timepoints within patients. Analysis of metagenomic data through GOTTCHA and WGFAST revealed overlapping patterns with the 16S, but was able to resolve to species and strain level. N-GARD sequencing revealed two CF patients with MRSA (SCCmec type II) and another patient with MSSA. Other species targets such as for Achromobacter, Haemophilus and Streptococcus are currently under development. Analysis of the fungal community is ongoing. Discussion: Newer techniques for analysis of the CF microbiome have the potential of not only describing the microbiological environment in the CF lung but also distinguish susceptibilities and personalize treatments and therapies in a timely fashion. Current diagnostics of CF exacerbations are based on clinical culturing of microbial isolates from sputum samples followed by antibiotic susceptibility testing. Despite this established gold standard, studies have shown that antimicrobial susceptibility profiles frequently do not correlate with clinical outcomes. In some instances, antibiotic treatment still results in patient recovery despite highly reported resistance. This underlies the incomplete understanding of the microbial basis of CF exacerbations and the best methods for treatment. The likely cause of this discrepancy is that many pathogens in CF lungs are not identified in standard clinical labs. Bacterial 16S rRNA gene profiling has shown that CF lung infections are much more diverse than that revealed by clinical culture. Thus, we have begun to implement a "Rapid Response" pipeline for CF exacerbations that employs multi-omics data including transcriptome, metabolome and 16S rRNA gene sequencing to provide a timely, comprehensive assessment to clinicians. Sputum samples are collected and then DNA, RNA and metabolites extracted, followed by nucleic acid sequencing and mass spectrometry, and finally, data analysis. The pipeline generates microbial taxonomy, gene expression and metabolite production information requiring high-powered computational resources to analyze. Despite the enormous scale of the data generated, a highly streamlined and integrative bioinformatics pipeline allows for analysis in less than 48 hours using a small group of people. Information is provided on virulence factor production, host inflammatory signals, gene expression of both microbes and host, taxonomic profiles of bacterial lung infections, including any new pathogens that may be driving an exacerbation event, and penetration of drugs to the site of infection. Recent application of this pipeline to a severe exacerbation event showed Pseudomonas aeruginosa growth was slow despite 95% of the lung microbiome being composed of this bacterium, expressing mostly alginate and iron chelating genes, while the 16S rDNA sequencing revealed a possible bloom of anaerobes. Metabolite production matched transcriptome profiling in that both detected the production of the siderophore pyochelin and also revealed that antibiotics given to the patient were reaching the site of infection. In this instance, the omics pipelines had mosly harmonious conclusions about this exacerbation. The future of CF exacerbation diagnostics and other diseases involving complex infections will employ multi-omics data, because efforts such as this one, show that timeframes for producing, analyzing, and translating this rich data to physicians now approaches the gold standard of bacterial culture. 305w Introduction: During coughing, patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) can generate P. aeruginosa droplet nuclei capable of travelling up to 4 metres and remaining viable for up 45 minutes (Knibbs L, et al. Thorax. 2014; 69:740-5) . The CF Foundation (CFF) recently updated their infection control guidelines to include the recommendation that patients with CF wear surgical face masks in communal areas of health facilities to reduce transmission of pathogens (Saiman L, et al. ICHE. 2014 ;35:S1-67). However, the outward protection of face masks worn by CF patients has not been extensively studied. The aim of this study was to investigate the effectiveness of face masks and cough etiquette techniques for reducing viable bioaerosols in patients with CF and chronic P. aeruginosa infection during talking and coughing. Methods: Twenty-five (15 male) adult subjects with CF, mean (SD) age of 31.2 (7.7) y and FEV 1 of 50.7 (17.4) % predicted were enrolled. Subjects were positioned in a validated, particle-free aerosol-sampling device and performed a series of six (order randomised) activities for 5 minutes each: 1. talking; 2. talking with surgical mask; 3. unmasked coughing; 4. coughing with surgical mask; 5. coughing with N95 mask; 6. coughing with hand covering mouth. A 6-stage Andersen Cascade Impactor, positioned 2 metres from the subject, collected and sized viable aerosols. Quantitative sputum and aerosol cultures were performed and the total number of colony forming units (CFUs) was determined. Subjects rated their comfort levels during each cough activity. Results: 20/25 subjects produced viable aerosolized P. aeruginosa during unmasked coughing, yet during talking studies (24 subjects), only 2 single P. aeruginosa CFUs were detected. There was a positive correlation between sputum P. aeruginosa load and unmasked cough aerosol P. aeruginosa CFUs (r=0.424, p=0.039). Compared with unmasked coughing there was a reduction in viable cough aerosols using both mask types and where a hand covered the mouth (p<0.001). There was no difference between CFUs detected when the surgical mask and N95 were compared during cough manoeuvres (p=1.0), though patients rated the surgical mask as more comfortable (p=0.002). CFUs detected with hand covering mouth was greater than both surgical (p<0.001) and N95 mask studies (p=0.001). Conclusions: Face masks worn by patients with CF reduce cough generated droplet nuclei containing viable P. aeruginosa, with the surgical mask providing enhanced patient comfort. Cough etiquette provides less protection than masks for reducing aerosol dispersal. These data support the current CFF Infection Control guidelines which recommend the use of surgical masks to reduce environmental contamination and the potential transmission of pathogenic microorganisms in patients with CF. Supported by: CFF Therapeutics (USA), The Prince Charles Hospital Foundation (Australia). Evolutionary theory predicts that when bacteria mutate to become antibiotic resistant, they should become less fit than their antibiotic-susceptible relatives when antibiotics are absent. Surprisingly, recent findings suggest that certain resistance mutations can increase bacterial fitness and virulence. These findings, and the intensive antibiotic treatment used in CF raise the possibility that treatment could eliminate susceptible isolates, only to have them replaced by hypervirulent, antibiotic-resistant siblings. We hypothesized that mutations conferring resistance to CF-relevant antibiotics could lead to enhanced bacterial virulence. To test this we first identified mutations that confer resistance to aztreonam, and then determined the effects of these mutations on virulence. Using in vitro selection we grew P. aeruginosa on increasing concentrations of aztreonam and then used whole genome sequencing to identify putative resistance mutations in 94 parallel evolved lineages. We found that the most common mutations affected genes involved in antibiotic efflux and cell wall remodeling. In total, 23 different nonsynonymous mutations were detected in the nalD, nalC, and mexR genes, all of which normally repress expression of the mexAB antibiotic efflux system. Furthermore, evolved strains with these mutations exhibited increased mexA expression. To determine whether aztreonam-resistance mutations enhanced virulence we compared two evolved resistant isolates with mutations in nalD and mexR, to the aztreonam-susceptible parental strain in an acute murine pneumonia infection model. The resistant isolates were ~8-13-fold more lethal than the susceptible parental strain. These results identify P. aeruginosa mutations that can simultaneously lead to antibiotic resistance and enhance virulence. These data raise the possibility that selection for resistance could also lead to enhanced bacterial virulence phenotypes that could promote CF pulmonary disease progression. Here, we introduce the Colorado CF Research and Development Program's Nontuberculous Mycobacteria (NTM) Molecular Core, which offers WGS of NTM isolates affecting US CF patients. This genomic surveillance of NTM isolates derived from US CF patients, combined with NTM isolate phenotyping and biobanking provided by the Biorepository Core, provides a critical resource for microbiologic, genomic, and epidemiologic investigations within the US CF community. For inquiries, please visit https://www. nationaljewish.org/Colorado-CF-Research-and-Development-Program/. Methods: In our first year, we collected and began WGS of ~250 CF NTM isolates including those from the Colorado CF PATIENCE and PRE-DICT clinical trials. NTM isolates were prepared for genome sequencing using the Nextera XT library preparation protocol, multiplexed and sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq to generate 2X300 bp paired-end sequence reads for each isolate. Sequence reads for each isolate were mapped to the most appropriate reference genome for each species (i.e. M. abscessus subsp. abscessus ATCC 19977 for all M. abscessus isolates or M. intracellulare ATCC 13950 for all M. intracellulare and M. chimaera isolates recovered) using Bowtie2. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and variants were identified using Samtools. Custom computational scripts were used to compare the SNP variation and estimate genomic relatedness among isolates. Sequence data are made publically available via an NCBI BioProject at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA319839. Results: We interrogated the genomic relationships of NTM isolates within and between CF patients to assess the likelihood of clustering and to characterize the predominant NTM species affecting US CF patients. With a mean of >30 SNPs between isolates from different patients, we found no evidence of clustering between the US CF patients analyzed to date. However, we see clusters of genetically related isolates that appear to comprise genomic subtypes (N=3-7) within M. abscessus, M. avium, M. chimaera and M. intracellulare. Pan-genome analyses revealed the presence of mobile genetic elements, which may carry putative virulence factors, in this population of NTM isolates. Conclusions: Here we describe a dynamic platform for analyzing NTM affecting US CF patients. Although genomic comparisons revealed genetically similar isolates within clinically relevant NTM species, no clonal lineages were shared between patients; therefore, we did not observe clustering of NTM within the US CF patients we have investigated to date. Our initial activity emphasizes the advantages and need for the integration of genome sequencing into clinical CF care and infection control. Supported Background: Mycobacterium abscessus is a rapid-growing mycobacterium that is increasingly isolated from the lungs of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Recommended treatment regimens include multiple drugs in two phases (intensive phase and continuation), but there is a lack of compelling evidence on clinical efficacy to guide mangagement. Methods: We performed a retrospective review of treatment outcomes of CF patients in a single center with at least M. abscessus-positive respiratory culture who underwent intensive phase treatment between 2006 and 2014, defined as a treatment regimen including at least one intravenous antibiotic. Patients who underwent lung transplant prior to or during treatment were excluded. Data collected from the electronic medical record included: age at time of treatment, anti-mycobacterial drugs received, route of administration, start and stop date of therapy, FEV 1 prior to treatment and at 90, 180, and 365 days post-treatment, dates of cultures positive for M. abscessus. Data were analyzed using parametric methods. Results: A total of 37 patients underwent intensive phase M. abscessus treatment, with average age 14.5±4.2 years. Amikacin was the most commonly used drug (81% of patients, though only inhaled in 4), followed by cefoxitin (76%) and clarithromycin (57%). 32/37 (86%) patients were treated with three or more drugs, and the average duration of the intensive phase was 36.4±18.6 days. Of the 24 patients who had at least 3 acid-fast bacillus cultures in the 18 months following treatment, 8 (33%) achieved bacterial clearance. Lung function values were available in 33 patients, and pre-treatment percent predicted FEV1 of 79.7% ±25.1% was not significantly changed at 90 or 365 days post-treatment (81.8% ±23.3%, 81.1% ±23.0%). However, excluding 8 patients treated despite above average pre-treatment lung function (FEV1>100% predicted) that may have had little opportunity to improve, we observed a significant increase in % predicted FEV1 90 days after starting treatment (69.9% ±20.4% vs. 74.2% ±20.9%, p<0.02), with a trend towards continued improvement at 365 days (73.6% ±21.1%, p=0.067). The subset of patients treated with clarithromycin had significant lung function improvement (p<0.02) and a trend towards increased clearance of M. abscessus vs. those who did not (50% vs.10%, p=0.079). Conclusion: Treatment of M. abscessus resulted in short-term improvements in lung function, but only in the subset of patients with below-average pre-treatment FEV1. Furthermore, patients treated with clarithromycin appeared to have more positive clinical responses, though interpretation is limited by small numbers and the heterogeneity of treatment regimens. Further investigation is needed to determine the impact of resistance patterns and continuation phase on the findings, as well as multivariate approaches to try and control for heterogeneity. However, these findings remain important in light of current guidelines that favor azithromycin over clarithromycin. Background: The prevalence of MRSA infections is increasing in CF patients and is associated with a consistent decline in FEV1 and higher mortality. Although there are cases of spontaneous clearance of MRSA, early eradication treatment (EET) could increase the percentage of clearance of the germ providing a clinically relevant germ-free period and therefore avoiding a negative prognostic factor. The microbiological outcome could indicate that prevention of persistent infection by EET of MRSA is a simple way for improving the long-term prognosis in CF patients. Purpose: To compare statistically the efficacy of EET against initial MRSA infection of the lower respiratory tract of CF patients and to evaluate MRSA antibiotic susceptibility at initial infection. Study design: Ongoing large-scale, open-label, multicenter RCT involving CF patients of 6 Italian centres with first/new MRSA infection randomly assigned to the active arm (A) or observation-only arm (B). Patients randomized to arm A are administered an association of antibiotics according to susceptibility pattern (oral co-trimoxazole and rifampin for 21 days associated with intranasal mupirocin for 5 days). Patient selection criteria: Eligible CF patients are older than 4 years, can demonstrate regular visits to the center, are not infected by B. cepacia complex and have no clinical signs of respiratory exacerbation. Primary outcome: In both arms the percentage of eradication and failure will be calculated. Successful eradication will be defined as the absence of the germ following antibiotic treatment in at least 3 antibiograms over a period of 6 months. Secondary outcome: Antibiotic susceptibility of MRSA strains at first isolation will be evaluated. Interim results: Since January 2013 we randomized 61 patients (M 42.6%). Twenty-nine (47,5%) of these were assigned to arm A and 32 (52,5%) to arm B; mean age was 19.05 (SD±12,86). At the moment, 40 (56,6%) patients have completed follow-up. Eradication has been successful in arm A in 12 out 29 patients (41,4%). Culture results were negative in arm B in 9 out of 32 (28.1%) patients. The antibiotic susceptibility pattern of MRSA at the moment of isolation supports the treatment by the chosen therapy. By the 15th of October 2016, follow-up of enrolled patients will be concluded. The polymicrobial nature in pulmonary infections in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the causes of the lack of efficacy of existing antibiotic treatment. Co-colonization of the lungs with Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia cepacia can result in more severe pulmonary disease than P. aeruginosa monoinfection. The aim of the present study was to evaluate clinical efficacy of nebulized solution of a novel, first-in-class antimicrobial drug candidate Mul-1867 (poly-N,N'-hexamethyleneguanidine, modified by hydrazine) in murine models caused by mixed infection of clinical isolates P.aeruginosa+B.cenocepacia. Methods: We studied the potency of Mul-1867 against bacterial isolates from patients with cystic fibrosis including strains obtained from CFF Therapeutics Development Network Resource Center for Microbiology at Seattle Children's Hospital (Seattle, WA, USA) and from the Institute of Human Microbiology, LLC (DE, USA). The MICs for antimicrobials were determined by the broth macrodilution method according to CLSI guideline. For in vivo studies, 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice were intranasally infected with P. aeruginosa + B. cenocepacia (each 2×10 7 cfu/mouse). Treatment was started 12 h after infection with Mul-1867 or tobramycin or aztreonam (Cayston), administered by intranasal inhalation at 32x MIC. Results: Mul-1867 exhibited a high level of antimicrobial activity with the MIC 0.25 mg/L against B. cenocepacia and 4.0 mg/L against P. aeruginosa. Tobramycin and aztreonam were less active; tobramycin MIC was 128 mg/L for P. aeruginosa and was not active against B. cenocepacia; aztreonam MIC were 128 mg/L for P. aeruginosa and 64.0 mg/L against B. cenocepacia. Induced pneumonia displayed a total death of control animals without treatment within 96 h post-infection in all groups with mixed infections. For the group P. aeruginosa + B. cenocepacia treated with Mul-1867 to the end of observation period (96 h) 10% of mice died, whereas no animal died in groups challenged solely with P. aeruginosa or B. cenocepacia. Animals treated with tobramycin displayed 50% mortality in P. aeruginosa + B. cenocepacia group, 20% in P. aeruginosa and 40% B. cenocepacia groups respectively. Animals treated with aztreonam displayed 60% mortality in P. aeruginosa + B. cenocepacia group, 20% in P. aeruginosa and 30% in B. cenocepacia groups respectively. Conclusions: Our study demonstrated that: -mixed P. aeruginosa and B. cenocepacia infection leads to higher mortality in animal models -Mul-1867 possesses great activity against monoinfection caused by P. aeruginosa or B. cenocepacia in in vivo animal models. -Mul-1867 possesses great activity against mixed infection (caused by P. aeruginosa + B. cenocepacia) in in vivo animal models. Background: In a cross-sectional study we previously showed an association between higher Stenotrophomonas maltophilia antibody levels and decreased lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) (Waters V, et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011; 183:635-40) . The purpose of this study was to assess the longitudinal relationship between serologic response to S. maltophilia and clinical outcomes. Methods: Changes in S. maltophilia antibody levels in adult and pediatric patients with CF from 2008-2014 were assessed with patients allocated to one of the following infection groups based on the frequency of positive respiratory tract cultures for S. maltophilia: 1) Never S. maltophilia: never any positive respiratory cultures for S. maltophilia, 2) Rare S. maltophilia: <5% of respiratory cultures positive for S. maltophilia, 3) Cleared S. maltophilia: 5-60% of respiratory cultures positive for S. maltophilia with last 2 cultures negative for S. maltophilia, 4) Intermittent S. maltophilia: 5-60% of respiratory cultures positive for S. maltophilia, and 5) Chronic (or persistent) S. maltophilia: >60% of respiratory cultures positive for S. maltophilia (Stanojevic S, et al. J Cyst Fibros 2013; 12(6) :575-83). We investigated whether antibody levels could predict subsequent S. maltophilia microbiological status, and whether they are associated with lung function and subsequent pulmonary exacerbation using generalized estimating equation models to account for repeated events within the same patients. Results: Repeated S. maltophilia antibody samples (n=409) from 135 CF patients showed that antibody levels were relatively stable between study visits, regardless of infection group. Higher antibody levels were independently associated with a subsequent positive culture (OR 1.62; 95% CI 1.09, 2.41; p=0.02) and an increased hazard ratio for subsequent pulmonary exacerbation (HR 1.3; 95% CI 1.1, 1.6; p<0.001). Higher antibody levels were not independently associated with a steeper rate of FEV 1 % predicted decline. Conclusions: S. maltophilia antibody levels may be helpful to identify individuals at risk of exacerbation who may benefit from earlier antimicrobial treatment. 29-34). The classification of patients as "chronic," "intermittent," or "free of infection" may no longer be relevant in the current era of eradication therapy. In this study we use latent class models to investigate patterns of P. aeruginosa infection in CF patients. Methods: This was a retrospective study including all patients followed at the Hospital for Sick Children and St Michael's Hospital (Toronto, Canada) between 2005 and 2015. Patients with at least 25 respiratory tract cultures were included in the latent class analysis. Patients were assigned to groups based on the frequency of positive cultures. The number of groups was selected based on the Schwartz Bayesian Criteria. The classification categories were then applied to a larger dataset to investigate differences in clinical characteristic and outcomes between the groups. Results: A total of 22,090 respiratory tract cultures were available for 622 patients over the 10-year study period; on average each patient was followed for 8 years. Latent class analysis identified 5 distinct patterns of infection (Figure) . Overall, 38.4% of patients did not grow P. aeruginosa during the study period and 30.9% were chronically infected. In addition we identified three new groups: one where patients rarely grew P. aeruginosa (23.6%), one where the probability of having a positive culture increases over time (5.4%) and another where the probability of having a positive culture decreases with each subsequent culture (1.7%). Patients in the group with decreasing probability of positive cultures and the rare group had the highest use of chronic inhaled therapy. Future analyses will consider how different treatments affect the classification of patients, and whether distinct patterns exist for pediatric and adult patients. Conclusion: We have identified three new patterns of P. aeruginosa infection. We are currently investigating how these groups differ in terms of clinical characteristics and outcomes. (CF) is genetic multi-organ disease caused by absent or dysfunctional CFTR-mediated anion secretion, which in the lung, leads to mucus obstruction and chronic infection/inflammation. The Burkholderia cenocepacia complex (Bcc) is a group of 18 genetically distinct species. Although generally harmless to humans, they are extremely pathogenic to CF patients, and acquisition of Bcc is associated with a significant increase in mortality. Treatment of Bcc infections are difficult as the bacteria are multidrug resistant and able to survive in biofilms (Mahenthiralingam E, et al. Clin Infect Dis. 2002; 33:1469-75 ). Short Palate Lung and Nasal Epithelial Clone 1 (SPLUNC1) is secreted by the airway epithilia and is a multifunctional innate defense protein. SPLUNC1 is known to have antimicrobial functions against many gram-negative bacteria including Bcc. CF airway surface liquid (ASL) is characterized with an increase of acidity which renders SPLUNC1 inactive and unable to regulate the epithelial Na + channel (ENaC) (Garland AL, et al. PNAS. 2013; 110:15973-8) . We therefore tested the hypotheses that SPLUNC1's antimicrobial and antibiofilm activity against Bcc were also pH-sensitive. Methods: Bcc clinical isolate J2315 was cultured with 0.4 μM SPLUNC1 for 2 and 24 h over the pH range of 6 to 7.5, and colony forming units were determined for SPLUNC1's antimicrobial activity. Bcc clinical isolate J2315 was then cultured for 24 h for biofilms in the presence of 0.4 μM SPLUNC1 at pH range of 6 to 7.5. Biofilm growth was measured by crystal violet (CV) staining. We have recently elucidated the crystal structure of SPLUNC1 and screened novel mutants based on this structure for pH-sensitivity of antimicrobial activity. J2315 was cultured for 2 and 24 h with 0.4 μM SPLUNC1 mutants at pH 6 to 7.5, and bacterial growth was measured by OD 600 nm readings and CFU counts. Results: SPLUNC1's antimicrobial activity against J2315 was impaired under acidic conditions, but was restored at pH 7.5. However, SPLUNC1 maintained its antibiofilm activity at a low pH of 6 and reduced J2315 biofilm biomass after 24 h. In addition, SPLUNC1 mutants that are pH-independent ENaC regulators had varied antimicrobial effects. SPLUNC1 mutant Q140E reduced J2315 bacterial growth at a low pH of 6. SPLUNC1 mutants K138D and K156C had no effects against J2315 at pH 6, but reduced bacterial growth at pH 6.5. Conclusions: Whilst SPLUNC1's mechanism of action is currently under investigation, our data suggest that SPLUNC1's antimicrobial activity against Bcc clinical isolate J2315 is pH-dependent while the antibiofilm activity is pH-independent. In addition, SPLUNC1 mutants that are pH-independent ENaC regulators, also retained pH-independent antimicrobial activity against J2315, suggesting that the pH-sensitive regions also play a role in SPLUNC1's antimicrobial activity. Whilst the impact of CF on SPLUNC1-Bcc antimicrobial interactions is currently under investigation, our data suggest that understanding this interaction may have important therapeutic applications for CF lung disease. Funded by the NIH and the UK CF Trust. Methods: We searched the Calgary CF biobank (a repository of bacterial isolates from every CF sputum sample collected from each clinical encounter since 1978) for adults with GBS isolated from their sputum on at least one occasion. Charts were reviewed for demographic information, spirometry, severity and management of pulmonary exacerbations (PEx), coinfections, and medication history (including the two years preceding and two years following first GBS isolate). The primary outcome was PEx occurrence within 6 weeks of first GBS isolate (2 weeks before and 4 weeks after sputum culture). A severe PEx was one requiring intravenous antibiotics or hospitalization. Secondary outcomes included: PEx frequency before and after the first GBS isolate, change in % predicted FEV 1 at the time of the incident GBS versus the last clinic visit, complications of GBS infection, and development of chronic GBS infection. Bacterial strain typing was performed by pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Results: Thirty GBS isolates were cultured from 11 individuals (55% male). Persistent infection occurred in three individuals; two cleared spontaneously after less than six months and the third cleared after 19 months with antibiotics for PEx treatment. PFGE was performed on 16 viable isolates, demonstrating the same strain was capable of chronic infections but no evidence of shared lineages was observed. The median % predicted FEV 1 was 81.4 (IQR 51-96) at incident GBS isolation. The majority were never smokers. At the time of GBS isolation 5 (45%) individuals experienced a PEx and under half were severe. Of the GBS isolates, 9 (30%) were associated with a PEx; one third of these were severe. The risk of PEx at index GBS isolate was not significantly different from the preceding visit (RR1.6, CI 0.34-7.94, p=0.45). At the time of GBS isolate, only one subject had a significant drop in FEV 1 (more than 10%). PEx frequency in the two years following index GBS isolate was similar to the two preceding years (RR 1.14, CI 0.80-1.60, p=0.58). No patients developed pneumonia or empyema. Conclusion: In adults with CF, GBS is a transient colonizer in most and does not appear to increase PEx risk at the time of index isolate. There was no evidence of infection transmission and no adverse effects on lung function (at the time of isolate), PEx frequency, or pulmonary complications were observed. Studies with a larger sample and controls are now necessary to confirm no adverse effects of GBS exist in adults with CF.  Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), the archetypal CF pathogen. This heterogeneity is proposed to account, in part, for the discordance between culture-directed therapy of exacerbations and patient response. In the last few years, Staphylococcus aureus (SA) has supplanted PA as the most common pathogen in CF. However, comparatively little is known. The aim of this study was to determine if diversity within SA exists within the CF lung. Methods: Sputum samples from patients with chronic SA infection (defined as >50% of cultures over the prior year) who attend the Calgary Adult CF Clinic were collected in the summer of 2015 and cultured on mannitol salt agar. From each sputum sample, 24 macroscopically identical but randomly selected isolates were collected. Isolates were independently confirmed as SA using catalase and coagulase testing. Isolates were tested for susceptibility to erythromycin (ERY), doxycycline (DOXY), ciprofloxacin (CIP), and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (SXT) using Kirby-Bauer disc diffusion. In addition, the isolates were tested for the production of hyaluronidase (HA) and protease (PR). Results: A total of 384 SA isolates were screened from 15 patients with chronic SA (94% MSSA, 60% male, median age 28.9) who contributed 16 sputum samples in total. Heterogeneity in Kirby Bauer zone sizes was observed resulting in macroscopically identical isolates with discordant susceptibility test results in 44% (CIP); 38% (ERY); 19% (DOXY) and 6% (SXT) of sputum samples. However, these differences occurred randomly, not in any particular patient and were confined to a small number of isolates in each sample. Much greater diversity with respect to production of virulence factors in each of the samples was observed -with 75% of samples having marked diversity in production of HA and 81% in PR. Diversity in production of virulence factors occurred in the majority of sputum samples but similarly this did not occur disproportionally in patients where diversity was observed for other phenotypes. Conclusions: We observed heterogeneity -albeit limited -amongst 24 randomly identified macroscopically identical isolates from individual CF sputum samples suggesting phenotypic diversity does exist amongst chronically infecting SA. This implies that like PA, antibiogram-directed therapy against SA in CF may be confounded by population diversity. However, the proportion of SA isolates with marked diversity from the population median was much less common than that reported amongst chronically infecting PA populations suggesting that mere persistence in CF airways is not adequate to explain diversification and population heterogeneity. Introduction: Achromobacter spp. are emerging CF pathogens with reported prevalence of 5-21%. Traditionally, Achromobacter spp. infections in CF have been attributed exclusively to A. xylosoxidans (AX) as biochemical testing and 16S rDNA PCR do not readily differentiate species. However, recent data have demonstrated a much greater breadth of species infecting the CF lower airways. Taking advantage of a longitudinal strain collection established in 1978 encompassing every isolate recovered from each CF patient, we sought to determine: 1) the species level identity of each Achromobacter isolate, 2) the natural history of infection and presence of common strains within our cohort to evaluate the potential of patient-patient spread, and 3) if particular phenotypic traits differed between species, and correlated with the ability to cause chronic infection or were more common in CF isolates. Methods: A retrospective analysis of Achromobacter spp. isolates from the adult CF biobank was performed. Patients were included if they had ever isolated an Achromobacter spp. Where available all incident isolates and repeated isolates at >1 year intervals in patients with persistent infection were included. Isolates were genotyped using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) for strain typing and nrdA sequencing for species identification. Proteolytic activity was assayed using a plate-based assay and biofilm formation using a crystal violet assay in the Calgary Biofilm Device. Isolates derived from non-CF bronchiectasis (nCFb) patients were used as controls. Results: We identified 115 (0.003%) Achromobacter spp. isolates of the 33166 isolates in the biobank as of December 2013. A total of 32 iso-lates were included from 18 of 34 total patients, manifesting in 10 chronic infections (>3 months) and eight transient infections (<3 mo). We also included nine of 89 nCFb isolates. Strain typing by PFGE revealed that a single strain was generally responsible for a chronic infection and shared strains were observed in only two CF patients, suggesting transmission between patients does not commonly occur. Of the 31 CF isolates that were confirmed as Achromobacter spp. via 16S rDNA PCR, there were 14 A. xylosoxidans (AX), 10 A. insuavis (AI), three A. spanius (AS), two A. dolens (AD), one A. ruhlandii and one of undetermined species. For the nine Achromobacter nCFb isolates, eight were AX and one was of undetermined species. Biofilm production was significantly higher in AX isolates in comparison to AI, AS and AD when compared individually. No isolates displayed protease activity. AX were no more likely to cause chronic infection than other species (AX vs. AI/AS/AD or AR, p>>0.05). Conclusion: Broadly, Achromobacter spp. infections appear to be increasing in frequency. Species level identification may aid in efficiently treating these patients as some phenotypic features, such as biofilm production, significantly differ between species. Chronic infections are almost always caused by an individual strain of bacteria and shared strains are rare in our cohort. Introduction: Rapid evaporative ionization mass spectrometry (REIMS) is a new technique that has been shown to accurately classify yeast and bacteria. Thermal stress is applied onto bacterial colonies which results in evaporation and ionisation of metabolites and structural lipids. The mass spectrometer detects and identifies analytes through spectral database comparison (Strittmatter N, et al. Anal Chem. 2014; 86:6555-62) . We describe the application of REIMS to cystic fibrosis (CF)-related pathogens and show that the technology can identify P. aeruginosa with 100% accuracy. Differences were observed in the phospholipid and rhamnolipid range; derivatives of quorum sensing molecules (QSM) were also detected. These may provide useful biomarkers for a non-invasive diagnostic tool using ambient mass spectrometric (MS) approaches currently in development. Methods: Isolates were collected from CF samples routinely processed at Royal Brompton Hospital (London, UK). These included 53 P. aeruginosa isolates and 51 isolates from 11 genera, including Achromobacter xylosoxidans, Staphylococcus aureus, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and Burkholderia spp. Genera were confirmed using Microflex LT MALDI TOF (Bruker Daltonics). REIMS analyses were performed in negative ionization mode, on colonies grown on plates in appropriate species conditions. A small amount of biomass was sampled directly from the medium using bipolar forceps. On drawing the probes together, an electrical current of 70W was applied and the resulting aerosol was channelled into a XEVO G2-XS Q-ToF instrument (Waters Corporation). A minimum of three technical measurements were acquired and averaged for each samples. Mass spectra were subjected to background subtraction and mass drift correction, unsupervised and supervised multivariate statistical analyses. Results: Principal component analysis effectively separated P. aeruginosa from the other genera and prediction was 100% accurate using linear discriminant analysis. Analysis of variance revealed separation was mainly based upon differences in the mass over charge range from 600 to 900 that comprises the phospholipids. Intraspecies diversity within P. aeruginosa was explored and rhamnolipids and QSM were found to differ between isolates. Conclusions: REIMS clearly distinguished P. aeruginosa from other CF pathogens thereby supporting its role as a diagnostic tool. Intraspecies differences were also observed. The characteristic P. aeruginosa features identified as part of this study may serve as biomarkers for the development of a direct-from-sample diagnostic tool. Indeed, we are currently working on non-invasive detection approaches, based on direct MS analysis of skin secretions and exhaled breath. Such non-culture-based systems would save valuable time to diagnosis. Whole genome sequencing is also being undertaken in parallel and results will be used to seek relationships with clinical outcomes. Supported (PEx) . Treatment of PEx in the hospital has certain advantages, however a 2-week hospital stay disrupts school and other daily activities and the whole family's life. In addition, hospitalization is costly and carries the risk of acquisition of hospital pathogens. Home intravenous (IV) therapy has been implemented worldwide for the past 4 decades and is the most commonly used treatment of PEx in adults with CF. However, limited data exist on the efficacy and safety of home IV therapy in children with CF. In this study, we investigated the clinical outcome of home IV in a pre-selected group of children with CF. Methods: A retrospective single CF center data collection (2000-2014) of all episodes of PEx treated with IV antibiotics at home and in the hospital was performed. Each PEx was recorded as an independent entry. Home IV eligibility was determined based on the center's criteria (age, family comfort, availability of home health care, known drug allergy, severe comorbidities, patient's stability, adherence, and complexity of the treatment). Outcome measures included FEV 1 , FVC, FEF 25-75 % p, time to the next PEx, weight and BMI. Antibiotic-related adverse reactions and treatment complications were identified. Results: 290 PEx events that occurred in 83 subjects were included. 242 events were treated in the hospital (hospital IV) and 48 were treated at home (home IV). Median age was 13.1 y (IQR 9.6, 15.1) and 13.4 y (IQR 10.1, 15.8) for home and hospital IV groups respectively. There were no differences between the hospital and home IV groups regarding CFTR mutations, known drug allergy, presence of G-tube, CF-related diabeies, and respiratory cultures. A higher percentage of the home IV group had prior experience with home IV (75% vs 32%, p<0.0001). Non-Medicaid insurance was higher in the home IV group ( The following data was collected from the electronic medical record to assess clinical outcomes: demographic information; pulmonary function (FEV 1 ) baseline, at beginning and end of vanc therapy; duration of vanc treatment; vanc trough concentrations; weight at beginning and end of vanc therapy; other organisms present in sputum; alternative anti-MRSA agents used. Clinical outcomes were compared between patients with low Etest MICs and high Etest MICs. Results: Thirty MRSA isolates from 17 CF patients were tested using Etest and VITEK vanc MIC detection methods. The Etest vanc MICs were consistently higher compared to the VITEK (p<0.01). Patients with high Etest MICs had similar baseline characteristics, vanc duration of treatment, vanc trough concentrations, improvement in FEV 1 , and weight gain during vanc therapy when compared to patients with low Etest MICs. There was no clear correlation between either VITEK or Etest MICs with patient outcomes. A trend toward more patients with high Etest MICs requiring an alternate anti-MRSA treatment (61.5%) than patients with low Etest MICs (0%) was seen (p=0.08). Patients who required alternate anti-MRSA treatment (linezolid or ceftaroline) had better improvement in FEV 1 on the alternative treatment versus treatment with vanc (17 ±11.5, 3.5±9.2 % predicted, respectively), p<0.001. Conclusion: Vancomycin MIC results were significantly higher when Etest was used compared to VITEK. Patients with a high vanc Etests who did not respond well to vanc and were switched to an alternate anti-MRSA agent had significantly better improvement in FEV 1 on the alternate agent. Objectives: 1) To determine if acquisition of SM is associated with accelerated lung function decline, and 2) To identify clinical differences following incident infection between patients with chronic and intermittent SM infection. Methods: A longitudinal, retrospective, pre-post study was conducted for 88 patients with CF, ages 6 to 51 years, with their first positive respiratory culture for SM between January 2008 and December 2014. We compared patients who developed chronic and intermittent infection to determine differences in baseline characteristics using Fisher's exact test or Wilcoxon rank sum test. Chronic SM infection was defined as 2 or more positive cultures within 12 months. We evaluated rate of decline in FEV1 prior to and following incident SM acquisition for all patients, using interrupted time series analysis. Results: Among the 88 patients, the mean (SD) age was 17.4 (9.2) years, mean (SD) BMI was 19.8 (3.8) , and mean (SD) FEV1 at the time of acquisition was 90% (25.2). 40/88 (45%) developed chronic SM infection, and 48/88 (55%) had intermittent infection. Those with chronic infection had more CF cultures obtained per year compared to those with intermittent infection (4.8 vs. 3.2, P<0.001). There was a trend towards younger age (15.8 years vs. 18.6 years, P=0.09) and lower BMI (18.9 vs. 20.6, P=0.07) among those with chronic SM infection, but there was no difference in gender, race, mutation type, CF-related diabetes, or baseline lung function. In unadjusted regression analysis, the average rate of lung function change for the 88 included patients was -0.67 percent predicted (95% CI: -1.21, -0.13) per year prior to acquisition, and further decreased to -1.67 percent predicted (95% CI: -2.104, -1.24) per year after acquisition (P<0.001). Conclusions: In this single-center cohort, slightly more than half developed chronic SM infection following their incident infection. In those with chronic infection, more cultures were obtained and there was a trend towards younger age and poorer nutritional status at the time of incident infection. SM acquisition was associated with an acceleration in lung function decline. Funding: This research was partially funded by a CFF clinical fellowship grant. Deficient Cftr function results in altered epithelial cell ion transport contributing to defective mucociliary clearance and subsequent colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. New and innovative therapeutics have been geared towards improving not only Cftr expression and activity, but also to manage inflammation and chronic infection. Using in vivo murine models, bone marrow transplantation of Cftr-deficient animals with wild-type bone marrow has been shown to provide benefit in decreasing inflammation and aiding in infection resolution. The use of bone marrow transplantation however, is counter-intuitive for CF, since the immunosuppressive therapy required to prevent transplant rejection has the potential of exacerbating the chronic pulmonary infection in CF patients. We have begun to pursue the concept of autologous bone marrow corrective therapeutics and mesenchymal stem cells as an alternative cell therapy to traditional transplantation in CF as a potential means to improved management of infection and inflammation. We created the myeloid-specific knockout, in which only the myeloid cells are deficient in CFTR as well as the myeloid-specific knockin where CFTR is deficient everywhere but the myeloid compartment. Further, bone marrow-derived macrophages from both CFTR deficient and wild-type animals were infused in the murine model of CF infection and inflammation to investigate the therapeutic potential of treating CF with autologous cells in the absence of irradiation and immunosuppressive therapy. The impact of the bone marrow-derived cells on CF lung infection and inflammation was investigated using the CF murine model of chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. We demonstrate that the myeloid-specific knockout has a phenotype which is not as severe as the total knockout, but is significantly more fragile in the ability to manage infection when compared to wild-type animals infected at the same time consistent with previous studies. Using our myeloid-specific knock-in, we demonstrate that although there is no statistical improvement in survival in the murine model of lung infection and inflammation, there are several immune parameters which are improved in terms of cytokine regulation and bacterial resolution. When Cftr-deficient animals were given wild-type bone marrow-derived macrophages (without irradiation), the infusion statistically improved both inflammation and infection resolution. These studies are consistent with the bone marrow transplantation and mesenchymal stem cell studies, suggesting that wild-type hematopoietic bone marrow cells (bone marrow, macrophages and mesenchymal stem cells), have the potential of supporting CF immunity, enhancing the management of infection and inflammation. As a next step in these studies we are beginning to explore genomic correction of myeloid cells, for potential therapeutic applications in CF. This work was funded by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, David and Virginia Baldwin Fund and NHLBI: R21HL104362. Meropenem, an IV carbapenem antibiotic, is frequently used for the treatment of cystic fibrosis pulmonary exacerbations. To date, a paucity of data exists regarding the use of inhaled meropenem. Objective: The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of inhaled meropenem. Methods: Data were extracted from our propietary Patient Analysis & Tracking System (CFPATS) to identify individuals who have used inhaled meropenem. Our center has been using inhaled meropenem selectively in individuals since 2008. Meropenem 1-g vials were diluted with 10 cc of 0.9% normal saline. Doses of 5mL (500mg of meropenem) were administered twice a day using a Pari LC Plus® nebulizer with a standard Pari® compressor. The duration of treatment was variable. The first dose of medication was administered in our office to monitor safety and tolerability. Lung function was measured pre-and post-dose. Efficacy parameters included change in FEV 1 post-treatment and subjective change in symptoms. Safety data included initial tolerability, side effects, and change in bacterial resistence patterns. Results: To date, 22 subjects (13M: 9F, Range 8-44 years) have undergone treatment with inhaled meropenem. Of the 22 subjects, 19 were colonized with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) and 3 with Burkholderia cepacia (BC). The most common indication was failure of other therapies. Baseline FEV 1 % for all subjects was 47.6 ± 20.6. FEV 1 and did not significantly vary following first dose administration in our office. Median duration of treatment was 21 days (range 10-58 days). While in general, inhaled meropenem has been well tolerated, all patients experienced varying degrees of cough during treatment. One subject experienced mild hemoptysis that did not interfere with continued treatment. Two subjects terminated treatment early, one due to chest tightness, and one due to an anaphylactic reaction which occured despite initial tolerability. Of those who completed treatment, 85% experienced subjective improvement in symptoms. For all subjects, FEV 1 increased by 5.7%, although this change was not statistically significant. However, when subjects with BC were excluded, the remaining 19 individuals demonstrated a significant improvement in FEV 1 of 9.18 ± 19.47% (p < 0.05). Bacterial resistance to meropenem on sputum culture did not appear to change post-treatment. No new emergence of BC or non-tuburculosis mycobacteria infection was observed. Conclusion: Preliminary data from this retrospective study suggest that inhaled meropenem appears to be well tolerated with minimal side effects observed. Lung function and self-reported clinical improvement data suggest efficacy for those with PA without BC. Future investigation to evaluate inhaled meropenem in a prospective fashion appears to be warranted. Introduction: The primary cause of morbidity and mortality amongst cystic fibrosis (CF) patients arises from pulmonary inflammation secondary to bacterial infections. It is well documented that Staphylococcus aureus (SA) is the most common pathogen seen in young children with CF, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) transitions to become the predominant pathogen during young adulthood. This transition is associated with PA biofilm formation and phenotypic changes. It is unclear how bacterial interactions within the CF lung microbiome can affect this transition or impact treatment of patients. Understanding the nature of these interactions may improve management and result in better treatment outcomes in CF patients. Objective: To determine the effects of SA interactions on PA biofilm development and on antimicrobial resistance in the context of response of PA initial acquisition to eradication therapy (inhaled tobramycin). Methods: This was a retrospective, cross-sectional study taking place at the Hospital for Sick Children from 2009-2014. SA clinical isolates (n=5) were obtained from children with CF that were not infected with PA. Bacterial SA filtrates were derived during planktonic or biofilm growth by separation of secreted material from bacterial cells. Newly acquired PA isolates were selected from patients who failed eradication therapy (n=5, persistent isolates) and those who had successful eradication therapy (n=5, eradicated isolates). The effects of SA filtrates on PA biofilm viability and thickness were assessed by confocal microscopy to examine the effects of SA filtrates on PA biofilms grown in a slide chamber. Results: The presence of SA filtrates leads to increased microbial aggregation of persistent PA isolates in established PA biofilms but had no effect on eradicated PA isolates. This increased aggregation resulted in coverage of the slide chamber without impacting total viable counts of bacteria or biomass present (determined by CFU counts). Biofilms from persistent PA isolates grown in the presence of filtrates are also more resistant to antibiotic killing (at 1000mg/mL of tobramycin 60-80% kill in media only vs. 22-30% kill in 10% SA filtrate; p≤0.001 between untreated control and treated persistent strain). The presence of SA filtrates did not affect the planktonic minimum inhibitory concentration to tobramycin of the PA isolates tested. The presence of filtrates from most SA isolates (n=4) did not affect initial formation of PA biofilms grown in a slide chamber for 24 hours, with no difference in thickness or architecture observed. Conclusions: Secreted products from SA are able to interact with established PA biofilms. PA response, including susceptibility to tobramycin, differs between bacterial strains from patients who failed eradication versus those from patients with successful eradication. An investigation to further delineate the mechanisms of PA response to SA filtrates is ongoing. Acknowledgements: Cystic Fibrosis Canada Fellowship, ASM ID award. Chronic lung infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the primary cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. P. aeruginosa enters a biofilm mode of growth during chronic infection in the CF lung, conferring vastly increased resistance to clearance by the immune system and antimicrobials. Clinical studies have found a correlation between respiratory viral infection and pulmonary colonization with P. aeruginosa, though the mechanism underlying this phenomenon is unknown. Using a unique model of the initial interaction of P. aeruginosa with respiratory epithelium, we have recently demonstrated that respiratory viral infection of the airway epithelium stimulates rapid biofilm biogenesis by P. aeruginosa, that apical iron-bound transferrin release is increased during respiratory viral infection, and that the increased iron levels are required for the induction of biofilm production (Hendricks MR, Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2016; 113:1642-7) . Additional studies have isolated the primary source of the biofilm stimulatory effect to extracellular vesicles released by the airway epithelium during viral infection. Using a co-culture system of polarized CF bronchial epithelial cells and P. aeruginosa, we are investigating the mechanism by which P. aeruginosa is able to take advantage of the pulmonary environment following viral infection, focusing on iron uptake and homeostasis pathways. Preliminary data suggest that P. aeruginosa utilizes multiple iron uptake pathways, including siderophores, to scavenge increased iron in apical secretions from airway epithelial cells during viral co-infection. Iron is not sufficient, however, to induce P. aeruginosa biofilm biogenesis, as supplementation of media with transferrin at concentrations similar to those found in apical secretions of airway cells during viral infection did not induce biofilm biogenesis. These results suggest that either additional factors or nutrients are present on the extracellular vesicles released by the respiratory epithelium during viral infection or that the transferrin must be delivered on extracellular vesicles to stimulate biofilm biogenesis. RNA sequencing analysis of the P. aeruginosa transcriptome during viral co-infection revealed decreased expression of ferrous iron uptake pathways and increased expression of an uncharacterized putative iron uptake system, indicating an adaptive response to the increased levels of extracellular vesicle-associated transferrin during viral co-infection. Additionally, we observed shifts in P. aeruginosa amino acid catabolism pathways during viral co-infection, suggesting that metabolic changes also play a role in adaptation to the conditions created by the viral infection. These studies suggest that nutritional immunity is compromised in the lung during viral infection and that P. aeruginosa alters its iron homeostasis and metabolism to take advantage of the more permissive environment, providing a potential mechanism by which P. aeruginosa more readily colonizes the lungs of CF patients during respiratory viral infection. Supported by the National Institutes of Health and the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. To test the hypothesis that iron homeostasis is also altered in the PN sinuses during viral infection, leading to increased bacterial colonization and biofilm growth, we performed a prospective study in a cohort of CF subjects with chronic rhinosinusitis. In this study, PN sinus secretions are being collected, as well as microbiome and viral swabs and associated clinical disease severity scores, approximately every three months starting January 2015. We have preliminarily analyzed iron levels in the PN sinus secretions in subjects at baseline and during viral infections. Viral infection was detected in 19% of our samples, with rhinovirus accounting for 90% of infections, and iron levels were significantly increased in PN sinus secretions during viral infection. Using primary PN sinus epithelial cells derived from CF patients, we observed an increase in P. aeruginosa biofilm growth in the presence of rhinovirus co-infection. Preliminary microbiome analysis found Pseudomonas and Staphylococcus to be the dominant genera and suggest shifts in the microbial communities of the PN sinuses occur during or following viral infections. Clinical disease severity and quality of life scores were not acutely altered during viral infection. Further study is required to better define shifts in the microbial community during respiratory viral infection of the upper respiratory tract and determine the long-term impacts on disease outcomes. Supported by NIH, NSF, and CFF. Objectives: A Pseudomonas aeruginosa AUST-02 strain sub-type (M3L7) has emerged in Australia, which chronically infects the airway of some people with CF and is associated with increased antibiotic resistance (Tai AS, et al. PLoS ONE. 2015; 10:e0144022) . Here, whole genome sequencing (WGS) was principally used to investigate short-term within-host diversity and antibiotic resistance mechanisms of M3L7. Methods: Eleven M3L7 isolates, that represented a range of different antibiotic susceptibility profiles, from a collection of 134 isolates cultured over 3 months from an individual with CF underwent WGS. A phylogeny was built and genomes were screened for acquired resistance genes using online databases (CARD, MERGEM, ResFinder). Chromosomal genes (n=136) associated with antibiotic resistance, hypermutation and pathoadaptation (based on a literature search), as well as intergenic regions were inspected for small genetic variants. The reference genome for the analyses was PAO1 (accession number: NC_002516). Results: Three phylogenetic groups were identified comprising two mutator groups showing a frame-shift mutation caused by a 1-bp deletion (1660delT) in mutL and one non-mutator group. No acquired antibiotic resistance mechanisms were detected suggesting M3L7 resistance is principally driven by chromosomal mutations. Ninety-seven non-synonymous chromosomal mutations possibly associated with antibiotic resistance were shared by all 11 isolates. These included a premature stop codon within oprD (E176*) and a novel nucleotide substitution in the ampC-ampR intergenic region that resides within the ampC -10 promoter region. WGS revealed mutations in 19 genes that were acquired following divergence of groups, which may also impact the activity of antibiotics and multi-drug efflux pumps. Forty-one genes previously associated with pathoadaptation (Marvig RL, et al. Nat Genet. 2015; 47:57-64) had acquired non-synonymous mutations. Conclusions: These data further highlight the complexity of chronic P. aeruginosa infection, and that it may involve a multitude of co-existing genotypically diverse sub-lineages. The findings may suggest that a heterogeneous M3L7 population has adapted to niches of the CF airway. Acknowledgements: Supported by an Australian Infectious Diseases grant, Queensland, Australia (QIMRB-UQ seed grant). Anning, L. 1 ; Rider, K. 3 ; Pavel, K. 3 ; Enderby, B. 2 ; Oades, P. 2 ; Withers, N. 3 ; Sheldon, C. 3 1. Intensive Care Unit, Musgrove Park Hospital, Taunton, Somerset, United Kingdom; 2. Department of Pediatrics, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom; 3. Department of Respiratory Medicine, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom Introduction: Exophiala has been reported as a lung colonizer in cystic fibrosis (CF) populations, but it is not clear if it is pathogenic or an innocent bystander. The aim of our review was to identify the prevalence of Exophiala, and to detect if there was evidence of clinical deterioration following colonization. Changes in microbiota were also assessed. Methods: A retrospective case review of adult and pediatric CF patients colonized with Exophiala. Patients with Exophiala on sputum or cough swabs in a five-year period were identified by the microbiology laboratory. Colonization was defined as two or more Exophiala isolates in a twelve-month period, at least three months apart. Spirometry, BMI, sputum cultures, and blood tests were reviewed. Number of inpatient days, days on intravenous (IV) antibiotics, and medications prescribed were monitored. Variables were compared two years before and two years after the first recorded Exophiala isolation. Results: Exophiala was isolated in 12 (6%) of the 195 CF patients from 2010 to 2015; 2 were excluded having only ever had one isolate. Six patients were female. Five were ΔF508 homozygotes; the remainder were ΔF508 heterozygotes, with the second mutations being 621+1G>T, c. 178G>T, R560T or unknown. Median age at colonization was 14.5 years (range 10-38 years). One patient died during the studied period. Most showed little change in FEV 1 , FVC and BMI though one patient deteriorated markedly. There was no significant difference in blood tests. More patients were prescribed corticosteroids (inhaled and oral), antibiotics (nebulized and long-term oral) and anti-fungals in the two years post-Exophiala colonization. Even excluding the patient who died, more days were spent as an inpatient and on IV antibiotics in the two years post-Exophiala colonization. Proportion of isolations of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida fell once Exophiala was isolated, but proportion of Staphylococcus aureus was unchanged. Aureobasidium pullulans, Scedosporium apiospermum, Rothia mucilaginosa, and Haemophilus paraphrophilus were also isolated. Once colonized, the proportion of sputum samples isolating Exophiala ranged from 13.3-100% (median 50.3%). Discussion: In our single-center cohort, patients who isolated Exophiala had severe CF mutations. Although an increase in treatments and time spent as inpatients was observed post-colonization, this may represent CF disease progression. A change in microbiota was observed following Exophiala colonization, the mechanism for this and its significance require further evaluation. Rarer fungal pathogens were also isolated. In some patients, fungal organisms appear to dominate the microbiome. Our population was variable in terms of age at colonization, frequency of isolation and disease progression, ranging from patients with no change in clinical parameters, to one patient who deteriorated and died, with no cause other than Exophiala found for their decline. Further work is required to determine the reasons for the variable pathogenicity of this fungus. Background: Limited therapeutic options, enhanced virulence properties, and phenotypic adaptations such as mucoid phenotypes contribute to an expanding threat to effective therapies for Burkholderia cepacia complex lung biofilm infection, frequently associated with cystic fibrosis (CF). Thick mucus and biofilm formation in the CF lung can render therapeutics less effective. A series of non-toxic derivatized polyglucosamines shown to be broadly active at dermal and mucosal interfaces encompass a newly developed class of molecules designated poly (acetyl, arginyl) glucosamine (PAAG). Specifically, the PAAG15A derivative is a non-toxic, soluble, biopolymer shown to potentiate a wide range of antibiotics against both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria and to effectively dissolve biofilms, including those of B. cepacia complex. The three-dimensional checkerboard synergy and minimal biofilm eradication concentration (MBEC) assays were used to examine antibiotic synergy against planktonic bacteria and the removal of biofilms formed by several clinical isolates of B. cepacia complex associated with cystic fibrosis, respectively. These studies demonstrate the ability of PAAG15A to potentiate antibiotic activity and remove biofilms with the goal of supporting more effective treatments. Methods: The MBEC assays were performed using 5 B. cepacia complex strains isolated from sputum from cystic fibrosis patients to compare biofilm reduction by PAAG15A (Parker AE, et al. J Microbial Methods. 2014; 102:55-64) . Strains of B. cepacia complex consisted of a multi-drug resistant and/or mucoid phenotype clinical isolates obtained from Seattle Children's Hospital and Cystic Fibrosis Research Center Birmingham, Alabama. Antibacterial potentiation was determined using the 3D checkerboard assay (Stein C, et. al. PLoS ONE. 2015 ;10(6):e0126479). Results: Concentrations of PAAG15A ranging from 50-200 μg/mL significantly reduced B. cepacia complex biofilms following once daily 10-minute treatment (p<0.05). Treatments with 50-200 μg/mL PAAG15A significantly reduced pre-formed B. cepacia complex biofilms in a dose-dependent manner after 1-hour treatment (p<0.05). The PAAG15A treated biofilms had up to 2-logs less bacteria than untreated biofilms. Potentiation of tobramycin and meropenam was observed in combination with between 32-1024 μg/mL PAAG15A. The fractional inhibitory concentration (FIC) calculations showed PAAG was able to potentiate antibacterial synergy (FIC=0.03) beyond the range achieved by antibiotics alone (FIC=1.3) . The FIC demonstrating synergy with antibiotics alone decreased 2-fold upon the addition of PAAG15A to further enhance antibacterial synergy. Conclusion: PAAG15A is an effective antibiofilm agent that facilitates the removal of biofilms in vitro. These studies show that B. cepacia complex biofilms are removed by PAAG15A in a dose-dependent manner. Studies also show that PAAG15A does not interfere with the antibacterial activity of tobramycin and meropenam and actually potentiates these antibiotics. The novel multifunctional activity of PAAG15A may result in more positive therapeutic outcomes, particularly in cystic fibrosis-related infections. Objective: 1) To evaluate in a cohort of pediatric CF patients the role of the first Pa isolation and nutritional status at 1 year of age as risk factors for chronic Pa infection; 2) to evaluate if the chronic Pa infection influences lung function and the nutritional status at the age of 7 years old. Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of all patients in follow-up at Florence Cystic Fibrosis Centre who had: 1) CF diagnosis (sweat chloride ≥ 60 mmol/L and two known CF mutations); 2) age ≥ 7 and ≤ 18 years; 3) spirometric and microbiological evaluation at least 4 times a year. For each patient we evaluated: age at first Pa colonization, age of chronic Pa colonization, pancreatic status (pancreatic insufficiency (PI) or pancreatic sufficiency (PS), weight-for-length percentile (W/L pc) at 1 year of age, best percentile of body mass index (BMIpc) and forced expiratory volume in the 1st second (FEV 1 ) at the age of 7 years. Pa microbiological status was defined according to the Leeds criteria. All patients with Pa infection received the following treatment for eradication: twice-daily inhalation of 300 mg tobramycin solution or 2 000 000 IU colistin and 30 mg/kg/day of oral ciprofloxacin divided into two doses for 28 days. At the end of the therapy all patients repeated the culture in order to evaluate the eradication of the microorganism. Results: 88 patients were eligible for the study: in 18 out of 88 (20.5%) Pa had never been isolated, while in 70/88 (79.5%) there had been at least one isolation of Pa during the follow up; in this group of patients, 53/70 (75,7%) eradicated Pa infection (group 1: 35/53 had PI, 18/53 had PS), while in 17/70 (24.3%) the eradication therapy failed and they developed a chronic Pa infection at a mean age of 6.7 years (group 2: 15/17 had PI, 2/17 had PS). The mean age at first Pa infection did not differ between the two groups (3 ± 3.9 years vs 3.9 ± 3.6 years, P value > 0.05). The W/L pc at 1 year of age was available in 47/53 subjects of group 1 and in 12/17 subjects of group 2: in 5/47 (10.6%) and 1/12 (8.3%) cases the W/L pc was below the 10th percentile. The mean W/L pc value did not differ between the two groups (P value > 0,05). Patients with chronic Pa infection had worse FEV 1 value and pcBMI value at the age of 7 years than patients with intermittent infection (FEV 1 88% ± 24.2 vs FEV 1 106% ± 19.3; P value < 0.005; BMIpc 40.9° ± 25.8 vs BMIpc 50.1° ± 29; P value < 0.05). Conclusions: The age at first Pa isolation and the nutritional status at 1 year of age do not influence the development of chronic Pa infection. Chronic Pa infection is associated with a worse lung function and nutritional status at 7 years. Aims: Our goal was to characterize the genetic background of MRSA isolates in our CF center over the last three years. Methods: All MRSA isolates collected from patients in regular follow-up during the last 3-year period were included. At least one strain/year/ patient was analyzed. Genome sequencing at > 60x coverage was performed on the Illumina MiSeq platform resulting in a total of 74 high-quality reference genomes de novo assembled using SPAdes. Genome analysis was performed to infer whole-genome phylogenies, epidemiology patterns, multilocus sequence typing (MLST) loci and types. Results: Seventy-five MRSA strains from 34 patients (58.8% male, median age 13.4 years, range 2.57-52.15 years) were analyzed. The mean MRSA colonization time was 1.57 years (1.24 SD). Fifteen (44.1%) of 34 patients harbored MRSA for less than one year (mean time 0.32 years ± 0.32 SD) and SCCmec type IV was detected in 12/15 (80%) patients. Nineteen (55.9%) of 34 patients harbored MRSA for more than one year (mean time 2.50 years ± 0.71 SD) and SCCmec type IV was detected in 5/19 (26.3%) patients (Fisher's exact test P= 0.006). MLST and SCCmec analysis indicated that 15 different clones were present in our cohort. Most of them (66%) belonged to known epidemic lineages (Table) . Thirty-two (94%) out of 34 patients were infected by a single MRSA clone. Most of the MRSA isolates were grouped into 3 lineages: ST5, ST228 and ST1866 (differing from ST5 by a single mutation in the pta allele). These clones were very closely related to each other (576 single nucleotide variations on average). The ST228 clone has been previously described as a Southern Germany epidemic clone. Whole genome analysis also showed that clones underwent genetic adaptation independently in each patient with several single nucleotide specific variants. Conclusions: We confirm that MRSA isolates from those patients infected for a longer period belonged mainly to Hospital-Acquired (HA)-MRSA. Most patients were infected with the same clone for several years with evidence of patient-specific strain adaptation. Overall, investigation of MRSA genetic background is important to assessing MRSA epidemiology and may lead to improvement of clinical management of these infections. Introduction: EBX-001, a combination of tobramycin with a bacterial metabolite as a potentiator, is being developed for the treatment of chronic P. aeruginosa infections in cystic fibrosis patients. The combination utilizes an anti-persisters strategy and is aimed at reducing recurrent infections. Methods: MICs were determined for a variety of CF clinical isolates to select a diverse set of strains for inclusion in the study. P. aeruginosa cultures in planktonic stationary phase (PSP) were used to select for bacterial persisters, bacteria in a quasi-dormant state. In these PSP experiments, a range of tobramycin concentrations was tested with a range of metabolite concentrations to determine the potentiation effect of the metabolite under a variety of conditions. In addition, 96-well dish biofilm and bacterial aggregation assays were performed. Results: Enhanced killing of up to 6 orders of magnitude of P. aeruginosa persisters for a range of strains was observed in the PSP experiments; see example for a mucoid CF isolate in the Figure below. Potentiation was also observed in biofilm and aggregation assays. Conclusions: A combination of tobramycin with a potentiator remains an attractive therapeutic option for eliminating recurrent P. aeruginosa infections through the eradication of bacterial persisters. Metabolite-enabled eradication of Pseudomonas persisters from PSP cultures. Cells were enumerated after 4 hours of exposure to the tobramycin-potentiator combination. Pulmonary aspergillosis is a common infection that can result in significant morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis. Depending on the state of the host, infection can result in Aspergillus bronchitis or allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), each of which are associated with diminished lung function and pulmonary exacerbations. Standard of care generally calls for oral doses of triazoles that inhibit fungal cytochrome P450s and inhibit fungal growth. Itraconazole (ITZ) and other triazoles are commonly used as first-line therapies for fungal infections. These treatments are generally poorly and variably bioavailable and result in a number of systemic side effects that limit their therapeutic potential. In addition, ITZ and other triazoles have an extensive list of drug-drug interactions that require drug monitoring during treatment and may lead to hepatotoxicity. We hypothesized that inhaled delivery of ITZ as a dry powder (PUR1900) would result in significantly higher lung exposure and lower systemic exposure relative to oral dosing. This profile may allow for improved efficacy, reduced overall dose and reduced drug-drug interactions. A 7-day repeat dose study in rats was performed to assess lung and systemic exposure levels of ITZ following inhaled (PUR1900) or oral (Sporanox) exposure. Oral ITZ (Sporanox® solution, 10 mg/mL) was dosed daily via oral gavage at 5 mg/kg/day. PUR1900, a novel dry powder formulation of ITZ was delivered by nose-only inhalation with an average achieved delivered dose of 5.2 mg/kg/day. In rodent dosing, approximately 10% of the delivered dose is considered to have reached the lung (0.52 mg/ kg/day), with the remaining 90% filtered by the nasopharynx and ultimately likely swallowed. Blood samples were collected on Days 1 and 7 at predose, immediately after dose and 2, 4, 8 and 24 hours after dose. Lung tissue was collected on Day 1 immediately after dose and 24 hours after dose and on Day 7, 24 hours after dose for measurement of itraconazole and the active metabolite, hydroxy-itraconazole (OH-ITZ). Systemic exposure (AUC and C max ) to both ITZ and OH-ITZ was lower following inhalation than following oral exposure on both Days 1 and 7. Peak lung itraconazole levels immediately after dose on Day 1 were approximately 300-fold higher in animals dosed with PUR1900 via inhalation versus animals dosed orally. Trough itraconazole lung levels on Day 1 (24 hours after dose) and Day 7 (24 hours after dose) were similar for both inhaled and oral dose routes. These data demonstrate the potential for PUR1900 to enable significantly higher pulmonary levels of itraconazole to reach the site of fungal infection. This approach has the potential to improve disease outcome while reducing the side effect profile associated with oral dosing. Bacteria rarely exist in isolation, whether on human tissues or in the environment, and they frequently co-infect with other microbes. Co-infection by Staphylococcus aureus with Pseudomonas aeruginosa occurs commonly in people with cystic fibrosis (CF) and is associated with higher lung disease morbidity and mortality. While previous studies have demonstrated interactions between these two species that impact growth and metabolism, little is known regarding the impact of polymicrobial interactions on biofilm formation, a bacterial community lifestyle suggested to predominate within CF lungs and to result in persistent infections. S. aureus secretes numerous exoproducts that are known to interact with host tissues, influencing inflammatory responses. The abundantly secreted S. aureus protein A (SpA) binds a range of human glycoproteins, immunoglobulins, and other molecules, with diverse effects on the host, including inhibiting phagocytosis of S. aureus cells. However, the potential effects of SpA and other S. aureus exoproducts on co-infecting bacteria have not been explored. Here we show that S. aureus secreted products, including SpA, significantly alter two behaviors associated with persistent infection. We found that SpA inhibited biofilm formation by some P. aeruginosa CF sputum isolates, and it also inhibited phagocytosis by neutrophils of all P. aeruginosa isolates tested. Our results indicate that these effects were mediated by binding to at least two P. aeruginosa cell surface structures-type IV pili and the exopolysaccharide Psl-that confer attachment to surfaces and to other bacterial cells. Thus, we found that the role of a well-studied S. aureus exoproduct, SpA, extends well beyond interactions with the host immune system, impacting persistence-related behaviors of another important and common CF pathogen. Because S. aureus frequently precedes P. aeruginosa in colonizing CF patient lungs, these findings suggest new models of how microbial community interactions can impact persistence and host interactions during co-infection. Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) infection has become standard of care in children with cystic fibrosis (CF), but there are limited data on the success of multi-step protocols for AET. We aimed to evaluate the effectiveness of a multi-step eradication protocol for new-onset Pa infections in children with CF. Methods: A three-step protocol of AET was developed in 2009 involving 28 days of tobramycin inhalation solution (TIS) for first or newly acquired Pa infection (step 1), a second 28-days course of TIS for patients failing to convert to negative culture after the first cycle (step 2) and 14 days of intravenous antibiotics followed by 28 days of TIS for patients failing the second eradication attempt (step 3). We conducted a retrospective review of all pediatric CF patients who had new-onset Pa infections, defined as a newly positive sputum culture between January 2010 and December 2015. Eradication success was defined as a negative culture for Pa after treatment. The success rate of each treatment step and the cumulative success rate were recorded. Results: During the 5-year study period, 124 patients had a total of 216 new-onset Pa infections. A total of 18 cases were symptomatic and treated with IV antibiotics followed by 28 days of TIS, of which 72% became Pa culture-negative. Pa infection was asymptomatic in 187 cases; the average age at the time of infection was 10 years (range 0. 2-17.8) . Of the asymptomatic cases, 151 (80.7%) became culture-negative for Pa after the first TIS cycle and an additional 10 (27.8%) cleared after the second cycle, with a cumulative success rate of 86.1%. Intravenous antibiotics followed by 28 days of TIS were administered in 24 cases, of which 9 cases (37.5%) successfully cleared. Fifteen cases (8%) failed all the steps and were considered chronically infected with Pa. Overall, the cumulative success rate of the multi-step protocol was of 90.9%. Conclusions: While the first step of the protocol led to the greatest eradication success, the additional steps improved the overall eradication success rate. A randomized controlled trial is warranted to define the optimal treatment strategy for patients failing the initial eradication protocol. abscessus allows strategies to modify the risk of infection and transmission in CF patients. We hypothesize that particle-associated growth of M. abscessus is supported and thereby tested fitness and growth models of M. abscessus using defined and environmental dust samples. Methods: Airborne sampling was performed in clinic and home environments. DNA was isolated from filters, and PCR-amplified 16s rRNA amplicons were sequenced. Sequence reads were compared to multiple 16S rRNA sequence databases with the QIIME analysis software using an open reference operational taxonomic unit (OTU) picking analysis pipeline that generates an annotated OTU count table (bacterial profile). M. abscessus cultures were grown in the presence of defined dust-like particles (mineral clay kaolin, silicone dioxide), or sterile samples of environmental dust from home and office. Association of M. abscessus with dust particles was determined by light and fluorescence microscopy. Growth in dust samples was compared to that in media alone for 10 days. The susceptibility of M. abscessus to antibiotic treatment was also tested. The ability of M. abscessus associated with dust samples, including clinical isolates, to recover from desiccation was tested over various times. Results: Mycobacterial species were detected in airborne environmental samples. In vitro, direct association of M. abscessus with defined and environmental dust samples was observed. Growth of M. abscessus was enhanced in the presence of environmental dust samples when compared to growth in media alone, but not appreciably different between dust samples. Antibiotic susceptibility was not changed in the presence of particles. To test the ability of M. abscessus to survive on particles, cultures of dust-associated M. abscessus were dried for up to 21 days and reconstituted in growth medium to determine viability. M. abscessus, including CF clinical isolates, survived desiccation for up to 14 days. Conclusions: The detection of mycobacteria in environmental samples, and association and growth on chemically defined and environmental particles indicate the capacity of particle-associated M. abscessus as an environmental source of infection. Importantly, M. abscessus can survive desiccation for extended periods suggesting the potential for dissemination from environmental sources. These data indicate the fitness of M. abscessus in a likely environmental state and in physical association with particles having airborne potential, and suggests new targets of infection control. Supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (NICK13A0 and MAL-COL14G0). Hood, K.; Novak, K.J. Pharmacy, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA Purpose: In CF patients with moderate to severe lung disease and chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection, current guidelines recommend chronic inhaled antibiotics given in 28-day on/off cycles. Tobramycin and aztreonam are the only two agents currently approved for this use. Based on the annual CF Foundation Patient Registry reports from 2009-2012, clinical practice is trending towards use of a continuous rotation of two inhaled antibiotics, as opposed to a 28-day on/off cycle using only a single agent. Current guidelines do not address incorporating both medications into a patient's maintenance regimen, and there are no clinical trials that have been able to effectively evaluate the risks and benefits of such therapy. Therefore, the primary objective of this study was to compare lung function (FEV1) and number of pulmonary exacerbations one year leading up to the initiation of dual rotating inhaled antibiotic therapy and one year after being on dual therapy. The secondary objective was to determine whether the CF care team evaluated and documented the outcomes of dual therapy and assessed the benefits and/or risks of continuing dual therapy. Methods: A retrospective review was conducted on all pediatric and adult CF patients who received dual rotating inhaled antibiotics for at least one year at a large free-standing children's hospital housing both pediatric and adult CF centers from January 1, 2010 to December 31, 2015. Data collected included patient demographics, lung function values (annual best and mean FEV1), number of pulmonary exacerbations one year leading up to the initiation of dual inhaled antipseudomonal antibiotic therapy and one year after being on dual therapy. Data were also collected on specific inhaled antipseudomonal antibiotics used, concomitant CF medications, and electronic medical record documentation. The primary objective was evaluated using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test for non-parametric data, and the secondary objective was evaluated using descriptive statistics. Results: A total of 27 patients were included in this study (age 10 to 39 years). The majority of patients (89%) had a mean FEV1 ≥ 40%; 78% of patients received inhaled tobramycin as monotherapy; and 70% received concomitant azithromycin. For the primary outcome, there was a statistically significant decrease in mean and best FEV1 (3% and 4%, p<0.05) when patients were switched from monotherapy to dual therapy; however this decrease is consistent with the annual FEV1 decline we expect in this patient population. There was no statistically significant difference in frequency of pulmonary exacerbations. In a subgroup analysis of patients receiving inhaled aztreonam as monotherapy, there was a statistically significant decrease in best FEV1 by 10 percentage points when patients were transitioned to dual therapy (p<0.05). This significant decline was not seen in patients receiving inhaled tobramycin as monotherapy when transitioned to dual therapy. Only 33% of patients had documentation within the electronic medical record assessing continuation of dual therapy. Conclusion: Overall, dual rotating inhaled antipseudomonal antibiotics did not appear to improve lung function or decrease the frequency of pulmonary exacerbations in patients with cystic fibrosis. Introduction: Pseudomonas aeruginosa is an important pathogen in cystic fibrosis (CF) with the majority of adults being chronically colonised with this organism. Pseudomonas colonises by adhering to mucins and forming biofilms within the stagnant airway mucus layer, but how it survives remains to be elucidated. P. aeruginosa is metabolically versatile, being able to survive in nutrient poor environments, but currently no data explains how P. aeruginosa specifically survives in the airway. Preferentially chosen sources of nitrogen and carbon are known to come from amino acids and polyamines, but sugars such as glucose which is elevated in the CF airway are less preferred substrates, although efficiently metabolised via the Entner-Doudoroff pathway. If preferred nutrients are offered in a mixture along with non-favoured carbon sources, catabolism of preferred substrates is regulated in an orderly fashion by catabolite repression control. Mucins are highly glycosylated polypeptides in abundance in the CF airway and may offer an alternative nutrient source to glucose. Understanding the specific nutrient source of Pseudomonas may allow identification of novel therapeutic targets to treat patients colonised with this organism. Aim: To evaluate whether airway mucins provide a nutrient source for Pseudomonas. Methods: Sputum samples were dialysed in order to remove low molecular weight sugars, lyophilised, dissolved in ultrapure water, and autoclaved in the presence of potassium phosphate buffer which protects against pH-induced cleavage of monosaccharides during autoclaving. Strains, PA01 and PA14, were grown in samples supplemented with M9 and growth was assessed via colony forming unit counts/mL by serially diluting culture samples and plating on Luria agar at defined time intervals. Bacteria were then incubated overnight at 37 o C. Specific growth rates were calculated at log growth phase. Sputa were purified via caesium chloride/4M guanidine hydrochloride density gradient centrifugation and fractions containing MUC5B and MUC5AC mucins were identified, pooled, and processed for growth studies as previously described. Growth in the mucin sugars: galactose, fucose, sialic acid, N-acetylglucosamine, and N-acetylgalactosamine was also assessed. Results: P. aeruginosa laboratory strains PA01 (p=0.0001) and PA14 (p=0.0004) showed an increased growth rate in 0.4% (w/v) adult vs. paediatric CF sputum (n=4). There was also an increased growth rate of PA01 when grown in 0.1% (w/v) adult vs. paediatric CF purified mucin fractions (p=0.0376, n=5). PA01 was unable to grow on 0.4% (w/v) mucin sugars compared to the negative control but could grow on glucose (n=3). Conclusions: This is the first report of a difference in growth rate of P. aeruginosa in adult and paediatric CF sputum and mucin. Currently the reasons for better growth on adult mucus remains to be explained since it was shown that although Pseudomonas can use glucose, it appears unable to use sugars within mucins as a nutrient source. Further work is needed to clarify whether Pseudomonas has the ability to grow on mucin protein, or growth is due to other factors within the CF airway which favour growth on adult mucus. Infection with multidrug-resistant (MDR) P. aeruginosa is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in CF patients. P. aeruginosa develops MDR phenotypes during its persistence in CF airways accumulating pathoadaptive mutations. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) can help to identify and predict potential molecular mechanisms of resistance and has already proved to be able to predict antimicrobial susceptibility in several pathogens. Despite several WGS studies on P. aeruginosa CF lineages that have been published, the evolutionary trajectories in relation to the development of antimicrobial resistance remain mostly unexplored to date. In this study we monitored the development of MDR in P. aeruginosa during its microevolution in the CF airways to provide an innovative, genome-wide picture of the acquisition of antibiotic resistance and to identify novel mechanisms allowing survival and persistence in CF patients under antibiotic therapy. We sequenced the genomes of 40 P. aeruginosa clinical strains obtained from the Trentino Regional Support CF Centre (Italy) and isolated from the sputum of a single CF patient over an eight-year period (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) . Genotypic analysis of the population by in silico MLST revealed a characteristic single clonal population dominated by ST390 and five closely related new ST variants indicating that all members of the population likely belong to the same clonal lineage and evolved from a common ancestor. Phenotypic analysis showed previously reported characteristics of adaptation to the CF lung, including loss of motility, protease secretion and pigment production, as well as changes in production of exopolysaccharides. While early isolates were found to be susceptible to almost all antibiotics, resistant phenotypes dramatically increased over time in the persistent population. Phenotypic and genomic analyses of the population indicated a correlation between the evolution of antibiotic resistance profiles and phylogenetic relationships. We then focused our attention on a subgroup of five clonal isolates belonging to ST1864, one susceptible to antibiotics, two resistant to some antibiotics and two MDR. Not only did they share the same genetic background, but they presented the same phenotypic traits that play a key role in P. aeruginosa adaptation process and may be involved in phenotypic resistance. When the genomes were analysed through the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database to detect the presence of resistance genes, we did not found any differences between the five strains, neither for presence or absence of specific genes nor for significant mutations. This is consistent with the hypothesis that these MDR phenotypes arose from as yet uncharacterized genomic determinants. We are currently investigating further the genome and transcriptome of these isolates looking at uncharacterized variations potentially involved in the development of MDR phenotype. This work was supported by a donation from Associazione Trentina Fibrosi Cistica. Although it is known that CF patients have elevated circulating MMPs, the impact of MMP modulation on the ability of CF monocytes to respond to bacterial stimuli, such as LPS, has not been fully characterized. Methods: Experiments were performed using primary human peripheral blood monocytes isolated from either healthy or CF subjects. Total RNA was isolated for cDNA library generation and assayed for the mRNAs of interest using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Results: To characterize the phenotypic alterations induced by MMP inhibition, CF and healthy monocytes were subjected to LPS stimulation with and without MMP inhibition. The inflammatory response to this paradigm was measured at various time-points by profiling mRNA expression. At 3 hours after stimulation with LPS, CF monocytes expressed higher IL-10 mRNA in comparison to healthy control monocytes. IL-10 and TNF-alpha mRNA expression was greater in healthy MMP-inhibited LPS-stimulated monocytes compared to control monocytes stimulated with LPS alone. In MMP-inhibited LPS-stimulated CF monocytes, we found a temporal downregulation of IL-10 and no change in TNF-alpha mRNA expression at 3 hours compared with CF monocytes stimulated with LPS alone. Interestingly, CF monocytes exhibited rapid upregulation of TREM-1 gene expression at 3 hours stimulation with MMP inhibitor regardless of LPS stimulation, whereas healthy monocytes exhibited very little change in TREM-1 gene expression under any condition. Conclusion: These data show that CF monocytes have a differential inflammatory response to bacterial stimuli compared to healthy monocytes, trending towards an anti-inflammatory response in CF monocytes compared to a pro-inflammatory response in healthy monocytes. Our preliminary data suggest that blockade of MMP activity attenuated this anti-inflammatory phenotype, however further investigation is needed to fully understand the mechanism responsible for altered bacterial response in CF monocytes. Introduction: Ceftobiprole is a broad-spectrum cephalosporin acting against several organisms, including P. aeruginosa (PA). Ceftozolane/tazobactam is a novel combination of a cephalosporin with a beta-lactamase inhibitor; this combination has shown in vitro activity against multi-drug resistant PA. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the in vitro antibacterial activity of ceftobiprole and ceftolozane/tazobactam against PA clinical isolates from CF patients. Methods: In vitro activity of ceftobiprole and ceftolozane/tazobactam was tested against PA isolates (n=100). These included 89 CF clinical isolates from patients attending the Northern Ireland Adult CF Centre (Belfast City Hospital). A total of 10 bacteraemic isolates from a non-CF population, as comparators, and a reference strain (NCTC10662) were also studied. The MICs of ceftobiprole and ceftolozane/tazobactam were determined by standard e-test methodology; ceftazidime was also tested by standard disk susceptibility assay. Results: The distribution of ceftobiprole and ceftolozane/tazobactam MICs are shown in the Table. The median MIC for ceftolozane/tazobactam in CF PA was 1 μg/mL; MIC50 and MIC90 were 1 μg/mL and 6 μg/mL, respectively; a total of 79/89 (89%) of isolates were sensitive to ceftolozane/tazobactam and only two isolates were highly resistant (MIC >256). All 10 resistant isolates were also resistant to ceftazidime, 38 isolates were sensitive to ceftolozane/ tazobactam but intermediate or resistant to ceftazidime. In the non-CF population, all 10 isolates were sensitive to ceftazidime and ceftolozane/tazobactam; median MIC was 0.75 μg/mL, MIC50 and MIC90 were 1 μg/mL and 3 μg/mL, respectively. For ceftobiprole, MIC50 and MIC90 were 6 μg/mL and 32 μg/mL in the CF population; 0.75 μg/mL and 3 μg/mL in the non-CF population, respectively. Assuming an MIC for non-CF P. aeruginosa at 2μg/mL, as clinical breakpoint, 29/89 (33%) of CF isolates were sensitive to ceftobiprole, while 8/10 (80%) were sensitive in the non-CF isolates. Discussion: Although ceftobiprole had good activity against bacteremic PA from the non-CF population, it has poor in vitro activity against CF isolates. Our results show that ceftolozane/tazobactam is a potentially effective antimicrobial to be evaluated as an alternative to commonly used beta-lactams in the treatment of P. aeruginosa chronic respiratory infection in CF patients. Acknowledgments: Author AG was supported by a SIP/IRS Research Fellowship grant. Introduction: Chronic respiratory infection by P. aeruginosa (PA) can lead to severe lung damage and respiratory complications in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The development of PA resistance to available antibiotics is common and a major concern in CF current practice. The purpose of the study was to evaluate antibiotic resistance trends over the last twenty years by the use of a novel score, called the Relative Resistance Index (RRI). Methods: Two collections of PA isolates obtained from two different periods of time, namely 1996-2001 and 2015-2016 were studied. Each collection included 100 PA isolates from 100 CF patients attending the Northern Ireland Adult CF Centre in Belfast. A modified microbiological RRI score was calculated for each isolate by assigning a value of 1 for sensitive, 2 for intermediate, 3 for resistant for the following four antibiotic classes (8 agents): beta-lactams, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones and polymyxin. An unpaired two-tailed t-test was used for comparison of trends between these two periods. Results: RRI increased significantly for ciprofloxacin (p<0.0001), aminoglycosides (both amikacin and tobramycin, p<0.0001) and meropenem (p<0.0007) for PA isolates from 1996-2001 to 2015-2016; mean RRI values for each antibiotic are reported (Table) . All isolates were susceptible to colistin over both periods, except for three 2016 isolates. Discussion: Overall this study showed markedly greater resistance in the 2015-2016 cohort. The RRI marker may be a useful quantitative tool in helping to track resistance emergence over long periods of time, which may be useful in clinical trials and beyond as well as adding value to existing and historic registry data. Conclusion: According to this index, the study highlights an increase in number of isolates with reduced susceptibility to carbapenems, fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides. This may reflect the chronic exposure of PA to several classes of antibiotics used in the management of CF airways infection. Intriguing in vitro data suggests QS signalling molecules can be "sensed" at the epithelial surface via the T2R38 (bitter taste) receptor expressed on airway cilia (Lee RJ, et al. J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:4145-59) . Activation of this receptor is predicted to lead to changes in ciliary beat frequency and nitric oxide production, which may enhance bacterial clearance. Three common polymorphisms exist in the gene coding for this receptor, altering the amino acid sequence at positions 49, 262, and 296 and correlating with receptor function; the functional allele has proline-alanine-valine (PAV) whereas the non-functional allele has alanine-valine-isoleucine (AVI) at these residues. In vitro response to QS molecules has been shown to be greatest in cells with the PAV/PAV genotype. We hypothesised that the T2R38 receptor may be important in host defence against Pa in people with cystic fibrosis (CF) and that T2R38 genotype may therefore modify infection status and clinical outcomes. Methods: Patients over 6 years with CF were genotyped for polymorphisms in the TAS2R38 gene. Pa infection status was determined by retrospective review of all respiratory cultures during 2014 and assigned according to Leeds criteria as chronic (>50% Pa-positive), intermittent (≤50% Pa-positive), Pa-free (previous Pa but none for >12 months), or never. Only patients with ≥3 cultures/year were included in analysis. Clinical and lung function data were obtained from each patient's annual review in 2014. Results: T2R38 receptor genotypes were obtained for 271 patients: 83 (30.6%) AVI/AVI, 44 (16.2%) PAV/PAV, 116 (42.8%) AVI/PAV and 28 (10.3%) AVI/other or PAV/other. Between AVI/AVI, PAV/PAV and AVI/ PAV groups there was no significant difference in median age, gender or proportion of p.Phe508del CFTR mutations. By T2R38 genotype, there was no significant difference in the proportion of patients in each infection category (Table) . Among all patients with intermittent or chronic Pa infection, there was no significant difference by T2R38 genotype in the proportion of patients who isolated mucoid Pa. In all patients with intermittent or chronic Pa there was no significant difference by T2R38 genotype in the mean percent predicted FEV 1 (AVI/AVI 59%, PAV/PAV 57%, AVI/PAV 63%, p=0.45) or mean percent predicted FVC. Conclusion: Genotype variation in the T2R38 bitter taste receptor does not appear to modify infection status with Pa in people with CF, or to be a modifier of lung disease in people with CF and intermittent or chronic Pa infection. Davies, J.C. 1, 2 1. National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom; 2. Paediatric Respiratory Medicine, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 3. Department of Cystic Fibrosis, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom Background: Chronic infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) is generally considered ineradicable and long-term inhaled antipseudomonal antibiotics, aiming to suppress bacterial load and limit airway damage, are standard of care. We have observed that some patients on inhaled antibiotics regularly have negative airway cultures, which could reflect technical issues relating to the presence of antibiotic in culture samples. We hypothesise an alternative explanation, that these patients comprise a clinically distinct group and differ from patients who continue to meet the definitions of either intermittent or chronic infection whilst on treatment. We conducted this retrospective review as part of an audit of our clinical practice. Methods: Airway culture results were examined during 2014 for all paediatric and adult patients attending a single CF centre and prescribed long-term inhaled antibiotics (IA) (ie, excluding those receiving eradication therapy for a new Pa growth). Only patients with ≥3 cultures in the year were included in an attempt to minimise misclassification. Clinical data including lung function at annual review and treatment with IA were obtained from the national CF registry and local electronic patient records. Results: Data were obtained for 434 patients on long-term IA with ≥3 cultures/year. Of these, 174 (40%) were Pa-negative and 260 (60%) were Pa-positive during 2014. The Pa-negative group had higher median (IQR) percent predicted FEV 1 (Pa-negative 78.1 (65.6-91.7)%; Pa-positive 62.0 (40.8-80.3)%, p<0.0001), however, they were also younger (median (IQR) age 15.1 (10.0-25.5) years vs. 26.4 (18.2-35.7) years, p<0.0001) which may have confounded this result. We therefore compared 99 patients in each group who could be matched for age (within 1 year), gender and CFTR genotype (p.Phe508del/p.Phe508del, p.Phe508del/other, other/other): the Pa-negative group still had higher median (IQR) percent predicted FEV 1 (74.9 (58.7-88.6)% vs 68.8 (45.1-84.9)%, p<0.05) and median (IQR) percent predicted FVC (87.9 (76.9-97.5)% vs 84.1 (69.6-97.9)%, p=<0.05). Conclusion: These data highlight potential clinical differences between patients who are Pa-culture negative and those who are Pa-culture positive whilst receiving long-term inhaled antipseudomonal antibiotics. Whether these differences mean that fitter patients are more likely to clear Pa or that Pa clearance leads to better status cannot be determined. Further evaluation of this patient group, including measurement of Pa antibodies, is proposed, to explore the mechanisms underlying these differences and to identify patients who may be suitable for a trial of antibiotic withdrawal. Pseudomonas aeruginosa airway infections affect 80% of adults with cystic fibrosis. Sodium nitrite inhibits bacterial respiration, and thus may provide a novel antimicrobial approach. However P. aeruginosa has a highly branched respiratory chain, and thus the precise targets of nitrosative stress are unclear. A transposon screen identified roxSR as a potential regulator of nitrite sensitivity. RoxSR encodes a two-component sensorkinase that regulates terminal oxidase expression in P. aeruginosa and may affect bacterial adaptation to nitrosative stress. Transcriptomic analysis was done with RNA sequencing to compare the roxSR strain to parental PAO1 in the presence and absence of sodium nitrite. In liquid, aerobic culture loss of roxSR leads to derepression of norCB, as well as misregulation of coxA. Exposure of PAO1 to nitrite leads to norCB as well as cbb3-type cytochrome oxidases. In contrast, roxSR strains do not further upregulate norCB (which was upregulated in unexposed cultures), and misregulate the cytochrome oxidases. These data suggest that roxSR, in addition to anr and dnr, may regulate denitrification. Because the cytochrome oxidases are the principal genes regulated by roxSR, the role of the specific cytochrome oxidases in nitrite sensitivity was examined. Nitrite sensitivity for strains deleted in combinations of the cytochrome oxidases were tested in both aerobic LB liquid culture and in the human bronchial epithelial cell line and Pseudomonas biofilm co-culture system that was previously described by Moreau-Marquis et al. The airway epithelial associated biofilms were treated with increasing concentrations of sodium nitrite. The roxSR strain was 2-fold more sensitive to nitrite than PAO1 under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions. Biotic biofilm formation was unimpaired, however resultant biofilms were more susceptible to growth inhibition by nitrite. In an acute mouse pneumonia model, C57BL6 mice were intranasally inoculated with PAO1 or roxSR. Bacteria were counted from the lung 24 hours later. Loss of roxSR leads to 3-4 log decrease in bacterial burden at 24 hours. In conclusion, the two-component system RoxSR is a key regulator of the P. aeruginosa response to nitrite in liquid culture and biotic biofilms, as well as being required for adaptation to growth in the mouse lung. In addition to known regulation of the terminal cytochrome oxidases, this TCS also likely regulates denitrification. Objective: Palivizumab is recommended to reduce hospitalizations in infants and children at high-risk for severe respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection. In children with CF there are potentially additional benefits of prevention of early RSV infection. Currently, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) guidelines recommend palivizumab for CF infants < 12 months of age with clinical evidence of chronic lung disease and/or nutritional compromise and in those < 24 months of age hospitalized in their first year of life for pulmonary exacerbations, with pulmonary radiographic abnormalities, or weight for length <10 th percentile. The effect of palivizumab on longer-term outcomes in children with CF is unknown. We used the CF Foundation Patient Registry (CFFPR) to evaluate the potential impact of receiving palivizumab in infancy on clinical outcomes up to age 6 years. Methods: We performed a retrospective cohort analysis using CFFPR data. Eligible children were born 2008 -2014 and diagnosed with CF by age 6 months. Children were categorized according to whether or not they received palivizumab at any time during their first 2 years of life and excluded if palivizumab status was unknown. Children were followed until 12/31/2014 for the following outcomes: hospitalizations for pulmonary indications, time to first isolation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) among those negative at the start of their first RSV season, and FEV 1 % predicted at age 6 years. A propensity model was developed to adjust for confounding by treatment indication. Results: The cohort included 4438 children of whom 37% (n=1652) received palivizumab during infancy. Annual palivizumab use declined significantly over the study period. Compared to those not receiving palivizumab, infants receiving palivizumab had more signs and symptoms of CF; for example, prior to receipt of palivizumab, they had lower weight percentiles, higher prevalence of PA, more severe CFTR mutations, and more pancreatic enzyme use. Overall hospitalization rates were comparable in those who did and did not receive palivizubmab. Those children receiving palivizumab had a 9% higher hazard of first isolation of PA (95% CI: 4%, 13%). Among the 441 children with lung function data at age 6 years, those receiving palivizumab (n=206) Conclusions: Infants with CF who received palivizumab had evidence of more severe CF disease when they received palivizumab, consistent with current AAP recommendations. After adjusting for disease severity, we did not detect improvements in long-term clinical outcomes based on receipt of palivizumab. However, the data available in the Registry did not allow us to assess potential benefits of palivizumab specifically among infants with chronic lung disease or nutritional compromise. In addition the CFFPR does not collect data on RSV infections. We plan to explore alternative datasets to assess short-and long-term benefits conferred by palivizumab in CF infants with more severe clinical manifestations during their first 2 years of life. Methods: Patients ≥6 years old with FEV 1 25-90% predicted and ≥2 PA-positive respiratory cultures were enrolled from CFF-accredited centers in the US. Respiratory samples were collected annually and processed at a central reference laboratory. The primary outcome measure is the annual change in the proportion of subjects whose least susceptible PA isolate has ≥4-fold increase in aztreonam minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and is above the parenteral aztreonam susceptibility breakpoint (>8 μg/ mL). Other outcomes include changes in PA susceptibility to aztreonam and other antibiotics; the association between number of AZLI courses and PA resistance to aztreonam; and the relationship between PA resistance to aztreonam and clinical outcomes obtained from the CFF Patient Registry database. Results: 510 subjects were enrolled (Aug-Nov 2011) from 31 CF centers. Mean age at enrollment was 26 years (range 6 to 71); 377 (73.9%) were ≥18 years and mean FEV 1 % predicted was 60% (range 17-104%). In the year prior to enrollment 278 (54.5%) subjects received ≥1 AZLI course and 130 (25.5%) received ≥5 AZLI courses. Subjects with paired respiratory samples with PA isolated + MIC data were compared for annual MIC changes from baseline through Year 3. Evaluable subjects with PA isolates that met the primary outcome: Year 1: 13.1% (41/312); Year 2: 21.8% (48/266); Year 3: 19% (49/258). There was no association with AZLI exposure (yes/no or number of courses) between subjects who did/did not meet the primary outcome. Aztreonam MIC 50 /MIC 90 for all PA isolates were 4 μg/mL/128 μg/mL at baseline, Year 1, Year 2 and Year 3. There was no significant difference in the annual percent change in FEV 1 % predicted from Year 2 to Year 3 for subjects who met (-4.3%) vs did not meet (-3.3%) the primary outcome. Pulmonary exacerbation rates for those who did/did not meet the Year 3 primary outcome were 83.7% (41/49) vs 60.9% (126/209), respectively, p=0.003. Hospitalization rates for those who did/did not meet the Year 3 primary outcome were 73.5% (36/49) vs 54.1% (112/209), respectively, p=0.02. Conclusions: A similar proportion of subjects had PA isolates that met the primary outcome in Year 3 compared to Year 2, although fewer subjects met the primary outcome in Year 1. AZLI use was not associated with meeting the primary outcome in any year, thus far. Those meeting the primary outcome did not exhibit a greater decline in lung function, but did have more exacerbations and hospitalizations, both of which are associated with antibiotic treatment. Supported by Gilead Sciences. The gut microbiota plays an essential role in humans across the life span, yet the acquisition and development of this microbial community in early childhood remain largely unexplored. Perturbations of the microbiome in early life, including colonization with specific microbes, have been linked to many diseases, including CF. The CF intestinal tract is likely to be populated with a host of maldigested macro-and micronutrients as well as their metabolites, which will alter the intestinal milieu, i.e., substrates, PH & oxygen, and bacteria growth. However, no large studies in CF have systematically characterized early life gut microbiota with respect to diet, growth, nutrition and lung disease. Objective: To characterize 0-3 y gut microbiota in CF, and to explore the influences of cesarean delivery, infancy feeding, and acid blocker use. Method: The study population includes children born after 2012 diagnosed through newborn screening, and enrolled in FIRST (Feeding Infants Right… from the STart), a multicenter prospective study being conducted at 5 CF Centers (Madison & Milwaukee; Indianapolis; Salt Lake City; and Boston) to identify optimal feeding for CF infants. Fecal specimens are collected at routine clinical visits during infancy and annually afterwards. 16S rRNA gene pyrosequencing and metagenomics data analysis using QIIME pipeline are performed by the Biotechnology Center at UW-Madison. We analyzed 268 samples from 92 children. Results: The samples were collected at 14±11 mo, including 134 in the 1 st , 84 in the 2 nd , and 50 in the 3 rd y. Of the 92 children, there are 47 boys and 45 girls; 17 MI, 68 PI, and 7 PS; 34 out of 72 children used acid blocker during infancy. 25 (28%) out of 88 children were born by cesarean delivery. In 70 full-term and normal birth weight non-PS children, 17 were exclusively breastfed (eB) for ≥3mo, 18 for 1-3mo, and the remaining 35 received either eB for <1mo or partial breast milk or formula only. Overall, 18,746,552 sequences comprising 19,325 operational taxonomic units with 285 unique genera were identified. 59% of the total number of reads was presented by 16 genera. Among them, Bifidobacterium was the most abundant genus (21%), followed by Bacteroides (8%), streptococcus (5%), Blautia (4%), Veillonella, lactobacillus, Clostridium, Enterococcus, Ruminococcus, Collinsella, Citrobacter, Parabacteroides, Dorea, Coprococcus, Klebsiella, and Haemophilus (all≤3%) . The alpha diversity scores increased with age. The abundance of Bacteroides, Blautia, Collinsella, and Coprococcus increased with age, while Bifidobacterium and Veillonella decreased with age. Cesarean delivery was associated with decreased Parabacteroides in the 1 st y, decreased Bifidobacterium, Veillonella, Klebsiella, and Haemophilus in the 2 nd , and decreased Veillonella and Klebsiella in the 3 rd y. Higher abundance of Haemophilus in the 2 nd and lactobacillus in the 3 rd y were associated with eB ≥3mo. Acid blocker use was associated with increased Collinsella in the 2 nd y. Conclusion: Our preliminary analyses suggest that infant feeding, acid blocker use, and cesarean delivery could alter early life gut microbiota composition. Latent class analysis for microbiota composition will be performed. ( Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients often receive prolonged courses of broad spectrum antibiotics for the treatment of acute pulmonary exacerbations (APE). CF patients are commonly infected with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa necessitating antibiotic coverage for both these organisms. Previous studies in non-CF pediatric patients have suggested an increased incidence of acute kidney injury (AKI) with vancomycin in combination with piperacillin-tazobactam. The objective of this study was to determine the difference in AKI between patients receiving piperacillin-tazobactam or cefepime in combination with vancomycin and tobramycin. Methods: An IRB-approved retrospective cohort study was conducted at a single CF center. Patients were included if they were hospitalized for an APE from 12/01/2008 to 06/30/2015, received treatment with intravenous vancomycin, tobramycin, and piperacillin-tazobactam or cefepime during hospitalization, and were age 30 days to 18 years old at admission. AKI was defined as an increase in serum creatinine (Scr) of at least 25%. The primary outcome was the difference in AKI incidence in patients receiving piperacillin-tazobactam or cefepime, as defined by modified pediatric risk, injury, failure, loss, end-stage renal disease (pRIFLE) criteria. Results: The study included seventy-eight patients, 39 patients in both the cefepime and piperacillin-tazobactam groups. The median (interquartile range) age was slightly older in the cefepime group: 13 years (8-16) versus piperacillin-tazobactam group 9 years (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) . Weight and height were greater in the cefepime group (Weight: cefepime 41.9 kg (26. 3-53.3) vs. piperacillin-tazobactam 27.7 kg (19-44.7) p=0.013; Height: cefepime 154 cm (126-161) vs. piperacillin-tazobactam 132 cm (107-152) p=0.021). AKI was identified in 56.5% (22/39) of the patients in the piperacillintazobactam group and 15.4% (6/39) of the patients in the cefepime group (p≤0.0001). There was no statistical difference in length of antibiotic days (9 vs. 10, p=0.52), days to maximum SCr (6.5 vs. 3.5, p=0.401), nor previous aminoglycoside or vancomycin courses. For the patients who experienced AKI, the maximum vancomycin trough measured for piperacillin-tazobactam was 22 (14-39) vs. 15 (9-21) for cefepime group (p=0.123). Conclusions: This study suggests that piperacillin-tazobactam therapy in combination with intravenous vancomycin and tobramycin in pediatric CF patients may cause a greater incidence of AKI when compared to treatment with cefepime. Background: Home nebulizers of patients with CF can become colonized with microbes despite standard cleaning practices, raising the possibility of pathogen exposure when using contaminated nebulizers (Blau H, et al. Child Care Health Dev. 2007; 33:491-5) . The CF Foundation recommends multiple different methods for nebulizer disinfection (Saiman L, et al. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2013 :35:S1-S67). There is less known regarding how newer disinfection techniques such as steam sterilization impact bacterial recovery from patient nebulizers. Hypothesis: Recommended disinfection techniques will not differ with respect to bacterial recovery from patients' nebulizers while increased frequency of nebulizer disinfection will result in decreased bacterial recovery. Methods: Informed consent was obtained from 20 pediatric CF families (children 6-18 years) who use nebulizer therapy daily for this pilot study . Families filled out a study questionnaire regarding nebulizer cleaning and disinfection techniques. The patients' PARI®LC PLUS nebulizer was swabbed (eSwab, Copan) inside the mouthpiece, the outlet, and the chamber. The swab was sent for bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial culture and recovered microbes were identified with MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry (Towle D, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2012; 12:512-6) . A chart review collated demographics and respiratory cultures with survery results regarding nebulizer cleaning and disinfection practices along with microbial recovery from nebulizers. Data were analyzed with Fisher's exact test and linear by linear association. Results: Although 90% (18/20) of patients disinfected their home nebulizers, 75% (15/20) of nebulizers grew at least one microbe, most commonly viridans group Streptococcus (35%, 7/20). Only 20% (4/20) of nebulizers had at least one CF pathogen. While 35% (7/20) of patients grew Pseudomonas sp within the last year, none was recovered from neb-ulizers. Staphylococcus aureus (SA) grew from 80% (16/20) of patient cultures within the last year while only 15% (3/20) of nebulizers grew SA. SA was recovered twice from both the patient and the patient's nebulizer. All patients grew mouth flora within the last year. Nebulizers disinfected after each use were less likely to be colonized by a microbe (43%, 3/7 with microbes) than nebulizers disinfected less frequently (93%, 12/13 with microbes, p=0.03). There was no difference in bacterial recovery comparing different disinfection methods (e.g., boiling, steam sterilization, alcohol, and bleach, p=0.23). Conclusion: Home nebulizers are contaminated with microbes regardless of the disinfection method. Disinfection after each use results in reduced microbe recovery from nebulizers compared with less frequent disinfection and should be a focus of patient education. Study limitations include the small sample size and bias associated with self-reporting. Current work is examining the contribution of other variables to microbe recovery from the nebulizer (e.g. antibiotic use) and the optimal method of nebulizer disinfection. Methods: We developed a confidential, anonymous online survey to determine if selected IP&C practices have been implemented. After pilot testing by 11 content experts, including former center directors, the revised survey contained 26 items with multiple-choice and yes/no responses. Emails (including 3 reminders) were sent to the directors of the 277 pediatric, adult and affiliate care centers asking them or their designee to complete the survey. Respondents received $25 gift cards for their participation. Results: To date, 152 centers (55% response rate) have completed the survey, including 85/119 (71%) pediatric, 52/104 (50%) adult, and 15/54 affiliate (28%) centers. Overall, 91% (138/152) of centers provide IP&C education during clinic visits; IP&C education is included on checklists of 18% (25/138) of these centers. Over half use newsletters (55%), signage (55%), and CFF educational materials (53%). Patients/families and the local IP&C team helped to develop education at 35% and 57% of centers, respectively. The IP&C team helps implement practices at 89% of centers. Education about IP&C in CF is consistently provided to inpatient staff (94%), PFT lab staff (91%) and social workers (84%); fewer than half of centers provide education to admitting, housekeeping, radiology, or phlebotomy staff. Feedback regarding IP&C is provided to staff at 69% (105/152) of centers and 45% (49/152) perform audits of environmental cleaning. Most centers (75%, 114/152) hold formal education events of which 94% (108/114) are in-person meetings. Adult centers are more likely to allow individual(s) with CF to attend in-person meetings than are pediatric centers (72% vs. 45%, respectively, p<0.05). Centers also use videoconferences (29%), videotapes (5%), and webinars (5%) to provide education. Most centers (91%) hold outdoor events; pediatric, adult, and affiliate centers are equally likely to allow individual(s) with CF to attend (91%, 94%, and 100%, respectively p=0.7). The most common IP&C strategy at outdoor events is the "6 foot rule"; it is used by 82% (114/138) of centers holding outdoor events. Half (51%) of centers participated in a national or local IP&C quality improvement project. Conclusions: Most responding CF care centers are implementing recommendations from the updated IP&C guidelines, partnering with the IP&C team to do so, and providing education for clinic staff, inpatient staff, and patients/families. These early findings also suggest additional educational opportunities for ancillary staff and improving audit and feedback for environmental cleaning of CF clinics. Future work in this project will focus on reviewing written IP&C protocols from responding centers for other selected recommendations and ultimately assess the impact of the IP&C guidelines on acquisition of selected CF pathogens. In young children the microbiome is more diverse and more dynamic in response to therapies. The roles of mucus obstruction, inflammation, and microbial interactions are unclear. Aims: We are examining the microbiome of young children by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) to identify changes related to age, mucus concentration and inflammation. Methods: Infants and children who undergo yearly BAL as part of the Australian Respiratory Early Surveillance Team (AREST) for CF program were included. Each subject had one BAL sample each from the right middle lobe (RML) and one from the lingula. In a subgroup, a bronchoscope wash (BW) ie, flush of the bronchoscope prior to the BAL was obtained. Microbial characterization was done by 16S rRNA gene sequencing, mucus concentration measured by refractometry, and inflammation measured by IL-8 and percent neutrophils (%PMN). Results: The mean (SEM) age of the 37 children was 3.1 (0.27) years, with microbiome data available in 37 RML, 31 lingula and 15 BW samples. Weighted principal component analyses showed clear separation of BW from the BAL samples ( Figure) and overlapping bacterial composition for RML-lingula samples. Alpha diversity (Shannon index) tended to decrease with age, especially in the first two years. Shannon did not correlate with IL-8 and %PMN but showed a weak negative correlation to mucin concentration (r= -0.25). In contrast, mucin concentration correlated positively with IL-8 (r=0.41) and %PMN (r=0.59). Discussion: Microbiome characterization in BAL fluid of young children detects bacterial taxa different from those present in the reagents used to perform the bronchoscopy. Interestingly, Shannon diversity decreases with increase in mucin concentration, which in turn correlates with lower airway inflammation. This may imply the importance of mucus obstruction in CF disease. Taxa-specific analyses in regards to regional diversity, age, inflammation and mucus will be presented. Background: Bacterial pathogens are associated with pulmonary decline in patients with CF. Co-colonization with multiple microorganisms is common in the CF airways even during infancy. Novel statistical analysis that simultaneously examines multiple microorganisms in the CF airway has been lacking. Understanding the heterogeneity in the joint profile of respiratory infections and their associations with breastfeeding can lead to critical scientific insights for optimizing early life disease management. Objective: To delineate the joint microorganism profiles, identify meaningful co-colonization patterns, and examine their associations to breast/formula feeding in infants with CF. Methods: The study cohort includes 96 CF infants enrolled in FIRST (Feeding Infants Right… from the STart), a prospective observational study initiated in 2012 at 5 CF centers (Madison, Milwaukee, Boston, Indianapolis and Salt Lake City) to identify optimal feeding. Data on respiratory infections from oropharyngeal cultures collected at routine CF center visits in the first year of life were analyzed. We applied a latent class analysis (LCA) to jointly examine respiratory infection status and intensity (defined by 0=no infection, 1=positive with a few colonies, 2=positive with a moderate number of colonies, and 3=positive with many colonies) of seven major microorganisms at 2, 6, 9 and 12 mo of age. Results: The LCA differentiated this cohort of CF infants into three groups that demonstrated distinct longitudinal co-colonization patterns of microorganisms (Figure) . CF infants in Class 1 had no infection of any considered microorganisms at all four age points. CF infants in Class 2 showed markedly elevated intensity of Staphylococcus aureus (Sa) infection, accompanied by a low intensity of co-infection with non-mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa) and Klebsiella. CF infants in Class 3 manifested a high infection risk of Sa as well as multiple other bacterial pathogens. Compared to exclusive formula feeding, exclusive breastfeeding >2 mo showed a significant protecting effect against the infection of Acinetobacter (OR=0.12, 95% CI: 0.02-0.62) throughout the first year of life. Breastfeeding partially or exclusively >6 mo also lowered the risk of Haemophilus influenzae infection during infancy (OR=0.19, 95% CI: 0.06-0.67). Conclusion: The latent classifications of microorganism profiles provided new insights into the heterogeneity in the microbial phenotype and identified co-colonizations of Sa and other bacteria. Breastfeeding lowered the risk of Haemophilus influenzae and Acinetobacter infections during infancy. Funded Background: Early diagnosis and treatment of respiratory infections is the cornerstone of management of lung disease in cystic fibrosis (CF). We have introduced routine induced sputum (IS) sampling as part of the annual review at our CF center for children for microbiological surveillance. Many of these children are not normally sputum producers. Whilst the procedure is safe and well tolerated, it is time consuming and requires specially trained staff. This study aimed to examine the value of routine IS sampling in children with CF during their annual review. Methods: This prospective observational study involved children with CF (5 to 17 y) who attended University Hospitals of Leicester, UK for their annual review between January 2012 and December 2015. Children able to perform IS and lung function testing were included. Sputum induction involved patients inhaling increasing concentrations of 3, 4 and 5% hypertonic saline for 5 minutes, provided that their drop in FEV 1 was acceptable at the end of each cycle. Sputum samples were processed by standard methods looking for bacteria, including mycobacteria and fungi. Results: 39 children (43.5 % male, mean age 9.9 ± 2.9 y, mean FEV 1 97.7 % ± 17.6% predicted) participated in the study. Of the 102 IS samples analysed during the study period, 54 samples (52.9%) resulted in 82 positive isolates. Positive bacterial yield was noted in 28 (27.5%) sputum samples, 14 (13.7%) of which were first time isolates (including all 3 atypical mycobacteria). The Image details the microbial isolates noted on IS. Intravenous antibiotics were used to treat 4 out of the 11 children with new bacterial isolates and 2 of 3 children who isolated mycobacteria. Conclusions: IS is a well-tolerated, safe and non-invasive method to sample lower airways in children with CF. We identified new isolates of important organisms in 9.8% of annual review IS samples. This suggests that annual review surveillance induced sputum is useful to identify important pathogens in children who are often asymptomatic, resulting in earlier initiation of eradication treatment and cohorting of children with pathogens, e.g. M. abscessus and B. cepacia, before they potentially infect other children in the clinic. The airways of patients with CF harbour rich communities of microbes or "microbiota," the role of which is unclear. Studies in adults have demonstrated that decreased community diversity may be a marker of end-stage disease with little change seen with exacerbations (Zhao J, et al. PNAS 2012; 109:5809-14) . Greater longitudinal study of the microbiota in infancy is needed to identify early changes that could be targeted therapeutically to prevent the onset of advanced disease. We hypothesised that changes in the airway microbiota would be seen with evolving clinical status in infants with CF. Methods: Thirty infants with CF diagnosed on newborn screening were recruited at a median age of 84 days and throat swabs collected at routine clinical appointments for up to 2 years, with a median of 35 days between each visit. Quantitative PCR and sequencing of the 16S rRNA bacterial gene was performed using Illumina MiSeq. Data analyses were performed in QIIME and Phyloseq in R. Results: Streptococcus was the most common genus in the first 2 years of life (55.3% of reads). Other common genera include: Haemophilus (12.3%) and Veillonella (7.54%). Staphylococcus and Pseudomonas had low relative abundance (0.123% and 0.097% respectively). A weak positive correlation was seen between age and bacterial load (r = 0.105, P = 0.016) and alpha diversity (within samples variation), measured by richness (the number of different species) and evenness (the spread of species) (r = 0.181 and 0.196 respectively, P < 0.001). A significant influence of age on beta diversity (between samples variation) was also demonstrated (Bray Curtis r 2 = 15.0%, P = 0.03). Preliminary examination of trends in the most common genera found that Streptococcus and Haemophilus begin with a similar relative abundance but diverge thereafter, with Streptococcus increasing up to 9 months of age then decreasing and Haemophilus showing the opposite trend. Seven children (23%) experienced an exacerbation (requiring intravenous antibiotics) within the first 2 years of life. No significant difference was found in bacterial load, alpha or beta diversity at exacerbation or with treatment (P > 0.05). At a genera level, the relative abundance of Streptococcus increased at the start of an exacerbation but declined sharply thereafter. Veillonella and Granulicatella showed similar but less pronounced trends whereas Haemophilus showed the opposite trend. The significance of these trends and changes in less common genera is currently being assessed. Conclusions: Whilst there was only a small change in bacterial load and alpha diversity, there was a significant relationship between age and beta diversity in the first 2 years of life, suggesting that changes at a genera level may have a greater influence on clinical features than overall diversity of the community. Changes in the relative abundance of Streptococcus, Haemophilus, Veillonella and Granulicatella were observed at exacerbation, albeit in a small number of patients. Larger longitudinal studies are needed to determine the clinical significance of these changes. Introduction: Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) have a particular affinity for patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and can lead to significant worsening of disease. It is well known that NTM live naturally in biofilms on water and soil, and recent studies have shown that rates of infection correlate directly with atmospheric water content. Our objective was to determine if there is an association between household proximity to water and acquisition of NTM in children with CF. Methods: An IRB-approved retrospective chart review was completed on all CF patients at the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation-accredited centers of Nemours Children's Clinics in Pensacola and Orlando, Florida. Inclusion criteria required regular follow-up, at least two acid-fast base sputum or bronchioalveolar lavage cultures, and a consistent home address during the study period of July 2012 -July 2015. Demographic and certain clinical information was obtained and compared between the two groups of NTM-positive and NTM-negative patients to assess for possible confounders. The distance from each patient's home to the nearest body of water was measured using ArcMap®, a Geographic Information System. The mean closest distance to water for the NTM-positive and NTMnegative groups was calculated and then compared by nonparametric Mann Whitney U test. Results: Of the 65 patients who met inclusion criteria, 21 tested positive for NTM (32.3%). Of the NTM-positive patients, 66.7% grew Mycobacterium avium complex, 23.8% grew Mycobacterium abscessus complex, and 9.5% grew both of these organisms. There was no significant difference between the NTM-positive and NTM-negative patients with relationship to sex, insurance status, CF genotype, or mean percent predicted FEV 1 , though patients in the NTM-positive group were significantly older with a mean age of 15.5 years versus 10.9 years. The mean distance to water for NTM-positive patients (397.60 m, SD 392.36 m) was significantly less compared to those who were NTM-negative (683.93 m, SD 649.16 m) with a p-value of 0.014. Living within 500 meters of a water source was significantly associated with NTM-positivity (p=0.005). The mean distance to water for each group is displayed below as a bar graph with error bars representing the standard error of the mean. Conclusions: In the regions studied, children with CF who live closer to water are more likely to acquire nontuberculous mycobacteria. Future studies in other geographic areas are needed to determine if these results are generalizable. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is a multidrug-resistant organism whose prevalence is increasing in CF. Chronic infection to Stenotrophomonas increased risk of pulmonary exacerbation (PEx), of lung transplantation (1, 2) and death (3) . The improvement of life expectancy has led to the emergence of new comorbidities; the most common one is CF-related diabetes. When blood glucose is ≥ 8 mmol/L, glucose is detected in the airway, creating a favourable environment for bacterial growth in the lungs of CF patients (4) . Objective: Characterize associations between a positive culture of Stenotrophomonas and glucose excursions in a large adult population with CF. Methods: This is a cross-sectional observational analysis of CF patients, without known CFRD, from the Montreal CF Cohort. All patients (N=260) underwent a 2-h Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) with glucose measurements each 30 min. With these measures, a reference blood glucose curve was created. This reference glycemia curve represents the threshold for elevated airway glucose concentration and was created through a selection of 18 patients who had a normal glucose level at 120 min of the OGTT (< 7.7 mmol/L) with a blood glucose level near 8 mmol/L (7.6 to 8.5 mmol/L) at 60 minutes of the OGTT. The area under the curve (AUC) from time 0 to 120 min of the OGTT (AUC 0-120 ) was measured and used as the reference blood glucose. Patients who had higher glucose AUC 0-120 values were categorised at risk of elevated airway glucose. Pulmonary bacterial colonisation of airway mucus, forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV 1 ), age, gender, nutritional status and the number of PEx requiring intravenous antibiotics were collected. Statistical analysis using the Mann-Whitney U-Test and Chi 2 nonparametric t-test was done. Results: Patients were 25.8 ± 7.9 years old with a mean body mass index of 21.8 ± 3.0 kg/m 2 and FEV 1 of 73.0 ± 21.9 %. Stenotrophomonas-positive patients (N=41, 15.8%) had significantly lower FEV 1 (p < 0.001) and underwent a higher number of PEx (p < 0.001) when compared to patients with no Stenotrophomonas colonisation. The proportion of Stenotrophomonas-positive patients with high glucose AUC 0-120 was significantly higher than the proportion of Stenotrophomonas-negative patients with high glucose AUC 0-120 (100.0 vs. 85.4%, p = 0.004). Conclusion: Patients with positive Stenotrophomonas culture had a lower FEV 1 and underwent more PEx compared to negative-Stenotrophomonas patients. The prevalence of higher glucose AUC 0-120 values is higher in Stenotrophomonas-positive patients. This suggests that the presence of Stenotrophomonas is associated with a deleterious clinical outcome and that abnormal glucose metabolism could be one of the contributing factors. Further mechanistic studies are necessary to understand the link between Stenotrophomonas and glucose homeostasis. References : Methods: Patients who had provided sputum samples within three years of their 18th birthday and had a minimum follow-up of five years (clinical and microbiologic) were included. All sputum samples were obtained from the CACFC Biobank established since 1998. Ten-and fifteen-year assessments were done for patients with available samples at those time points. Duplicate samples were assessed for each time point as able and samples collected within 14 days of new systemic antibiotics were filtered out. The microbial composition was determined via Illumina MiSeq sequencing of the V3-V4 of 16S rRNA. Patients were categorized based on their rate of lung function decline (measured as FEV 1 % predicted) (i.e. stable (0±3%/ year), mild (-1 to -3%/year) and severe (≥3%/year). Results: Fifty adults (56% males) were included and were assessed at the following intervals: 0, 5 y (n=50); 0, 5, 10 y (n=19); and 0, 5, 10, 15 y (n=5). The cohort was composed of 40% F508del homozygous and 38% heterozygotes with a median FEV 1 % of 77.5% and FVC 99% predicted. A total of 219 sputum samples were assessed. Patients were categorized at 0-5 years as experiencing stable (28%), mild (30%) and severe lung function decline (42%). The groups did not differ with respect to proportion of cultured pathogens; PA (stable: 76.8%, mild: 76.7% and severe: 62.2%, P= 0.075) and Haemophilus influenzae (HI) (stable: 3.6%, mild: 12.3% and severe: 8.9%, P= 0.244), with the exception of Staphylococcus aureus (SA) (stable: 50%, mild: 38.4% and severe: 58.9%, P= 0.032). There was a reduction (measured with observed estimator) in the alpha diversity between time periods 0 to 5 years in the severe group (P= 0.02), however, no difference was found for the stable and mild lung disease group. Based on the relative abundance the genera that was driving that reduction in the severe group included PA, HI, Prevotella, SA and Streptococcus (P adjusted < 0.05). Interestingly, when the rate of decline was calculated based on time 0 to 10 years, there was no longer a difference for the alpha diversity in the severe group (P=0.52). Comparison of the relative abundance among lung disease groups showed that PA, Rothia, Dialister, HI, Prevotella, SA, Fusobacterium, Streptococcus and Neisseria were driving the differences among the groups (P adjusted < 0.05). We determined that CF microbiome was clustered based on the FEV 1 % decline group (P= 0.009, Permanova). Conclusions: In our longitudinal cohort of CF adolescents, we found a relationship between bacterial diversity with the rate of lung function decline and the predominant constituents found in the microbial community of the sputum samples. Introduction: Great efforts have been made at understanding how CF airways infections influence clinical outcomes in CF. However, two findings have dramatically changed our perception of infections: the recognition that P. aeruginosa (PA) strains have different clinical prognosis, and that a diverse community of organisms populate the airways (CF microbiome). Epidemic strains of PA (ePA) have been described for their multidrug resistance. Within our clinic an ePA has recently been described (the Prairie Epidemic Strain; PES) whose infections are associated with increased risk of exacerbations, rate of lung function decline, and progression to end-stage lung disease, compared to those with unique infections. Whereas earlier studies have proposed ePA have exaggerated virulence capacity we hypothesized that ePA may select for a more virulent lower airways community. Methods: Previous work from our group using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and multilocus sequence typing has determined the PA infecting strain type of our entire cohort over the last thirty years. We matched patients with chronic PES infection by birth cohort ±2 years and sex to control patients infected with unique (non-epidemic strains of PA, uPA). We then examined our longitudinal sputum biobank (established in 1998) to identify sputum samples collected at similar time periods between the two patient groups at up to three time points for analysis. Samples were excluded if they were collected within two weeks of systemic antibacterials. We performed Illumina MiSeq sequencing of the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene. Results: We identified 164 sputum samples from 42 matched pairs (22 male; 20 female) of PES and uPA infected patients for analysis. Demographics of matched patients were similar with respect to pancreatic insufficiency and genotype distribution, but patients with PES had advanced airways disease, as defined by FEV 1 (P= 0.002). Sputum samples were collected at a median of 36 (IQR19.5-96) days apart in each pairing. Pooled analysis demonstrated those samples from patients with ePA had lower alpha diversity (P= 0.029 (Observed) and P= 0.031 (Chao1)). Proportional community abundance of PA in the PES group were greater than uPA (48.25% (IQR13.5-81.7) vs 18.4% (0.2-67.88), P= 0.0182). Permanova analysis of the microbial community structure was clustered based on gender (P=0.003), FEV 1 % (P=0.003), FVC% (P=0.004) and ePA status (P=0.005). Genera that were found to be different between PES infected patients and uPA at significant levels included; Streptococcus, Fusobacterium, Haemophilus, Dialister, Mycoplasma, Eikenella, Prevotella, Acinetobacter and Acidovorax (P adjusted < 0.05). Conclusions: Herein we observed that patients infected with PES, an ePA associated with worse clinical outcomes, have different lower airways community structure than those infected with uPA. Although ePA may be disproportionally more virulent than other PA strains it may also function to modify the CF microbiome to one that is more harmful to the host by which patients infected with ePA experience worse clinical outcomes. Collins, M. 2 ; O'Rourke, T. 1 ; Drapeau, G. 2 ; Feinn, R. 1 ; Murray, T.S. 1,2 ; Curtis, R. 2 1. Med Sci, Frank H. Netter, M.D. Sch of Med, Quinnipiac Univ, Hamden, CT, USA; 2. Pulm, Ct Child Med Center, Hartford, CT, USA Introduction: Infection control practices are important for optimizing the health of children with CF but can be time-consuming and challenging for families to follow (Saiman L, et al. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2014 ;35 S1-S67). Awareness of the CF Foundation (CFF) guidelines and adherence to CFF infection control guidelines practices is highly variable amongst patients and centers (Miroballi Y, et al. Pediatr Pulmunol. 2012; 47:144-52) . A wealth of information is available for families with CF regarding all aspects of patient care, including newer corrective therapies. We wanted to learn how families' current knowledge and attitudes regarding infection control impact their actual practice and how knowledge of new advances in CF therapy compares with knowledge of infection control guidelines. Hypothesis: Families will know less about routine infection control practices compared with information regarding new CF corrector medications. Infection prevention will be important to families but they will have difficulty performing recommended routine procedures such as nebulizer cleaning and disinfection. Methods: After obtaining informed consent, 20 children and their families were surveyed during a routine visit regarding awareness and access to infection control guidelines; awareness and access to information on corrector therapies; attitudes toward infection prevention; and information regarding frequency and methods of home nebulizer cleaning and disinfection (CCMC IRB 15-081). Results were compared using Fisher's exact test and linear by linear association. Results: Germ avoidance is very/somewhat important to 95% of families, however only 45% disinfect nebulizers daily (Table) . Daily-disinfecting families are more likely to feel disinfection is important than those who disinfect less often (Table) . While 89% of families felt nebulizer cleaning was very/somewhat important only 45% had cleaned their nebulizer in the last 24 hours. While 60% of families referred to the CFF infection control guidelines, over 90% were aware of ivacaftor information but this did not reach statistical significance (p=0.23). The ability to find information on the CFF website regarding ivacaftor was associated with increased likelihood of having read the infection control guidelines (p=.004) suggesting a more general knowledge of CF information. Conclusions: A positive relationship exists between how patients feel about the importance of disinfection and frequency of nebulizer disinfection. However even though 95% of families place importance on germ avoidance less than half disinfect their nebulizer daily. This suggests education regarding the importance of infection control practices such as disinfection may lead to better adherence. Work is underway to understand the challenges of implementing infection control practices for families who acknowledge its importance. Bustamante, A.E. 1 ; Jaime-Perez, J. 2 ; Cordero-Perez, P. 3 ; Villarreal-Villarreal, C. 2 ; Mercado-Longoria, R. 1 1. Clinica de Fibrosis Quística Neumologia, Hospital Universitario, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; 2. Hematologia, Hospital Universitario, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; 3. Laboratorio Unidad de Hígado, Hospital Universitario, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a disease characterized by progressive lung inflammation that is largely triggered by infection. Platelets participate significantly in inflammation and they can be activated by bacterial toxins such as lipopolysaccharide of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. P. aeruginosa is the leading pathogen that infects CF patients and represents a determining factor for the deterioration of lung function and shortened survival. Early detection of the presence of this pathogen in CF airway is essential to establish early treatment and achieve elimination. The main problem is that young patients are not able to expectorate and therefore the identification of the bacteria is not always possible. Having a biomarker in peripheral blood that reflects the presence of the pathogen could be very useful. Objective: Evaluate platelet activation measured by sCD40L and its relationship with the presence of P. aeruginosa in the CF airway. Methods: The study evaluated 60 stable patients diagnosed with CF followed in the CF clinic at Hospital Universitario in Monterrey, México. Analyzed data included demographic information, CFTR genotype, spirometric measurements, radiographic and tomographic evaluations, platelets, sCD40L, IL6, TNFα, VEGF, ICAM1 in peripheral blood, airway colonization status with expectoration and/or throat swab culture, and P. aeruginosa serology. The patients, according to Leed's classification, were divided into three groups: 1) patients in whom P. aeruginosa was never detected; 2) patients with intermittent colonization; and 3) patients with chronic colonization. Results: (Table. ) The cytokines measured showed no statistically significant differences between the groups. The sCD40L cutoff value of 1255 pg/mL was associated with an area under the curve of 0.84 (95% CI 0.71-0.97) and reflects the presence of P. aeruginosa in the CF airway, with a sensitivity of 73% and specificity 89%. Lung damage expressed through Brasfield score, Bhalla score and spirometry (FVC%, FEV1%) had statistically significant difference between groups (P <0.001). Conclusions: Platelet activation measured by sCD40L may represent a predictive biomarker of the presence of P. aeruginosa in the airway of the CF patient. Recent studies suggest that the polymicrobial nature of infections plays a key role in driving CF lung disease and, in turn, significantly impacts the clinical outcomes of patients. In children, S. aureus colonization/infection usually precedes chronic colonization of the respiratory tract by P. aeruginosa, and continues into adulthood, when it can be co-isolated with P. aeruginosa from CF respiratory cultures. To date, it is unclear whether and how S. aureus is an independent contributor to CF lung disease pathogenesis and its impact on the progression of P. aeruginosa chronic lung infection. Exploring this causal association in humans is complicated by confounding variables that cannot be controlled individually. We recently developed and characterized a murine model of P. aeruginosa infection reliably mimicking the course of human infection (Cigana C, et al. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:21465) . Here, we take advantage of this murine model to study the role of S. aureus in the pathogenesis and progression of P. aeruginosa lung disease. C57Bl/6 mice were infected with S. aureus Newman strain (10 6 CFU) embedded in agar beads to mimic chronic infection and analyzed in a time course. The incidence of chronic infection was 90% at 7 days and remained stable up to 21 days. However, bacterial load, leukocyte recruitment and cytokines/chemokines levels peaked at 7 days and decreased at 21 days. The histopathological analysis at 7 days post-infection showed an initial formation of abscesses, similar to those observed in human lungs infected by S. aureus, that further increased at 21 days. At day 7, S. aureus-infected mice were superinfected with P. aeruginosa strains embedded in agar beads for 14 days. Pre-infection by S. aureus decreased the acute mortality induced by the highly virulent reference P. aeruginosa strain PA14 and the early CF clinical isolate AA2, and increased the number of mice progressing to P. aeruginosa chronic disease. In addition, S. aureus pre-infection increased the incidence of chronic infection established by the CF-adapted isolate AA43. Notably, the inflammatory response in terms of leukocyte recruitment and cytokines/chemokines production was similar in mice infected by P. aeruginosa, regardless of S. aureus pre-infection and abscesses formation. Immunofluorescence staining showed that S. aureus was localized mainly in the abscesses in the parenchyma, whereas P. aeruginosa was mainly present in the agar beads at bronchial level. Our study indicates that S. aureus shapes the host response favoring the P. aeruginosa persistence within the lung. Notably, the mouse model, refined in this study, is an invaluable tool for studying the pathogenesis and progression of infection in CF. Objectives: Chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection is the most severe complication in cystic fibrosis patients. It is characterized by antibiotic-tolerant biofilms in the endobronchial mucus with zones of oxygen (O 2 ) depletion mainly due to polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) activity. While the exact mechanisms affecting antibiotic effectiveness on biofilms remain unclear, accumulating evidence suggests that the efficiency of several bactericidal antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin, is enhanced by stimulation of the aerobic respiration of pathogens and that lack of O 2 increases their tolerance. In fact, the bactericidal effect of several antibiotics requires bacterial metabolic activity and depends on the formation of reactive O 2 radicals (ROS). Re-oxygenation of O 2 -depleted biofilms may thus improve susceptibility to ciprofloxacin possibly by restoring aerobic respiration. Our aim is to sensitize anoxic biofilms of wild-type P. aeruginosa and a catalase-deficient mutant (ΔkatA) to create tolerance against ciprofloxacin by hyperbaric oxygen treatment (HBOT). We tested such strategy using re-oxygenation of O 2 -depleted P. aeruginosa strain PAO1and ΔkatA agarose embedded biofilms by HBOT enhancing the diffusive supply for aerobic respiration during ciprofloxacin treatment. 3-day-old anoxic biofilms were treated with 1 and 2 mg/L ciprofloxacin. The biofilms were further incubated for 90 min ± HBOT (100% O 2 , 2.8 bar). Results: We demonstrated enhanced bactericidal activity of ciprofloxacin in P. aeruginosa agarose-biofilm during 90 min of HBOT (P<0.05). In fact, the maximum enhancement of killing by HBOT exceeded 1 log using 1 mg/L of ciprofloxacin. Preliminary data of ΔkatA biofilms to supplemental HBO suggest that ROS contributes to the enhanced activity of ciprofloxacin. Conclusions: This study demonstrates that biofilm re-oxygenation by HBOT can significantly enhance the bactericidal activity of ciprofloxacin on P. aeruginosa during 90 min of incubation. Combining ciprofloxacin treatment with HBOT thus clearly has potential to improve the treatment of P. aeruginosa biofilm infections. We suggest considering HBOT in CF patients where the lung infection has not yet advanced into creating exacerbation and zones of trapped air. Furthermore, we intend to demonstrate if supplemental normobaric O 2 may enhance the activity of antibiotics. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a recessive genetic disease caused by a defective CFTR leading to impaired chloride and bicarbonate ion transport. This defect leads to accumulation of dense, intractable mucus, which makes patients more susceptible to chronic lung infections. OligoG CF-5/20 is a refined low molecular weight oligosaccharide oligomer derived from brown algae alginate. It comprises mainly guluronate (>85%) and has inherent calcium chelating properties. Previous studies have shown OligoG can disrupt bacterial biofilms in vitro, potentiate antibiotics, and reduce elevated mucus viscosity in ex vivo CF sputum. OligoG is currently in phase IIb trials for cystic fibrosis, it has demonstrated excellent safety and tolerability in healthy volunteers, and CF patients. The study is a randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over study (phase IIb) of inhaled alginate oligosaccharide (OligoG CF-5/20 as a DPI) for 28 days in 12 subjects with cystic fibrosis using aztreonam due to chronic colonization with Burkholderia spp. The primary endpoint is to demonstrate the efficacy of inhaled OligoG in reducing the microbial burden of Burkholderia spp. as measured in expectorated sputum samples from 6 time points during the study. Secondary endpoints include evaluating the effect of inhaled OligoG on various efficacy variables eg, lung function, QoL, sputum rheology and other microbiological outcome measures. Microbiological objectives in the study are focused on determining the relative quantity of target pathogens and bacterial diversity using culture-independent molecular techniques. Standard molecular microbiology operating procedures have been developed and quantitative analysis of Burkholderia based on DNA and microbiome analysis will be performed. Ribosomal Intergenic Spacer Analysis (RISA) was used as a rapid and qualitative measure of the microbiota and has now been followed up by deep sequencing analysis of the 16S rRNA gene. Quantification and identification of the Burkholderia cepacia complex species present in each sample has been carried out by real-time PCR of the rpoD gene and sequencing of the recA and gyrB genes, respectively. Sequences will be compared to the B. cepacia complex multilocus sequence typing database for accurate identification. All sputum samples will be examined to identify whether the infecting B. cepacia complex strain has remained the same during the study. The bacterial diversity present in the Burkholderia study samples before and after OligoG therapy including statistical analysis of diversity changes will be investigated. Results Background: In a recent study, we demonstrated that hypoxic epithelial necrosis in mucus-obstructed airways triggers spontaneous neutrophilic inflammation in Scnn1b-Tg mice via the release of IL-1α and that inhibition of the IL-1R-MyD88 pathway with the IL1-R antagonist anakinra reduced airway neutrophilia and structural lung damage in this model of CF lung disease (Fritzsching B, et al., Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015; 191:902-13) . However, the effects of anakinra on airway inflammation and antibacterial host defense in the context of Pseudomonas infection remain unknown. Objective: The aim of this study was to determine the in vivo effects of anakinra on neutrophilic inflammation and Pseudomonas infection in wildtype mice and Scnn1b-Tg mice with CF-like lung disease. Methods: Scnn1b-Tg and wild-type mice were treated with anakinra (5mg/10g body weight) or vehicle (NaCl) alone subcutaneously b.i.d. and subsequently challenged with the P. aeruginosa strain PAO1 (~2.5x10 7 cfu/mouse) or vehicle (PBS) alone by intratracheal instillation. 24 h after Pseudomonas infection, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed and analyzed using differential cell counts, measurements of proinflammatory cytokines by a cytometric bead assay and quantitative microbiology. Results: Acute infection with PAO1 induced a robust neutrophilic inflammation in both wild-type and Scnn1b-Tg mice. Treatment with anakinra reduced neutrophils in PAO1-infected wild-type and Scnn1b-Tg mice (n=13-15, P<0.01). Despite this reduction in airway neutrophils, anakinra treatment did neither aggravate the acute PAO1 infection in wild-type nor Scnn1b-Tg mice (1.9x10 3 ±1.5x10 3 cfu/mL (untreated) vs. 5.6x10 3 ±3.8x10 3 cfu/mL (treated), n=13-14, P>0.4). Conclusion: Our results support that treatment with the IL-1R antagonist anakinra reduces neutrophilic inflammation without exacerbating bacterial infection in CF-like lung disease in mice. These data suggest that anakinra may be used as a novel anti-inflammatory approach to control overwhelming neutrophilic airway inflammation without aggravating bacterial infection in CF. However, clinical studies are warranted to test the safety and efficacy of this anti-inflammatory strategy in patients with CF. Supported by a grant from the European Commission (7th Framework Program Project No. 603038 CFMatters). Aim: To determine if treatment of sputum from CF patients with ALX-009 results in a significant decrease in total sputum microbial load and microbial load of key CF pathogens, P. aeruginosa and Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc). Methods: Sputum samples, excess to clinical requirements, were collected from CF patients chronically colonized with P. aeruginosa (n=24) or Bcc (n=6). Sputum plugs were selected and homogenised by repeated passage through a 1mL syringe; ALX-009, tobramycin, ALX-009 and tobramycin or phosphate buffered saline (PBS; control) were added and total viable counts measured at 0, 6 and 24 hours. Total viable counts were performed using selective agar plates, for P. aeruginosa and Bcc count, with non-selective blood agar plates used to determine total sputum bacterial load. Results: ALX-009 demonstrated bactericidal activity against P. aeruginosa in 12/24 samples tested, reducing the total viable count below the detectable limit at 24 hours. For these 12 samples, P. aeruginosa sputum load was approximately 10 5 CFU/g sputum (Figure) . For the remaining 12/24 samples, where P. aeruginosa was present in a higher load of approximately 10 7 CFU/g sputum, there was an initial decrease in the P. aeruginosa viable count; however, by 24 hours there was significant regrowth of P. aeruginosa. ALX-009 demonstrated some activity against Bcc in sputum but the decrease in Bcc load following treatment was less than that apparent for P. aeruginosa. Total sputum bacterial load was similar in both ALX-009 treated and control sputum samples for both P. aeruginosa and Bcc samples. There was also some evidence of synergistic activity between ALX-009 and tobramycin against both P. aeruginosa and Bcc. Discussion: This study demonstrates that treatment of sputum from CF patients with ALX-009 results in a significant decrease in the microbial load of key respiratory pathogens. Moreover, there was no significant change in the total load of bacteria present in the respiratory microbiota. Funding: Department of Education and Learning Studentship (Joanna Payne) and Alaxia.  Introduction: Staphylococcus aureus is a highly prevalent pathogen in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients and is classically identified early in infancy. The incidence of S. aureus infection in CF patients contributes to lung disease and increase in mortality. Direct and rapid identification of S. aureus in respiratory specimens from CF patients is a challenge for clinical laboratories. The aim of this study was to evaluate the performance of a new chromogenic medium intended for the isolation of S. aureus on various pulmonary clinical specimens from CF patients. Methods: Respiratory samples (n=202) from CF patients were tested on chromID TM S. aureus ELITE (SAIDE, bioMerieux), chromID TM S. aureus (SAID, bioMerieux), BBL TM CHROMagar TM S. aureus (BBL, Becton Dickinson) and Columbia blood agar + CNA (CNA, bioMerieux). Three readings were performed after 24h, 48h and 72h at 37°C. Identification of chromogenic colonies was confirmed using MALDI-TOF. First, sensitivity, specificity and selectivity were evaluated independently for each medium. Then, the significance of the differences of BBL, SAID and CNA versus SAIDE was tested according to CLSI EP12-A2, i.e. that the performance was considered as significantly different at risk of 5% if 0 was not included in the 95% CI of the difference. Results: The sensitivity of S. aureus detection from CF patients on SAIDE is consistently higher compared to the other media whatever the reading time. Interestingly, the difference is significant when SAIDE is compared to BBL after 24-, 48-, and 72-h. The specificity of the chromogenic media was very high, especially for SAIDE and BBL (100%), whatever the reading time. The selectivity of SAIDE was significantly higher compared to the other media based on the number of non-chromogenic colonies detected on each medium. Conclusion: In real life conditions, ChromID TM S. aureus ELITE demonstrates a better, earlier and easier detection of S. aureus using clinical samples from CF patients compared to the classical media used in this population. The implementation of this new chromogenic medium is promising to improve the management of CF. Introduction: Chronic lung colonisation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa occurs in about 80% of cystic fibrosis patients. This colonisation, predominately as a biofilm, correlates with increased morbidity and mortality, as well as increased resistance to antimicrobials. Novel therapies that are effective against P. aeruginosa are therefore urgently required. The alginate OligoG CF-5/20 has been shown to inhibit pseudomonal motility and biofilm assemby. Motility in P. aeruginosa PAO1 is regulated by signalling pathways such as Las and Rhl, and these pathways are environmentally and temporally regulated. We hypothesised that OligoG CF-5/20 affects signalling pathways in P. aeruginosa. Methods: The effect of the OligoG CF-5/20 on the acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs) N-butyryl-L-AHL (C4-AHL) and N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-AHL (3-oxo-C12-AHL) was studied using induction and inhibition (respectively) of a Chromobacterium violaceum CV026 biosensor strain. A time course (12, 18, 24 and 30 h) of OligoG CF-5/20 (0.2-10%)-treated P. aeruginosa PAO1 cultures in Mueller-Hinton (MH) was used to study virulence factor (pyocyanin, rhamnolipids, elastase, protease) production using spectrophotometric assays. AHLs were quantified using Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (LC/MS) and expression of QS genes lasI/R, rhlI/R, pilE, pqsR and pvdQ studied using SYBR-Green Real-time RT-PCR (qPCR). Biofilm (24 h) extracellular DNA (eDNA) grown in MH ±OligoG was extracted and quantified using UV-Vis spectrophotometry. Normalisation of culture biomass was by dry-weight. Circular dichroism spectroscopy (CD) was used to study the interaction of C4-AHL and 3-oxo-C12-AHL (in acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid) with OligoG (0.05% in 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5) up to the following maximum molar ratios 1:6.1 and 1:3.5 (respectively). Results: Significant reductions in AHL production were observed following OligoG treatment for both C4-AHL (at ≥0.2%) and 3-oxo-C12-AHL (at ≥2%; regulated by Las and Rhl respectively). LC/MS showed a pronounced decrease in C4-AHL production over time, whilst changes in the much lower levels of 3-oxo-C12-AHL were less obvious. The reduction in both AHLs in the time course samples was significant at ≥2% OligoG (although not for every time point tested) with the greatest reduction at 10% OligoG (*P<0.05). The effect of OligoG on virulence factor expression was most apparent with pyocyanin where a significant reduction was seen at ≥18 h with ≥0.2% OligoG. There was a limited effect on other virulence factors and only in samples at >18 h (*P<0.05). qPCR showed that gene expression was significantly affected by OligoG, but these effects were virtually all at ≥24 h and predominantly for lasI/R. No significant difference in eDNA was seen in 24 h biofilms. CD confirmed that no direct interaction between AHLs and OligoG CF-5/20 occurred. Conclusion: OligoG CF-5/20 affects signalling pathways in P. aeruginosa PAO1 in a time-dependent manner showing that its anti-biofilm effects are reflected in changes in pseudomonal pathogenicity.  Background: Azithromycin is a widely used macrolide antibiotic in cystic fibrosis (CF), but little is known about the safety of long-term use. Reported side effects only apply to short-term use. The aim of this study is to investigate possible azithromycin-induced toxicity of the kidney, liver and heart during chronic azithromycin therapy and whether long-term use can be considered safe regarding the condition of these organs. Methods: CF patients from two medical centers in the Netherlands were included in this cohort study. Data were retrospectively extracted from January 1, 2008 to December 31, 2015 from hospital electronic patient files and anonymously transferred into the database. Index group participants used azithromycin for at least three uninterrupted years, whereas control group participants did not use azithromycin for at least three uninterrupted years. To reflect renal function, the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was used, calculated with the MDRD Equation. To monitor hepatic function, the liver function parameters alanine amino-transferase (ALAT), aspartate amino-transferase (ASAT), gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and total bilirubin (TB) were used. The QTcinterval was used to determine the condition of the heart. The parameters to reflect renal and hepatic function were analysed with Linear Mixed Models analysis. For the QTc-interval was determined whether population means of index and control group were equal. Results: A total of 91 adult patients, 72 index patients and 19 patients in the control group, were included in the study. The health status of index patients was worse than the condition of patients in the control group, since presence of CF-related diabetes (CFRD) and population means of FEV 1 and BMI differed between groups (P=0.001 for CFRD; P=0.002 for FEV 1 ; P=0.027 for BMI). Decline in eGFR over time for the index group did not differ from the control group (P=0.763). During the whole study period the eGFR was higher for the index group (P=0.001). For the liver function parameters there was no difference in course over time between index and control group (P=0.587 for ALAT; P=0.851 for ASAT; P=0.646 for GGT; P=0.209 for ALP; P=0.268 for TB). During the whole study period the GGT was higher for the index group (P=0.005). There was no difference between population means regarding the QTc-interval (P=0.229) nor was this influenced by gender (P=0.660 for males; P=0.190 for females). Conclusion: Chronic azithromycin therapy can be considered safe regarding the risk for kidney, liver and heart. However, it cannot be ruled out that that the elevated GGT in the index group is due to azithromycininduced toxicity from use before the study period. Further research should focus on this possible azithromycin-induced liver toxicity. Introduction: Scedosporium species are the second most common filamentous fungi found in the respiratory tract of individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF). The prevalence is greater in the adult CF population. Although isolation of Scedosporium from CF sputum is thought to be clinically associated with pulmonary morbidity, there is no systematic research on this topic to date. Objective: To evaluate the association between Scedosporium and poor clinical outcomes, including decrement of lung function and number of pulmonary exacerbations, in an adult CF population. Methods: A three-year cohort study of adults in the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Patient Registry was conducted from January 2010 to December 2012. Exclusion criteria included age younger than 18 and older than 45 years, organ transplantation at baseline, and insufficient clinical encounters (defined as less than 2). Scedosporium infection was defined by the presence of Scedosporium species in a respiratory culture at any time during 2010-2012. Change in lung function was defined as the absolute change of FEV 1 percent predicted between baseline lung function and lung function at the end of the study period. Pulmonary exacerbations were defined by the average number of care episodes (exacerbations requiring intravenous antibiotics) per year. Multivariable linear regression was performed to determine the relationship between Scedosporium and decrease in FEV 1 percent predicted. Multivariable logistic regression was used to evaluate association between Scedosporium and pulmonary exacerbations. The following independent variables were adjusted in the models: baseline age, baseline FEV 1 percent predicted, pancreatic insufficiency, F508del genotype, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonization. Results: During study period January 1, 2010 and December 31, 2012, there were 9842 adult individuals that met the eligibility criteria of the study. Baseline characteristics included mean age 27.4 ±7.20 years, female 4620 (46.9%), F508del homozygous 4546 (46.2%), mean body mass index 22.5 ±3.80, baseline FEV 1 percent predicted 65.0 ±23.6, pancreatic insufficiency 8739 (88.8%), CF-related diabetes 3940 (40.0%), and Pseudomonas aeruginosa 7101 (72.2%). Three-year prevalence of Scedosporium was 3.4% in the adult population. There was no association between Scedosporium and change in FEV 1 percent predicted from baseline to end of study period, β=0.14, (95% confidence interval -1.03 to 1.31, p-value 0.81). However, Scedosporium was associated with a 68% increased odds of an average of one or more pulmonary exacerbation per year during the study, odds ratio 1.68 (95% CI 1.30 to 2.16, p < 0.001). Although attenuated, statistically significant association remained in the presence of antifungal therapy, OR 1.48 (95% CI 1.14 to 1.91, p-value 0.003). Also, the presence of Scedosporium was associated with greater number of average care episodes per year, β=0.31 (95% CI 0.12 to 0.49, p-value 0.001) for the subgroup with at least 0.5 year follow-up. Conclusion: CF adults with Scedosporium isolated in the airway are more likely to have pulmonary exacerbations than those without this infection. Further prospective study is needed to further examine the relationship between Scedosporium and pulmonary exacerbations. Introduction: Chronic P. aeruginosa infection is associated with increased morbidity and mortality in CF patients. Initial acquisition of P. aeruginosa may occur via transmission from colonised individuals or contact with contaminated water sources. Current understanding of risk factors for acquisition is limited and so the aim of this study was to examine a large sample of environmental waters from diverse sources. Methods: Environmental water samples (n= 7904 from Jacuzzis, hydrants, swimming pools, hot tubs, plunge pools, bottled natural mineral water (NMW), taps, springs, ice machines, water coolers, bores and showers) were processed from June 2008 until April 2016 using standard bacteriological culture methods for isolation, identification and characterisation of P. aeruginosa. In parallel, 44 P. aeruginosa isolates were obtained from health service estates waters. These underwent susceptibility testing against 8 anti-pseudomonal antibiotics: tobramycin, amikacin, ceftazadime, pipercillin/ tazobactam, meropenem, ciproxin, colistin and aztreonam in accordance with CLSI antibiotic susceptibility methodology. These isolates were also examined phenotypically for the presence of mucoidy and pigmentation. Results: Hot tubs [51/243 (21%)] and Jacuzzis [432/5811 (7%)] were the most likely environments where P. aeruginosa was isolated. P. aeruginosa was isolated from 24 of 1234 (2%) samples from dockside watering hydrants, 2 of 67 (3%) bottled NMW samples and 5 of 270 (2%) samples from swimming pools. Relatively few of the remaining sources yielded significant numbers of positive isolates. Antimicrobial susceptibility studies on health estates water P. aeruginosa isolates demonstrated pan-sensitivity and lack of mucoidy. 77% of isolates were pigmented. There were no significant differences in the seasonal distribution of positive isolates. Discussion: Our study highlights the ubiquitous nature of P. aeruginosa. Given CF patients are frequently counselled to make lifestyle changes to minimize P. aeruginosa exposure, these results have important implications. It may be many imposed lifestyle changes have less impact on acquisition than previously believed. Risk factors for acquisition remain unclear. Adherence, nutritional status and genetics may all play a role. Loss of CFTR function is associated with earlier age of acquisition (Rosenfeld M, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2012; 11:446-53) Ireland CF population remain infrequent. Most early isolates are nonmucoid and pan-sensitive, similar to the isolates examined in our study, suggesting the isolates from health services estates water samples originated from environmental sources. Conclusion: As P. aeruginosa is ubiquitous in the environment recommending CF patients make lifestyle changes to minimise contact may be ineffectual. Further work is needed to identify those at highest risk of acquisition. Acknowledgments Background: CF lung disease begins early, often in infancy, with lower airway inflammation and obstruction. Recent investigations highlight the significant role of viruses in CF pulmonary exacerbations. Worldwide, acute respiratory illnesses are common, even in healthy children, with 70% due to viral infections. Infants with CF acquire viral infections as frequently as their healthy counterparts, but are at higher risk of lower respiratory tract infection, decline in pulmonary function and hospitalization. A gap exists tracking early respiratory viral infections and relating these to lower airway inflammation and lung function abnormalities in CF infants in the first year of life. Understanding the contribution of respiratory viruses to early CF lung disease could help guide management and highlight areas for intervention. Objective: To examine the frequency of respiratory viruses and explore the association of these infections to respiratory symptoms, airway inflammation and infant lung function in CF infants during the first 6 months of life. Methods: As part of a multi-center prospective study, infants with CF diagnosed by NBS were enrolled and evaluated in clinic every 2 months. Nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs, processed using viral PCR, were obtained at each visit and at home by parents during times of respiratory symptoms. Infant pulmonary function testing using raised volume technique and flexible bronchoscopy with BAL were performed at each site. BAL fluid was analyzed for cell count, differential and inflammatory markers. T-tests were used to compare outcomes between those with a respiratory virus vs those without during the first 6 months of life. Results: Sixty-nine participants were enrolled, mean age of enrollment 3.1 months, SD 0.8. Of the 69 participants, 43% were male, 97% Caucasian and 56% homozygous F508del. Of the NP swabs tested (N=132), 33% (N=43) were positive for a respiratory virus. Human rhinovirus was the most common in 74%, followed by human coronavirus in 16%. Infants were symptomatic in 27% of encounters. The most common symptom was cough (70%), followed by nasal congestion (55%) and wheeze (24%). The odds of viral detection increased with the number of symptoms (OR 1.6, 95% CI 1.18-2.35). There was no significant association between having a respiratory virus and pulmonary function (FEV 0.5 z-score 0.22 vs 0.40, p=0.82) or lower airway inflammatory markers including IL-8 (1.92x10 4 vs 1.52x10 4 pg/mL, p=0.75) and NE (6.6 vs 4.2 μg/mL, p=0.63). Conclusions: The presence of a respiratory virus in the first 6 months of life did not significantly impact lower airway inflammation or pulmonary function in these CF infants. HRV was the most common virus, in line with data on healthy infants. Collection of viral and symptom data through the first year along with repeat pulmonary function testing and bronchoscopy at 12 months of age will allow for assessment of longitudinal changes and potential cumulative impact of repeat viral infections. Also, future work will examine the use of antibiotics during viral infection to determine current practices and effects on pulmonary outcomes. Methods: To date, 7 subjects were enrolled to obtain longitudinal samples, including blood, oral wash, sputum and fecal samples. Samples were obtained at baseline and after 1 month during a period of stability. Two subjects were on inhaled antibiotics, in whom samples were obtained before initiation and at the end of inhaled antibiotic cycle. 16S rRNA gene sequence (MiSeq, Illumina) was used to assess the microbiome composition. Data were processed with QIIME. α diversity (within-sample diversity) based on Shannon index and β diversity (between-sample diversity) based on weighted UniFrac distance calculations. Monte Carlo simulations were utilized to compare different samples. LEfSe analysis evaluated taxonomic differences (LDA>2). Results: Sufficient sequence depth was achieved in all samples (median [IQR] = 38, 606 [28, 446 ] reads per sample). α Diversity was significantly higher in fecal samples (p<0.03) and lower in sputum samples (p<0.001). β Diversity plots showed significant difference between all three types of samples based on UniFrac. Procrustes analysis with Monte Carlo simulation showed similarities between different samples (oral wash, sputum and fecal) for each subject (p<0.035 for all comparisons) supporting microbiota identity for each subject in different mucosa. Comparison between baseline and 1-month time point showed significant similarities between the two time points for sputum samples (Monte Carlo p value=0.002, M 2 =0.11) but did not reach statistical significance for oral or fecal samples. There was a trend towards higher β diversity change in sputum in subjects on inhaled antibiotics compared with subjects that were not on this therapy (0.28±0.10 vs. 0.16±0.09). A case where bronchoscopy was performed showed that while Achromobacter dominated BAL samples (>98% relative abundance) this genus had much lower representation in sputum and in oral wash (59% and 1% respectively). Conclusions: This preliminary data supports prior work showing microbial similarity (cross-pollination) between different mucosa sites. Stability of the microbiome will be assessed during initiation of inhaled antibiotic therapy. Bronchoscopic assessment of the lower airway microbiome may illustrate discrepencies between lower airway microbiota and sputum. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and other pathogens have been observed to live in multicellular aggregates in CF airways. Key infection characteristics, including noninvasive behaviour and treatment resistance, have been attributed to aggregated growth. Bacterial aggregation is typically thought to result from active self-assembly mechanisms akin to those observed in in vitro biofilm. However, many CF clinical isolates are unable to form biofilms in vitro and biofilm formation genes are frequent targets for inactivating mutations during in-host evolution. Furthermore, bacteria in CF airways may not be surface attached, so a key biofilm-initiating signal may be absent. These observations raise the possibility that in vivo aggregation may occur by mechanisms that are independent of biofilm formation. We investigated whether environmental conditions in CF airways could spontaneously promote bacterial aggregation. CF airways are rich in host polymers, such as mucin and DNA, and polymers can cause particles to aggregate via a crowding mechanism called depletion aggregation. When particles aggregate, more volume is available to the polymers, maximizing the entropy of the system. We incubated P. aeruginosa in both synthetic (PEG) and disease relevant (mucin+DNA) polymers and found that bacteria spontaneously aggregated. The relationship between bacterial numbers, polymer concentration, and aggregation; and the lateral arrangement of bacteria within aggregates indicated that both PEG and host polymers caused aggregation by the depletion mechanism. We also found that depletion aggregation promoted tolerance to multiple antibiotics within 15 minutes of aggregate formation. Control experiments indicated that polymers did not inactivate antibiotics and that aggregation was responsible for the tolerance phenotype. Furthermore, depletion aggregation promoted tolerance in strains where biofilm formation was disabled, indicating that active biofilm assembly functions are not required. When aggregates were dispersed, tolerance was retained in dispersed bacteria for 15 minutes. However, dispersed bacteria became sensitive to antibiotics 60 minutes after dispersion. The fact that tolerance to multiple antibiotic classes developed rapidly and persisted for a time after aggregates were dispersed raised the possibility that depletion aggregation may induce tolerance-promoting stress responses. Because of its role in producing antibiotic tolerance, we initially focused on the SOS response, which is induced by a variety of environmental stresses. Studies with a fluorescent gene expression reporter indicated that the SOS response was induced within aggregates. Furthermore, inactivation of the SOS response or SOS-regulated genes that induce growth arrest markedly reduced aggregate-mediated tolerance. Together, these results suggest that polymer-rich environments, such as CF airway secretions, may promote bacterial aggregation via the depletion mechanism, resulting in stress-induced growth arrest, and antibiotic tolerance. We have previously shown that the macrocyclic peptide RTD-1 exhibits antibacterial activity in F508del mice with chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infection. RTD-1 also has immune modulating activity yet its anti-inflammatory mechanism of action (MoA) is poorly understood. The current study aimed to further elucidate RTD-1 anti-inflammatory MoA in vivo using gene expression profiling. Methods: Chronic airway infection was established in C57BL/6 mice via intratracheal injection of P. aeruginosa-embedded agarose beads. Aerosolized saline/RTD-1 was delivered at 167μg/kg daily (n=8/group 3/7 days). Lung inflammation was assessed by cell counts in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid. Microarray analysis identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in BAL cells and lung tissue. To confirm the clinical relevance of animal model data we tested RTD-1 activity in ex vivo sputum cell culture. Spontaneously expectorated CF sputum samples were obtained from 6 inpatients and 3 outpatients. Sputum immune cells were cultured with 10μg/ mL or 100μg/mL of RTD-1 for 4/24 hours. The anti-inflammatory effects of RTD-1 were assessed by measuring cytokine concentrations by ELISA. Results: RTD-1 treatment of mice with chronic P. aeruginosa airway infection induced a significant reduction in neutrophil lung infiltration versus saline treated controls (Day 3 mean -55% p=0.001; Day 7 mean -32% p=0.01). Microarray analysis revealed CXCL10 as the most highly downregulated gene in BAL and lung tissue. IPA analysis revealed IL-1β and IFN-γ as potential targets of RTD-1. Both IL-1β and IFN-γ are known regulators of CXCL-10 expression. IL-1β was shown to be downregulated by 100μg/mL RTD-1 at 4 and 24 hours in sputum cell culture (4 h -42.42% p=0.01; 24 h -61.91% p=0.03). Discussion: Data demonstrate the potential of RTD-1s as a therapeutic for CF lung disease by alleviating pulmonary neutrophilic inflammation. Furthermore, these data begin to indicate and confirm key cellular targets of RTD-1's MoA namely, CXCL10, IL-1β and IFN-γ. These data will help direct the development of future translational and MoA studies. Acknowledgments: Funding was provided by CFRI and the Webb Foundation. The leading cause of death in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients is respiratory failure due to chronic respiratory infections. There has been an increase in CF patients exhibiting chronic MRSA infections which are associated with an increased rate of lung function decline, failure to recover from acute pulmonary exacerbations and an increase in mortality (Dasenbrook EC, et al. JAMA. 2010; 303:2386-92) . MRSA infects young CF patients and often grows as biofilms which are more resistant than their wild-type counterparts to antimicrobial therapy and clearance by the immune system. Even though MRSA infections are devastating clinically, there is a fundamental gap in our understanding of how dysfunctional immunity in the CF lung hampers bacterial clearance. The objectives of this study are: 1) to perform longitudinal sampling of CF patients to measure changes correlated with the ability of MRSA isolates to form biofilm, and 2) to determine the effect of CFTR mutations on the ability of macrophages to phagocytose and kill MRSA. Methods: Serial sputum samples were obtained from patients with chronic MRSA infection or MRSA-Pseudomonas aeruginosa co-infection at quarterly lab visits. MRSA was isolated from the sputum and identified by standard morphological and biochemical characteristics and biofilm formation quantified using an established polystyrene microtiter plate assay. To measure phagocytosis and killing of MRSA, RAW264.7 murine macrophages were treated with a CFTR inhibitor (CFTRinh-172) or vehicle control for 24 hours followed by challenge with MRSA at various MOIs. Following a 1-hour incubation with bacteria to allow for phagocytosis (t=0), cells were washed to remove extracellular bacteria and then incubated for an additional 2 hours (t=2). Phagocytosis was assessed by enumerating viable intracellular staphylococci at t=0 and bacterial killing was measured at t=2 by enumerating viable bacteria using standard microbiological plating. Results and Conclusions: Our results suggest that macrophages treated with CFTRinh-172 exhibited reduced phagocytosis of MRSA compared to untreated macrophages. There was a 35% decrease in the amount of viable MRSA recovered at t=0 in the CFTRinh-172 treated macrophages compared to untreated macrophages. Compared to MRSA recovery at t=0, there was approximately 50% reduction in viable MRSA recovered from untreated macrophages at t=2, suggesting killing of intracellular bacteria by untreated macrophages. However, the amount of MRSA recovered at t=2 by CFTRinh-172 treated macrophages was not different from t=0, suggesting that CFTRinh-172 treatment inhibited bacterial killing. These results suggest that deficient CFTR activity in macrophages may inhibit both phagocytosis and killing of MRSA which may contribute to the development of chronic MRSA infections in CF patients. Introduction: Burkholderia cepacia complex (Bcc) represents a classification of genetically related bacteria found to infect cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Infection with Bcc leads to a spectrum of clinically relevant disease ranging from asymptomatic colonization of unclear significance to necrotizing pneumonia with rapid loss of lung function and death, however its presence portends a worsened prognosis. Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PsA) has similar characteristics in this regard, but can be successfully eradicated using a protocol-based approach when detected early. To date, a standardized antibiotic eradication protocol for treatment of Bcc infection has not been described. We developed an empirical eradication protocol in our center. The treatment protocol consisted of an initial 21 days of therapy, termed the "induction" phase including: intravenous tobramycin daily (8-10mg/ kg), intravenous ceftazidime (2 grams) three times daily, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (800/160 -two tablets) twice daily, inhalational tobramycin (300 mg) twice daily, and azithromycin (250 mg) daily. Following completion of the induction phase, patients received an additional two months of inhalational tobramycin (300 mg) twice daily, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (800/160-two tablets) twice daily, and azithromycin (250 mg) daily, termed the "consolidation" phase of treatment. We then conducted a retrospective chart review of subjects treated for Bcc in our center. Sputum samples were obtained every three months following initiation of the protocol as were pulmonary function testing and body mass index (BMI). Patients were defined as having successful eradication after one year of negative cultures and at least three negative cultures. Results: 13 patients were found to be infected with Bcc by sputum culture. Six patients were identified as having new infection and were placed on the eradication protocol while seven patients were identified as having chronic colonization/infection and were not treated with intention to eradicate. Sputum samples obtained 4-6 weeks after initiation demonstrated clearance of Bcc in all patients placed on the eradication protocol. Negative Bcc cultures were maintained in all patients at one year follow-up. No significant difference was seen in FEV 1 % predicted or BMI at 3, 6, and 12 months posteradication compared to their preinfection baseline. Conclusion: Clearance of Bcc using a standardized protocol based on antibiotic sensitivities was successful at one year and resulted in clinical stability of these selected patients. The long-term clinical effect of Bcc eradication in CF patients is of unclear significance and requires further evaluation. A multicenter study utilizing a protocol for Bcc eradication should be considered. In patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), the detection of respiratory pathogens is a primary clinical and microbiological concern. Culture-independent 16S rRNA gene microbiome sequencing has demonstrated improved comprehensiveness and sensitivity compared to routine culture in CF sputum samples, but has not been systematically compared to culture for detection of these pathogens. Furthermore, positive molecular tests in culturenegative samples are of unclear significance. Our objective was to systematically compare 16S rRNA gene sequencing and culture in 77 pediatric CF patients for six pathogens: Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia complex, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Achromobacter xylosoxidans. Microbiome profiling identified pathogens in 99.1% and 73.7% of culture-positive and negative samples respectively. Culture-positivity was associated with a significantly greater relative abundance (RA) of the genus, with culture-positive samples having an average RA nearly 50-fold greater than culture-negative samples. Culture-positivity with mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa was associated with greater Pseudomonas relative abundance by sequencing than culture-positivity with nonmucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Stenotrophomonas, Haemophilus, and Staphylococcus and Pseudomonas were highly prevalent, even in culture-negative samples. Supported by Canadian Institutes for Health Research. P. aeruginosa is the most common pathogen in the cystic fibrosis airway and colonizes nearly two-thirds of the CF population. Importantly, P. aeruginosa is associated with persistent chronic infections that are increasingly difficult to treat and eradicate due to the bacteria's ability to form biofilms and develop antibiotic resistance. P. aeruginosa strain PA14 is a clinical isolate that is closely related phylogenetically to other clinical isolates, but shows a high level of virulence compared to several well studied P. aeruginosa strains, especially strain PAO1. The virulence phenotype of PA14 is linked to its endotoxin profile, pili structure, pathogenicity islands composition, type III secretion system (TTSS) activity, and cytotoxicity towards mammalian cells. Strain PA14 also shows distinct profiles of antibiotic resistance with respect to other commonly studied strains of P. aeruginosa. Analysis and characterization of strain variability increases the understanding of bacterial processes that can ultimately inform clinical management. A Pseudomonas aeruginosa ordered non-redundant transposon insertion mutant library (PA14NR Set) was constructed using strain PA14 by Dr. Fred Ausubel's lab (Liberati N, et al. PNAS. 2006; 103:2833-8) at Massachusetts General Hospital, and the library has been recently transferred to the Yonker/Hurley lab for curation and distribution to the scientific community. The PA14NR Set is composed of a single mutant per non-essential open reading frame that was selected from a comprehensive library of insertion mutants. Version 1.0 of the PA14NR Set consists of approximately 5800 mutants (representing approximately 4600 PA14 genes) arranged in 96-well microtiter plates. The present study describes methods used for replication of the PA14NR Set designed to maximize the number of copies produced while minimizing cross-contamination. The PA14NR Set consisting of 64 microtiter plates was divided into 4 sets of 16 microtiter plates that were processed during 4 consecutive weeks to generate a total of 12 copies destined for library distribution. Quality control was done by testing a random set of mutants and confirming gene identity using arbitrary PCR and subsequent sequencing. The use of the P. aeruginosa strain PA14 ordered non-redundant transposon insertion mutant library has been referenced in 501 publications, attesting to the importance of the use of insertion mutant libraries as tools for the characterization and understanding of bacterial processes. Genetic screens that used the PA14NR Set have contributed to the understanding of mechanisms involved in antibiotic resistance, bacterial metabolism and growth, biofilm stability and host-pathogen interactions. The PA14NR Set has become an important resource for the CF community and its continuous availability will undoubtedly have important implications for the advancement of the treatments for CF airway infections. This gene has homology to fixL of the rhizobial FixL/FixJ two-component system. FixL is a sensory histidine kinase that detects oxygen tension and phosphorylates the transcription factor FixJ in low oxygen, leading to activation of the fixK gene. Our previous work identified that the fixLJ system is involved in biofilm formation, motility, and persistence in a murine model. The reference strain, B. dolosa AU0158, which was isolated from the index patient after several years of colonization, contains a point mutation in the fixL gene (S439) compared to the ancestral isolate (W439). In this study, we sought to understand the implications of this mutation in fix-mediated phenotypes. Methods: We constructed a fixLJ deletion mutant of B. dolosa strain AU0158 using allelic replacement as well as isogenic strains complementing the deletion mutant with either S439 fixL (reference sequence in strain AU0158) or W439 fixL (ancestral sequence), both of which contained the fixJ reference sequence. We also complemented the deletion mutant with fixL R347H or G345S, which were both detected during a period of FEV 1 decline in a B. dolosa-infected patient. We measured swimming motility as well as the ability of these constructs to form biofilm on PVC plates. In a murine model of pneumonia after intranasal inoculation, we assessed the ability of these B. dolosa strains to persist in the lung and disseminate to the spleen. We measured fix-regulated gene expression using RNA-seq. Results: B. dolosa carrying the ancestral FixL sequence (W439) produce significantly (p <0.001) more biofilm than isogenic bacteria carrying the reference fixL sequence (S439). Interestingly, B. dolosa carrying the ancestral fixL are nonmotile while B. dolosa carrying the reference sequence are motile. In the murine pneumonia model, B. dolosa carrying the ancestral fixL sequence have 8-to 10-fold lower viable bacteria in the lungs and spleen 7 days postinfection compared to B. dolosa carrying the reference fixL sequence (p <0.05). Using RNA-seq we found that 255 and 244 genes are down-and up-regulated, respectively, in S439 relative to W439, with the entire flagellar biosynthetic pathway down-regulated in W439, which is consistent with its nonmotile phenotype. Both R347H and G345S had biofilm and motility phenotypes similar to S439. Conclusion: B. dolosa strains carrying one of several FixL point mutations arising later during human infection are less able to form biofilms, more motile, and better able to persist in vivo in the murine lung and spleen compared to B. dolosa carrying the ancestral genotype. Funding: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Introduction: Two mechanisms of drug-induced haemolysis have been described. Usually both, extravascular and intravascular haemolysis, are caused by drug-dependent antibodies (ddAb). Extravascular haemolysis presents with mild and less severe clinical symptoms of anaemia, whereas intravascular haemolysis usually manifests with a rapid destruction of red blood cells caused by antibody-mediated complement activation leading to acute clinical symptoms. Interestingly more than 50% of all piperacillininduced immune haemolytic anaemia (PIHA) cases investigated at a reference laboratory in Germany were patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Therefore the investigated hypothesis of this study is a higher prevalence for PIHA in patients with CF as for the general population. Method: Included were all patients with CF older than 12 years who were admitted to the hospital for antibiotic treatment. Past transplantation was an exclusion criterion. Blood samples were obtained in the beginning and at the end of a given intravenous treatment. Direct antiglobulin test (DAT) and indirect antiglobulin test (IAT) were performed using standard techniques. For positive samples an antibody differentiation was done. DdAb were investigated using gel technique. Thus we prepared a 1mg/mL drug solution or used ex-vivo antigens, respectively and incubated it for 30 minutes in presence of patients' plasma and group O RBCs. The individual prior exposure to piperacillin and information concerning atopy and microbiology are documented. Results: In the currently ongoing trial 2 out of 40 patients developed a PIHA. This is a high prevalence compared to the general expectation of approximately 1:1,000,000. Both had ddAb but no complement activation. This is typical for extravascular haemolysis. Clinical symptoms of haemolysis were mild even though there was a drop of haemoglobin by 4 Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a gram-negative, opportunistic pathogen that chronically infects approximately 80% of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients by early adulthood, accounting for the majority of morbidity and mortality in these patients. The development of chronic P. aeruginosa infections in the CF lung involves the formation of highly recalcitrant biofilm communities. Clinical observations have noted acquisition of chronic P. aeruginosa infection by CF patients often occurs during respiratory viral seasons, with up to 85% of new P. aeruginosa colonization occurring within 3 weeks following a respiratory viral infection (Johansen HK, Hoiby N. Thorax. 1992; 47:109-11; Collinson J, et al. Thorax. 1996; 51:1115-22) . Although the mechanism underlying this interaction in the CF lung is not well understood, we have recently shown that respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) co-infection stimulates increased biofilm growth by P. aeruginosa on airway epithelial cells (AECs) through a mechanism that is dependent on the apical release of the host iron-binding protein transferrin, suggesting that nutritional immunity is compromised in AECs during RSV co-infection (Hendricks MR, et al. PNAS. 2016; 113:1642-7) . However, the mechanism by which transferrin is released from AECs during respiratory viral infection remains undefined. Transferrin mRNA and protein levels are not altered in AECs during RSV infection, suggesting an alternative mechanism of secretion. We hypothesized that respiratory viral infection alters transferrin trafficking within AECs and allows its apical secretion, thereby promoting P. aeruginosa biofilm biogenesis. We show in these studies that extracellular vesicles released apically from AECs during RSV co-infection enhanced P. aeruginosa biofilm growth. Extracellular vesicles had significantly increased levels of iron and chelation of iron from the extracellular vesicles reduced their ability to stimulate P. aeruginosa biofilm growth. Interestingly, RSV infection enhanced the transcytosis and apical secretion of transferrin originating from the basolateral compartment of cells, loaded onto extracellular vesicles. Together these results suggest RSV infection redirects transferrin trafficking in AECs, resulting in the loading of transferrin onto apically released extracellular vesicles, which can be utilized as an iron source by P. aeruginosa to form biofilms. We are currently investigating the pathways by which RSV infection induces transferrin packaging and secretion in extracellular vesicles to stimulate P. aeruginosa biofilm growth. Our data suggest a novel mechanism by which the host response to viral infection contributes to the development of chronic pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection and provide mechanistic insight into our understanding of nutritional immunity in the lung.  Introduction: Progressive airway obstruction from chronic inflammation and infection continues to be a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. The rise of multidrug-resistant (MDR) Pseudomonas aeruginosa has sparked an ongoing search for novel antibiotics that can be used in the treatment of CF-related respiratory infections. Ceftazidime/avibactam (Avycaz) is an antimicrobial agent combining the 3rd generation cephalosporin, ceftazidime, with a non-β-lactam β-lactamase inhibitor, avibactam (Zhanel G, et al. Drugs. 2013; 73:159-77) . It was approved for use in the United States in 2015 for intra-abdominal infections (Chalhoub H, et al. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015; 70:1596-8) . In this study, we test the susceptibility of MDR P. aeruginosa sputum isolates collected from CF patients to ceftazidime/avibactam in vitro. Methods: Sputum cultures were collected from 28 CF patients ≥ 18 years of age, known to be colonized with MDR P. aeruginosa. All isolates were ceftazidime resistant and demonstrated resistance to >5 antibiotics routinely used to treat P. aeruginosa respiratory infections. Patient demographics, spirometry, and co-existing organisms cultured were collected. P. aeruginosa was isolated from each culture for sensitivity testing against 12 anti-pseudomonal antimicrobials, including ceftazidime/avibactam susceptibility. The study was IRB approved at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX. Results: Of the 28 P. aeruginosa isolates collected, 17 were sensitive to ceftazidime/avibactam (58.6%) with an average mean inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 4/4. Mean age of patients with sensitive strains was 31.0 ± 8.9 years versus resistant strains 35.3 ± 11.3, p = 0.260. Average FEV1% in the patient cohort was not significantly different between those with isolates sensitive to ceftazidime/avibactam (FEV1% = 39.3) versus those with isolates that were resistant (FEV1% = 39.9), p = 0.927. Of the 17 nonmucoid P. aeruginosa isolates, 10 were sensitive to ceftazidime/avibactam (58.8%). Of the 11 mucoid P. aeruginosa isolates, 6 were sensitive to ceftazidime/ avibactam (54.5%), suggesting a benefit that may be independent of morphotype. Importantly, 20 isolates collected were extensively MDR with resistance to greater than 7 commonly used anti-pseudomonal antibiotics. Of these, 12 (60%) were sensitive to ceftazidime/avibactam. Conclusions: Ceftazidime/avibactam is a novel antimicrobial agent that demonstrated significant activity in vitro against highly resistant P. aeruginosa isolates collected from CF patients. Further understanding of P. aeruginosa gene expression that may predict ceftazidime/avibactam resistance and the impact of using this agent in CF patients with MDR P. aeruginosa remains to be determined. Townsend, S.; Narayanaswamy, V.; Baker, S.; Wiesmann, W. Synedgen, Inc., Claremont, CA, USA Background: Limited therapeutic options, enhanced virulence properties, and phenotypic adaptations, such as biofilm formation, contribute to a lack of effective therapies for nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) lung biofilm infection, associated with cystic fibrosis (CF). Only recently it was determined that NTM or more specifically Mycobacterium abscessus complex (MABSC) strains form biofilms in the CF lung during chronic infection, contributing to rapid clinical deterioration due to chronic inflammation and tissue damage. Thick mucus and biofilm formation in the CF lung can render therapeutics less effective. A series of nontoxic derivatized polyglucosamines shown to be broadly active at dermal and mucosal interfaces encompass a newly developed class of molecules designated poly (acetyl, arginyl) glucosamine (PAAG). Specifically, the PAAG15A derivative is a nontoxic, soluble, biopolymer shown to potentiate a wide range of antibiotics against both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria and to effectively dissolve biofilms, including those of MABSC. The minimal biofilm eradication concentration (MBEC) assay and stationary tissue culture plate biofilm assays were used to examine the removal of biofilms formed by several clinical isolates of MABSC associated with cystic fibrosis, respectively. These studies demonstrate the ability of PAAG15A to disrupt MABSC biofilms with the goal of supporting more effective treatments. Methods: The MBEC assay (Parker AE, et al., J Microbial Methods. 2014;102:55-64) and stationary biofilm assays were performed using 3 MABSC strains isolated from sputum from cystic fibrosis patients to compare biofilm reduction by PAAG15A. The strains were obtained from the ATCC (19977) and the Cystic Fibrosis Research Center in Birmingham, Alabama. Concentrations of PAAG15A ranging from 50-200 μg/mL significantly reduced NTM biofilms following once-daily 10-minute treatment (p<0.05). Treatments with 50-200 μg/mL PAAG15A significantly reduced preformed NTM biofilms in a dose dependent manner after 1-hour treatment (p<0.05). The PAAG15A-treated biofilms had up to 2-logs less bacteria than untreated biofilms. Conclusion: PAAG15A is an effective antibiofilm agent that facilitates the removal of biofilms in vitro. These studies show that NTM biofilms are removed by PAAG15A in a dose-dependent manner. The biofilm dissolving activity of PAAG15A may result in more positive therapeutic outcomes, particularly in cystic fibrosis-related NTM infections. Results: 32 patients were identified. Median age at presentation was 30 (range from 12-78). There were 14 males and 18 females. 16/32 were double-ΔF508 (50%). 25/32 had pancreatic insufficiency, 5 were pancreatic sufficient. 10/32 were diabetic. Of the MABSC isolates, 14/32 were subspecies abscessus, 3 were subspecies massieliense, and the remaining 15 were unknown. 10 patients were coinfected with MAC and 9 with Aspergillus fumigatus. A functional erm gene was present in isolates from 15 patients rendering them clarithromycin resistant. Patients received combinations of parenteral imipenem/amikacin/cefoxitin/inhaled amikacin/oral zyvox/clarithromycin for an average of 12 months. 6 patients have died of advanced CF lung disease, 1 received a lung transplant, and the rest are alive and well on or off therapy. The microbiological responses were divided into: group 1) having 3 negative cultures and no positive cultures; group 2) transient negative then positive cultures; group 3) never negative, countable colonies; group 4) persistent smear and culture positivity. The patient distribution within these subgroups is summarized in the Table. Conclusions: Knowing the subspecies of MABSC and presence of a functional erm gene is critical in the therapeutic algorithm of MABSC infection in CF. These factors determine the true morbidity of MABSC infection in CF. Background: At East Tennessee Children's Hospital, our patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) routinely undergo bronchoscopy to obtain definitive endobronchial cultures that guide antibiotic therapy. However, the standard practice in many cystic fibrosis centers is to use less invasive procedures; the CF Foundation asserts that there is not enough evidence to recommend bronchoscopy for routine culture and therefore recommends routine oropharygeal (OP) cultures in individuals with CF (Mogayzel Jr, P, et al. Annals of the ATS 2014;11:1640-50). Objectives: The purpose of this analysis is to provide evidence for the routine use bronchoscopy to obtain definitive endobronchial cultures. Methods: This is a qualitative, retrospective data analysis, using the CFF Patient Registry reporting mechanism. Cultures performed in CF clinic, either via OP swab or sputum, were compared to cultures obtained via bronchoscopy on the same patient. We defined a difference as any discrepancy between the reported cultures collected, including multiple different pathogens found in one incidence counting as one collective difference. Any difference found that would merit an alternate course of treatment based on the bronchoscopic culture versus the sputum or OP culture was designated as a treatable difference. Results: There were a total of 331 incidences analyzed; each incidence includes both cultures collected within 30 days. Results are displayed below in the Table. Conclusions: Based on the results of this data analysis, we feel that continuing the practice of routine bronchoscopy is appropriate and results in better recovery of pathogenic organisms. Not only do we see a high percentage of discrepancy between the cultures obtained in CF clinic and cultures obtained during bronchoscopy, but a majority of those differences are also considered to be clinically significant; ie, the patient would be treated with different antibiotics. There are several limitations in this analysis, however; for example, it is unknown if the patient was exposed to new pathogens or treated with oral antibiotics during the time from clinic visit to bronchoscopy. We feel that a prospective study design is warranted to further determine the validity and significance of these findings in addition to investigating the differences in specific pathogens. In this analysis, the percentage of discrepancy is relatively consistent regardless of age group and the method of initial culture. Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections of the CF airway are associated with decreased lung function, increased hospitalizations and shorter lifespan. P. aeruginosa is naturally antibiotic resistant, making it difficult to treat with conventional therapies. Furthermore, this pathogen regularly augments its survival strategies by forming surface-associated groups or aggregates known as biofilms that are highly tolerant to antibiotics. Another strategy involves the formation of metabolically repressed cells that resist antibiotic killing, known as persisters. Hence, complete clearance of P. aeruginosa in chronic infections via antibiotic therapy is often impossible. Our group has sought to overcome P. aeruginosa antibiotic resistance/ tolerance through development of anti-virulence compounds. Through a small molecule screen we identified inhibitors of MvfR, the master regulator of a quorum-sensing pathway that affects virulence factor production, biofilm and persister formation (Starkey M, et al. PLoS Pathog. 2014; 10:e1004321) . This inhibitor (M64) is fundamentally different from traditional antimicrobial therapies as it specifically targets a quorumsensing pathway rather than a basic biological function to limit selective pressure for resistance. Early studies showed that this inhibitor is well tolerated and enhances bacterial clearance in a burn model of infection. The goal of this project is to test whether M64 can reduce airway damage and enhance clearance in chronic pulmonary infections. To date, we have tested the effects of M64 on airway cells (CFBE and CALU-3) and found no significant cytotoxicity at therapeutic doses. Airway cell coculture experiments have demonstrated the efficacy of M64 at limiting the cytotoxicity of P. aeruginosa grown planktonically, with more dramatic decreases in cytotoxicity seen for P. aeruginosa biofilms. Biofilm CFUs were not affected by M64 in this system. Cytokine analyses of the biofilm infections showed strong reductions in IL8 and CXCL1, as well as reductions for IL6 and CXCL2 with M64 treatment. We also tested M64 efficacy against drug resistant/tolerant pathogens that co-exist in the lung with P. aeruginosa in human infections and similarly form persister cells (Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumanii and Burkholderia). These additional species were tested with the inhibitor in mono-and poly-microbial infection settings on airway cells. As expected, the inhibitor showed little to no effect on the virulence of the other species grown either planktonically or in biofilm, demonstrating the specificity of our compound. Importantly, the inhibitor's efficacy at reducing P. aeruginosa virulence was not diminished by the presence of the other species, suggesting that the polymicrobial nature of CF infections should not be an obstacle for this therapeutic. These studies also revealed interesting interspecies interactions with P. aeruginosa in biofilm infections. Our biofilm and polymicrobial infection preliminary results indicate M64 may serve as a valuable therapeutic for the treatment of CF lung infections. Efforts to assess this inhibitor's efficacy in vivo are ongoing. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a cAMP-activated chloride channel, plays critical roles in phagocytic host defense. However, how activated neutrophils regulate CFTR channel distribution subcellularly is not well defined. To address this issue, multiple antibodies against different CFTR domains were tested to examine CFTR expression in human peripheral blood neutrophils by flow cytometry. The data confirmed that resting neutrophils had pronounced CFTR expression. Activation of neutrophils in vitro with soluble or particulate agonists did not significantly increase CFTR expression level, but induced CFTR redistribution to cell surface. Such CFTR mobilization correlated with cell-surface recruitment of formyl peptide receptor during secretory vesicle exocytosis. Intriguingly, neutrophils from ΔF508-CFTR patients, despite expression of the mutant CFTR, showed little cell-surface mobilization upon stimulation. While normal neutrophils effectively targeted CFTR to their phagosomes, ΔF508-CFTR neutrophils had impairment in that process, resulting in deficient hypochlorous acid (HOCl) production. Taken together, activated neutrophils regulate CFTR distribution by targeting this chloride channel to the subcellular sites of activation, and ΔF508-CFTR neutrophils fail to achieve such targeting, thus undermining their host defense function. Methods: We conducted a retrospective chart review of CF patients who received a lung transplant at our institution from 2002 to 2016 to determine the prevalence of fungal lung isolates prior to transplant and their impact on the incidence of invasive fungal infection in the first month after transplantation. Fungemia and graft fungal infection were evaluated after transplantation. Results: Among 86 CF patients who received lung transplantation, 49 (57%) had at least one fungal isolate from respiratory samples (sputum, tracheal aspirate or BAL) prior to lung transplant. The fungi isolated included molds, the most common of which were Aspergillus fumigatus (11), other aspergillus species (4), Scedosporium apiospermum (3), Fusarium (1) and yeasts of which Candida albicans was most common (19), other Candida species (18) and unspecified yeast (17). 26 had at least two isolates of the same organism and were considered to have persistent infection. Among these, 31 had positive respiratory cultures within 3 months prior to transplant, and 23 had fungal isolation in blood (n=3) and/or lower respiratory tract (n=21) within one month after transplant. The organism isolated after transplant was identical to the pretransplant isolate in 14 patients; specific organisms included C. albicans (7), C. glabrata (1), C. parapsilosis (1), Trichosporon (1), Penicillium (1), and unspecified yeast (3). One patient grew Coccidiodes imitis, which had not been isolated from the recipient prior to transplant and was presumed to be donor-derived. Intra-operative donor bronchial cultures for eight recipients grew C. albicans and there was no subsequent growth in the recipient in this group. There were two deaths during transplant hospitalization attributable to fungal infection, both before 2009. Three other patients had fungemia in the immediate postoperative period without invasive fungal disease. After 2009 when our treatment protocol was changed to treat every lung transplant recipient with an extended course of oral azole treatment and inhaled amphotericin B in the first one to two weeks after surgery, there have been no deaths from invasive fungal disease. The only patient with chronic fungal pulmonary infection was the recipient with coccidiomycosis and she was transplanted before 2009. Conclusions: Invasive fungal infections occurred in 23% of CF patients within one month after bilateral lung transplantation and included two deaths. Recipient and donor fungal colonization/infection prior to transplant is associated with posttransplant fungal disease in CF patients but we were unable to predict risk factors from pretransplant cultures. Fungal cultures collected routinely from the respiratory tract are helpful to assess the risk of posttransplant infection and the selection of peri-and post-operative antifungal regimen in CF lung transplant recipients. In the current study, we utilized a molecular signature that is present in the outbreak strains, namely two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the rpoB gene, for identification of this subtype among non-outbreak clinical Mmas from non-CF patients. Then, WGS was performed to explore the genetic diversity and evolutionary history of isolates with the molecular signature compared to prior outbreak strains. Methods: We performed WGS on a Mmas isolate cohort from non-CF patients representing 11 states in the United States (US; n=41: including 25 non-outbreak isolates containing the 2-SNP rpoB signature) and compared them to genomes of CF-derived, outbreak Mmas isolates from the UK (n=27) and Washington (n=3), epidemic soft tissue Mmas isolates from Brazil (n=2) and M. abscessus from the US, Europe and Asia (n=23). Using bioinformatics and phylogenomics, we estimated the genetic diversity among the clinical M. abscessus population in the core genome (ie, SNPs) and accessory genome, including mobile genetic elements and plasmids. Results and Conclusions: Based on core genome analyses, the majority of non-outbreak Mmas (18/25=72%) with the 2-SNP rpoB signature clustered into a genetically similar clade that included both outbreak CF as well as non-CF isolates. However, the Brazilian epidemic isolates and a subgroup of US non-CF isolates (7/25=28%) fell into distinct lineages outside this cluster. Examination of accessory genome variation suggests a complex evolutionary history of this Mmas subtype that is present in various regions of the world among disparate patient subpopulations. The key difference(s) between outbreak and non-outbreak Mmas strains remains to be delineated and will be discussed. Supported by the NTM Center of Excellence and CFF-funded Colorado CF Research Development Program at National Jewish Health, Potts Foundation, Owens Foundation, and the Amon G. Carter Foundation. Pugazhenthi, V. 1 ; Bhakta, Z.N. 1 ; Zobell, J. 2 ; Young, D.C. 1  City, UT, USA; 2. Pharmacy, Intermountain Primary Children's Hospital, Salt Lake City, UT, USA Introduction: Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is an emerging opportunistic pathogen affecting cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) Patient Registry reported an average annual increase of 1.4% in CF sputum isolates from 2006 to 2012. Colonization with S. maltophilia in CF patients has been independently associated with decline in % predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 second, acute pulmonary exacerbation (APE) hospitalizations, lung transplantation, and increased mortality. There are many barriers with S. maltophilia treatment, including multidrug resistance requiring a combination of multiple antibiotics. Currently, there are limited published studies and no treatment guidelines to aid clinicians in selecting antibiotics for APEs due to S. maltophilia infection. Objectives: The primary purpose of this study was to investigate current antibiotic treatment practices for S. maltophilia infection in CF patients at CFF-accredited care centers in the United States. Secondary objectives included describing the epidemiology of S. maltophilia at CFF-accredited care centers and identifying barriers to treatment. Methods: An electronic survey was designed via SurveyMonkey ® and distributed to all CFF-accredited care centers in the United States, to be completed by the center director or designated representative over a 6-week period. The survey included questions regarding CF center demographics, incidence of S. maltophilia infection, and antibiotics used for its treatment. Specifically, respondents were asked to select the 3 most commonly used antibiotics outpatient and inpatient, dosing strategies, and monitoring parameters. Results: The survey yielded a response rate of 58% (n=70), with participation from 35 states. Responses were for both pediatric (56%; n=39) and adult (44%; n=31) patient populations. In the pediatric population, 97% (n=30) of CFF-accredited care centers had at least one patient colonized with S. maltophilia and 70% (n=21) had 1-5 new cases in the past year. Similarly, in the adult population, 100% (n=23) of CFF-accredited care centers had at least one patient colonized with S. maltophilia and 74% (n=17) had 1-5 new cases in the past year. The most commonly used antibiotics in outpatient and inpatient settings were trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (88%; n=72), tetracyclines (63%; n=52), levofloxacin (37%; n=30), and ceftazidime (18%; n=15). There was high variability in medications chosen, as well as dosing strategies and monitoring with each individual antibiotic. The most frequently reported barriers to treatment of S. maltophilia included lack of research (31%; n=34), antibiotic resistance (28%; n=30), and antibiotic shortages (17%; n=18). Overall, 79% (n=37) of responders stated a need exists for clinical practice guidelines to aid in the treatment of S. maltophilia infection. Conclusions: Treatment practices for management of S. maltophilia infection in CF patients at adult and pediatric CFF-accredited care centers are highly variable. This study highlights the need for further clinical research and clinical practice guidelines in CF patients infected with S. maltophilia. The first line of host defense of the airway, the epithelium, can be compromised by the absence of CFTR function. However, it has been challenging to explain how the loss of CFTR function can induce excessive lung inflammation and how the robust inflammatory response cannot defend CF patients from bacterial infection. While CF airway epithelial cells clearly contribute to the proinflammatory environment of the CF airway they do not adequately explain the failure of CF patients' innate immune response to kill and clear bacteria. Identifying and understanding other relevant components of the innate host defense system and their regulation in CF patients will be beneficial for design and implementation of future therapeutics. Macrophages are one kind of professional phagocyte that play an important role in innate host defense. Absence of Cftr from myeloidderived cells leads to impaired resolution of infection and elevated inflammation in mice. Also, increased cell numbers and impaired bactericidal activity of CF macrophages have been reported in both murine and human CF lungs. This suggests that abnormal macrophage function could partially contribute to impaired innate immunity in CF patients. Mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDM) are mature and homogeneous macrophages that can be propagated in culture and are ex vivo models for studies regarding macrophage function. WT and CF bone marrow were isolated from mouse legs and differentiated to macrophages by treatment with MCSF (macrophage colony stimulating factor) and confirmed by staining for F4/80. Tissue (alveolar) macrophages secrete proinflammatory cytokines, and the levels of these mediators have been reported to be significantly higher in CF sources relative to non-CF tissues. Here we examined IL6, IL1β and CCL3 expression in unstimulated cells and cells exposed to various stimuli and found no difference between WT and CF BMDM in terms of proinflammatory cytokines regardless of stimulation states. Epigenetic changes have been reported in macrophages in some chronic lung diseases, such as COPD. We performed ChIP-Seq with H3K27ac, H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 antibodies on both WT and CF bone marrowderived macrophages. Our preliminary data showed that there is no obvious difference in any epigenetic modifications with the above antibodies between WT and CF BMDM. Those data will be compared to RNA-seq profiles to more fully determine if epigenetic profiles are different between CF and non-CF macrophages. Baseline and stimulated profiles will be compared. The current data imply that the CF macrophage phenotype is acquired upon migration into the lung and thus similar experiments will be performed on mouse alveolar macrophages to provide clues regarding when a macrophage is affected by CFTR's absence as well as how and when the epigenome responds. Introduction: Recent emphasis of home-based healthcare in the US has presented unique challenges to clinicians. Methods used in the hospital are often difficult to apply in the home setting. An example is the therapeutic drug level monitoring (TDM) of IV tobramycin in cystic fibrosis patients where currently there exists no standard in the home setting. It was hypothesized that a method of tobramycin TDM tailored to the home setting would improve patient care. Methods: An existing TDM method for home IV tobramycin adult CF patients was assessed for limitations. A new method aimed to mitigate the limitations was devised and implemented. Information was collected from a 12-month period; 6 months before and after the implementation. The existing TDM method of the first 6 months entailed a home nurse drawing a true trough and a 1-hour post-dose "peak." A pharmacist would apply these levels to peak/trough goals. In the latter 6 months, a new TDM method was used entailing a home nurse drawing a random level 2-8 hours postdose. A pharmacist would then apply, preferentially, inpatient kinetics data or, alternatively, population-derived kinetics data to the random level to extrapolate a peak and trough which would be applied to peak/trough goals. The Dettli Equation was used for the population-derived extrapolations. Inpatient halflives were tabulated for patients in both groups. Staff was surveyed for their observations/impressions. Results: Initial assessment of the existing TDM method revealed two primary limitations: frequently skewed or undetectable levels and dose/ draw scheduling difficulties. Retrospective review of this group showed that of the 242 ordered levels, 20% (49/242) were missed, 193 were drawn from 27 patients with a total of 121 patient-weeks, 59% (57/96) of troughs were undetectable, another 25% (24/96) of troughs and 8% (8/97) of peaks were suspected to be skewed. A valid peak and trough was extrapolated 6% (15/242) of the time. Retrospective review of the new method group showed that of the 131 ordered levels, 8% (11/137) were missed, 126 were drawn from 28 patients with a total of 131 patient-weeks, 100% (126/126) of levels were detected, inpatient data were available in 82% (23/28) of patients and a peak and trough was extrapolated 92% (126/137) of the time. When Dettli-derived data was applied, peaks or troughs were often consistently high or low for individual patients. When Dettli-derived halflives were compared to inpatient half-lives in 43 patients, the equation had a 99.9% average accuracy but individual accuracies ranged from 50% to 156% with an average of ±17%. Nurse response was entirely in favor of the change citing increased scheduling flexibility and greater patient freedom as the primary reasons. Pharmacist response was mixed citing ability to achieve a peak/trough as favorable but difficulty interpreting results as the primary drawback. Conclusions: A home-tailored method of tobramycin TDM was implemented and patient care was improved. This is evidenced by fewer missed levels, fewer levels drawn per patient-week, increased valid peak/trough extrapolations, increased dose/draw scheduling flexibility and increased patient freedom. Further investigation is needed to develop a populationderived equation with greater individual patient specificity. Introduction: Ivacaftor has been shown clinically to be an effective intervention in CF patients with the G551D mutation. Effects on the second host system, namely colonising/infecting bacteria, are largely unknown. However, it is known that bacteria also possess chloride ion channels, but it remains unclear as to the potential interference of ivacaftor on these bacterial chloride channels, potentially manifesting in increased/decreased antibiotic susceptibility. The aim of this observational study was to examine several phenotypic characteristics of P. aeruginosa (PA), including antibiotic susceptibility, in patients commenced on ivacaftor (2 years), compared to their microbiology, during the two-year period preceding ivacaftor therapy. Methods: Archived microbiology-related data were examined for 16 adult CF patients, two years pre-and post commencement of ivacaftor therapy. The following microbiology characteristics were examined: (i) antibiotic treatment (oral and IV/month), (ii) rate of mucoid/non-mucoid PA isolation, (iii) density of mucoid/mon-mucoid PA, (iv) antibiotic susceptibility of mucoid/non-mucoid PA to the antibiotic classes: aminoglycosides (gentamicin, tobramycin and amikacin), β-lactams (temocillin, ceftazidime, piperacillin/tazobactam, aztreonam, imipenem and meropenem), polymixin (colistin) and fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin). Results/Discussion: There was no significant difference between the number of oral antibiotic courses/month before and after ivacafator therapy; 0.10 and 0.07 courses/month, respectively [p=0.41], however there was a significant reduction relating to the number of IV treatments/month; 0.09 and 0.01 courses/month, respectively [p=0.003]. None of the patients (7/16) who were negative for mucoid PA prior to ivacaftor therapy gained mucoid PA. Approximately one-fifth of patients (2/9) lost their mucoid PA after treatment and overall there was a significant reduction in both the rate and density of mucoid PA isolation (p=0.02 and 0.003, respectively). There was no significant difference in the rate and density of nonmucoid PA isolation before and after therapy (p=0.95 and 0.25, respectively). Following ivacaftor therapy, the antibiotic susceptibility of total PA isolates was significantly increased for the β-lactams ceftazidime (p=0.03), piperacillin/ tazobactam (p=0.004), aztreonam (p=0.045) and meropenem (p=0.005). For mucoid PA, ceftazidime (p=0.04), was the only antibiotic yielding an increased susceptibility. In the case of no-mucoid PA, ceftazidime (p=0.03), piperacillin/tazobactam (p=0.002), and meropenem (p=0.02) were the only antibiotics yielding an increased susceptibility. Conclusions: The findings of this study indicate that there is a change in the microbiology of PA isolated from patients following ivacaftor therapy both in terms of phenotypic growth and antibiotic susceptibility to β-lactams. However, it is not clear as yet why PA has become more susceptible to such β-lactam agents including a cephalosporin and a carbapenem, which now warrants further investigation. Bensman, T.; Jayne, J.G.; Trinh, K.; Beringer, P. Univ Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA Background: Airway neutrophilia is a prominent hallmark of cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease that has been positively correlated with disease severity. In addition, neutrophil associated proteins (ie, MMP-9, NE) are instrumental in perpetuating the inflammatory condition. MMP inhibition in vitro has been shown to reduce MMP-generated matrikines and chemoattractants and therefore may hold therapeutic benefit in diseases such as CF. Objective: To evaluate the therapeutic potential of global MMP inhibition in a murine model of CF airway infection and inflammation. Methods: Murine respiratory infection model. Mucoid Pa (RP73)impregnated agarose beads (5 x 10 5 CFU) were intratracheally instilled into the lungs of C57BL/6N mice. Mice received daily, 1 mg/kg intranasal or intraperitoneal (IP) administered TAPI-2 (N=7), or normal saline (N=8/ group). Lung bacterial burden. Bacteria in BAL and homogenized lung tissue were quantified 6 days postinfection. Inflammation burden. BAL leukocytes and leukocyte populations, body weight, and BAL cytokines were also determined. Results: Inflammation burden. IP TAPI-2 (1.5E5 ± 3.3E4) reduced airway leukocytosis by 66% compared to controls (4.5E5 ± 3.1E4) (p<0.0001). BAL cell differentials revealed a 51% reduction in neutrophils in IP TAPI-2 treated mice (20.93% ± 9.7) compared to controls (42.8% ± 10.16) (p<0.001). There was no difference in airway leukocytosis with IN TAPI-2 (p=0.8), however there was a 48% increase in airway neutrophils treated with IN TAPI-2 (84.5% ± 6.3) compared to IN saline control mice (57% ± 7.2) (p<0.001). Weight change from baseline was not significantly different for IP TAPI-2 compared with IP control mice, however IN TAPI-2 mice recovered slower than IN control mice starting at day 3 (p<0.001) and persisting to day 6 (p<0.05). BAL IL-6, MCP-1, TNF, IL-17, IL-1b, KC, MIP-2, TIMP-1, and amphiregulin were not different compared to controls. Lung bacterial burden. There was no difference in CFUs/lung in both IP and IN TAPI-2 mice compared to controls. Conclusion: Systemic, but not intransal, TAPI-2 appears to be beneficial in reducing airway neutrophilia. The potential for metalloproteinase inhibitors such as TAPI-2 as anti-inflammatory agents in CF warrants further investigation. The association between cystic fibrosis (CF) and nontuberculous mycobacterium (NTM) has become a growing concern among the CF population. Unlike Mycobacterium tuberculosis, NTM are found within the environment and historically were not believed to be transmissible from person-to-person. However, research has gained interest to further the investigation of transmissibility between CF patients. The Mycobacteriology Laboratory at National Jewish Health (NJH) is a national reference laboratory specializing in the growth detection, identification, and antimicrobial susceptibility testing of NTM. Through a grant from the CF Foundation (CFF), the banking and further characterization of CF NTM isolates nationwide (biorepository) is made possible. Furthermore, these CF NTM isolates are made available to qualified investigators. Methods: All CF NTM isolates at various collection dates, either clinical or research, are accepted into the biorepository. Clinical samples are logged daily by the technical staff upon submission. Furthermore, outgoing CF final reports are recorded to build a comprehensive record of all CF NTM isolates submitted to the laboratory. The CF NTM isolates are recorded, checked for purity, and prepped for isolation of intact genomic DNA and freeze-down. Pure DNA extractions of single isolated colonies are completed using a Zymo Research Genomic DNA Clean & Concentra-tor™ kit designed for further analysis via next generation sequencing. Flash freezing methodology is accomplished with the use of dry ice and ethanol. All isolates are frozen down in aliquots of 9 and stored at -80°C in a Thermo Scientific TSX Series freezer with V-drive to assure maximum preservation and availability for future research endeavors. A biorepository database has been constructed in order to store completed documentation of all CF NTM isolates; including culture and patient information, identification, antimicrobial susceptibility testing (dependent on each submitter's clinical requests), geographical location, and whole genome sequencing results. The database is also valuable to catalog frozen aliquot locations for subsequent retrieval of frozen aliquots. This process allows for longitudinal data to be stored among the patients' isolates as well as geographical locations and healthcare facilities. Results: So far, the NJH mycobacteriology laboratory has obtained approximately 300 CF NTM isolates for the biorepository. Coordination has now started with facilities including those in New York, Texas, Washington, and New Jersey to organize isolate transferals with concerns of NTM clustering or even person-to-person transmission relating to CF patients. Isolate inventory is expected to increase at least 60 to 80 cultures per month without additional public attention to the Colorado CF Research and Development Program. As the project gains supporters, expansion of the CF NTM biorepository will progress with the goal of banking all CF NTM isolates nationwide. Supported by the CFF-funded Colorado CF Research Development Program at National Jewish Health. For more information visit: https:// www.nationaljewish.org/Colorado-CF-Research-and-Development-Program/Home. While much research has focused on M1 macrophages, less is known about the cellular signaling pathways that regulate macrophage reparative properties. Recent studies demonstrate inhibition of the MEK1/2 pathway reduces macrophage proinflammatory responses to LPS stimulation. However, whether the MEK1/2 pathway functions to regulate the reparative properties of macrophages remains unknown. Objective: Determine whether MEK1/2 inhibitor (MEKi) therapeutic administration reduces infection-induced lung injury by modulating macrophage function to promote the resolution of inflammation. Methods: Murine bone marrow-derived (BMDM) and alveolar macrophages (AM) and human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) were used to study the effects of MEKi-treatment on modulating macrophage M2 gene expression and efferocytosis of fluorescently labeled apoptotic cells. To reveal the contribution of MEKi on acute airway injury in vivo, MEKi or vehicle was administered via intraperitoneal (IP) injection on days 1-3 postintratracheal challenge with E. coli LPS or P. aeruginosa strain PAK. Weight loss was monitored to track disease and immune cell populations from the BAL were characterized by flow cytometry or by cytospins at days 2 and 4 postchallenge. Results: We report three distinct observations supporting the hypothesis that MEKi may be used as a therapeutic to promote reparative properties of macrophages and reduce acute airway inflammation. First, MEKi-treatment of BMDM from either wild-type or CFTR-/-mice increased M2 gene expression in part through increased Stat6 phosphorylation during IL-4+IL-13 treatment. Second, MEKi-treatment increased murine BMDM, AM, and human MDM efferocytosis of apoptotic cells by a mechanism independent of M2 polarization and coinciding with increased macrophage surface expression of proteins that mediate efferocytosis: Mertk, Tyro3, and Abca1. Third, MEKi treatment after LPS challenge significantly reduced airway inflammation and increased weight-loss recovery compared to vehicle-treated mice. In addition, MEKi-treatment following P. aeruginosa infection significantly reduced disease compared to vehicle-treated control mice as determined by weight loss, lung inflammation, and bacterial counts. Conclusions and Future Studies: Our results show that MEKi promotes reparative properties of macrophages and reduces lung inflammation in murine models of lung injury or pneumonia. Our future studies will evaluate the in vivo role of MEKi administration in CFTR-/-mice in both LPS challenge and infection models to determine if this is a therapeutic strategy to reduce detrimental airway inflammation. The views of the cystic fibrosis (CF) community on optimal infection control practices have evolved over the years. In the past, it was thought that patients with CF rarely acquired organisms from other CF patients. More recent data suggests patient-to-patient transmission is possible. There is increasing evidence that implementation of strict infection control practices in CF clinics and inpatient units can decrease the spread of pathogenic bacteria. The 2013 update to the Infection Prevention and Control Guideline for CF reflects this emerging viewpoint on organism transmission in CF. This guideline was instituted at our CF center in August 2014. Objective: To determine the effect of implementation of the new infection control recommendations on incidence and prevalence of pathogenic organisms in patients at one CF center. Methods: In this single center prospective study, quarterly data were obtained on the incidence (proportion of patients with new acquisition) and prevalence (proportion of patients with a culture positive for each organism) of selected pathogenic bacterial organisms commonly found in patients with CF. The four quarters before and after implementation of the new guidelines were compared for statistically significant differences. Results: Respiratory cultures were collected from 147 patients in the year prior to the implementation of guidelines at our center, and from 157 patients in the following year. Annual prevalence rates for common organisms in the year before and after guideline implementation are shown in the Table. Quarterly prevalence and incidence rates were compared for these organisms over the same time period and no significant changes were seen after institution of guidelines. Conclusion: There were no significant differences in the incidence or prevalence of nine common pathogens in the first year after implementation of the new CF Foundation Infection Control Guidelines. Ongoing data collection and analysis are being performed to determine if significant decreases will occur over time. National data analysis is needed to determine if the results of this single center study can be generalized. Progressive loss of lung function due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection is the major cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis. P. aeruginosa infection is typically concurrent with colonization by oral microbiota and followed by secondary infection with other bacterial and fungal pathogens such as Burkholderia and Aspergillus species. Highdensity P. aeruginosa populations such as those found in the CF airways produce significant concentrations of secreted metabolites, including at least 50 quinolone-based small molecules. One of the most highly abundant of these is HQNO, which is detected at micromolar concentrations in CF sputum. Here we show that physiological levels of HQNO suppress innate immune function. Although the dysfunction in mechanical clearance in the CF airway is well characterized, CF patients also seem to have ill-defined deficiencies in innate immune cell function as they have difficulty eradicating pathogens from the airway despite the presence of high numbers of phagocytes. Innate immune cells kill extracellular bacteria via phagocytosis and a subsequent oxidative burst in the phagosome through the production of high levels of nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS). Phagocytosis and oxidative burst are activated by toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling in response to pathogens, and activated phagocytes undergo a dramatic metabolic shift in order to generate the energy and reducing potential required to sustain a bactericidal oxidative burst. Stimulation of TLRs by pathogens induces the metabolic shift required by phagocytes to produce NO and ROS through activation of the kinase mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Here we show that treating macrophages with physiological levels of HQNO inhibits oxidative burst and prevents phagocytic killing of P. aeruginosa, Burkholderia multivorans, and Staphylococcus aureus. Our data show that treating macrophages with HQNO prevents the activation of mTOR by TLR agonists. In host cells mTOR is negatively regulated by AMP-activated kinase (AMPK), which is a central sensor of cellular energy stress through increased AMP:ATP ratio. The primary source of ATP in eukaryotic cells is oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondrial membrane. As HQNO has previously been described as an inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration, we tested the effect of physiological HQNO concentrations on mitochondrial activity. Our data show that HQNO is a potent inhibitor of mitochondrial activity, causing hyperpolarization of the mitochondrial membrane and subsequent production of reactive oxygen species within the mitochondria indicating loss of mitochondrial function. Finally, we show that mTOR inhibition by HQNO is dependent on AMPK activation. In summary, HQNO induces AMPK activation, thereby inhibiting mTOR activation and bactericidal activity in phagocytes. We propose that HQNO produced by P. aeruginosa is a significant contributor to morbidity in CF patients by enhancing the immune defects in CF airways leading to further colonization by P. aeruginosa and secondary pathogens. Background: Infection by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, an opportunistic pathogen that frequently occupies the cystic fibrosis (CF) lung, is associated with lung inflammation that is characterized by the accumulation of neutrophils in the airspace and mucosal tissue damage. Neutrophil migration across the lung epithelium is amplified by leukotriene B4 (LTB4), an eicosanoid produced by neutrophils during the breach of infected mucosa. LTB4 is derived from arachidonic acid, which is produced by the phospholipase A2 (PLA2) activity of cPLA2α. The bacterial toxin ExoU exhibits PLA2 activity as well through a conserved patatin domain. We hypothesize that ExoU can boost production of LTB4 from neutrophils, thereby amplifying neutrophil transepithelial migration. Methods: Neutrophils were isolated from blood drawn from healthy human subjects. Epithelial barriers comprised of the H292 lung epithelial cell line were infected on the apical side with PA14, PA14ΔExoU, PA01v-PucP or PA01v-ExExoU. Neutrophil migration was measured across the epithelial barrier, from basolateral to apical side via myeloperoxidase assay. LTB4 levels in the apical supernatant liquid were determined via ELISA. Multiple assays were conducted to evaluate the cytotoxic effect of ExoU on H292 epithelial barriers. Neutrophils were pretreated with various inhibitors of key enzymes along the host LTB4 synthetic pathway and subjected to migration across H292 barriers infected with ExoU(+) or ExoU(-) strains. Results: Greater neutrophil migration across the epithelial barrier was observed when the epithelium was infected with the ExoU(+) strains when compared to genetically matched ExoU(-) strains. Increased neutrophil migration associated with ExoU correlated to higher levels of LTB4 (>2-fold for PA01V-ExExoU; >6-fold for PA14) in the epithelial apical supernatant. Epithelial barrier integrity and cell viability were not impacted by the presence of ExoU during the 1 hour infection incubation. Treatment of neutrophils with inhibitors of multiple enzymes along the host LTB4 synthetic pathway impaired both LTB4 synthesis and neutrophil migration when the epithelium was infected with PA strains lacking ExoU. Infection of epithelium with PA strains expressing ExoU also exhibited inpairment in neutrophil LTB4 synthesis and migration after subjection to inhibitors of LTB4 synthetic enzymes, however, this was the case only for enzymes downstream but not upstream of host cPLA2α. Conclusion: ExoU augments neutrophil production of LTB4 through its PLA2 activity, potentially exacerbating the immune response. This study furthers the understanding of transepithelial lung neutrophil trafficking, and can aid in limiting the inflammatory pathophysiology through future therapeutic approaches. including Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) and the rapidly growing M. abscessus group (MABSC) are diverse environmental organisms that are increasingly recognized as pathogens in individuals with underlying conditions, including cystic fibrosis (CF). Treatment of NTM lung disease is challenging, with limited numbers of active antibiotics and requirements for long courses of potentially toxic drugs. New strategies are desperately needed to improve efficacy of treatment regimens. Recent research with the related mycobacterial pathogen, M. tuberculosis (MTB) has demonstrated that expression of bacterial efflux pumps by MTB within macrophages contributes to both intracellular survival and antibiotic tolerance. Furthermore when verapamil (VER), which acts as an efflux pump inhibitor, is added to standard regimens in an MTB mouse model, it can shorten duration of treatment and reduce risk of relapse. These results in MTB led us to ask whether efflux pumps can serve as a new target for treatment of NTM pathogens. Objectives: Our work in this area seeks to answer the following: i) Do efflux pumps contribute to intracellular survival of NTM pathogens? ii) Will inhibition of efflux pumps with verapamil (VER) increase effectiveness of available antibiotics by either counteracting constitutive antibiotic resistance due to efflux or inhibit macrophage-induced tolerance? Results and Conclusions: Based on available reference genomes many efflux pumps are conserved between MTB and NTM. Of MTB macrophage-induced efflux pumps, 69% demonstrate orthologs in both MAC and MABSC groups. To determine whether VER can inhibit intramacrophage growth of NTM species we infected THP-1 macrophages and then treated infected cells with VER for 48h. VER reduced the colony forming units (CFU) of the MAC101 reference strain in THP-1 cells by nearly 10 fold (1 log), but effects observed on multiple CF patient MAC and MABSC strains were more variable, with some strains showing no effect and others demonstrating only subtle decreases in CFU. We also used broth microdilution to determine MICs for multiple antibiotics in the absence and presence of efflux pump inhibitors and did not see significant shifts in the MICs suggesting that VER cannot counteract intrinsic resistance to these antibiotics. We are currently using a THP-1 infection model to determine whether NTM pathogens develop macrophage-induced tolerance, and if so whether VER can inhibit this tolerance. Preliminary results suggest that MABSC develops tolerance to amikacin and clarithromycin, and that VER may partially counteract tolerance to clarithromycin but not amikacin. Phan, J.; Whiteson, K. Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disease that causes buildup of thick mucus in the lungs and airways of patients, leading to prolonged infection. Before the widespread use of antibiotics later in the 20th century, patients succumbed to infections from Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., and other common members of the oral microbiota. Now, life expectancy has grown dramatically, and CF patients develop persistent infections with slow-growing, antibiotic-resistant gram-negative bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Burkholderia spp. Elucidating the available nutrients and the interactions between bacterial strains within the polymicrobial communities in the airways is essential for understanding persistent infections and patient outlook. We are interested in studying the metabolic interactions and nutrient flow between our clinical isolates Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Rothia mucilaginosa, dominant and long-term residents of the CF polymicrobial community. By performing gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) on mono-and co-cultures, we were able to characterize molecules present in the interaction between our two clinical isolates. R. mucilaginosa produces metabolites consumed by P. aeruginosa, and may provoke the production of toxic molecules. For example, fermentation products such as 2,3-butanedione provoke P. aeruginosa to produce more phenazines, which are toxic and can generate reactive oxygen species in the presence of oxygen, and may also act as an alternative electron acceptor in a low oxygen environment. A combination of metabolomics data and hypothesis-driven experiments to better understand the interaction between P. aeruginosa and R. mucilaginosa will be presented. The ecological dynamics of CF lung microbiota play a critical role in the progression of airway disease. While interactions between canonical lung pathogens (eg, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus) have been described in detail, the ecological role of anaerobic microorganisms in the lower airways, and their influence on CF disease progression is relatively unknown. Objective: To determine the influence of mucin-degrading and mucin-fermenting anaerobes in the growth and pathogenicity of P. aeruginosa both in vitro and in vivo. Methods: Purified mucins were used as a sole carbon substrate to assess the ability of P. aeruginosa to utilize respiratory secretions as a carbon source in the presence and absence of mucin-degrading bacteria. RNA sequencing was then used to monitor in vivo bacterial gene expression as a proxy of mucin utilization. Finally, a Calu-3 epithelial cell line model was used to determine the ability of P. aeruginosa to colonize the airway mucosal interface in the presence of mucin degrading bacteria (eg, Prevotella, Veillonella). Multiplexed immunoassays were also used to test whether these anaerobes stimulate P. aeruginosa virulence factor production, which in turn elicits a heightened host immune response. Results: Clinical isolates of P. aeruginosa were unable to grow when provided mucins as a lone carbon source, except when grown in co-culture with mucin-fermenting bacteria, suggesting that anaerobic bacteria are critical for P. aeruginosa growth in vivo. RNAseq (transcriptomic) analysis of co-cultures of anaerobes+P. aeruginosa also revealed a similar gene expression profile to sputum samples, suggesting that in vitro nutritional interactions between these two populations also occur within the airways. In addition to nutritional interactions, we used a Calu-3 epithelial cell line model to demonstrate that anaerobes stimulated the colonization of the lung epithelium by P. aeruginosa (10-fold, relative to P. aeruginosa alone) as a result of mucin degradation. Finally, multiplexed immunoassays revealed increased inflammatory activity (IL-6, IL-8, TNFa; p < 0.01) by Calu-3 cells in response to P. aeruginosa + anaerobic bacterial communities, relative to P. aeruginosa in monoculture or an anaerobic bacterial community alone. Conclusions: Together, these data implicate a central ecological role for anaerobic, mucin-degrading bacteria in the colonization of the lower airways by P. aeruginosa and its influence on the host. These results motivate future studies targeting bacterial mucin fermentation as a potential therapeutic strategy to help delay the onset of P. aeruginosa colonization and alleviate the progression of CF lung disease. (1). Although for some patients B. contaminans respiratory tract infection is transient, its acquisition most typically results in a chronic infection with a gradual decline in lung function (2) . It was recently reported for B. cenocepacia J2315 (belonging to the ET12 lineage) that the "Burholderia cepacia epidemic strain marker" (BCESM) genomic region located on the genomic island (GI) BcenGI1, contains an operon (BCAM0257-8-9) possibly involved in persistence, quorum sensing expression, and virulence (3). We here aimed to study a possible relation between persistence and establishment of B. contaminans chronic infection, and the presence of genes associated to the genomic island BcenGI11, which was not reported for this species, so far. For this purpose, we analyzed 145 B. contaminans isolates recovered from 51 patients attended in the period 2004 -2015 in 3 different CF reference centers of Argentina. Persister cells in 24-h old biofilms exposed to ciprofloxacin concentrations of 4 and 128 × the MIC was quantified. The BCESM and the BCAM0257-8-9 regions were detected by PCR -using B. cenocepacia specific primers -and sequenced. The percentage of persister cells was between 5% and 10% for B. contaminans isolates recovered from chronic lung infections in contrast to less than 2% of persistors for isolates obtained from transient infections. Interestingly, 100% of the chronically infected patients (37 patients) and the 28.6% of the patients with transient infections (4 out of 14 patients) harbored both the BCESM and the BCAM257-9 regions. Sequence analysis showed that the amplification products of these regions had an identity of 93% and 95% with those of B. cenocepacia J2315, respectively. These results showed the presence of the operon contained in the BCESM region might be responsible for the emergence of persistors and therefore the difficulties in the eradication of B. contaminans chronic infection. Introduction: Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is a lung disease caused by Aspergillus fumigatus (A.f) with a prevalence of 2% to 15% in people with cystic fibrosis. The role of respiratory epithelial cells (REC) in the clearance of A.f has been poorly studied. In the present study we observed that REC display the property of inhibiting mycelium development of A.f. Methods: Wild-type (WT) bronchial cell lines (BEAS-2B and 16HBE) and a CFTR-deleted cell line (CFBE) were infected with A.f for 15 hours. The growth of the fungus was estimated by optical microscopy observation and measurement of galactomannan production in the extracellular media. The role of PI3 kinase was evidenced by the use of the specific inhibitor LY294002 (30 μM). Results: We observed that most of the spores incubated in contact with WT REC did not germinate as opposed to spores incubated in the absence of cells. The fungal growth, quantified by measuring galactomannan production, was 4.5 lower in the presence of cells. This anti-Aspergillus activity was inhibited when cells were incubated with LY294002, indicating the involvement of the PI3 kinase pathway. Of note, inhibitors of p38 MAP kinase and ERK1/2 were inactive. We also observed that this anti-fungal activity was not released in the extracellular medium but that the number of conidia binding to REC was decreased in the presence of PI3K inhibitor. It is of importance to note that CFBE cells were not able to inhibit the germination of the conidia. All those observations led us to hypothesize that a "receptor" with a PI3K-dependent expression could be involved in this anti-fungal activity. To validate this hypothesis, we compared the transcriptomic analysis of BEAS-2B incubated or not with LY294002 and infected with A.f during 0, 2 and 4 h. By comparing gene expression for each time point of infection, we identified 6387, 6926 and 9044 differentially expressed genes at 0, 2 and 4 h post-infection, respectively. We focused on the 2408 down-regulated genes commonly expressed at each time point of infection. Bioinformatic analysis and classification of the genes according to their protein class revealed 29 categories, among which there was a "defense/immunity protein" category and a "receptor" category. We focused first on the 15 common genes belonging to those two families. We identified 73% of G-protein coupled receptor. We have already validated the expression of some of these genes. The next step will be to look for their expression in CFBE cells. Genes down-regulated both in the CFBE cell line and by LY294002 will be selected. Their role in the anti-fungal activity will be searched in A.f -infected WT REC by decreasing their expression with specific siRNA. Conclusion: Unlike CFTR-deleted REC, WT REC play a role in the morphologic transition of A.f from conidia into the filamentous form and as such potentially prevent its dissemination. Those results could explain Aspergillus colonization of the airway of cystic fibrosis patients. Funding: This work was supported in part by a grant from Vaincre la Mucoviscidose. Background: FEV 1 is insensitive to early changes in lung disease in CF. Hyperpolarised gas ventilation MRI (HP-MRI) allows direct visualisation of small defects and is more sensitive than FEV 1 , CT and the lung clearance index (LCI) at detecting early lung disease in CF. We hypothesised that HP-MRI would be able to monitor disease progression with time and that HP-MRI metrics would be more sensitive to longitudinal change than LCI or spirometry. Aim: To assess changes in lung disease using HP-MRI, LCI and spirometry in a group of children with mild CF at 2 year intervals. Methods: The original cohort consisted of 19 CF children (>5years) assessed with HP-MRI, LCI, full lung function and CT. To date, 8 have been assessed on a second occasion, after 2 years. All children followed up had mild CF and with an FEV 1 >-1.64 z-score at baseline. Results: FEV 1 did not change significantly over 2 years: mean(SD) baseline FEV1 -0.1 (0.8) vs -0.4 (0.8), p=0.7. 2/8 subjects had an abnormal LCI at baseline. At 2 years, LCI had increased significantly and 6/8 subjects had an abnormal LCI: mean(SD) baseline LCI 7.1(0.6) vs 8.4(1.3), p=0.02. All subjects had ventilation defects evident on HP-MRI at baseline, which significantly worsened at 2 years. Mean(SD) unventilated volume % was significantly increased at follow-up: 4.5(2.1) vs 13.5(5.1)% p=0.002. The coefficient of variance (inter-voxel ventilation heterogeneity) was also significantly increased: 13.8(1.9) vs 16.6(1.8)% p=0.03. The Figure demonstrates comparative HP-MR images at baseline and 2 years of a single representative subject alongside the corresponding lung function scores. Conclusion: HP gas ventilation MRI is capable of detecting subclinical lung disease in well children with CF. HP-MRI is more sensitive at detecting longitudinal lung function deterioration than both LCI and FEV 1 . Example of paired HP-MRI scans of lungs of child with CF at baseline and after 2 years. Corresponding lung function measurements shown below lung images. Horsley, A.R. 1 Background: Lung clearance index (LCI) is a sensitive measure of early airway change in CF derived from multiple breath inert gas washout. In order to be clinically useful however, a better understanding is required of its variability in the short-medium term. This is an important step in determining the minimal clinically significant difference in LCI. LCI-SEARCH is a longitudinal study of LCI in children and adults, where LCI is measured at each clinical review using a portable closed-circuit washin system (www.lci-search.com). Here we report initial LCI repeatability from the adult cohort, from repeat measurements within 6m taken at times of clinical stability. Methods: LCI measurements were performed in triplicate using a closed-circuit washin method on an Innocor gas analyser (Horsley AR, et al. ERJ Open Res. 2016; 2:0053-2015) . Adult patients in the LCI-SEARCH cohort (n=40) were reviewed for this analysis. LCI measurements were performed in triplicate at all visits and final result quoted as mean of at least 2 acceptable repeats. Most recent paired LCI measurements were included if within 6m of each other and if patient was both deemed clinically stable by reviewing physician, and scored no more than +1 (out of 4) on a respiratory symptom score. Repeatability was assessed by Bland-Altman analysis. Results: Of 40 subjects, paired data that fitted inclusion criteria were available on 21 (7 subjects had completed only 1 assessment, 1 withdrawn, 11 clinically unstable). These 21 subjects (14 male) had completed a median of 5 LCI measurements each (range 2-11), a median of 84 (range 42-189) days apart. Mean age was 28y, mean FEV 1 82% predicted, 11 pancreatic sufficient, 11 had never had Pseudomonas infection. Mean (SD) LCI at visit 1 was 8.68 (2.96) vs 8.73 (2.81) at visit 2 (p=ns). Median coefficient of variation for LCI was 3.9 (visit 1) and 4.2% (visit 2). Mean change in LCI between visits was 0.05, or 1% of baseline LCI. Limits of agreement (LOA) were -1.1 (-13.7)% to 1.0 (11.6)% of baseline LCI. In this very mild cohort 7 patients had normal LCI (<7); exclusion of these did not substantially alter LOA (-13.9 to 13.1%). There was greater variability in FRC: mean bias -1.5% of baseline (LOA 30 to -33%). Conclusions: Even in this very mild cohort of CF adults, patients are frequently unwell or more symptomatic at routine review. Within-visit repeatability was good, and similar to previous reports. When clinically stable, LCI variability over a period of up to 6m was within approximately ±10%. Addition of more adult as well as paediatric data to this assessment will widen the applicability of these confidence intervals. Supported by NIHR CS012-13. Background: Oral antibiotics are often used to treat pulmonary exacerbations in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). While pulmonary exacerbations treated with oral antibiotics usually do not lead to hospital admission and may be classified as milder, they may affect long-term clinical outcomes. Despite extensive knowledge regarding the effect of pulmonary exacerbations treated with intravenous (IV) antibiotics on clinical outcomes in cystic fibrosis (CF), there is less known about the impact of pulmonary exacerbations treated with oral antibiotics (oPEx). Methods: This was a retrospective cohort study of CF patients followed at the Hospital for Sick Children and St. Michael's Hospital from 2009-2014. A pulmonary exacerbation was defined as a clinical event treated with antibiotics for a respiratory cause. Patients were included in the study if they had received either oral antibiotic treatment for a pulmonary exacerbation (oPEx) or IV antibiotic treatment for a pulmonary exacerbation (iPEx); patients treated with both were considered as in the IV-treated group. We evaluated the proportion of oPEx events in which 100% or 90% of baseline forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) % predicted was recovered at the end of treatment. Baseline was defined as the best measurement in the 6 months prior to each event, provided the patient was not receiving treatment at the time of measurement. We then examined the association of oPEx with FEV 1 % predicted decline and body mass index (BMI) Z-score decline with age using a mixed effects model with random intercepts. Results: From 2009 to 2014, 768 patients were followed in the Toronto CF database; 71% of the CF population had at least one oPEx during the study period. There were a total of 2,608 oPEx events in 570 subjects during the study period. Overall pulmonary symptoms were treated with oral antibiotics nearly 4 times more often than with IV antibiotics. In over half of oPEx events, lung function was already at 90% or higher of baseline FEV 1 at the initiation of oral antibiotic therapy. While the majority had recovered lung function at follow-up, 18% of patients did not return to 90% or higher of baseline FEV 1 . After adjusting for known risk factors of lung function decline, an increasing number of oPEx events was independently associated with FEV 1 decline. When we grouped the events into tertiles, those with >6 oPEx events had steeper lung function decline (-0.63% predicted/year (95% CI -0.97; -0.5) compared with those with 0-3 oPEx events (-0.37%/ year (95% CI -0.5; -0.3) (p<0.001)). oPEx events were not independently associated with changes in BMI over time. Conclusions: We found that a greater number of oPEx events, independent of iPEx events, was associated with lung function decline in CF patients and that a significant proportion of patients treated with oral antibiotics for exacerbations did not recover baseline lung function.  Rationale: Microbial epidemiology in cystic fibrosis (CF) airways has become increasingly complex as novel pathogens are identified. Achromobacter species are opportunistic bacterial pathogens for which clinical outcomes remain poorly understood. Objective: To determine the association of Achromobacter sp. infection with clinical outcomes in cohort of CF patients. Methods: A retrospective longitudinal cohort study of pediatric and adult patients with CF followed between 1997 -2014 at the Hospital for Sick Children and St. Michael's Hospital (Toronto, Canada) was conducted. Achromobacter sp. infection was categorized in a time-varying manner as no history of infection, intermittent infection (minimum 1 positive culture), and chronic infection (≥ 2 positive cultures) in the preceding 12 months. Generalized estimating equation models were used to assess whether over time, the rate of lung function decline or rate of pulmonary exacerbations treated with intravenous (IV) antibiotics differed by Achromobacter sp. category. Cox proportional hazard models were used to estimate the risk of death or transplantation. Covariates included age, sex, body mass index, pancreatic insufficiency, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) % predicted, CF-related diabetes, number of PEx, and airway infections with P. aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia complex, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus were investigated using a step-wise approach. Results: There were 1209 patients (55.1% male) followed over the 18-year study period; 92 (7.6%) patients had at least one positive culture for Achromobacter species. Patients with Achromobacter infections had a greater prevalence of co-infection with P. aeruginosa (21.7% vs 17.6%, p < 0.001), lower proportion with mild mutations (5.4% vs 12.9%, p = 0.03), and a trend to lower baseline FEV 1 % predicted (61.3% vs 67.3%, p = 0.56) than the total cohort. Infection with Achromobacter sp. was not associated with either rate of lung function decline, or rate of pulmonary exacerbations. Conversely, chronic Achromobacter infection was associated with a significantly greater risk of death or lung transplantation compared to patients with no history of infection (unadjusted HR 3.22 [95% CI, 1.89 -5.54], p < 0.001). This remained significant after adjusting for known confounders as above (adjusted HR ], p = 0.028). No increased risk of death or transplantation was noted in those with intermittent Achromobacter infection (adjusted HR 0.72 [95% CI, 0.44 -1.17], p = 0.18). Conclusion: Chronic Achromobacter infection was associated with an increased risk of death or lung transplantation, but not accelerated lung function decline or pulmonary exacerbations. Given the increased mortality risk, further studies of the optimal treatment strategies for Achromobacter sp. infections in CF patients are needed. R. Somayaji is supported by a CF Canada clinical/research fellowship. Although classic bacterial pathogens have traditionally been thought to be the major cause of lung disease progression, respiratory viral pathogens have been increasingly identified in association with pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) (Wat D, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 7; 320-8; Wang EE, et al. NEJM. 1984; 311:1653-8) . Further characterization of the clinical effect of respiratory viral pathogens on CF pulmonary disease is needed. Objective: To determine the association of influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) with risk of PEx in children and adults with CF in the United States. Methods: We conducted a cohort study from 2003 through 2009 using the CF Foundation (CFF) Patient Registry merged with CDC Virus Surveillance data on influenza and RSV positivity in children and adults with CF. We used monthly influenza and RSV surveillance data from each US census region. Prior studies in CF using these data sets did not link individual patients to regional viral detection data or adjust for individual characteristics. The primary outcome was the relationship between influenza or RSV positivity (per 10%) with risk of PEx defined as a respiratory illness requiring hospitalization or home intravenous antibiotics. We fit multivariable Poisson regression models to estimate risk of PEx adjusting for demographic and clinical predictors and stratified for adults (≥ 18 years) and children (< 18 years). The models included covariates for sex, age, race, genotype, insurance, pancreatic insufficiency, body mass index, forced expiratory volume in 1 second % predicted, and seasonality. Results: In 2003, there were 21,506 patients (51.8% male) in the CF patient cohort composed of 12,702 children (mean age 9.5), and 8,320 adults (mean age 28.7). Review of 2003 test data indicated regional and seasonal variability in the number of influenza and RSV detections and associated respiratory illness. The dominant Influenza strain was H3N2 with lesser proportions of H1N1 and influenza B viruses. Of the 2003 cohort, 7,088 (33.0%) patients experienced at least one PEx, and 6,345 (29.5%) had a PEx requiring hospitalization. The incidence rate of PEx was 521.9 per 10,000 person-months through the 2003-09 study period. In children, the proportions of influenza (RR 1.02 [95% CI 1.01-1.03], p < 0.001) and RSV (RR 1.05 [95% CI 1.02-1.07], p < 0.001) positivity in regional surveillance adjusted for confounders were both significantly associated with PEx risk. Conversely in adults, only influenza positivity in regional surveillance (RR 1.02 [95% CI 1.01-1.02], p < 0.001) but not RSV (RR 1.01 [1.00-1.03], p=0.07) adjusted for confounders, had a significant association with PEx risk. Conclusion: Our large CF population-based cohort study spanning seven years demonstrated a significant association with influenza regional activity in children and adults, and with RSV regional activity in children. Further prospective studies of respiratory viral infections are necessary to understand the causal impact on CF lung disease. R. Somayaji is supported by a CF Canada fellowship. Objective: To determine median survival for US CF patients after FEV 1 <30% predicted and identify predictors of survival among these patients with low lung function. Methods: We conducted a retrospective cohort study using the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Patient Registry, with data available between Jan. 1, 2003 and Dec. 31, 2013 . Adult patients (age ≥18 years), who had not yet undergone lung transplantation (LTx), were included if FEV 1 <30% during a stable encounter (not marked as pulmonary exacerbation or hospitalization). Patients were censored at the time when LTx was documented, at loss to follow-up, or at the end of available follow-up (12/31/13). Kaplan-Meier transplant-free survival was estimated. Multivariable Cox proportional hazards (PH) regression (included significant covariates (p<0.10) from univariate regression) was used to determine predictors of survival; Schoenfeld residuals used to confirm PH assumption. Results: There were 3,340 subjects who met criteria for survival analysis and 1,250 (37.4%) patients died without LTx. 945 patients (28.3%) underwent LTx. Median survival was 6.6 years (95% CI 5.9 -7.0). Introduction: Both magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and multiple breath washout (MBW) may be sensitive methods to monitor cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease. Studies assessing treatment responses in acute pulmonary exacerbations (aPEs) have shown a heterogeneous response in the lung clearance index (LCI), the main outcome measure of MBW, with a significant proportion of patients showing worsening of LCI with treatment (Sonneveld N et al. Eur Respir J 2015) . This is potentially explained by recruitment of poorly ventilated areas of the lung to MBW by decreasing mucus plugging with treatment of aPEs. The objective of this study was to evaluate MRI and MBW as measures of CF lung disease before and after treatment of an aPE treated with intravenous (IV) antibiotics in children with CF. Methods: MRI of the chest, MBW using sulfur hexafluoride (SF 6 ) and spirometry were performed before (V1) and after (V2) 14 days of IV antibiotics. Lung morphometry (bronchiectasis, airway thickening, mucus plugging, parenchyma and trapped air) was scored using the CF-MRI scoring, an adapted version of the Brody score for MRI. Spirometry measures were analyzed as percent predicted. Results: 13 patients (7 males) had an MRI on V1 and V2. Mean age was 13.5 y (range 7.8-17.4). Mean FEV 1 at V1 was 67% and increased to 74% on V2 (Δ7%, 95% CI 2, 12%; p=0.01). Improvement was also seen for FVC (p=0.04), FEV 1 /FVC (p=0.05) and FEF 25-75 (p=0.05). While no significant changes with therapy were seen on MRI for bronchiectasis, airway thickening, parenchyma or total lung score, improvement was seen in scores for mucus plugging (Δ-3.5; 95% CI -5.4, -1.5; p=0.002) and air trapping (Δ-2.5; 95% CI -4.7, -0.3; p=0.03). Out of the 13 patients that underwent MRI, 8 had research-quality MBW measured at V1 and V2. Mean (SD) LCI score at V1 was 12.4 (2.3) and did not change with treatment (Δ-0.2; 95% CI -1.1, 0.7). At V1, LCI was positively correlated with total MRI score (r=0.64; p=0.06), mucus plugging (r=0.72; p=0.03) and bronchiectasis score (r=0.70; p=0.04). There was no correlation between changes in MRI scores with changes in spirometry. However, there was a significant negative correlation between changes in LCI and changes in MRI total lung score (r=-0.85; p<0.01). Significant negative correlations suggested worsening of LCI with improving mucus plugging (r=-0.74; p=0.04) and air trapping (r=-0.79; p=0.02) with therapy. Conclusions: Consistent with previous studies, MRI can be used to quantify lung disease in children with CF. In this pilot study, improved mucus plugging and trapped air on CF-MRI correlated with worsening LCI. These findings suggest that opening up poorly ventilated areas of the lung with treatment affects the LCI measurement and may explain the previously reported heterogeneous response in LCI with treatment of aPEs. Sensitive clinical tools to assess subtle changes in lung structure and function are essential for assessing disease progression and therapeutic efficacy in early CF lung disease. Spirometry is the clinical gold-standard for measuring lung function but is known to be somewhat insensitive and effort-dependent. Lung clearance index (LCI) via multiple-breath washout is emerging as a sensitive biomarker for ventilation heterogeneity, and recently, we demonstrated that hyperpolarized 129 Xe magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was sensitive to ventilation deficits in CF patients with clinically-normal spirometry (ie, FEV 1 ). The objective of this study was to investigate the relationship between PFTs, LCI, and 129 Xe MRI for the assessment of ventilation heterogeneity in early CF lung disease. Methods: Hyperpolarized 129 Xe MRI was performed in 8 pediatric CF patients (3 males and 5 females; ages 8-16 y; FEV 1 98.6±15.2% predicted) using Xe prepared by either a commercial or homebuilt Xe polarizer. 129 Xe ventilation images were acquired during a single breath-hold (≤16 seconds) of Xe from functional residual capacity. Ventilation deficits were identified using a signal intensity threshold (60% mean whole-lung 129 Xe signal) and quantified as a percentage (VDP) of total lung volume and of each lobe. VDP was compared to clinically-obtained LCI 2.5 and FEV 1 by Pearson correlation. Results: The 129 Xe MRI breath-hold was well tolerated by all subjects; a small, transient decrease in blood oxygenation (SpO 2 decrease -6.5±8.5% from baseline) was recorded but resolved within 1 minute of normal breathing. Ventilation deficits were visually apparent in all CF patients, even in subjects with clinically-normal FEV 1 , with varying degrees of lobar distribution. The mean whole-lung 129 Xe VDP was 18.3±8.6%, which poorly correlated with FEV 1 (R 2 =0.37, p = 0.108) but strongly correlated with LCI 2.5 (R 2 =0.76, p= 0.005). This demonstrates the sensitivity of 129 Xe MRI to early airway obstruction compared to spirometry and the ability of 129 Xe MRI to quantify regional ventilation heterogeneity. Conclusion: 129 Xe MRI is a sensitive technique to assess ventilation heterogeneity in early CF lung disease and correlates well with LCI. 129 Xe MRI also provides regional information which can be used to guide interventions (eg, bronchoscopies) and evaluate regional ventilation changes associated with disease progression or therapy response. Methods: This study included 30 subjects with cystic fibrosis (M:F 16:14, age: 10-55y, FEV1: 25%-122%) imaged at baseline using CT and MRI. 10 subjects returned for a repeat visit 1-2 weeks later. CT was performed using a low-dose volumetric protocol including both end-inspiration and end-expiration scans. MRI methods included conventional "CONV" and newer ultrashort echo time "UTE" (TE = 0.08ms) methods. MR images were acquired before and after each subject received 1 mmol/kg of gadobenate dimeglumine. Two cardiothoracic radiologists scored the 5 image datasets (CT, precontrast CONV, postcontrast CONV, precontrast UTE, and postcontrast UTE) in a randomized blinded fashion. The Heidelberg morphologic score system was modified by adding an air trapping score and increasing the scale from 3 to 4 (none, <1/3, 1/3-2/3, or >2/3 of the lobe affected) to better approximate the well-validated Brody CT score. Scores were compared using the Kruskal-Wallis test with post hoc Dunn's test on a per-subject and per-lobe basis. Correlations between the methods were also calculated. Results: Acquisition of all data is complete. Complete analysis will be complete before the NACFC meeting. Analysis of a random subset of 19 subjects is complete as of the submission date. Per-lobe analysis revealed differences in total lobe score between the methods. Although there was no difference in the bronchiectasis score amongst the MR methods, all MR methods underscored bronchiectasis relative to CT (p<.001). Consolidation and pleural categories did not differ between the methods (p=.428 and .828, respectively). The only MR score that did not differ from CT on was air trapping on postcontrast UTE (p=.07). On a per-subject basis, total score on CT differed from CONV MRI (p<.001) but not from either precontrast (p=.117) or postcontrast (p=.136) UTE. Air trapping on CT differed from CONV MRI (p<.001) but not from either precontrast (p=.155) or postcontrast (p=.591) UTE. IV contrast did not significantly change either total score or air trapping score on either per-lobe (p=.185 CONV; p=.680 UTE) or per-subject (p=.304 CONV; p=.376 UTE) analysis. The correlations of UTE with CT total and air trapping scores are shown in the Table. Conclusion: Ultrashort echo time MRI significantly outperformed conventional MRI and showed excellent correlation with CT scores. There was no significant difference between CT and UTE MRI for either total score or air trapping subscore, regardless of whether or not contrast was given. Rationale: Cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease is characterized by progressive bronchiectasis and lack of airway tapering. Objective quantification of tapering in patients with CF and controls has not been defined. Objectives: To explore tapering measures as a novel image biomarker in CF lung disease and to establish reference tapering values. Methods: Spirometer-guided inspiratory chest CTs of 12 random CF patients and 12 age-and gender-matched controls (lungs evaluated as normal on CT) between 6 and 16 years old were retrospectively selected. In addition a subset of 156 control CTs from the Normal CT dataset (10 international centers collected clinically indicated CTs with normal lungs evaluated on CT) without lung volume control were included. Stateof-the-art automatic image analysis software was used to quantify intrabranch tapering (reduction in airway diameter along the branch), interbranch tapering (reduction in airway diameter before and after bifurcation), and airway artery (AA) ratios. Image biomarkers were obtained for each individual branch and reported as median values for each subject. Biomarkers were further stratified in small, medium and large airways based on 3 equal groups of the accompanying vessel size of spirometer-guided controls (<3.08, within 3.08 to 4.23, and >4.23 mm). CF-CT bronchiectasis scoring was done for all spirometer-guided CTs. Differences were tested using Mann-Whitney U and correlations with Spearman correlation coefficient. Results: One patient with common variable immune deficiency was mislabeled as CF, but due to similar structural changes remained included as CF. CF patients had a reduced median intrabranch tapering (lumen=0.89%; outer diameter=0.65%) compared to controls (lumen=1.19%; outer diam-eter=0.95%) (p<0.01). CF patients had a reduced median interbranch tapering (lumen=32.3%; outer diameter=19.3%) compared to controls (lumen=38.5%; outer diameter=23.7%) (p<0.01). Differences in tapering between CF and controls were significant for all airway sizes. Difference in AA-ratio was only significant in small airways. CF-CT scores correlated with intrabranch tapering (lumen=0.75; outer diameter=-0.56, both p<0.01), interbranch tapering (lumen=-0.67; outer diameter=-0.65, both p<0.01) and AA-ratios (lumen=0.53; outer diameter=0.75, both p<0.01). Conclusions: Airway tapering is a promising novel CF biomarker and correlates well with validated CT scoring systems. CF patients showed a significant reduction in airway tapering across all airway sizes compared to controls, whereas a significant increase in AA-ratio was only observed in the small airways. Detecting tapering reduction in larger airways could potentially lead to earlier diagnosis of bronchiectasis on CTs of young CF patients with relatively low CT resolution to detect changes in small airways. Thomen, R.P.; Walkup, L.L.; Roach, D.J.; Cleveland, Z.; Fleck, R.; Clancy, J.P.; Woods, J.C. Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA Introduction: Ultrashort echo time (UTE) MRI is an emerging technique that can quantify regional structural abnormalities in lung with sensitivity similarly to CT, but without the use of ionizing radiation. Hyperpolarized (HP) 129 Xe MRI generates images of regional pulmonary ventilation and, in obstructive lung diseases, provides quantifiable maps of regional ventilation defects. In early CF lung disease these defects are observed even without clinically significant decline in pulmonary function. We hypothe-size that structure-function relationships exhibited by pathologies associated with CF lung disease (bronchiectasis and bronchial wall thickening [BR], mucus plugging [MP], consolidation [CN] , ground glass opacities [GG] , and air trapping [AT]) can be identified using UTE and HP 129 Xe MRI. In particular, we used UTE MR images to identify these pathologies and spatially matched and quantified their corresponding ventilation defects from HP 129 Xe MRI. Methods: 5 adolescents (ages 11-16) with early CF lung disease were imaged via UTE MRI and HP 129 Xe MRI. Regions of defective ventilation were quantified from HP 129 Xe images, and UTE images were independently examined for structural abnormalities, with care taken to locate the areas of parenchyma associated with each abnormality. Defect percentages associated with each structural abnormality were calculated for each subject. Results: Whole-lung defect percentage averaged 22% ± 8% in these subjects (mean FEV 1 = 82%). Across all subjects, 71% of ventilation defect volume was associated with a clear structural abnormality. By volume, BR was responsible for 34% of ventilation defects, MP for 24%, CN for 8%, GG for 1%, and AT for 3%. In the subject with lowest FEV 1 (61%), BR and MP were responsible for 29% and 42% of the identified defect volume. Conclusions: In this small group of patients, we have identified and associated structural abnormalities in UTE MRI that accounted for the majority of the volume-percentage of ventilation defects in HP 129 Xe MRI. In these subjects MP and BR were responsible for the greatest fractional volume of ventilation defects. Associating regional ventilation with regional structural abnormalities may be particularly useful in longitudinal monitoring of CF disease progression, especially in evaluation of individualized treatments. Introduction: Azithromycin therapy has been associated with QTc prolongation and cardiac events in patients without CF, but has not been well described in patients with CF. In April 2014, an outpatient ECG protocol was developed outlining the number and type of risk factors to consider when obtaining an ECG for both pediatric and adult populations with chronic azithromycin therapy. Objective: Local practices of obtaining ECGs in patients with CF at risk for QTc prolongation with chronic azithromycin therapy were examined to identify the number and type of QTc prolonging risk factors, the percentage of patients receiving baseline and follow-up ECGs, and the classification of QTc intervals. Methods: This retrospective review examined medical records for patients aged >6 with a clinic visit from April 1, 2014 through October 1, 2015. Patients were divided into those initiating or currently receiving chronic azithromycin, then divided into the number and type of QTcprolonging risk factors present. The percentage of patients with initial and follow-up ECGs was determined. QTc intervals were classified as normal, borderline, or prolonged. Results: Sixty-five patients were included. Half of those examined (49.5%) had no risk factors, 26.3% had one, 54.6% had two to four, and 1% had five risk factors for QTc prolongation. The most common risk factors were female gender (n = 30) and long-acting beta agonists (n = 27). Twenty-four initial ECGs were obtained, and 1 azithromycin patient had a borderline QTc interval (430 to 450 msec). Four follow-up ECGs were obtained, and 1 patient had a prolonged QTc interval (> 450 msec). The patient with initial borderline ECG did not obtain a follow-up ECG. All other QTc intervals were normal. Conclusion: CF patients may have multiple risk factors for QTc prolongation. A system should be implemented to ensure follow-up ECGs for those with initial borderline or prolonged QTc intervals initiating azithromycin. QTc intervals need to be specifically requested when ordering ECGs. It is important to further study cardiac risks associated with medication therapy in patients with CF.  Background: There is a growing interest in assessing lung disease in young children given the long-term benefits of early intervention. In preschool children with CF, lung clearance index (LCI) is more sensitive than spirometry to detect abnormal lung function and is predictive of structural lung disease. However, LCI is not yet standardized for clinical use, in part, due to challenges to perform the test. We hypothesized that LCI is more reproducible than spirometry to detect lung disease in preschool children with a positive CF newborn screen (NBS). Objectives: 1. To compare test completion ratios between LCI and spirometry (FEV 1 ); 2. to assess reproducibility of LCI and FEV 1 measurements; 3. to explore which of the two tests is more sensitive to detect early lung disease between the CF and CFTR-related metabolic syndrome (CRMS) subgroups. Methods: Children with positive NBS for CF (CF and CRMS) between 3 and 6 years of age were recruited from the CF clinic at Children's Hospital Los Angeles. Subjects with any acute illness were excluded. Age-matched healthy controls (HC) were recruited from the hospital employee day care. Those with persistent asthma or family history of CF were excluded. All eligible subjects were scheduled for 2 visits (within 2 weeks) and LCI and spirometry were performed both days. Subjects had 4 attempts or up to 20 minutes per test. Satisfactory completion for each test followed ATS criteria. Statistical analysis: mean differences in LCI and FEV 1 within subjects and between groups (HC, CF, and CRMS) were measured by ANOVA with repeated measure adjustment. Generalized Estimated Equation with linear regression was used to examine the differences across ages and attempts, adjusted for repeated measure. Results: We studied 34 subjects (CF=18, CRMS=7, and HC=9). CF vs CRMS phenotypes compared as follows: 1) Mean sweat chloride: 88±22 vs 30±14; 2) Pseudomonas aeruginosa-ever: 50% vs none; and 3) presence of chronic cough: 33% vs 14%. Completion rates were similar between LCI and spirometry: LCI=65% (95%CI: 46%-80%) and spirometry=59% (41%-75%). Reproducibility: LCI and FEV 1 measurements had similar variability (cv: 17.9% vs 18.8%, respectively). For both LCI and FEV 1 , there was no significant difference across attempts (p=0.46 and p=0.64); or across ages 3 through 6 years (p=0.68 and p=0.23); or between the two visits (p=0.58 and p=0.53). Sensitivity: there was no significant difference of mean LCI between groups: CF=5.24±0.97; CRMS=4.44 ± 0.55; and HC=4.72±0.59 (p=0.06) or for mean FEV 1 : CF=83.34±17.10; CRMS=98.19±13.99; and HC=88.54 ±12.27 (p=0.14). Conclusions: We conclude that LCI and spirometry are reproducible tests in preschool CF and CRMS children 3 to 6 years of age. Children in this age group tolerated 4 attempts per test and they performed equally across attempts. Also, they performed the tests as well in the first visit as in the second visit. There was no difference in LCI and FEV 1 between groups and the values were within normal limits. This is likely due to early therapeutic interventions with diagnosis by NBS. Supported by: Webb Foundation and Children's Hospital Los Angeles Pediatric Pulmonary. Background: An N-of-1 trial is a single-patient clinical trial with multiple crossovers between treatments. The idea of N-of-1 studies is not new. More than 20 years ago the feasibility of an N-of-1 trial service was described and an offer of an N-of-1 trial recommended when the patient or clinician was uncertain about the value of treatment for symptomatic chronic diseases. In 2014 the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality released a guide for the design and implementation of N-of-1 trials to improve general understanding and raise the level of evidence generated from such trials. However, N-of-1 trials remain relatively uncommon in areas where they may be most beneficial, such as for pediatric chronic diseases. Methods: We examine N-of-1 trials for cystic fibrosis (CF) to identify when N-of-1 trials are more appropriate and/or more efficient than traditional study designs. We discuss design considerations including randomization, blinding, replication, and washout and the more complex statistical modeling needed to combine N-of-1 trials. We illustrate candidate N-of-1 trials for CF to identify when N-of-1 trials may be favored over traditional study designs. Simulations comparing the sample size of N-of-1 designs to parallel and crossover studies are presented. Pulmonary function and sweat chloride endpoints from studies conducted by the CF Therapeutics Development Network are used to select simulation parameters. Results: N-of-1 trials require the same rigorous development as more traditional clinical trials designs to support both treatment decision making for the individual patient as well as the potential to combine sets of N-of-1 trials to provide general treatment recommendations for a patient population. Sets of complementary N-of-1 trials require smaller sample sizes than AB/BA crossover designs for anticipated within-patient correlations. N-of-1 trials are a feasible approach to treatment decision making in pediatric chronic diseases. Conclusions: N-of-1 trials provide the opportunity to practice evidence-based, patient-centered care. While the primary goal of N-of-1 trials is to inform treatment decisions for a specific patient, the information gathered in multiple N-of-1 trials can be leveraged through meta-analysis to provide generalizable information comparable to traditional parallel-arm clinical trials. N-of-1 trials are a viable alternative to traditional designs and hold promise for evaluating new therapies in rare diseases such as CF. All scenarios assume a type 1 error of 0.05 and power equal to 90%. Introduction: While FEV 1 is useful for assessing global CF lung function, functional imaging can show regional disease heterogeneity. Although hyperpolarized gas ventilation imaging is an excellent tool for showing impaired ventilation in CF, it is not widely available. Perfusion MRI, however, can be performed at any site that has MRI. The purpose of this study was to compare lung function assessed with perfusion MRI to ventilation MRI in a wide range of CF lung disease severity. Methods: Spirometry and MRI were performed on 26 subjects (M:F: 13:13, age: 10-55 y, ppFEV 1 : 25%-122%) at their baseline state of health. Ventilation MRI during a breath-hold of hyperpolarized 3 He and dynamic contrast-enhanced perfusion MRI were performed using previously published methods. Imaging and spirometry were repeated for 8 subjects 1-2 wk later. Ventilation Defect Percent (VDP) was quantified using a previously published adaptive K-means method. Semiquantitative analysis of lung perfusion used time course maximum intensity projections and manually segmented defects to determine Perfusion Defect Percent (PDP), blinded to VDP and spirometry results. VDP and PDP measures were compared using Bland-Altman analysis and linear regression to determine the correlation of both PDP and VDP with FEV 1 . Interday repeatability of PDP, VDP, and FEV 1 was compared using intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) and Bland-Altman plots. Results: Perfusion and ventilation defects were generally matched. Both PDP (r=-0.66 [-0.82, -0.42]) and VDP (r=-0.74 [-0.84, -0.48]) showed strong correlations with FEV 1 . PDP was 11.6% [7.5%, 15.6%] higher than VDP. PDP repeatability was excellent (ICC=0.94) and did not differ significantly between visits (bias=0.95% [-1.8%, 3.7%]). VDP also showed strong repeatability (ICC=0.83). The 95% limits of agreement (LOA) of repeated PDP [-9.3%, 11.2%] and VDP [-11.2%, 19 .7%] were not significantly different. FEV 1 measurements showed the strongest repeatability (ICC=0.98) and least variability (95% LOA=-10.2%, 9.4%). Conclusion: Perfusion MRI may serve as a relatively inexpensive, easy to use, and widely available surrogate for ventilation MRI to depict the progression of functional defects in CF lung disease. (Worlitzsch D, et al. J Clin Invest. 2002; 109:317-25) . However, little follow-up work has been done since the Wörliztsch paper to measure and to modify the actual oxygen tension in the CF airways. Here, using a fastresponse sensor, we introduce a noninvasive procedure for measuring abnormalities in the oxygen content of the airways. Methods: The fraction of expired airway oxygen was measured in real time using an O2CPX Fast Laser diode oxygen analyzer (response time of ~200 ms) in series with pneumotachometer and CO 2 analyzer (Oxigraf, Mountain View, CA). Subjects breathed comfortably at FRC into a low-resistance mouthpiece, then exhaled their expiratory reserve volumes at a flow rate of 400 mL/s. The nadir of fractional oxygen (NFO) was recorded after the fraction of exhaled CO 2 crossed 5% (~38 mmHg). Measurements were repeated three times. Additional measurements were made in a subject breathing 0, 2, 3 and 4 liters per minute (lpm) oxygen by nasal cannula (NC). Stable, normoxic CF outpatients were recruited from the Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital (RBCH) CF clinic. Healthy volunteers were recruited from faculty and staff. This study was reviewed and approved by the RBCH IRB. Results The procedure was well-tolerated by all subjects. Mean (±SD) NFO values for adult healthy volunteers (22-60y; n=7), adults with CF (25-55yo; n=8) and children with CF (12-15y; n = 3) were 13.8±1.3, 11.6±0.9 and 12.0±0.6 %, respectively (p=0.004 by one-way ANOVA). Adult CF NFO values were lower than adult healthy control values (p=0.004 by Tukey pairwise comparison). In some CF patients, oxygen content increased in the final msecs of exhalation, presumably reflecting emptying of a population of true respiratory bronchioles and alveoli. NFO was not related to arterial oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry (linear regression, p=0.971). Supplemental oxygen by NC increased healthy adult NFO in a dose-dependent fashion (linear regression, p<0.0005; n=3; r 2 =0.91). At 4 lpm the NFO was 21.8±1.5%. Conclusions: These results demonstrate that gas-phase oxygen levels in the terminal airways are low in CF patients. Phase IV values and normal arterial oxygen saturations, however, suggest regional inhomogeneity and V/Q matching. Higher values in CF children than adults suggest that decreased airway oxygen levels may arise from bronchiectasis, inflammation and/or infection, though there is also evidence that oxygen consumption is increased in CF epithelial cells (Worlitzsch D, et al.) . The data raise several questions about the physiology, ontogeny and airway ecology of airway oxygen tensions in CF. The data are partially consistent with the idea that oxygen tensions may favor the growth of mucoid Pseudomonas and anaerobic bacteria in the CF airways. If so, low-dose oxygen therapy might be considered for its antimicrobial value. Objective: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with high rates of pulmonary exacerbations (PEx) leading to an accelerated decline in lung function, impaired quality of life, increased inpatient (IP) admissions, and premature mortality. In clinical trials of patients with CF gating mutations, ivacaftor (IVA) treatment has been associated with reductions in PEx. The objective of this analysis of multistate Medicaid data was to compare rates of PEx among patients with CF 12 months pre-and-post initiation of IVA treatment in a Medicaid population. Methods: This retrospective cohort study used administrative claims data for US patients insured by Medicaid from January 2012 to November 2014. Patients with CF ≥6 years of age with ≥1 claim for IVA (initiation date=index date) and 12 months of continuous enrollment pre-and post-index were included. A PEx was defined based on (i) an IP stay (hospitalization) and/or intravenous (IV) antibiotic use, or (ii) use of oral antibiotics alone for acute treatment without IP stay or IV use. Rates of PEx were compared between the 12-month pre-and post-index periods. Results: The study inclusion criteria identified 44 patients who initiated IVA in the Truven MarketScan Medicaid Multi-State database of more than 15 million patients. The study population (N=44) was 55% female; mean age (SD) was 13.1 (6.7) years. Comparison of the 12-month pre-and post-index periods showed a statistically significant decline in the proportion of all patients with PEx requiring hospitalization and/or IV antibiotic use (from 43.2% to 25.0%, P=0.03). Of the patients with a history of PEx requiring hospitalization and/or IV antibiotic use before IVA initiation (n=19), less than half had a PEx event requiring hospitalization and/or IV use after IVA initiation (n=8). Overall proportions of patients without PEx ("pulmonary exacerbation free") tripled from 4.5% in the pre-index period to 15.9% after IVA initiation (P=0.025). Conclusions: Findings from this retrospective analysis of a small cohort of patients with CF in the Medicaid population suggest that treatment with IVA was associated with reductions in PEx rates. These outcomes from real-world settings are consistent with the results of clinical trials of IVA among patients with CF gating mutations. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. Results: Eleven (73%) were female. Age at colonization with Bc (cBc) was 17.5 (7-44.9); follow-up after cBc was 3.7 (1-6.3) years. Nine (60%) were under care at the Pediatric CF Centre. Patients with Bc were segregated from all other CF patients. MLST identified four different clones: 3 had ST102; 4, ST482; 2, ST771; and 6, ST404; all evenly infecting children and adults. Best FEV 1 %Pred on the year prior to cBc was 86 (45-125). Four each had chronic bronchial infection (cbi) with S. aureus (3 children) and P. aeruginosa (all adults). Twelve (80%) were on nebulized colistin either for eradication therapy or cbi with P. aeruginosa. Ten (67%) including 5/6 adults had no change in their symptoms at cBc but five (three with ST404 and one each ST102 and ST482) had noted increased symptoms for weeks to months. Symptoms subsided in all following the start of long-term nebulized ceftazidime 1g bid (Cft), and all 4 children had ≥10% absolute increase in FEV 1 %Pred within 2-4 months. Five (4 adults) developed cbi with Bc over the first year after cBc and still had it in 2015. Eight (7 children) were Bc-free in 2015 and two children had intermittent colonization. There was no significant difference in the annual change in the best FEV 1 over two years prior to cBC (-0.2 (-5.5 -+8)) vs 2 years after (+2.7 (-2.5 -+15)). There was also no difference in the annual number of exacerbations requiring IV antibiotics: 0.3±0.5 vs 0.035±0.12. Remarkably the annual total number of exacerbations decreased: 1.75±1.99 vs 0.82±0.82 (p<0.005). FEV 1 increased significantly within 4 months in the 13 patients being put on Cft : 90.2±27.5 vs 80.8±24.2 (p<0.01). Conclusions: Bc is an emerging multiresistant organism which can infect the airways of CF patients. An association of cBc with long-term aerosol colistin was found. Bacterial DNA studies did not support extensive cross-infection. Only a third progressed to cbi. No significant difference in the annual change of FEV1 was seen along two years after cBc and the annual number of exacerbations even decreased, but nearly all were put on Cft which was associated with short-term significant improvement in the FEV1 and symptoms. We conclude that Bcc is less likely to be followed by cbi and to be associated with clinical and pulmonary function impairment as compared with Bm and Bcpc. Prospective multicenter studies are needed to further evaluate its clinical impact. Introduction: The value of lung clearance index (LCI) is well recognised in children and adults. It is also a sensitive measure of lung disease in infants with cystic fibrosis (CF), with a potential role both in clinical practice and as a research outcome. However, measuring LCI in infants is technically challenging due to the need to accurately combine flow and gas measurements at rapid respiratory rates. There is no simple method of assessing lung function outside research laboratories in this population, but this is a topic of increasing importance as we look to improve long-term outcomes for infants diagnosed by newborn screening, and facilitate access to new therapies for younger patients. We have previously described an alternative method of performing multiple breath washout (MBW), in which expired gas is collected and analysed to derive functional residual capacity (FRC) and LCI without directly measuring flow. This eliminates one of the major technical challenges in infant MBW, whilst also reducing dead space of the system. This system has been demonstrated to be highly accurate in vitro, with a mean accuracy of FRC measurement to within 1%, down to FRC of 100mL (Shawcross A, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2016; 51:491-7) . Aim: To assess the practical applicability and accuracy of this method in vivo. Method: Healthy controls (infants without respiratory disease already undergoing a procedure requiring sedation), and infants with cystic fibrosis are undergoing MBW testing using this method. Practical applicability of the system is determined by the number of successful LCI tests and within-subject repeatability. Comparison will also be made with LCI measurements obtained using a respiratory mass spectrometer, currently considered the gold standard for infant LCI measurement. Results: To date, 7 healthy controls (mean age 53 weeks) and one infant with CF (age 55 weeks) have successfully undergone LCI measurement using this method. Mean LCI in controls was 6.81 (range 5.79-7.91). Mean within-subject CV was 6%. In the infant with CF LCI was 7.45 (CV 4%). Conclusion: Preliminary data suggest this is a feasible and reproducible method of performing LCI in infants, with results falling within the normal range predicted from the mass spectrometer (Lum S, et al. Eur Respir J. 2013; 41:1371-7) and well within accuracy limits set by international guidelines (Robinson PD, et al. Eur Respir J. 2013; 41:507-22) . This could provide a more accessible alternative to previously described systems, avoiding the pitfalls associated with direct measurement of flow in infants. 1 1. Pediatrics, State Univ. of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA; 2. Biostatistics, State Univ. of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA Background: Lung clearance index (LCI) is a measure of ventilation inhomogeneity based on tidal breathing, is increased in people with cystic fibrosis (CF) compared to normal subjects (Subbarao P, et al. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2015; 12:392-9) . and has been shown to improve (decrease) after treatment for CF pulmonary exacerbations (Robinson PD, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2009; 44:733-42) . Forced maneuvers generate FEV 1 % predicted, which usually improves (increases) during the same treatment period (Horsley AR, et al. Thorax. 2013; 68:532-9) ; however, the expected inverse correlation in FEV 1 % predicted and LCI is not always seen (Sonneveld N, et al. Eur Respir J. 2015; 46:1055-64) . Patient satisfaction with LCI has not been previously reported. We aimed to compare the change in LCI to the change in FEV 1 % predicted before and after treatment for CF pulmonary exacerbation and to compare patient satisfaction with LCI compared to standard pulmonary function testing (PFT). Methods: For this exploratory study, a convenience sample of subjects > age 7 y, consecutively admitted to Women and Children's Hospital of Buffalo performed spirometry, plethysmography and LCI (in that order) at the beginning and end of hospitalization for CF pulmonary exacerbation after informed consent (and assent, when indicated) was obtained. Lung function tests were performed at least in duplicate. Satisfaction with testing was assessed with a five-item questionnaire for each test at the beginning and end of hospitalization (1 = greatest satisfaction, 5 = least satisfaction) and a mean score was generated. Basic demographic information was collected. Paired t-tests and Pearson's correlation coefficient were used to compare data. Results: 25 patients with CF (9-25 y) were enrolled between August 2014 and October 2015. 39% were F508del homozygotes and 48% were F508del heterozygotes; 57% grew Pseudomonas and 39% grew MRSA in sputum cultures. There were 23 unique subjects in the study (2 consented during 2 different hospitalizations), and 21 complete data sets. One subject withdrew consent before testing, one withdrew due to sinus pain after one LCI maneuver. Two subjects performed LCI at the beginning but not at end of hospitalization; their satisfaction data was still counted (one had vomiting before discharge test maneuvers and one did not want to participate on the discharge test). The time between tests was 8.7 d (range 5-15 d). There was an average decline in LCI of 1.5 units (± 1.16, p <0.01 ) and an increase in FEV 1 % predicted of 10.1% (± 9.6, p< 0.01). There was a moderate inverse relationship between mean change in LCI and mean change in FEV 1 % predicted (r= -0.43, p<0.01) . There was better satisfaction with LCI vs PFT (average mean score 1.7 vs 2.8, indicating greater ease of performing test (p < 0.01); patients reported less cough and trouble breathing performing LCI as compared to PFT. Conclusions: LCI testing was well tolerated by children and young adults with CF. We found a moderate inverse correlation between LCI and FEV 1 %, however satisfaction with ease of testing was higher with LCI than with standard PFT. Huynh, H.Q. 1 ; Bhakta, Z.N. 1 ; Gurgel, R. 2 ; Young, D.C. 1  Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder that can lead to chronic bacterial colonization resulting in inflammation and destruction of the respiratory tract. Cystic fibrosis patients suffer from recurrent episodes of deterioration called acute pulmonary exacerbations (APE). Treatment of an APE includes IV antibiotic therapy, airway clearance therapy, and exercise. Aminoglycosides (AG) are frequently used to treat common pathogens associated with an APE (eg, Pseudomonas aeruginosa), which have been known to cause ototoxicity. Currently there are no specific guideline recommendations on screening for aminoglycoside-induced ototoxicity. The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) guidelines recommend periodic assessments for ototoxicity, but do not provide specific recommendations on the types and frequency of audiology screening. Objective: The primary objective of this study is to characterize the audiology screening practices at CFF-accredited pediatric and adult care centers in patients receiving AG therapy for an APE. Our study will also assess the need for a standardized audiology screening practice guideline. In addition, we will develop an audiology screening protocol at the University of Utah. Method: A retrospective case series was performed at the University of Utah to assess the frequency of audiology screening performed in CF patients receiving aminoglycosides for an APE. In order to characterize audiology screening practices across the United States, a survey was created via REDCap™ and was e-mailed to all CFF-accredited care center medical directors or designated representatives. Recipients of the survey had an 8-week period to complete the survey, with reminder e-mails sent out every 2 weeks. Result: The results of the retrospective case series demonstrated the rate of audiology screening at the University of Utah was approximately 3%. The response rate of the CFF-accredited care center survey was 45% (n=54). Routine audiology screening was performed at approximately 26% (n=14) of the responding care centers, with 9 centers having a protocol. The frequency of audiology screening varied between annual, after every 2 to 4 courses of AG use, after every course of AG use, or at least annually if the patient has been admitted for an APE. The majority of the responding care centers performed high-frequency pure-tone audiometry (60%; n=9). Approximately 79% (n=42) of the responding care centers believe there is a need for standardized audiology screening practice guideline in CF patients receiving AG. Survey results were used to develop a protocol for audiology screening at the University of Utah, which was implemented in May 2016. Conclusion: Audiology screening at CFF-accredited care centers for CF patients receiving aminoglycoside therapy during an APE occurs at a low rate. There is a wide variability in types and frequencies of audiology tests performed at CFF-accredited care centers. A high percentage of responding CFF-accredited care centers believed there should be a clinical practice guideline for audiology screening in CF patients who have received AG for an APE. Broder, M.S. 1 ; Chang, E. 1 ; Reddy, S.R. 1 ; Raimundo, K. 2 ; Holden, M. 2 1. Partnership for Health Analytic Research, LLC, Beverly Hills, CA, USA; 2. Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, CA, USA Introduction: Dornase alfa has been shown to reduce the risk of respiratory infections and improve pulmonary function in patients with CF. The recommended dosage of dornase alfa is once-daily (QD), although certain CF patients may benefit from a twice-daily (BID) regimen. Little is known about how patients treated with QD or BID regimens differ. Methods: This retrospective descriptive analysis of de-identified commercial insurance claims data examined characteristics of patients with CF (ICD-9-CM: 277.0x) on BID vs QD dornase alfa regimens in the identification (ID) period (1/1/2009 -10/31/2011) . We compared patients starting BID use to continuous users of QD dornase alfa. The first fill date of either BID or QD use in the ID period was defined as the index date. Patients not continuously enrolled in the 3 months before (baseline) or after (follow-up) the index date were excluded. New vs continuous users were determined based on baseline medication use. Patient demographics, comorbidities, respiratory exacerbations, and treatment exposure (over 1 year) were compared between study groups. The database has no clinical variables, so exacerbations were defined as CF-related hospitalizations or emergency department visits or use of IV/oral antibiotics. The analysis was repeated for the subset of patients ≥ 21 years old. Results: We identified 170 BID and 175 QD users. Mean (SD) age for BID users was 24 years (14.1) vs 15.5 years (11.5, P<.001) for those on a QD regimen. There were no imbalances in gender or geographic region between BID and QD users. BID users had a Charlson Comorbidity Index of 1.8 (1.8) vs 1.1 (1.5) for QD users (P<.001). Rates of comorbidities were (BID vs QD): diabetes (17.1% vs 6.9%, P<0.01), pancreatic insufficiency (71.2% vs 91.4%, P<.001), Pseudomonas infection (55.3% vs 38.9%, P<0.01), gastroesophageal reflux (14.1% vs 10.9%, P=0.359), chronic sinusitis (32.4% vs 12.0%, P<.001), malnutrition (9.4% vs 7.4%, P=0.507), osteoporosis (1.8% vs 1.1%, P=0.681), and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (4.7% vs 0.6%, P=0.018). Baseline exacerbation rates were 69.4% (BID) and 61.7% (QD, P=0.133), and the mean number of exacerbations among patients with exacerbation was 2.4 (3.5) and 1.4 (1.7, P<.001), respectively. Three-month follow-up exacerbation rates were 62.4% (BID) and 66.9% (QD, P=0.382), and the respective mean numbers of exacerbations among patients with exacerbation were 2.2 (4.2) and 1.4 (1.6, P=0.021) . Annual mean (SD) days supply filled for each regimen was 132.5 (109.9, BID) vs 286.6 (91.3, QD) (P=<.001). Results for patients ≥ 21 years were similar. Conclusion: On average BID dornase alfa users were older than QD users and had higher rates of most comorbidities, including diabetes, Pseudomonas infection, and chronic sinusitis, and lower rates of pancreatic insufficiency. Overall exposure to QD treatment was about twice as long as BID treatment. Between-group differences in rates of respiratory exacerbations were not statistically significant in baseline or follow-up. Introduction: Ventilation distribution outcomes obtained from the multiple breath washout technique (MBW) are sensitive to structural lung damage, infection and inflammation in young children with cystic fibrosis (CF). The impact of respiratory symptoms on ventilation distribution outcomes, including lung clearance index (LCI), are unknown. We assessed the associations between recent respiratory symptoms and hospital admissions on ventilation distribution outcomes in young children with CF Methods: Children with CF, aged 3 to 10 years, were recruited from within the AREST CF clinical trial (Perth and Melbourne) and the CF clinic of Riley Children's Hospital, Indianapolis. Ventilation distribution outcomes, including LCI, the 1st and 2nd moment ratios (MR1, MR2), and measures of convection-dependent inhomogeneity and convection-interaction-dependent inhomogeneity (S cond and S acin , respectively) were measured. Hospital admissions in the last 3 months and recent (last month) and current respiratory symptoms were documented. The impact of the presence (binary; yes/no) of hospital admission and common symptoms (cough, cold, sputum) on ventilation distribution was assessed. Changes in MBW and symptoms outcomes over repeated visits were assessed using mixed effects models with random intercepts for repeated visits. Results: Paired MBW and respiratory symptom data were available in 138 visits in 77 children (43 male) with CF [mean (range) age 6.4 (2.8-10.3) years]. Children with current cough (n=63 visits) had an increased LCI (coefficient 0.49; 95% CI: 0.05, 0.93; p=0.029) and MR2 (0.81; 0.01, 1.62; p=0.049), with unchanged MR1, S cond and S acin , compared to children without cough. Cough in the last month (n=77) was associated with increased LCI (0.64; 0.21, 1.08; p=0.004), MR2 (0.96; 0.17, 1.75; p=0.018) and S cond (0.01; 0.00, 0.02; p=0.05) compared to children without recent cough. Current cold symptoms were associated with increased S acin (0.29; 0.08, 0.51; p=<0.01) while current sputum production was associated with worse S cond (0.02; 0.01, 0.03; p=0.04). Hospital admission in the past 3 months was associated with significantly increased LCI (1.29; 0.53, 2.04; p=0 .001), MR1 (0.24; 0.10, 0.39; p=0.001) and MR2 (2.12; 0.83, 3.41; p=0 .001) with S cond and S acin unchanged. Conclusion: Children with CF presenting with cough or recent hospital admissions have significantly worse ventilation distribution outcomes. The ability of ventilation distribution outcomes predict exacerbations or monitor treatment needs to be assessed. Introduction: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a recognized complication of advanced lung disease in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The exact prevalence is unknown given the invasive nature of cardiac catheterization; the gold standard method of diagnosing PAH. Early detection and management of PAH could improve outcomes in CF patients. The diameter of the main pulmonary artery (mPA) and the ascending aorta (Ao) can be readily measured on chest CT scans where both an enlarged mPA and an increased mPA:Ao ratio have been associated with PAH. In adults, the cut-off for the mPA:Ao ratio in healthy subjects has been found to be 1, with ratio exceeding 1 being indicative of PAH. Recent data from our institution suggest that the upper limit of normal for this ratio is higher in children than in adults (1) . Objectives: To define the prevalence of PAH in pediatric CF patients based on measurements of the mPA:Ao ratio on chest CT scans using age-appropriate reference data and to assess the relationship between the mPA:Ao ratio and lung function in CF. Methods: A retrospective study of CF patients under the age of 18 years who underwent chest CT scan testing as part of their clinical evaluation and management at the CF clinic at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto between January 2005 to January 2015. Clinical characteristics, pulmonary function tests, and chest CT scans were recorded; for pulmonary function testing the best available FEV1 value within three months of the CT scan was used for analysis. The mPA diameter and the aortic (Ao) diameter were measured at the level of the bifurcation from the same chest CT scan as described before (1). Measurements were independently performed by two pediatric radiologists blinded to the pulmonary function results. Results: A total of 30 patients were identified in whom chest CT scans were performed for clinical indications in this time period. The mean age (SD) for the patient group was 10 (3.9) years. The mean FEV1 for the group was 69.6 (23.9)% predicted. The mean (SD) mPA:Ao ratio in CF patients was 1.01 (0.16; range 0.66-1.33). Using the adult cut-off for the mPA:Ao ratio of >1, 15 of the 30 patients (50%) would have met criteria for PAH. However, when the age-appropriate cut-off ratio of >1.09 used, 11 of the 30 patients (36%) were found to be positive. Using linear regression analysis, no association was observed between the mPA:Ao ratio and age (p=0.52). Similarly, the mPA:Ao ratio showed no significant correlation with FEV1 percent predicted (p=0.72). Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first study assessing the relationship between the mPA:Ao ratio (as a surrogate for PAH) and lung function (FEV1) in pediatric CF patients. Age appropriate referenced data reduce the prevalence of an increased mPA:Ao ratio; whether the mPA:Ao ratio predicts subsequent clinical outcomes requires further investigation. Reference: Compton GL, et al. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2015; 205:1322-5. We have demonstrated increased respiratory rates and altered breathing patterns during sleep in children with CF compared to healthy controls that are independent of age, BMI, and lung function. With advanced CF lung disease, the work of breathing contributes significantly to pulmonary cachexia. We previously assessed the effect of High Flow Nasal Insufflation (HFNI) on respiratory patterns in children with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and found that HFNI reduced respiratory rate and effort during sleep. The purpose of this study was to assess the effect of HFNI during quiet wakefulness and sleep in individuals with advanced CF lung disease. Hypothesis: We hypothesize that in individuals with CF, sleep imposes increased cardiorespiratory loads that are alleviated with HFNI. Methods: During polysomnography (PSG), we analyzed cardiorespiratory loads and gas exchange in quiet wakefulness and NREM sleep during brief trials with HFNI turned on at 20 L/min and off alternating over 5 to 10 minutes. Changes in respiratory rate (f), tidal volume, oxygen saturation (SaO 2 ), transcutaneous CO 2 (tcCO 2 ), and pulse rate were compared on and off HFNI. In this case series, three participants underwent PSG with alternating on/off HFNI trials. Mean age was 17.7±1.2 years. Mean FEV 1 was 41±24% predicted. Mean BMI (z-score) was 20±2.4 kg/m 2 (-0.51±0.89). Mean percentage of NREM sleep time was 91±8.8%. Mean AHI was 0.1±0.2 events/hr, indicating that none of the participants had OSA. All subjects showed moderate to severe tachypnea during quiet wakefulness (mean f=22±5 breaths/min) that increased during NREM sleep (mean f=27±6 breaths/min), consistent with our previously published findings. There was a 50.9% decrease in mean tidal volume, a 2.2% decrease in mean SaO 2 , and a 2.2% increase in tcCO 2 from quiet wakefulness to NREM sleep. Compared to quiet wakefulness, HFNI decreased mean f by 11.1%, reduced mean pulse rate by 5.7%, and increased tidal volume by nearly twofold during NREM sleep. Moreover, HFNI increased SaO 2 by 1.3% and decreased tcCO 2 by 10.9%. Conclusions: Our studies consistently demonstrate increased respiratory rate during sleep as a relevant disease biomarker. Individuals with severe CF lung disease exhibit increased cardiorespiratory loads during both quiet wakefulness and NREM sleep that are alleviated with HFNI during sleep. Furthermore, the use of HFNI to lessen cardiorespiratory loads during sleep may be associated with not only improvements in respiration and gas exchange, but also significant savings in the metabolic cost of breathing during sleep. Support: This work was supported in part by CFF (SMP, PARAN-J13A0) and NIH (HS, HL105546). Fischer, R. 1 ; Flume, P.A. 2 ; VanDevanter, D.R. 3 ; Polu, K. 4 ; Pecoraro, M. 4 ; Bhatt, N. 4 ; Elborn, J.S. Munich, Germany; 2. Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA; 3. Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA; 4. Raptor Pharmaceuticals, Novato, CA, USA; 5. Queen's University, Belfast, United Kingdom Objectives: Levofloxacin inhalation solution (LIS; Quinsair ® ) was recently approved by EMA for treatment of adults with cystic fibrosis and P. aeruginosa based on the results of a randomized, open-label, three 28-day on/off cycle non-inferiority comparison (MPEX-209) with tobramycin inhalation solution (TIS) in patients ≥12 years of age (Stuart EJ, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2015; 14:507-14) . Here we describe MPEX-209 efficacy results among patients ≥18 years that were the basis for LIS approval. Methods: Data from the MPEX-209 ≥18 y patient subgroup were studied. Least-squares (LS) mean differences in absolute change from baseline (BL) in forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) percent (%) predicted at end of "on-drug" visits were determined by ANCOVA adjusting for region and baseline FEV 1 (<55%, ≥55% predicted). Time to pulmonary exacerbation (PEx) defined either by a) antipseudomonal antibiotic (ABX) treatment; or b) ABX treatment in the presence of 1 of 4 worse respiratory symptoms were compared between treatment groups using Cox proportional hazards with terms for treatment, region, and baseline FEV 1 % predicted (<55%, ≥55%). (Figure) . Conclusions: Mean FEV 1 change from BL at the end of each 28-day treatment was greater for LIS than TIS patients, with statistically significant differences after the second and third treatment cycles. Adult patients receiving LIS were at lower hazard of PEx over the 24-week study. Introduction: Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) is a common pathogen in patients with CF and frequently the target of antibiotic therapy for pulmonary exacerbations (PEx). Standard of care is for clinicians to monitor sputum cultures to drive antibiotic choices. However, there is poor correlation between drug susceptibility test (DST) results and clinical outcome of treatment for PEx. Since 2015, our center has limited DST for PA to only once annually. The purpose of this study is to assess the impact of this change in practice on clinical outcomes in our patients. Methods: Prior to 2015 PA DST was performed routinely every 3 months on outpatient isolates and the first isolate after admission or upon request of clinicians. Since 2015, DST was limited to only the first isolate of the year. We evaluated the number of cultures and DST for PA as well as clinical outcomes of patients the year before and after this change in practice. We included adults and pediatric patients in our analysis. Results Objective: To assess whether children with CF and their providers can accurately estimate lung function. Methods: Children with CF seen in our center and CF providers were asked to qualitatively estimate their lung function in comparison to the prior visit (better/same/worse) and quantitatively estimate current FEV 1 immediately before performing spirometry. Qualitative assessments were compared to actual FEV 1 changes (better: FEV 1 >5% higher than prior; same: FEV 1 within ±5%; worse: FEV 1 >5% lower than prior). Quantitative assessments were compared to current FEV 1 (underestimate: estimate >5% lower than actual FEV 1 ; accurate: estimate within ±5% of FEV 1 ; overestimate: estimate >5% higher than FEV 1 ). We then explored factors associated with these categories. Results: A total of 107 CF patient/provider encounters were included (mean age [SD]=12.4 [2.8] years; 48.6% male). Patients thought their lung function was better than last visit ~49% of times, the same 37%, and worse 14%; for providers, numbers were 24%, 56%, and 20%. Agreement between qualitative estimate and actual category was low for patients (κ=0.17) and moderate for providers (κ=0.43); patients-provider agreement was also low (κ=0.27). Providers with more years of experience were better estimators (OR=1.06 [95%CI=1.01-1.12] p=0.028); none of the other covariates (patient age, sex, race, months since last visit, or year's best FEV 1 ) was associated with patient or provider accuracy. Mean actual FEV 1 was 90.6% (18.1), patient estimate 92.6% (17.3), and provider estimate 92.2% (17.6). Mean patient error was 2.1% (10) and mean provider error 1.7% (9.2). About 60% of patients were accurate estimators, 18% were underestimators, and 22% overestimators. For providers, numbers were 65%, 14%, and 21%. Patient-provider agreement was moderate (κ=0.34, see Table) . Longer visit interval was associated with greater error (patient β=2.3% [1.6-3.0] p<0.01; provider β=1.3% [0.6-2.1] p<0.01); experience was associated with slightly lower provider error (β=-0.16% [-0.31, -0 .01] p=0.03). In 5 cases (4.6%) both patient and provider underestimated FEV 1 ; in 12 cases (11.2%) both overestimated FEV 1 ("high risk" group). Longer interval between visits showed a nonsignificant trend towards higher odds of being in the "high risk" group (OR=1.31 [0.95-1.83] p=0.09). Conclusions: CF patients' and providers' perception of lung function is low to moderately accurate at best. Relying on subjective impression may place ~5% of patients at risk of unnecessary treatments, and ~11% of patients at high risk for increased morbidity. Longer visit interval was associated with higher risk of overestimating lung function. These findings highlight the importance of frequent objective lung function assessment rather than relying on patients' or providers' subjective impressions. . Azithromycin use has been associated with electrocardiographic abnormalities including QTc prolongation, particularly when taken in combination with other QTc prolonging drugs (QTPD) (Albert RK, et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014; 189:1173-80; Kezerashvili A, et al. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2007; 18:243-6) . CF patients may be at increased risk of QTc prolongation and ventricular arrhythmias (VA) due to CAT, with or without the administration of additional QTPD often prescribed during treatment of CF pulmonary exacerbations. Methods: We performed a retrospective review of telemetry recordings and medication use in CF patients admitted to a tertiary care medical center in 2014. CF patients with at least one telemetry recording during hospitalization were included in the study. The longest recorded QTc interval value was collected. Patient demographics, CAT at admission, and inpatient QTPD use were collected from the electronic medical record. Our primary objective was to evaluate differences in QTc interval in patients on CAT vs those not on CAT. Our secondary objectives were to evaluate the incidence of VA for patients on CAT vs those not on CAT, and the influence of additional nonazithromycin QTPD on QTc. Results: We identified telemetry recordings from 40 CF patients with 57 hospitalizations in the year 2014. The study cohort was 48% male (n=19) with a mean age of 37 years (±13; range 21-65 years). The mean length of hospital-stay was 12 days (±6.3), and average length of telemetry was 5.4 days (±4.7). Patients were taking CAT on admission in 46% of hospital encounters (n=26). Only one patient had CAT discontinued at admission. Other QTPD commonly used in the cohort included ondansetron (63.2%), azole antifungals (24.6%), and fluoroquinolones (22%). There was no significant difference in the longest recorded QTc interval in patients on CAT vs those not on CAT (443 ± 29ms vs 443 ± 31ms, respectively; p=0.997). In a generalized linear model (GLM), there was no significant association between age, sex, or CAT with longest QTc (p=0.487; p=0.058; p=0.523 respectively). However, in a GLM assessing total number of QTPD (including CAT; range 0-6), after adjusting for age and sex there was a significant association with longest QTc interval (β=7.3; 95% CI=1.3-13.2; p=0.017). Six arrhythmias were noted in 6 patients during the study period, including 5 episodes of nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (ranging 5-19 beats) and 1 episode of atrial fibrillation. There was no significant difference in the incidence of VAs for patients on CAT (n=3) vs those not on CAT (n=2) (p>0.05). Conclusion: Physicians are routinely faced with the question of discontinuing CAT when prescribing other QTPD to CF patients. Our findings demonstrate no significant difference in QTc based on CAT, however the cumulative number of QTPD should be monitored with caution. Future multicenter studies should be considered to validate these findings. Objectives: CF patients are exposed to repeated x-ray and computed tomography (CT) examinations which may be problematic due to the cumulative radiation dose. Lung magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) appears as a promising alternative to CT and new methods such as ultrashort echo time (UTE) MRI have improved lung imaging quality. To avoid motion corruption of the images, breath holding or prospective gating of the acquisition to end expiration is usually used. Breath hold duration limits the acquisition duration and spatial coverage or resolution. Retrospective gating allows reconstruction of images in multiple phases of the respiratory cycle. In this work, we studied a new method to retrospectively sort the data acquired during free breathing to obtain whole-lung coverage with a high isotropic spatial resolution. Diagnostic performance of this new MRI technique was compared to that of CT. Methods: A 3D UTE MRI sequence was used to acquire data during free breathing in 6 adult CF patients for which CT images were available (CT acquired 1±1 year before MRI). A self-gating method was used to reconstruct motion-suppressed images (1.3 mm isotropic spatial resolution) at both end-expiration and end-inspiration. For each subject the Helbich-Bhalla score was determined using the end-inspiration MRI data and CT data independently. Spearman's ρ, intraclass correlation for consistency (ICC) and mean percentage error were computed. Results: The average MRI data acquisition duration was 15±1 min. Severity of bronchiectasis and peribronchial wall thickening could be well assessed on MRI images. Helbich-Bhalla scores were well correlated between both modalities (ρ = 0.72). Consistency between both methods was moderate (ICC = 0.49). This may be linked to the fact that average scores were 12% lower using MRI compared to CT. In this preliminary report, encouraging correlations between UTE MRI and CT were observed for the assessment of proximal and distal airway disorders without requiring any breath holding or gating hardware for MRI examination. The Helbich-Bhalla scores computed using MRI were on average lower than with CT but comparison is delicate because of the long time interval between both examinations (1 year on average). and colistimethate sodium (COLI) via nebulizers is complex and time consuming. Although treatment burden with nebulized therapies is documented, no clinical studies on ease of use of inhaled antibiotics have been performed to date. This study compared the ease of use of tobramycin inhalation powder (TIP) administered via T-326 inhaler with TIS or COLI, both administered via nebulizers, for treating chronic pulmonary Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). This was an open-label, crossover, interventional Phase IV study of approximately 20-week duration, consisting of a screening visit (Visit 1), cycle 1 (Visits 2 and 3), and cycle 2 (Visits 4, 5, and 6). CF patients aged ≥6 years with FEV 1 ≥25% to ≤90% of normal predicted values were assigned to 1 of 3 treatment arms (COLI/TIP; TIS/TIP; TIP/ TIP) in cycle 1 based on patient's usual inhaled antibiotic treatment. All patients were crossed over to receive TIP in cycle 2. Each cycle consisted of a 28-day on-treatment period followed by a 28-day off-treatment period. The study primarily compared the total administration time (time required to set up the device, administer the drug, and clean the device) of TIP via T-326 inhaler to that of TIS or COLI via nebulizers. Treatment satisfaction was evaluated by Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire for Medication (TSQM) and Chronic Treatment Acceptance (ACCEPT) questionnaire. Safety parameters were also assessed. Results: A total of 60 patients (mean [SD] age, 27.6 [8.40] years) were assigned to treatment arms as follows: TIS/TIP (n=14); COLI/TIP (n=28); TIP/TIP (n=18). The mean total administration time in cycle 1 vs cycle 2 for TIS/TIP, COLI/TIP, and TIP/TIP arms was 37.0 min vs 5.0 min, 16.4 min vs 3.8 min, and 4.2 min vs 3.4 min, respectively. The difference in mean total administration time was significantly shorter in cycle 2 (after crossover to TIP) than in cycle 1 for TIS/TIP (-32.7 min, P=0.0112) and COLI/TIP (-13.3 min, P=0.0016) arms. The median TSQM scores for the convenience domain were high (TIS/TIP, 63.9; COLI/TIP, 61.1; TIP/TIP, 77.8) at cycle 1 and were either improved (TIS/TIP, 77.8; COLI/TIP, 83.3) or sustained (TIP/TIP, 77.8) at cycle 2. The scores for the ACCEPT questionnaire followed a similar pattern. Treatment-related adverse events in cycles 1 and 2 were reported in 4 and 8 patients, respectively; majority of which were mild or moderate in intensity. Conclusion: The significantly lower administration/cleaning time and improved TSQM/ACCEPT scores suggest that TIP is easy to use in CF patients treated for pulmonary P. aeruginosa infection. The safety results observed for TIP in this study were generally consistent with its established safety profile. Study was sponsored by Novartis Pharma AG. Background: Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a sensorimotor disorder and a clinical diagnosis characterized by an urge to move legs, or other body parts that begins, or worsens during rest or inactivity, is relieved by movement, and occurs primarily in the evening. The prevalence is 7-11% in the generalized population, but higher in chronic medical conditions like rheumatological disorders and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Iron deficiency, and dysfunctions in iron metabolism and dopamine regulation are hypothesized to play a role in the disease pathogenesis. Cystic fibrosis (CF) leads to multisystem disease including chronic inflammatory lung disease. RLS has a wide range of severity from mere annoyance to severe enough disturbance in sleep and quality of life to warrant treatment. Sleep complaints are common in CF patients. To date, RLS symptoms and prevalence have not been extensively investigated in the CF population. Objective: To evaluate the prevalence and severity of RLS in patients with CF and to investigate the factors associated with RLS among adults with CF. Methods: A total of 75 adult patients with CF and 75 control participants without CF were enrolled. The RLS survey was administered by a single member of the research team who is a board-certified sleep physician. A diagnosis of RLS was made according to the International RLS Study Group (IRLSSG) criteria. Study subjects with 4/4 criteria were classified as definitive RLS. Significant RLS was defined as symptoms occurring more than twice per week and with at least moderate distress. Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS) was used to assess excessive daytime somnolence. Risk factors evaluated included: lung function at the time of enrollment (%FEV1), CFTR genotype, age, sputum microbiology, antibiotic use days in the preceding year, presence of CF-related diabetes (CFRD), hemoglobin A1c, serum hemoglobin, vitamin D level, age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and family history of RLS. Results: RLS was significantly more prevalent in CF patients than in controls (36% vs. 14.7%; p = 0.0027). This significance was maintained when controlling for BMI, age, sex, ESS score, and RLS family history. Of those with RLS, 26% had significant symptoms compared to none in the control group. There was a trend towards increased antibiotic use days, and lower BMI and lung function in those with significant RLS, but these did not reach statistical significance. Among covariants analyzed, sputum microbiology, CFTR mutation type, CFRD, vitamin D levels, and hemoglobin did not predict for the development of RLS. Multivariate logistic regression of all subjects showed that ESS score was the only factor predictive of RLS after adjusting for covariates and CF status. Conclusions: RLS is highly prevalent in CF patients, adds to the disease burden, and should be specifically investigated as part of overall management to improve quality of life. Our data from a single center suggest that significant RLS is more prevalent in CF, and may be associated with advanced disease. Larger studies from multiple CF sites are needed to adequately power for analysis of those with RLS with significant symptoms. Conrad, D.J. Medicine, UC San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA Introduction: Modeling lung function over time in CF is important to assess severity of acute illness and disease risk. Spirometry is easy to obtain, reproducible and poses minimal risks to the patient. Linear modeling of lung function and generation of lung function quantiles have been useful in assessing genomic/genetic disease risk. However, linear modeling is less useful in studies that require short-term modeling of lung function such as metabolomics and metagenomic investigations. We modeled FEV1 changes with median quantile splines, captured the variation in these splines using 9 variables and then created lung function dynamic phenotypes. Methods: All subjects followed in the adult CF clinic (n=177) who signed consent and had more than 4 spirometry studies during calendar years 2012-14 were included in the study. A median quantile spline was fitted for each patient (R package qsreg). For each spline, the period between the first and most recent FEV1 was divided into 1000 intervals. The values of the median spline as well as the first and second derivative were calculated for each of these intervals. For each patient the following variables were calculated: a) the effective degrees of freedom of the spline; b) the number of local maxima and minima of the spline, first derivative and second derivative; c) the range between the 5th and 95th percentile values of the spline, first derivative and second derivative; d) the median value of the first and second derivatives. After correlating these 9 variables with clinical parameters, classes of the dynamic lung function variables were created and correlated with clinical phenotypes using published protocols (Conrad DJ, Bailey BA. PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0122705). These were then correlated to physiological, clinical variables and clinical phenotypes. Results: In many subjects, the median quantile spline identified shortterm variation in lung function that resulted from important clinical events. None of the nine individual lung function dynamic variables correlated significantly with demographic or clinical variables such as (FEV1, height, weight, BMI, age, gender etc.). FEV1 dynamic classes were then generated with these nine variables forming 3 groups with classification error rates of about 10%. This strategy identified stable, intermediate and hypervariable FEV1 dynamic phenotypes. The stable FEV1 dynamic phenotype was seen more frequently than expected in a CF clinical phenotype D which is a male-dominated phenotype with excellent lung function and nutritional status. The intermediate and hypervariable phenotypes were seen in two female-dominated clinical phenotype groups with either good lung function (clinical phenotype C) and worse FEV1 (clinical phenotype E). Phenotype C is clinically unstable and these patients have a low incidence of Pseudomonas and higher incidence of combined MSSA and Aspergillus airway infections. Conclusions: Nonlinear modeling of FEV1 using median quantile splines is more useful in picking up clinically relevant short-term variation of lung function compared to standard linear modeling. Furthermore, creating classes of lung function dynamic variables identified stable and hypervariable phenotypes and was very useful in further characterizing published clinical phenotypes. Collins, N. 1 ; Steele, L. 1 ; Irving, S. 2 ; Carr, S.B. 2 ; Davies, J.C. 2, 3 1. Physiotherapy, Royal Brompton Hosp, London, United Kingdom; 2. Paediatric Respiratory Medicine, Royal Brompton Hosp, London, United Kingdom; 3. Gene Therapy, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom Background: Early detection of organisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) in CF is essential for successful eradication. Detection, however, is difficult in nonexpectorating children as it relies largely on cough swabs (C/S) with suboptimal sensitivity and specificity (UK Cystic Fibrosis Trust Antibiotic Working Group, 2009, 3rd ed) . C/S are also not very useful in detecting nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) (Ahmed B, et al. Arch Dis Child. 2012; 97:854-5) . Sputum induction (SI) has been found to be safe, feasible, and have a higher rate of positive bacterial culture than same-day C/S (Jochmann A, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015; doi:10.1002/ ppul.23366) . We are increasingly using SI in nonexpectorating children both to detect infection and assess the response to an eradication intervention. Objectives: To compare culture results from SI and same day C/S and assess impact on treatment decisions. Methods: Children with CF were referred for SI if: a) infection was suspected despite negative C/S cultures, or b) to confirm if eradication treatment was successful. After C/S and bronchodilator, 7% hypertonic saline was nebulised via an ultrasonic Ultraneb (DeVilbiss Healthcare) for 15 min. Spirometry was performed pre-, post-and at 5-min intervals throughout inhalation in children old enough to perform the maneuver. O 2 saturation was monitored and auscultation performed. Sputum was collected. Children unable to expectorate received an oropharyngeal (OP) suction. Samples were sent for microscopy, culture and sensitivity, fungal and AFB analysis. Results: 85 patients, mean age 9.1y (range 1.3-15.9y), 34 male, completed SI. 68 were old enough to perform spirometry and had a median FEV 1 of -1.79 z scores (79%) (range -5.74 (25%) -1.48 (118%)). 59/85 (69%) patients managed to expectorate sputum during SI and 26/85 (31%) received OP suction. 54 patients were referred due to reason a) and 31 were referred due to reason b) above. 35 patients (41%) had positive bacterial, fungal or NTM growth on SI (PA 11, S. aureus 9, Aspergillus 7, NTM 9, other bacteria 7; 8 patients grew > 1 organism on SI) of whom only 3 (9%) grew the same organism on the preceding C/S. 1 patient had a positive C/S but negative SI. The result of the SI informed clinical management in 40/85 (47%) patients. 24 patients were referred for SI to check for eradication of PA (grown on a previous C/S) following treatment. 21/24 (88%) were clear of PA on SI and remained negative as determined by C/S at 3 months. 2/24 (8%) were clear of PA on SI but regrew it within 3 months, 1/24 (4%) grew PA on SI and in both situations had to recommence treatment or be admitted for IV antibiotic therapy. Conclusion: SI has a higher rate of positive culture than same-day C/S and can identify NTM which cannot be obtained from a C/S. No growth on SI is a good predictor of successful eradication of PA following antibiotic therapy at 3 months. SI is thus a useful test and should be incorporated into the clinical management armory for both the deteriorating patient and after eradication therapy having informed clinical management in almost half of the patients referred. Introduction: Pulmonary exacerbations are common in children with CF and are frequently treated in the outpatient setting with oral antibiotics. There are limited data detailing characteristics of these exacerbations and changes that occur with oral antibiotics. We sought to prospectively determine changes in lung function and sputum bacterial colony counts in a cohort of children with CF treated with oral antibiotics in the outpatient setting for a pulmonary exacerbation. Methods: Patients ages 8-18 years prescribed oral antibiotics for a pulmonary exacerbation were enrolled. Subjects were seen for the first visit within 48 hours of starting antibiotics. Spirometry, pre-and post-bronchodilator, was performed and a sputum sample, expectorated or induced, was obtained for quantitative microbiology and viral testing. All subjects completed two weeks of oral antibiotics. A second visit was performed within one week of completing antibiotics and spirometry and quantitative sputum microbiology were repeated. We intend to capture pre-and post-exacerbation data from 30 subjects. Results: To date, 22 patients [median age (range) = 14 y (8-18 y); 13M: 9F], have been enrolled and completed pre-and post-antibiotic study visits. The median baseline FEV 1 based on the highest FEV 1 in the 6 months prior to the first visit, was 95% predicted, which is comparable to the median FEV 1 for patients 6 to 17 years of age at our CF center (95.2%). At exacerbation onset, the median FEV 1 for this cohort was 84% predicted, representing a median decrease in FEV 1 of 10% predicted prior to antibiotic therapy (range: -45% to 4%, p <0.01). FEV 1 improved by a median of 10% predicted (range: -8% to 31%, p < 0.01) at completion of treatment. FEV 1 percent predicted did not improve to 95% or greater of baseline FEV 1 values in 7 out of 21 subjects (95% CI: 13.2-53.5%). Viruses were identified in 8 subjects (36% of samples, 95% CI: 16.3-56.5%). The primary bacteria identified on sputum culture were methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (50%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (36%), methicillin-resistant S. aureus (23%), and Haemophilus influenzae (9%). Quantitative microbiology culture results are available for fifteen subjects at the two time points. In these subjects, density of the dominant-detected bacteria decreased by 0.82 log 10 cfu/mL (-8 log 10 to 2 log 10 , p=0.07). Conclusions: Treatment of pulmonary exacerbations with outpatient antibiotics was associated with improvement in FEV 1 . The median improvement is similar to a previously reported study of exacerbations treated with IV antibiotics (Sanders DB, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2010; 45:127-34) . Onethird of patients did not improve to within 95% of baseline FEV 1 , which is similar to those that failed to return to baseline FEV 1 with IV antibiotics (23.1%) (Sanders DB, et al). There is a trend to suggest a decrease in bacterial density. However, the range is large suggesting wide variability in antibiotic response. Lindblad, A. 3 ; Rosberg, M. 2 ; Gustafsson, P. 1 1. Dept of Pediatrics, Kärnsjukhuset, Skövde, Sweden; 2. Clinical Physiology, Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden; 3. Dept of Pediatrics, Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden Background: Nitrogen multiple breath washout (N 2 MBW) can now be performed with commercial equipment (Exhalyzer D, Eco Medics) in children from age 6 years and above but has not been evaluated in children below 3 years. Methods: N 2 MBW and SF 6 MBW using mass-spectrometry were performed in 26 children (age 1.45 (0.65) years with CF, bronchopulmonary dysplasia or oesophageal atresia. N 2 MBW was undertaken with or without priming with 30% O 2 before N 2 MBW. Chlorate hydrate 70-90 mg/kg was used for sedation. A mean of three washouts was aimed for at each testing. The lung clearance index (LCI) was used to assess ventilation distribution efficiency. Both equipment had similar pre+postcapillary dead space (DS) with no filters used of 4.5 and 5.5 mL respectively. Results: Mean (SD) LCI for SF 6 was 7.20 (0.84) while LCI N 2 was 9.10 (1.72) (p<0.001). FRCSF 6 and FRCN 2 did not differ significantly different (195 (49) mL vs 201 (56) mL). Tidal volumes while using 100% O 2 as washout gas were significantly lower compared to using SF 6 as tracer gas (72 (22) vs 83 (19) mL (p>0.01). CEV (SF 6 ) was 1.384 (0.398) L vs. CEV(N 2 ) of 1.846 (0.643) L (p<0.001). These differences did not change significantly with tidal volumes after priming with 30% O 2 being 74 (24) mL with LCI being even higher (9.45 (2.01)). Conclusion: N 2 MBW produces markedly higher LCI values than SF 6 MBW (approximately +2 units). Similar results were obtained after priming the child with 30% O 2 suggesting that this priming is not enough to normalize tidal breathing. Possible explanations might be release of tissue N 2 due to the relatively high cardiac output in young children, or smaller tidal volumes during pure oxygen breathing decreasing the alveolar ventilation and thereby increasing the number of breaths and CEV or a combination of both. Anderson, C. 1 ; Gao, Y. 1 ; Donnola, S. 2 ; Kavran, M. 2 ; Drumm, M.L. 3, 4 ; McBennett, K. 4, 5, 6 ; Darrah, R.M. 3, 7 ; Flask, C.A. 1, 2, 4 1. Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve Univ., Cleveland, OH, USA; 2. Radiology, Case Western Reserve Univ., Cleveland, OH, USA; 3. Genetics, Case Western Reserve Univ., Cleveland, OH, USA; 4. Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve Univ., Cleveland, OH, USA; 5. Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, Cleveland, OH, USA; 6. Medicine, Case Western Reserve Univ., Cleveland, OH, USA; 7. Nursing, Case Western Reserve Univ., Cleveland, OH, USA Background: Imaging has the potential to be a powerful tool in the care and monitoring of CF patients. Quantitative MRI holds promise as a safe, noninvasive method for performing measurements of lung disease. One major challenge for MRI in the lungs is artifacts caused by respiration motion. Manual breathholds are typically used to limit motion artifacts, but can be impractical in patients with advanced lung disease or in infants. Magnetic Resonance Fingerprinting (MRF), a novel quantitative MRI method, has demonstrated motion insensitivity in both clinical and preclinical applications (Ma D, et al. Nature. 2013; 495:187-92; Gao Y, et al. NMR Biomed. 2015; 28:384-94) . In this study, we evaluate the MRFbased dictionary matching process with respect to reducing the impact of respiratory motion artifacts in MRI quantification. Objective: To assess the impact of MRF-based dictionary matching on respiratory motion artifacts in T1 relaxation time estimation. Methods: Numerical simulations were used to model a conventional Inversion-Recovery Look-Locker (IR-LL) T1 relaxation time MRI acquisition using a numerical Shepp-Logan phantom. The simulated IR-LL MRI data were corrupted with respiratory motion "spikes" and stochastic noise to represent real lung MRI data. Quantitative T1 relaxation time maps were estimated using a dictionary-based matching process as well as a conventional least-squares error fit to the simulated data. Simulations were performed with respiratory motion artifacts alone or in combination with stochastic noise. The simulation experiment was repeated 50 times to calculate a mean and standard deviation of the T1 error for a range of T1 values. Results: With respiratory motion artifacts only, the dictionary match resulted in significantly reduced errors of 31.1±154.8 ms (<2.8%) compared to the standard exponential fit error of 148.6±100.7 ms (>12.9%) (p<0.0001). The combination of respiratory motion artifacts and noise resulted in larger errors for both estimation methods. However, the errors for the dictionary-based matching process remained smaller than for the exponential fit (T1 error = 137.8±186.8 ms (<12.0%) vs. 224±140.3 ms (>19.4%), p<0.001). Conclusions: This initial simulation study demonstrates that dictionary-based matching algorithms employed for Magnetic Resonance Fingerprinting result in significantly reduced errors from respiratory motion artifacts in comparison to conventional fitting techniques. These results are consistent with prior studies qualitatively describing the motion insensitivity of MRF. Importantly, these results suggest the opportunity of using a dictionary-based matching process for accurate quantification during free-breathing MRI studies which could directly limit the need for anesthesia in patients. Background: L/I improves lung function and reduces exacerbation frequency in patients homozygous for F508del; however, worsening respiratory symptoms have been reported in some individuals. In addition, there is a lack of data in patients with severe lung disease (predicted FEV 1 ≤40%). The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety and tolerability of L/I including patients with severe lung disease. Methods: This is a retrospective, single center, descriptive study of all patients who were started on L/I at USC/Keck CF Clinic. In clinic drug challenge and monitoring was performed by a pharmacist and respiratory therapist. Peak flows (PF) and Borg scores were performed at baseline and at periodic intervals after the challenge dose to assess for tolerability. Follow-up visits were performed for the assessment of any side effects. Results: A total of 28 patients were initiated on L/I at our center, 6 of which were initiated without observation. Median age was 31 years old, with 50% being males, and a median BMI of 22 kg/m 2 . Seven (25%) patients had FEV1%pred of ≤40, with 4 (66%) of these patients starting under an observed setting. Twelve (43%) patients subjectively noted slight increased work of breathing or chest tightness following the first Orkambi dose with improvement after albuterol administration. There was no observed change in the median peak flow or Borg score; however, five patients (18%) experienced PF reductions (range 4-12% decrease) and symptoms requiring albuterol administration. Increases in Borg scores (0. 5-1.5) were noted in 4 patients (14%). All patients went home with full dose or FDA-approved dosage adjustment based on DDIs or hepatic impairment. Ten (36%) patients have discontinued L/I, 3 (30%) of which were initial patients who started Orkambi and did not undergo any observed dosing. The other 7 (70%) patients discontinued due to: rash and swelling of the face, respiratory intolerance vs exacerbation, compliance to lab follow-up and appointments, increased anxiety, and 3 with persistent respiratory intolerance/tightness to lumacaftor/ivacaftor. Discontinuation of L/I was greatest in patients with severe lung disease (5 of 7 patients with FEV 1 ≤40%). In order to improve the tolerance of L/I we initiated slow dose titration in one patient and coadministration of prednisone in another. Both of these patients have since discontinued L/I due to respiratory intolerance/tightness. Conclusions: Subjective reports of adverse respiratory symptoms with the initiation of lumacaftor/ivacaftor, are common. Changes in peak flow or Borg score are uncommon suggesting symptoms are more subjective in nature and could be overcome with a slower dose titration or increased bronchodilator usage, particulary in those with severe lung disease. 1 1. Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Richmond, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA; 2. Chemical and Life Science Engineering, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA Rationale: Despite aggressive therapy for pulmonary exacerbations, the overall course of cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease is relentless progression. CF lung disease severity directly correlates with airway neutrophil elastase (NE) activity. The current paradigm is that sputum NE is decreased following treatment for pulmonary exacerbations. However, published reports demonstrate that inhaled dornase increases NE activity in CF sputum. Therefore, increased mucolytic therapy during treatment for pulmonary exacerbations may paradoxically increase NE activity promoting CF lung disease progression. Hypothesis: Despite clinical improvement of CF patients following treatment for pulmonary exacerbations, observed as increased FEV 1 and decreased sputum viscoelasticity, sputum NE activity may be increased. Methods: This is a retrospective study of nine CF subjects over ten hospitalizations. The subjects provided consent for participation in the VCU Sputum Biorepository. Sputum was collected and spirometry performed during hospital or home intravenous antibiotic therapy. Following removal of saliva, sputum aliquots were stored frozen at -80°C. Sputum was thawed and divided for rheology and biomarker analysis. Rheological analysis was performed on a DHR-3 stress-controlled rheometer (TA instruments) using a 2-mm aluminum parallel plate geometry at 25°C. The viscous (G'') and elastic (G') moduli at 1% strain and 1 rad/s were reported. For NE analysis, sputum was diluted with normal saline (1:1; W:V), mixed, incubated at 37°C for 2h, and centrifuged. NE activity was quantified in the supernatant by spectrophotometric assay using the NE substrate Suc-Ala-Ala-Pro-Val-P-nitroanalide. To test whether mucolytic or hyperosmolar therapies affect NE activity, additional sputum samples were diluted with normal saline with or without dornase alfa (0.01-0.3 mg/m:), or hypertonic saline (HS; 3.5 and 7% NaCl) or mannitol (3.5%) (W:V) and sputum supernatant NE activity was measured. To our knowledge the impact of hyperosmolar therapies, including HS and mannitol, on NE activity in sputum has not previously been reported. Results. There was a significant increase in FEV 1 % predicted and a significant decrease in G' and G" from admission to discharge. In five hospitalizations, there was an increase in NE activity; there was no change or a slight decrease in NE activity in the other patient samples. In vitro, sputum treatment with dornase and HS, but not mannitol, significantly increased NE activity. Conclusions. Our results suggest that therapy for pulmonary exacerbations may increase airway NE activity, resulting in an increased inflammatory load despite overall clinical improvement. In vitro assays demonstrate that dornase and HS increase NE activity in CF sputum. Therefore, we attribute the increase in NE activity at least in part to dornase and/or HS therapy. Our observations support the development of antiprotease and anti-inflammatory therapies for CF patients to protect lungs from unopposed NE activity. Supported by CFF VOYNOW15I0. Care Guidelines for children >6 years of age with evidence of moderate lung disease or chronic symptoms. The published guidelines for newborns diagnosed with CF support use of dornase alfa in symptomatic infants. The role of dornase alfa in asymptomatic infants with CF remains unclear and provides the basis for this retrospective analysis. Methods: Data were gathered from the charts of children currently aged 5-12 years at Nemours CF centers (n=65/96 included). Patients were grouped according to whether dornase alfa was initiated in asymptomatic infants <12 months (n=22/65) vs those with onset of symptoms at >12 months (n=43/65). Groups ± dornase alfa were compared based on measurements of lung function (FEV1), time to acquisition of P. aeruginosa (PA), or S. aureus-methicillin-sensitive (MSSA) and methicillin-resistant (MRSA) strains, time to first hospitalization and also total number of respiratory hospitalizations. The data (when available) are expressed as the mean ± SD and are compared by t-test. Results: FEV1 in children with early initiation of dornase alfa (FEV1=1.23L ± 0.24, n=11) was similar to those initiated at >12 months of age (FEV1=1.17L ± 0.25, n=30, p=0.07). Time to first acquisition of PA was similar in patients with early initiation of dornase alfa (29.6 mos ±26.7, n=18) vs those initiated >12 mos (34.7 months ±23.8. 4, n=30, p=0.25) . Time to first acquisition of MRSA was similar in patients with early initiation of dornase alfa (41.5 months ±24.7, n=6) vs those initiated >12 months (53.3 months ±22. 2, n=16, p=0.29) . Time to first acquisition of MSSA was seen earlier in patients with early initiation of dornase alfa (21.9 months ±22.6, n=17) vs those initiated >12 months (38.7 months ±28.4, n=37, p=0.04). BMI was similar between early initiation (51.5% ±28.4, n=22) vs those initiated >12 months (48.1% ±24.5, n=42, p=0.6). Time to first hospitalization was slightly increased following early initiation of dornase alfa (25 months ± 27.1, n=21) vs those with initiation >12 months (28 months ±34, n=42, p=0.06) and number of total hospitalizations was similar between both groups (2.6 ±3.3 (n=21) vs 1.6 ±2.7 (n=42), p=0.8). There were no safety concerns documented in patients receiving dornase alfa. Conclusions: Early initiation of dornase alfa in our centers did not improve FEV1, BMI, number of respiratory hospitalizations or prolong the time to acquisition of PA or MRSA compared with children in whom dornase alfa was started when symptoms arise. Interestingly, acquisition of MSSA was earlier when Dornase alfa was initiated at <12 months, but there was a trend towards increased time to first hospitalization. (4) Indeterminate. We extended this work by using a developmental dataset of 1200 patients randomly selected from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Patient Registry to guide construction of an algorithm for identifying IP in individuals that can be applied to large databases. Objective: To develop a computer algorithm capable of identifying the presence of an inflection point in the course of FEV 1 /FVC ratio over time in CF patients and classify them into the groups described above. Methods: After an iterative developmental process, we determined yearly best (YB) and personal best (PB) FEV 1 /FVC values best confirmed the patterns proposed by Menendez et al. IP was defined by: (a) starting YB FEV 1 /FVC values in the normal range; (b) ≥ 3 consecutive YB values observed that were > 2 population standard deviations below PB; (c) ≥ 2 YB values observed prior to these 3 consecutive points, with IP being defined as the last of these prior values. We then developed mathematical definitions of groups 1 -4. A piece-wise linear regression model with discontinuity was used to determine the pre-and post-IP rates of change in FEV 1 /FVC (slopes) in individual patients. Results: For group 1, the mean post-IP slope was significantly different from zero (p < 0.0001) while the mean pre-IP slope was not (p = 0.061, Table) . Pre-and post-IP periods in group 1 were separated by a large discontinuity, with a decrease in FEV 1 /FVC in the single year between the IP and first post-IP YB averaging 12.75% predicted. Conclusions: These results support the concept of an inflection point in FEV 1 /FVC, with distinctly different behavior pre-IP (normal range, minimal change) and post-IP (steadily declining), and a mean one-year drop of about 13% predicted connecting these periods. Future work includes validating these results in a larger, confirmation dataset. These results may be of value for developing better clinical trial entrance criteria and outcome measures, designing epidemiologic studies, and informing basic and translational research.  Quantitative description of lung structure and function, following long term (~1 year) ivacaftor therapy, could help elucidate the underlying mechanism(s) for less airflow obstruction with CFTR restoration. We hypothesized that 1 year of ivacaftor therapy might reverse aspects of CF lung disease. Methods: Seven adults with CF and a G551D-CFTR allele participated in this study. Spirometry, and chest-CT scans (at end-inspiration and end-expiration) were obtained at baseline and after approximately 1 year of ivacaftor therapy. Results: FEV1(L) increased significantly from baseline to 1 year of ivacaftor therapy (1.84 ± 0.24 vs 2.48 ± 0.37 L, p<0.05). Quantitative analysis of chest CT scans indicate little change in inspiratory lung volume (5.3 ± 0.3 vs 5.2 ± 0.2 L, p>0.05), but a significant decrease in expiratory lung volume (3.2 ± 0.3 vs 2.8 ± 0.3 L, p<0.05). The volume of trapped air in the lung, assessed from expiratory CT scans using a -856HU threshold, reduced with ivacaftor therapy (18.3 ± 5.0 vs 13.9 ± 4.5%, p = 0.06). Conclusions: First, we observed an improvement in spirometry and air trapping. Second, wthe reduction in air trapping was associated with improvements in residual volume. Finally, by additional quantitative airway measurements, we hope to gain additional insight into the underlying mechanism(s) of ivacaftor's effects and CF disease pathogenesis. The majority of CF patients in the US receive care at a CF Care Center accredited by the CF Foundation, and there has been a strong association between the establishment of these Care Centers and improved patient outcomes. The Care Center model allows for standardization, but may create a travel burden for patients with CF. Travel burden, or the impact of travel distance to health care, has been studied in multiple health disciplines, and has been associated with worse outcomes. However, the impact of travel burden has not been studied in CF. Objective: The primary objective of this study is to assess whether increasing distance from a Care Center is associated with decreased lung function. Our secondary objectives were to assess whether increasing distance is associated with an increased odds of CF-related exacerbations or with a decreased number of clinic visits per year. Methods: This is a longitudinal cohort study of patients in the CFFPR who resided in a subset of preselected states between 2005 and 2010 (n = 4,133). We excluded patients who had a history of lung transplantation, were younger than 6 or older than 50, or who lived more than 300 miles from their Care Center. Distances were measured as the number of miles between an individual's zip code and the zip code of their Care Center. For our primary analysis, we used multilinear regressions with generalized estimating equations and robust variance estimation to model the effect of distance on percent predicted FEV 1 and multivariable regression to model the effect of distance on the change in FEV 1 over time. In a secondary analysis, we used multivariable logistic regressions to model the effect of distance on the odds of CF-related exacerbations. In a separate secondary analysis, we used multivariable linear regression to estimate the effect of distance on the number of clinic visits per year. Models were adjusted for age, CFRD, pancreatic insufficiency, socioeconomic status, and the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus or Burkholderia species on respiratory culture. Results: Increasing distance from a Care Center was statistically significantly associated with lower lung function; for every 100-mile increase in distance, FEV 1 percent predicted decreased by 0.8 (95% CI -1.4 to -0.2, p 0.01). However, there was no statistically significant effect on change in FEV 1 percent predicted (coefficient = 0.1, 95% CI -0.2 to 0.3, p 0.67) or on the odds of CF-related exacerbations (relative odds 1.0, 95% CI 1.0 to 1.1, p 0.52). There was a significant decrease in the number of outpatient visits per year as distance from Care Center increased; for every 100-mile increase in distance, the number of visits decreased by 0.46 (95% CI -0.54 to -0.38, p < 0.01). Conclusion: There is an association between distance from Care Center and lung function, although the clinical significance of this is unclear. Increasing distance from a Care Center is not associated with an increase in rate of change in lung function, nor with increasing odds of exacerbation, but is associated with a decreased number of outpatient visits. Further research is needed to investigate this potentially modifiable risk factor and the structure of health care delivery. Similarly, in the binary outcome model low 25(OH)D was significantly associated with having at least one CF exacerbation (p=0.05). Conclusions: 25(OH)D is a nutrient of concern among CF patients. Using the Poisson and binary outcome models, we found a correlation between low 25(OH)D levels and increased CF exacerbations. 25(OH) D has been associated with immune function and inflammation. Low 25(OH)D levels are associated with increased CF exacerbations annually. It is imperative to monitor 25(OH)D levels, and supplement if needed, to achieve satisfactory lab values. Maintaining a 25(OH)D level within acceptable parameters may decrease the frequency of CF pulmonary exacerbations. Further research on this association is needed. Kim, S. 1 ; Stephenson, A. 2 ; Strug, L.J. 1 1. Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2. Adult CF Program, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada Background: Forced expiratory volume per 1 second (FEV1) plays a key role in the management of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). Using a healthy population as the norm, FEV1 is commonly transformed into FEV1 %predicted (FEV1 pp), a ratio of patients' FEV1 to the predicted FEV1 for a healthy individual sharing the same age, sex and height. Because both healthy and CF populations are known to have different growth characteristics, this has been criticized in the literature. To overcome this limitation, CF-specific reference equations using US CF registry data from 2001-2006 were generated and are publicly available. Contemporary Canadian CF-specific FEV1 percentiles (%iles) are not currently available. Objectives: (1) To derive Canadian CF-specific FEV1 reference equations; (2) to characterize changes in FEV1 %iles over time; (3) to compare US and Canadian CF FEV1 %iles. Methods: This is a longitudinal cohort study using Canadian CF Registry data from 2000-2014. Subjects were included if they had at least one FEV1 measurement and were between 6 and 40 years of age. The first stable FEV1 measurement per person per year was used. Post-lung transplant FEV1 measurements were excluded. Quantile regression was used to model each %ile of FEV1 as a function of age and/or height, stratified by sex. Lung disease progression was compared using FEV1 %iles vs FEV1 % predicted (FEV1 pp) using the GLI reference norms. Canadian CF-FEV1 %iles were compared to US %iles for the period 2001-2006. Results: 4,289 subjects (46.5% female) were included in the study, contributing to 36,727 measurements taken between 2000-2014. FEV1 increases exponentially during childhood and adolescence and declines in adulthood (Figure) . Peak FEV1 was reached earlier for females than males. Improvement in FEV1 percentiles for the population as a whole was seen in the more recent time period (2008-2014) compared to 2000-2007. These improvements over time were more dramatic in those with FEV1 measurements below the 50th percentile as well as in males (Figure) . In selected subjects, FEV1 pp masked changes in disease progression that were evident when using FEV1 percentiles. Canadian CF patients had higher FEV1 %iles compared to US patients during [2001] [2002] [2003] [2004] [2005] [2006] . The difference in FEV1 %iles can be seen as early as 6 years of age and increases in the lower %iles and in males. Conclusions: Canadian CF-specific FEV1 %iles have improved over time and can provide useful information about changes in lung health that may be masked by using FEV1 pp. Applying the US specific reference equations to Canadian patients would systematically overestimate Canadian CF-specific FEV1 %iles. Chhatwani, L.; Mohabir, P.K. Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA Background and Objectives: Massive hemoptysis is a challenging clinical problem in cystic fibrosis (CF). We reviewed our center experience with an aim to evaluate risk factors for and clinical outcomes of CF patients with FEV1≥ 50% since this is a clinical presentation with significant associated morbidity and mortality yet few data are available to guide CF pulmonologists and patients faced with this presentation. Methods: In this study, we queried the adult CF center clinical database at our institution to identify patients with massive hemoptysis requiring bronchial artery embolization (BAE) and FEV1 ≥ 50% at presentation with hemoptysis. Clinical data including risk factors, management and both short-term and long-term outcomes were reviewed. Results: Twelve patients with FEV1≥ 50% presented with massive hemoptysis with 11 patients requiring BAE and one patient requiring surgical resection. There was a higher proportion of male patients (75%) and mean age at presentation was 25 years. FEV1 at presentation was 54-106%, with FEV1 > 70% predicted in 7 patients and FEV1 >90% predicted in 4 patients. On review of microbiology, respiratory cultures showed typical cystic fibrosis organisms without any particular pattern identified. With regard to genetic mutations, 4 patients (33%) were homozygous for ΔF508 and 4 (33%) patients carried one copy of this mutation. Of these 12 patients, 3 patients have had subsequent presentations with massive hemoptysis and required multiple repeat BAE procedures. Summary: Massive hemoptysis, a life-threatening complication of cystic fibrosis, can occur in patients without severe obstructive lung disease including those with normal lung function and such a presentation does not appear to be associated with identifiable risk factors. In the future, this manifestation of cystic fibrosis lung disease with massive hemoptysis despite preserved lung function should be further studied in large multicenter cohorts with an aim to optimize management of these patients. Harris, C.E. 1 ; Dorkin, H. 2 ; Cataletto, M.E. 3 ; Katkin, J. 4 ; Laskosz, L. 5 ; Ruch-Ross, H. 5 ; Mulvey, H. 5 1. Pediatrics, Los Angeles, CA, USA; 2. Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 3. Pediatrics, Winthrop, Mineola, NY, USA; 4. Pediatrics, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; 5  The care of patients with cystic fibrosis over the past years has been improved largely by educating physicians with specialized expertise in this condition. Working with the CF Foundation, pediatricians took on this task, leading to the establishment of centers in a network that promoted quality and research. Over time, these pediatricians became sufficiently specialized that board certification in pediatric pulmonology was offered. More than 1200 pediatricians have passed the certification examination. The American Academy of Pediatrics has surveyed the workforce twice, most recently in 2014. Methods: The objective of this study was to survey these physicians on career, demographics, and practice issues. The internet survey was designed with the help of the AAP Division of Workforce & Medical Education Policy. Representing more than one-third of the pediatric pulmonary workforce, 485 pediatricians completed the survey. Results: Results were compared, when possible, to the prior survey done in 1997. They had, on average, completed medical school 26 years prior, giving an average age of ~52 years; significantly older than the average age of 45 years in 1997. Clinicians spent a median of 70% of their time in direct patient care and nearly 10% of time in teaching. Research activities occupied 10-35% of time for some of the physicians surveyed. Only 7% of specialists were involved in basic science but nearly three of five were involved in clinical investigations. Most of respondents' clinical time was spent in subspecialty care; few provided primary care. CF was a common diagnosis seen; more than 70% of respondents reported being part of an accredited CF center. Flexible bronchoscopy, lung function tests and telephone consultations for home care were common procedures and activities. Most clinicians in the survey confined their practices to pediatrics, but nearly one in twenty also saw adults. Nearly 90% were affiliated with a medical school. More than half of those surveyed would like to add colleagues in the next three years. A substantial proportion of respondents felt that there would be jobs available in the future, but that insufficient funding of these new positions would make it difficult for them to be filled. Nearly 10% of the pediatric pulmonary workforce is planning on retiring in the next five years. Conclusions: Pediatric pulmonologists provide much of the CF care in the US. These complex patients have improved outcomes when seen in accredited CF centers. Although we have been successful in transitioning adults to internal medicine colleagues with CF expertise, their care continues to be time consuming. It is clear that the pediatric pulmonary workforce is aging. Although newborn screening has helped identify CF patients before lung disease is severe, the number of CF patients cared for is not decreasing. Further, despite advances in therapeutics, it is unlikely that CF will disappear soon. Clearly, attention must be given to attracting trainees to pediatric pulmonology especially with major debt burden. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) leads to progressive decline in lung function with increased incidence of sleep hypoxemia in patients with severe lung disease. Sleep hypoxemia in CF patients has been proposed as an independent parameter in the evaluation of CF patients with significant burden of disease as there is no laboratory or clinical surrogate testing for sleep hypoxemia. However, there currently are no accepted guidelines for evaluating CF patients for sleep hypoxemia with a polysomnography (PSG). Objective: The aims of the study are to determine the indications cited for polysomnography studies obtained, to characterize the severity of sleep disordered breathing, and to determine what subgroup of patients tested show sleep hypoxemia in a large tertiary pediatric cystic fibrosis center. Methods: We reviewed the electronic medical records of all the pediatric cystic fibrosis patients followed in our center from January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2014. All patients who underwent a PSG before their 19th birthday were included. We noted for each subject the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at the time of the PSG as well as the year's highest FEV1 value. For each PSG done we noted the indication; parameters of oxygenation and ventilation, and apnea indices. We defined sleep hypoxemia as a hemoglobin saturation that is on average below 92% or below 90% for more than 3% of the total sleep time. All physicians in the pediatric cystic fibrosis center were surveyed on their practices in the evaluation and treatment of sleep disordered breathing in pediatric CF patients by a written multiple choice questionnaire. Results: Of the 341 patients seen in the pediatric cystic fibrosis center during the study period, 27 (7.9%) met inclusion criteria for a total of 36 PSG done: 28 diagnostic studies (16 to evaluate for obstructive sleep apnea and 12 due to severity of lung disease; and 7 studies to titrate for noninvasive ventilation during a CF exacerbation). A total of 11 patients had sleep hypoxemia with age ranging from 5.9 to 16.7 years, and a year's highest FEV1 value ranging between 44 and 75% predicted, only 2 of those patients had obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). All patients with sleep hypoxemia had frequent severe CF exacerbations with more than 3 hospital admissions in the preceding 2 years. 8 (50%) of the 16 studies done to rule OSA were positive. Physicians reported OSA symptoms and subjective poor sleep quality as the most common indications for PSG as outpatient (100% and 88% respectively); whereas poor lung function was the least common (12%). For inpatient PSG, oxygen desaturations noted by continuous pulse oximetry was the most common indication (100%). Treatment of choice for sleep hypoxemia in CF for most is oxygen via nasal cannula. Conclusions: In pediatric CF patients with frequent exacerbations, sleep hypoxemia can be found in patients with an FEV1 as high as 75% irrespective of OSA. Objectives: A novel transnasal pulmonary aerosol delivery system ("tPAD") capable of administering nebulized medicines overnight, during sleep, delivering aerosols quietly and comfortably via a supplemental oxygen-like nasal cannula is being developed by Parion Sciences. The tPAD has been evaluated in adults and is ideally suited for the delivery of medications to pediatric patients, in which aerosol delivery is particularly challenging. The primary objective of this study was to quantitatively determine the efficiency of pulmonary and body deposition of 7% hypertonic saline (HS) aerosol, labelled with saline 99m Tc-diethylenetriamine-pentaacetic acid (DTPA), delivered via the tPAD to 3-8-year-old children with cystic fibrosis. The well characterized pediatric PARI LC SPRINT ® nebulizer, equipped with an oral mouthpiece instead of a facemask, was used as a control for the study. Methods: This was a single center, randomized, open-label crossover study of the pulmonary and body deposition of 7% HS aerosol delivered via the Parion tPAD versus that delivered via the PARI LC SPRINT in 3-8-year-old children with cystic fibrosis. Seven children with cystic fibrosis and their parents consented to participate and, in a random sequence, completed aerosol deposition with both nebulizers. Each subject received a 15-minute treatment with 99m Tc-DTPA labeled 7% NaCl via the tPAD and PARI LC SPRINT devices, on separate study days. Radioactivity was continuously monitored after dosing in the head and thorax by gamma scintigraphy, and corrected for decay, soft tissue attenuation and tracer absorption/clearance. The primary study endpoint was the pulmonary deposition of 99m Tc-DTPA expressed as percent of emitted dose deposited in the whole lung. The secondary endpoints of the study include percentage of 99m Tc DTPA deposited in the central lung, peripheral lung, nasooropharynx, stomach and esophagus. Results: Aerosol delivery by both the transnasal (tPAD) and oral (LC SPRINT) nebulizers were well tolerated. Five of the seven study participants performed both deposition studies as instructed and can be fully evaluated. The median values for those 5 subjects are presented in the table below. The pulmonary deposition achieved with the tPAD was approximately 53% greater than that achieved via the PARI LC SPRINT. A greater fraction of the dose was deposited in the nose with the tPAD than the LC SPRINT but the LC SPRINT deposited a higher fraction in the stomach than did the tPAD. Conclusions: As has been observed in adults, the tPAD is an effective means to deliver an aerosol to the lungs in children. As the tPAD delivers an aerosol transnasally, it has the advantage over oral nebulizers that it is hands-free and can deliver an aerosol over an extended period of time. This may offer both therapeutic and safety advantages over drug administration rapidly via an oral nebulizer. Greater long-term survival has for many years been associated with regular physical exercise and increased exercise capacity in cystic fibrosis (CF). Many patients with CF find achieving regular exercise challenging and adherence to daily physical activity has been shown in many studies in CF to be poor. Objectives: To establish whether an increase in maximal cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) is associated with increased wellness in adults with CF across all ages and the lung function spectrum. Methods: All patients at our CF Unit with at least one G551D mutation eligible for treatment with ivacaftor underwent CPET using a maximal incremental cycle ergometer using the Godfrey protocol before and after a total of four months (4 mo) treatment with ivacaftor (1 month in a crossover study and 3 months open-label) . Selected measures of CPET, lung function and the the Alfred Wellness Score CF (AweScoreCF) measuring sputum, cough, energy, exercise participation, appetite, weight, mood, anxiety, sleep and general health (Total Score 100%) are presented. Results: These are presented as mean (range) for 20 adults (12 male 1.21 (0.18-2.24 ) p=0.023. The AweScore was well received by patients and took 1-2 minutes to complete. They valued the fact that it was measuring "wellness," found it visually pleasing and compact. Patients perceived less sputum and coughing after treatment with ivacaftor which they perceived led to improved sleep quantity and quality. The increased energy experienced may have been linked to greater exercise participation which in turn may have led to improvements in lung function and parameters of exercise capacity and sense of wellness. Conclusions: A total of 4 months of treatment with ivacaftor resulted in significant improvements in lung function, exercise time and VO2max along with total wellness score in adults with CF across all ages and spectrum of lung function. Study supported by Vertex Inc. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) pediatric patients' regular evaluation includes aerobic exercise capacity by cycle ergometry (CE) with pulse oximetry (Godfrey protocol). CE is a complex laboratory test that requires expensive equipment and well-trained specialized personnel. Alternatively, the Modified Shuttle Walk test (MSWT) is a simple reliable field test with minimal equipment requirements. Objective: The purpose of this study was to compare maximum effort calculated from the heart rate (HR) responses between CE and MSWT. Additionally, to examine the validity of MSWT to promote its use as MSWT is a simpler and less expensive method than CE. Materials and Method: From December 2014 to December 2015, 24 stable CF patients were included in the study. The mean age was 13± 2.3-years-old, mean BMI 18.1 kg/m 2 , mean FEV 1 74%, more frequent mutation F508del heterozygous, pancreatic insufficient pancreatic 87%. The CE test was performed using an electronically braked cycle ergometer which holds the power output constant independently of variations in cadence. The original Godfrey protocol with power output increments of 10 W in individuals with a height <120 cm, 15 W for those 120-150 cm and 20 W for those >150 cm tall was used. The exercise time was kept within the 8-12 min (1) . The MSWT was carried out in a standardized fashion using a CD player and two markers placed 9m apart. Patients had a paced 10-meter shuttle walk test by Singh, et al adapted and validated for use in CF. Subjects were allowed to run increasing the number of levels to 15 with a maximum speed of 10.2 km. All patients completed both tests on the same day, the second test was sequentially carried out after an interval of at least 30 minutes to return to resting level values. Parameters measured for evaluation of the tests were pulse oximeter, HR and dyspnea scores. Exercise time duration was recorded. Distance and peak work rate were measured. Values were expressed as mean and standard deviation. T-test and correlation analysis were used. Results: All patients were able to achieve maximum effort with both tests. There was no significant statistical difference between peak pulse rate (MSWT 187 ± 10.1 ppm; CE 182 ± 10.9 ppm, p= 0.110), and final pulse oximetry (MSWT 93 ± 7%; CE 94 ± 5 %, p= 0.479). The dyspnea score average was the same in both tests (7). There was a significant correlation analysis between distance (970 ± 299 meters) and power (115 ± 47.8 watts, R = 0.84) (p <0.01). Average time duration in MSWT was 11'32'' and in CE 8'43''. Conclusions: In our study, MSWT achieved similar peak HR response as CE and showed a strong correlation between power and distance. There was no statistical difference in final pulse oximetry. MSWT is simpler and less expensive than CE. The cost for each test was CE €3000; MSWT €500 respectively. The results of our study suggest that MSWT in lieu of CE should be considered for use in institutions with limited resources managing pediatric CF patients. MSWT provides a low-cost effective alternative for exercise tolerance evaluation with valid information for monitoring and prescription exercise in CF patients. Introduction: Exercise testing is an important tool in the evaluation and care of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). There is robust evidence that survival in CF is strongly correlated with exercise test results. Laboratory testing is not always freely available or feasible, resulting in field exercise tests often being performed in the clinical setting. The modified shuttle test (MST) is one field exercise test which has been shown to have a strong correlation with VO 2 peak and is responsive to inpatient treatment. There are currently no published normative data for the MST, either for healthy individuals or individuals with CF. Objectives: The purpose of this study was to audit MST results for children with CF to determine what factor (eg, age, height or FEV 1 ) has the greatest correlation with distance. For this factor, 25th, 50th and 75th percentile results will then be calculated. Methods: Medical records for all CF patients covering a four-year period (2011 to 2015) were retrospectively reviewed. All MST results were noted. The best result for each year (in age) for each patient was recorded. Of these, results that were deemed by two reveiwers to be submaximal were excluded. Correlation for each measure with distance was calculated using Pearson product-moment coefficient of correlation. Box plots were then developed for the outcome with the strongest correlation with distance for both males and females showing 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles. Results: 708 tests were found for 189 subjects. 383 "best" tests were analysed of which 82 were deemed submaximal, leaving 301 tests (subjects aged 5 to 19 years). Most subjects had normal (52%) or mild disease (34%) on the basis of FEV 1 % predicted. The outcome with the strongest correlation with distance was found to be height (r=0.53). The mean distance covered increased with increasing height. At 115cm height, mean distance was 824m (male) and 887m (female). At 140cm, mean distance was 1179m (male) and 932m (female). At 165cm, mean distance was 1411m (male) and 1035m (female). Conclusions: MST distance was more strongly correlated with height than age. This study has developed normative data for the CF population, allowing future tests to be compared to the results of height-matched peers. RR, et al. JAMA. 1995; 273:402-7) . PA in individuals with CF improves exercise capacity, slows decline in lung function, increases mucus clearance and improves health-related quality of life (Dwyer TJ, et al. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2011; 17:455-60) . Measuring ventilation inhomogeneity provides a novel approach to assessing the effects of PA on lung health. Hypothesis: Less ventilation inhomogeneity as measured by lung clearance index (LCI) via Multiple Breath Washout (MBW) and better lung function via spirometry in participants with CF will be associated with greater exercise capacity as measured by the Modified Shuttle Walk Test (MSWT). We completed the MSWT, spirometry and MBW in the first 30 participants at enrollment into the Do More, B'More, Live Fit trial. This randomized control trial will enroll a goal of 60 participants into a 6-month fitness training program designed to optimize exercise habits of 12-21 yearolds with CF. Lung function was measured via spirometry and MBW using the Exhalyzer D (EcoMedics, AG© Switzerland). Lung function was compared to the number of MSWT shuttles completed at enrollment. Results: Of the 30 participants, 15 were males (50.0%), 6 had a positive Pseudomonas aeruginosa culture upon enrollment (20.0%), the mean age was 14.5 years and the mean BMI was 52.1% (SD = 30.1; range 2-93%). The genotypes of the participants included 13 with homozygous F508del, 10 with heterozygous F508del and 7 heterozygous for other mutations. The mean MSWT shuttles completed was 104 (SD = 34; range of 33-150). The mean FEV1 was 84.4% (SD = 18.2; range of 28-108%), the mean LCI 2.5 was 10.0 (SD = 3.75; range of 6.23-18.73) and the mean LCI 5.0 was 6.02 (SD = 1.38; range of 4.42-9.13). MSWT shuttles were correlated with better lung function as measured by FEV1, r = 0.4854 (p = 0.008) and also associated with less ventilation inhomogeneity as measured by LCI 2.5 and LCI 5.0, r = -0.3633 (p = 0.053) and r = -0.3979 (p = 0.033) respectively. Conclusions: A higher number of MSWT shuttles correlated with better lung function as measured by FEV1 and with ventilation inhomogeneity as measured by LCI 2.5 and LCI 5.0 . These data suggest that there is an association between LCI values and FEV1 with better exercise capacity as measured by the MSWT. Based on these correlations, it is suggested that LCI is a similar predictor of exercise capacity as FEV1. With continued enrollment into the Do More, B'More, Live Fit trial, the use of LCI in revealing improvements in individuals with mild lung disease related to exercise capacity may be further elucidated. Notably this is one of the first trials to collect MSWT data from adolescents and young adults with CF who are not in the midst of a pulmonary exacerbation. Support: T32HL072748 and The Herbert Bearman Foundation. (Dwyer TJ, et al. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2011; 17:455-60) . The positive effects of physical conditioning on lung function have been reported; however, conventional measurements of lung function may lack the sensitivity to reveal improvement in individuals with mild lung disease. Hypothesis: Higher self-reported PA in individuals with CF will be associated with improved lung function as measured by FEV1 and lung clearance index (LCI). Methods: Physical activity was measured by self-report via the Habitual Activity Estimation Scale (HAES). The percentage of time awake that participants were active was assessed separately for weekdays versus weekends. Inactivity was defined as "inactive" and "somewhat inactive" categories; whereas, activity included only "active" and not the "somewhat active" category. Lung function was measured via spirometry and Multiple Breath Washout (MBW) using the Exhalyzer D (EcoMedics, AG© Switzerland) in the first 30 participants at enrollment into the Do More, B'More, Live Fit trial. This randomized control trial will enroll a goal of 60 participants into a 6-month fitness training program designed to optimize exercise habits of 12-21 year-olds with CF. Results: Of the 30 participants, 15 were males (50.0%), the mean age was 14.5 years (SD 2.26; range of 12-21 years) and the mean FEV1 was 84.4% (SD 18.2; range of 28-108%). The mean percent weekday active time was 18.7% (SD 17.3; range of 0-51.8%); whereas the mean percent weekend active time was 19.89% (SD 19.6; range of 0-64.8%). The mean percent weekday inactive time was 47.8% (SD 20.9; range of 12.8-83.5%) and the mean percent weekend inactive time was 46.9% (SD 20.3; range of 11.6-100%). Participants that were more active on weekdays tended to be more active on weekends with a correlation of r = 0.7739 (p < 0.001). Weekday and weekend inactivity levels were also significantly correlated r = 0.4715 (p = 0085). As hypothesized, FEV1 was significant in a negative correlation with LCI 2.5 and LCI 5.0, r = -0.739 (p < 0.001) and r = -0.694 (p < 0.001) respectively. There was a trend for a correlation between weekday activity levels with LCI 2.5 and LCI 5.0, r = 0.28 (p = 0.134) and r = 0.31 (p = 0.096) respectively. Weekday activity and FEV1 were not correlated r = -0.1859 (p = 0.325). Weekday inactivity, weekend activity and inactivity levels were not associated with FEV1 or LCI. Conclusions: While there is no significant correlation between selfreported PA level with ventilation inhomogeneity; there does appear to be a trend between weekday activity and LCI 2.5/LCI 5.0. These data suggest that LCI may prove to be a more sensitive indication of the response to PA than FEV1. With continued enrollment into the Do More, B'More, Live Fit trial, this trend may be further elucidated. Introduction: Tai Chi (TC) is an ancient Chinese martial art which uses controlled movement forms and meditative techniques to aid posture, strength and wellbeing. Due to risks of cross infection group classes are not possible. Aim: To investigate perceived physical and psychological benefits of Tai Chi (TC). To compare face-to-face (F2F) with internet based (IB) TC teaching. Methods: Participants were randomised to F2F lessons at home (group 1) or IB teaching (group 2). A course of eight TC forms were taught over three months in eight lessons, a friend or family member was allowed to learn with them. Semi-structured interviews were carried out at the end of each TC session and telephone interviews at the end of the study conducted by an independent member of the research team. Results: Fifty participants were recruited, 40 participants completed the full course (23 in group 1) (age range 6.1-51.5 y). Eleven participants withdrew: n=7 prior to starting lessons (logistics, too busy, ill health), n=4 after starting TC (n=3 from group 2: 1 child could not see the teacher on the iPad, 1 home computer broke, 1 missed lessons), the F2F withdrawal was for ill health. Semi-structured interviews: Twenty-three (58%) reported improvement in breathing (group 1: 70%, group 2: 30%). Eighteen (45%) reported an increase in sputum production when TC was done prior to airway clearance (group 1: 44%, group 2: 56%). Eighteen (45%) reported improvements in posture (group 1: 61%, group 2: 39%). Thirty-six (90%) reported feeling calmer and less stressed when they did TC (group 1: 61%, group 2: 39%). Telephone interviews (n=20, group 1: n=11): All discussed enjoying both methods of teaching TC. Reasons included convenience for the family, no need to travel, reduced risk of infection, and reduced embarrassment of disrupting a class through coughing. Comments included: able to take bigger breaths, able to breathe better at night and using TC to relax when stressed. Conclusion: We have shown that teaching TC (F2F or IB) in the home environment is feasible. Most participants also took the option of having the lessons with a friend or family member. Classes were reported as popular and achievable. Patients reported benefits in breathing, sputum expectoration, being calmer and less stressed. Extension of TC teaching over the internet in the form of group classes will be the next logical step to make this a financially achievable therapy. Black, K.D. 1 ; Barfield, W. 2 ; Flume, P.A. 3 1. Physical Therapy, Medical University of South Carolina, Johns Island, SC, USA; 2. Respiratory Therapy, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA; 3. Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA Objectives: Airways clearance therapy (ACT) is a fundamental component of the treatment of cystic fibrosis (CF) airways disease. Exercise is recommended as an important adjunct to ACT. However, adherence to ACT is generally reported as poor and we suspect the same for exercise. We sought to measure subjective adherence and identify barriers to airway clearance and participation in exercise in patients with cystic fibrosis. Methods: An eleven-item survey consisting of questions in regards to perceived importance of ACT and exercise, as well as the patient's ability, adherence and barriers to ACT and exercise was administered to 24 patients in clinic from January 2016 to April 2016. Six questions were specific to ACT and 5 questions were specific to exercise. Five questions specific to adherence, ability and importance were measured on a Likert scale, five questions specific to mode of ACT and exercise and barriers were open ended for response and one question was close ended. Results: The median age of patients surveyed was 27 years; 17 were females (70%). One patient did not complete ACT questions as they were not applicable to the patient (status post-lung transplant). Adherence to prescribed ACT was reported to be 73.7% overall with 87% of patients rating their adherence to ACT as >70%. All but one patient reported performing ACT at least once daily. All but one patient reported utilizing a vest for ACT (95.7%) with other modes including: Flutter or Acapella (26.1%), Aerobika (21.7%), manual chest PT (13%), and exercise (13%). Seventy percent of patients reported time as being a barrier to performing ACT. Over half (62.5%) of patients surveyed reported exercising regularly. In our sample, age was not a predictor of reported participation in regular exercise; however, females were more likely to report regular exercise than males surveyed (70.5% of females, 42.8% of males). Three common barriers to exercising regularly emerged including: lack of time (37.5%), energy (37.5%) and motivation (33.3%). The average rating for ability to perform all prescribed ACT was rated as 8/10 (0 =great difficulty, 10 = no difficulty) and the average rating for importance of performing all prescribed ACT was 8.7/10 (0 = not important at all, 10 = very important). The average rating for ability to exercise regularly (3-5x/week) was 7.1/10 and the average rating for importance of regular exercise was 6.8/10. Conclusions: A majority of adult CF patients reported adherence with their prescribed ACT, reporting time as the primary barrier to treatment. Fewer patients reported exercising regularly, reporting lack of time, energy and motivation as barriers to exercise. Generally, patients rated their ability to perform ACT and exercise highly, but reported less importance for engaging in regular exercise. Age did not appear to be a factor in engaging in exercise, but females were more likely than males to report engaging in exercise. Future interventions and counseling of patients should aim to overcome barriers to ACT and exercise identified through this questionnaire. Richmond, M.; Lee Son, N.; Chilvers, M.; McIlwaine, M. CF Clinic, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada Introduction: People with cystic fibrosis (CF) are required to perform daily airway clearance techniques (ACT). This technique may take anywhere from 20 -120 minutes daily and can be monotonous. As a result, reported adherence is very low at 30 -45% (O' Donohoe R, et al. Respir Care. 2014; 59:1731-46) . Reported adherence is also known to be higher than actual adherence (Modi AC, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2006; 5:177-85) . Prior to this study there has been no objective way to measure either adherence to, and the quality of the ACT. Objective: This is a pilot study to assess the use of technology to objectively measure adherence to, or quality of ACT while performing the Positive Expiratory Mask (PEP). Methods: A digital manometer using Bluetooth technology was developed with the assistance of a software company and was connected to the pressure port of the PEP mask. This digital manometer measured and recorded pressure, inspiratory and expiratory times, number of breaths and sets of PEP performed and the time of day the session was performed. The study enrolled 10 patients with CF or bronchiectasis between 6 -12 years of age who routinely performed PEP mask therapy on a daily basis at home. Each patient then performed two treatments (A and B) using the PEP mask in a randomized order. Treatment A was to perform PEP with a manual manometer as they would at home, while the digital manometer recorded the session without feedback to the patient. Simultaneously, a physical therapist trained in the use of PEP subjectively scored the patient's technique out of 10. Treatment B was to perform PEP using the digital manometer for feedback. The software then calculated quality of the treatment based on: achieving an inspiratory pressure of between 10 -20 cm H 2 O for at least 2 seconds, number of breaths taken and sets completed. Results: All 10 patients completed the pilot study. Half were randomised to receive treatment A first and the other half treatment B first. Mean percentage of quality of treatment A was 70.5%±20.5 versus 93.9%±8.6 with treatment B (P=0.001). The physical therapist's assessment of quality was 80% while patient performed treatment A. The Table  shows individual ratings. Conclusions: The use of the digital manometer with onscreen feedback improved quality of treatment significantly. The physical therapists overrated quality of the treatment session. The second part of this study is now planned where patients will take the digital manometer home but will be blinded to its use and adherence and quality of treatment will be measured over 4 months. Aubriot, A. 1, 4, 5 ; Lebecque, P. 1 ; Teresinha, L. 2 ; Liistro, G. 3 ; Reychler, G. 3, 4, 5 1. Pediatric CF Center, Belgium; 2. Louvain Centre for Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, Brussels, Belgium; 3. Pneumonology Dept, Brussels, Belgium; 4. IREC, Brussels, Belgium; 5. Physical Medicine, Brussels, Belgium Introduction: Positive airway pressure (PEP) is frequently used in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The combination of PEP and nebulization could reduce the treatment time and the perceived treatment burden in these patients. Study Objective: To compare in vivo amikacin lung delivery by a classical jet nebulizer (LC Sprint, PARI, DE) used alone (NEB-alone) or coupled to a PEP device (NEB-PEP) (Pari PEP, DE). Method: Amikacin (500 mg/4mL)(Bristol-Myers) was nebulized with both configuration devices. Lung delivery was assessed in CF patients by urinary monitoring of excreted amount of amikacin. The study was enrolled and completed by nine stable CF patients (6 males). The mean age of patients was 28.5±9.5 y. FEV1 was 68.5% ± 17.8. Lung dose was similar when comparing NEB-alone and NEB-PEP (10.1±3.4 vs 9.1±3.4 % initial dose; p=0.357), as well as half-life (4.72±2.0 vs 4.70±1.1; p=0.457) and elimination rate constant 0.17±0.07 vs 0.18±0.04; p=0.759). Conclusion: These data suggest that the combination of NEB-PEP does not modify the efficacy of NEB alone. To combine NEB and PEP allows a significant time savings in the daily care for patients without modifying lung delivery and it could improve treatment adherence. Introduction: Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) have impaired ability to clear thickened lower airway secretions, which often leads to progressive loss of lung function, pulmonary exacerbations, and ultimately respiratory failure. Airway clearance treatment (ACT) aims to improve ventilation and mucociliary clearance through the removal of tenacious and obstructing secretions, however ACT often adds a significant treatment burden. High frequency chest wall oscillation (HFCWO) is the most common method for ACT in the US CF population. The Aerobika®, an oscillatory positive expiratory pressure (OPEP) device, approved by the FDA in May 2013, has become a common device within the US CF care community, despite the paucity of published literature. Many CF ACT studies comparing modalities have been published; however, few studies compare simultaneous use of 2 ACT modalities in an outpatient setting. The objectives of our pilot study are to: 1) provide preliminary evidence on the clinical efficacy of augmented ACT in CF patients by combining simultaneous use of the Aero-bika® and HFCWO, while providing preliminary data related to candidate primary outcomes that allows for future trials; 2) search for possible effects and associations; and 3) help inform decisions about larger clinical trials and patient inclusion criteria. Methods: In our retrospective chart review, we analyzed the effect of the Aerobika® on FEV 1 , FEF 25-75 , BMI, need for additional antibiotics and frequency of pulmonary exacerbations in six CF patients. Selected patients had the Aerobika® added to their routine daily HFCWO. Patients served as their own controls for the 8-12 months pre-and post-Aerobika® period. Outcome metrics measured included rate of change of FEV 1 , cumulative days of additional antibiotics, and number of pulmonary exacerbations. Paired change in value from pre-to posttreatment was used in analysis for all variables. Linear regression was used and the slopes of the pre-and postinitiating Aerobika® data were compared against the null hypothesis. In addition we will calculate index of individuality. Results: Linear regression analysis of lung function measures, BMI, antibiotic usage, and CF exacerbations has been completed and shows that patients with an initial FEV 1 <70% tended to show the largest improvements, most notable for reduced rate of decline in FEV 1, and reduction in antibiotic usage. We also calculated the index of individuality for FEV 1 values and compared these to group values, finding a reference interval < 0.6 supported comparing the individual to him or herself rather than a population-based comparison. Conclusions: These data support the need for further research into augmenting established ACT strategies in CF patients with moderate to severe lung disease by using OPEP devices like the Aerobika® in combination with HFCWO. Coppolo, D.P. 2 ; Suggett, J.A. 3 ; Nagel, M.W. 3 ; Mitchell, J.P. 1 1. Jolyon Mitchell Inhaler Consulting Services Inc., London, ON, Canada; 2. Monaghan Medical Corp., Plattsburgh, NY, USA; 3. Trudell Medical International, London, ON, Canada Background / Objective: Hypertonic saline is associated with increased mucociliary clearance of secretions. OPEP therapy helps to mobilize secretions mechanically. This laboratory investigation examined the performance of a breath-actuated nebulizer (BAN) in conjunction with OPEP for the delivery of hypertonic saline to see if the OPEP affected the emitted aerosol size distribution. Methods: The AeroEclipse®-XL BAN (MMC, n = 5 devices) with tabletop compressor (Ombra®) was evaluated for the delivery of hypertonic saline (4 mL, 7% v/w NaCl aq.) with and without the OPEP device (Aerobi-ka®, MMC) inserted between the mouthpiece and nebulizer. Aerosol from the BAN was "inhaled" via a vacuum source operated at 28.3 L/min, and sized by a laser diffractometer (Malvern Spraytec, Malvern, UK). Comparative measurements were also made with a widely encountered breathenhanced nebulizer (LC-Plus®, PARI Respiratory Equipment, Midlothian, VA; n = 5 devices) operated by tabletop compressor (BOY-SX). Results: Measures of the aerosol size distribution were volume median diameter (VMD) and fine droplet fraction defined as the % < 4.7 μm diameter (FDF< 4.7 µ m ), and are summarized in The Table. Conclusions: The addition of the OPEP device marginally reduced droplet size (paired t-test for each metric, p < 0.001), but the effect was small and likely unimportant, given that the finer droplets are more likely to penetrate further into the airways of the lungs, especially when restricted by secretions. The comparator BEN device produced similar, if slightly larger, droplet size results. Use of the AeroEclipse®-XL with tabletop compressor, either with or without the concurrent use of the Aerobika* OPEP device, would appear to be an effective method of delivering hypertonic saline to the lungs for the purpose of mucociliary clearance. Introduction: Many exercise programs use the six-minute walk test (6MWT) to assess change in endurance in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). However, it is unclear if the 6MWT truly captures maximum distance and speed for these patients, partially due to lack of external motivation apart from the test requirements of standardized verbal encouragement. In contrast, the Incremental Shuttle Walk Test (ISWT) provides external motivation to the test participant with the goal of reaching the 10 meter distance prior to the audible beep. The purpose of this retrospective chart review was to determine if the ISWT better captures endurance, as measured by distance and speed, in comparison to the 6MWT. The results of these two tests were compared both pre-and post-cardiopulmonary rehabilitation program. Methods: Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval was obtained and demographic and clinical data were gathered through retrospective chart review. Data were collected from the charts of 27 patients with CF who had completed a 6-10 week outpatient cardiopulmonary rehabilitation program within the past 2 years. Participants completed ISWT and the 6MWT both pre-and post-rehabilitation. Data of these two tests were collected and analyzed; variables of interest included distance, speed, heart rate, and oxygen saturation. Data were analyzed using paired t-tests and separate repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). Results: When comparing the ISWT and 6MWT, a series of paired t-tests revealed significant differences between the endurance tests in speed and distance both pre-and post-rehabilitation (p<.0125). Examination of mean scores indicated that both the speed and distance were greater for ISWT than 6MWT at both time points. Results of the separate ANOVAs revealed significant improvements (p<.001) in distance and speed from preto post-rehabilitation regardless of the endurance test performed. Conclusions: Participants of an outpatient cardiopulmonary rehabilitation program with CF were able to ambulate greater distances and at higher speeds during the ISWT both before and after rehabilitation. This study suggests that the external motivation of the ISWT better captures endurance than the 6MWT and therefore may be more beneficial when measuring the outcome of an exercise prescription for participants in a cardiopulmonary rehabilitation program. Griego, B.; Tataria, S.; Kirchner, K. Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA Background and Purpose: The current gold standard of clinical improvement in patients admitted to the hospital with a cystic fibrosis (CF) exacerbation is FEV 1 , measured by standardized spirometry. However, FEV 1 may not accurately predict a patient's exercise tolerance and great variability exists between patients with comparable lung function (Radtke T, et al. Pediatr Phys Ther. 2009; 21:275-81) . After a review of literature, no studies were found that measured change in physical endurance in pediatric patients during an acute CF exacerbation. The purpose of this study is to examine the change in physical endurance measured by the Modified Shuttle Walk Test (MSWT) and pulmonary endurance measured by FEV 1 in pediatric CF patients hospitalized for an acute exacerbation, and how that change differs based on the severity of a patient's disease. Study Design: This study includes 79 pediatric patients between 7-21 years of age hospitalized with an acute CF exacerbation. All patients received a 14-day course of antibiotic therapy, airway clearance, nutritional support, and daily physical therapy. Patients were divided into three groups based upon the severity of underlying lung disease (expressed as percent predicted lung function) on admission -Mild: FEV 1 ≥70%, Moderate: FEV 1 40-69%, Severe: FEV 1 <40%. The percent change in performance on the MSWT and percent change in FEV 1 (from admission to discharge) were recorded for each patient. No protected health information was removed or recorded and no link exists to identify participating patients. Results: Significant improvement was noted within all groups on the MSWT and FEV 1 despite severity of disease. However, for MSWT, no significant difference in mean percent change was identified between the mild (6.82%), moderate (8.37%), and severe (4.17%) groups as tested by a 2-way ANOVA. For FEV 1 , the mild group (10.4%) demonstrated significantly less improvement in airflows compared to the moderate (17%) and severe (22.9%) groups as tested by a 2-way ANOVA using a Fisher LSD test for significance. No significant difference was identified between moderate and severe groups for FEV 1 . The percent improvement in FEV 1 was significantly larger than the percent improvement on the MSWT in the moderate and severe groups, but no difference was noted in the mild group. Conclusion: This study demonstrates that in the moderate and severe groups, the pulmonary endurance measured by FEV 1 improves significantly more than physical endurance. The limited improvement in the MSWT during the studied interval may have occurred because physical endurance recovery requires more time. Administration of the MSWT in the outpatient setting, if conducted on an annual basis, would provide a baseline quantitative measure of the trajectory of a patient's physical endurance. In the same way that FEV 1 monitors and guides treatment, the MSWT may prove useful in monitoring physical endurance and would assist clinicians in tailoring a continuous exercise program that improves patient outcomes over the lifetime of CF care. Kaye, M. 2 ; Roberti-Miller, A. 2 ; Bhatia, R. 1 1. Pediatric Pulmonology, Akron Children's Hospital, Akron, OH, USA; 2. Pediatrics, Akron Children's Hospital, Akron, OH, USA Introduction: We previously showed the utility of multiple outcome measures like 6MWT (6 Minute Walk Test), CFQ-R (Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised) and PFT during CF pulmonary exacerbation (Bhatia R, et al. Pediatr Allergy Immunol Pulmonol. 2012; 25:86-91) . The goal of this study is to investigate how 6MWT, CFQR domains and PFT change over time including exacerbations and baseline health in CF. Methods: We performed 6 MWT, PFT, and CFQ-R in moderate-tosevere CF subjects for a year at each outpatient visit as well as weekly during hospitalization. The first four encounters for each patient were chosen as a baseline; from these encounters the best and worst scores for FEV 1 and 6MWT were noted. Next FEV 1 and 6MWT relative best and worst scores were calculated at each encounter (ex. FEV 1 Best Relative Score = Encounter FEV 1 / Best FEV 1 ) to limit the bias. For CFQ-R domain scores, the reported composite scores in each domain were used. Results: Nine CF subjects have completed the study so far with 51 usable data points. The 6MWT Relative Worst Scores and FEV 1 Relative Worst Scores are significantly correlated (0.28, p = 0.04). While 6MWT Relative Worst Scores and CFQ-R Physical domain scores are significantly correlated (correlation = -0.34, p = 0.03), FEV 1 Relative Worst Scores and CFQ-R Physical domain scores are not significantly correlated suggesting 6MWT and FEV 1 are explaining different components of the physiological changes. Visualization of data via scatterplots with imposed linear regression line reveals a line with a small positive slope for FEV 1 vs 6MWT Relative Best Scores, with 6MWT increasing at a faster rate than FEV 1 , indicating that the two clinical measures offer different information (Figure) . Examination of CFQ-R Respiratory domain vs the 6MWT and FEV 1 Relative Scores reveal all to have positive a slope, with the 6-MWT Relative Best Score having a steeper slope than that of FEV 1 indicating that the two measures are not in agreement as measures of respiratory function (Figure) . Conclusion: Our preliminary data suggest that 6MWT, CFQ-R and FEV 1 measure different aspects of CF pathology and multiple outcome measures should be utilized in CF care to get the complete picture. Method: Based on the 1994 ACT survey, an Airway Clearance Survey was created at BC Children's Hospital to gather information about current practice in ACTs used with the CF population. The survey was distributed at the 2015 NACFC during the various Respiratory Therapy (RT) and Physical Therapy (PT) sessions. The survey asked the respondents to identify which ACTs were being used at their CF centers and at which specific ages, treatment time length, which healthcare professional taught ACTs, when these techniques were initiated and how often these techniques were reviewed. Results: The survey was completed by 75 respondents from the USA and 18 respondents from Canada. The results indicated that a wide variety of ACTs are used by individuals with CF. PDP was still the predominant ACT reported in the 0-6 year group in Canada and the USA; however, 4% of the American respondents and 0% of the Canadian respondents continued to use tipped positions. ACTs that were dependent on breathing patterns, such as AD and ACBT, were more commonly used in the > 12 year age group. The adult group appeared to have the broadest use of ACTs. The ACT of HFCWO was more common in the USA than Canada across all age groups; 56 -69% of American respondents reported use of the HCFWO at their center, depending on age, compared to 6 -33% of Canadian respondents. ACTs were primarily taught by RTs in the USA and by PTs in Canada; 85% were RTs in the USA and 100% were PTs in Canada. American respondents reported reviewing ACTs an average of 2.2 times per year compared to an average of 3.1 times per year in Canada. ACT teaching was initiated at diagnosis more often in Canada; 72% of Canadian respondents and 35% of American respondents. Conclusion: A wide variety of ACTs are now being used to treat individuals with CF in North America compared to 20 years ago. Differences in the choice of ACT used by an individual with CF may be influenced by their age and country they live in. Limitations of this study included low number of Canadian respondents and lack of standardized survey responses. Further studies will be required to continue to look at the ACTs used by the CF population. Bellini, R.; Cazzarolli, C.; Tridello, G.; Borruso, A.; Tartali, C.; Background: Standardized exercise testing should be part of the regular assessment of subjects with cystic fibrosis (CF). Higher levels of fitness are associated with better prognosis and survival. The cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET) provides detailed information about ability to exercise. In CF, Palange, et al. identified subjects with VO 2 peak ≥ 82% predicted as those with the highest levels of fitness with CPET. The incremental shuttle walk test (ISWT) represents an alternative to CPET but it does not identify the possible cause of lower exercise capacity level. Probst, et al. developed an ISWT reference equation in healthy subjects to determine the predicted ISWT distance (ISWD). To date there are no threshold values to identify subjects with higher levels of fitness on the basis of predicted ISWD. Aims: To determine the best cut-off of ISWD to discriminate CF subjects with highest levels of fitness. Methods: Retrospective analysis was conducted on 73 (43F) adult subjects with CF (mean age 28±6 y; mean FEV 1 74±18% pred) who performed ISWT and CPET within 1 month from 2011 to 2015. Anthropometric data and lung function were collected from clinical records. ISWT and CPET were performed according to ERS/ATS recommendations. Subjects awaiting lung transplantation and subjects who needed oxygen supplementation were excluded. A logistic model was performed in order to define the relationship between ISWT (distance and predicted distance) and the level of fitness (high vs low). Successively, a ROC curve was performed in order to detect the best threshold value to identify subjects with a high level of fitness. The best cut-off was selected according to the maximum Youden index (Sensitivity + Specificity − 1), in order to obtain the higher sensitivity and specificity values. Results: A cut-off of 1010 meters provided the higher Youden index with a sensitivity of 86% and a specificity of 61%. Using the threshold value for ISWT 53% of patients could be classified as subjects with a high level of fitness despite only 30% of patients showed high levels of fitness (VO 2 peak ≥ 82% pred) according to the gold standard CPET. Among subjects that performed ≥1010 meters, 49% had high levels of fitness compared to the 9% for patients below the cut-off. The Probst's reference equation was not applicable in this cohort of patients, due to the difference in age and BMI thus the predicted distance was not considered. Conclusions: An ISWT cut-off could identify subjects with lower fitness levels, but these results were related to a small population and showed a poor specificity. The development of a reference equation could allow a better interpretation of walking performance that is generally adopted to evaluate the ability to respond to treatment-induced changes in exercise capacity. Fries, L.M. 1 ; Cahill, B. 2 ; Arora, A. 3 ; Thomas, R. 3 ; Frederick, C.A. 1 1. UBMD Internal Medicine, State Univ of NY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA; 2. Pediatrics, State Univ of NY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA; 3. Radiology, State Univ of NY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA Introduction: Pulmonary disease is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) (Erkkila J, et al. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1978; 131:146-50) . Past studies in children with CF suggest the degree of thoracic kyphosis positively correlates with severity of pulmonary disease as measured by FEV 1 and FVC (Denton J, et al. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 981; . Bone disease is a common complication of adults with CF resulting in low bone density and increased risk of fracture. Consideration may be given to increased kyphosis as an added risk factor for compression fracture. Trunk deformity by elevated thoracic kyphosis may compromise vital capacity in other patient populations as well (Swisher A, et al. CF 101 Phys Therapist. 2010; 5,23) . If there is a positive correlation between thoracic kyphosis and severity of lung compromise, postural correction as a potential positive intervention may be warranted. Our primary aim was to analyze the correlation between thoracic kyphosis as measured by Cobb angle and FEV 1 and FVC as measurements of pulmonary disease. Methods: The study evaluated 52 subjects with CF (age 18-59y). Eligible subjects had a PA and lateral chest x-ray (CXR) performed between Sep 2014 and Sep 2015 and at least two spirometries in the year prior. For subjects with multiple CXRs during that time, the most recent CXR was selected. The best FEV 1 in the year prior to CXR was used for analysis. Alternate Cobb and vertebrocentric angles were measured on the upright lateral CXR between T4 and T9. Angles of kyphosis were measured three times by one reader to ensure internal validity and a third of these were verified by a blinded second reader. Results: Data were analyzed by Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC). No significant correlations were found between either the Alternate Cobb or vertebrocentric angle and FEV 1 (-0.09, p=0.50, -0.091, p=0.52 respectively) or FVC (-0.02, p=0.89,-0.091, p=0.53) . Age, BMI and number of hospitalizations were analyzed and no correlation with degree of kyphosis was found. Collectively the PCC for all of the above variables related to kyphosis were nearly 0 (-0.21-0.11) suggesting that even with a sample size of >300, correlation would unlikely be clinically or statistically significant. Conclusions: Physical therapy, strengthening and conditioning are recognized as important components of CF care. Evaluation and treatment for postural dysfunction is included in the CF 101 Guide for Physical Therapy (Swisher A, et al. CF 101 Phys. Therapist. 2010; 5,23) . Despite prior studies in pediatric and adolescent CF populations concluding that kyphosis increased with severity of pulmonary compromise, this correlation was not found in our adult CF population. Failure of finding a correlation does not indicate that correcting postural dysfunction is without benefit. Unmeasured benefit such as decreased pain, improved functional status, limited progression of kyphosis or stabilization of lung function over time may exist. Future research is needed to help target rehabilitation efforts. Rodriguez Hortal, M. 1,2 ; Hedborg, A. 1 ; Nygren-Bonnier, M. 1,2 ; Hjelte, L. 1, 2 1. Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; 2. Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Introduction: Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) with bilevel-PAP (positive airway pressure) reduces respiratory muscle work, prevents respiratory muscle fatigue and could thus be a good alternative for very ill patients who need extra support during training. The aim of the study was to investigate if NIV is as effective as oxygen supplementation during an incremental test. Lung function test FEV 1 and FVC, PCO2 (transcutaneous), Borg RPE Scale, Rating of Perceived Dyspnea Scale, oxygen saturation (SpO2), respiratory rate and heart rate were measured before and after the test in both groups. Distance completed was recorded. Wilcoxon signed-ranked test was used for statistical analysis. Results are presented as median and range. Result: SpO2 decreased after NIV from 97% (92-99) to 90% (90-97) p=0.01; and after oxygen supplementation from 96% (94-99) to 93% (91-95) p=0.01. There was no difference between the groups (p=0.43). The tcPCO2 increased after NIV from 4.5 kPa (4-5.68 ) to 5.43 kPa (4.6-6.07) p=0.03; and after oxygen supplementation from 4.84 kPa (4.28-5.69 ) to 6.34 kPa (6.13-6.57) p=0.01, ie, tcPCO2 increased less in the NIV group (p=0.01). FEV 1 and FVC did not change significantly before and after in either group. Heart rate increased after NIV from 86 (73-97) to 150 (122-179) p=0.01; and after oxygen supplementation from 97 (90-112) to 153 (124-175) p=0.01. There was a significant difference between the groups (p=0.04). Borg RPE scale increased after NIV from 6 (6-6) to 15 (13-17) p=0.01; and after oxygen supplementation from 6 (6-6) to 15 (11-17) p=0.01 with no difference between the groups (p=0.2). Rating of Perceived Dyspnea Scale increased after NIV from 0 (0-2) to 4.5 (3-7) p=0.01; and after oxygen supplementation from 0.5 (0-3) to 4 (3-8) p=0.01. There was no difference between the groups (p=0.5). The results in the present study showed that NIV is as good as oxygen supplementation during an incremental test for patients with CF who are severely ill. In our study NIV showed a decreased rise in tcPCO2 maintaining the tcPCO2 level within normal reference values compared to oxygen supplementation. Introduction: Decreased physical activity (PA) is a poor prognostic factor in various respiratory diseases, yet little data exist on activity levels in adults with cystic fibrosis (CF). We examined determinants of objectively-measured daily PA with a special interest in extrapulmonary factors. Patient Sample and Methods: In this cross-sectional single-center study, CF patients wore a multisensor SenseWear armband for 7 consecutive days, which evaluated the number of steps per day, energy expenditure and time spent in different intensity ("mild" PA >3 metabolic equivalents (METS), "moderate" PA >4.8 METS and "vigorous" PA >7.2 METS). In addition, nutritional biological parameters, data on body composition and bone mineral density (dual X-ray absorptiometry), body plethysmography and 6-minute walk test were collected. Quality of life, anxiety and depression were assessed using validated questionnaires. Multivariate regression models were used to identify demographic, behavioral, clinical and biological factors independently associated with <7500 steps/day and with time spent in the three intensities of PA. Results: 80 adults with CF (46 males -mean ±SD age: 32.1±8.9 years; BMI 21.7 ±2.9 kg/m 2 ; FEV1 58.6±20.6 % predicted) were included between February 2013 and January 2015. 73 (91%) had pancreatic insufficiency and 20 (25%) had diabetes. 43 (54%) patients had chronic pulmonary colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 46 (57%) received a mean of 2.6 ±1.8 antibiotic IV courses in the previous year. The mean number of steps per day was 7,881 ± 3,829. The mean daily time spent in mild, moderate or vigorous activity was 3.3 ±1.8 h, 30 ± 52 min, and 1±2 min, respectively. In univariate analysis, subjects with step count/day < 7500 had a lower FVC (p=0.015) and FEV1 (p=0.008), lower oxygen saturation during the 6-min walk test (p<0.05), more antibiotic IV courses (p=0.05) and lower lean body mass (p=0.002). There was a trend for women to walk less than men (p=0.078) and for a correlation between lower BMI (p=0.063) or higher blood fibrinogen (p=0.062) and lower step count per day. Time spent in activity (>3 METS) was lower in women (p=0.032), decreased with increasing BMI (p=0.0018) and fat body mass (p=0.0001), and tended to decrease in subjects with a walking distance <475m during the 6-min walk test (p=0.071). No correlation was found with age, age at diagnosis, CFTR genotype, diabetes, bone mass density. Multivariate analyses examining determinants of time spent at moderate and vigorous activity, and multivariate analyses will be presented at the meeting. Conclusion: Determinants of PA levels in adults with CF included markers of respiratory disease (FVC, FEV1, oxygen saturation during the 6-min walk test, IV antibiotics). Importantly, nutritional characteristics appeared also strongly correlated with PA which increased with lean body mass while time spent in activity was negatively correlated with BMI and fat body mass. Finally, time in activity was higher in men than in women. Hilton, N.; Craig, M.; Ledson, M.; Nazareth, D.; Walshaw, M. Liverpool Heart and Chest Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom Objectives: Given that the forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV 1 ) is the most frequently used marker of disease severity in CF, it fails to detect structural airway damage beyond conducting zones. Furthermore, there is growing concern that the FEV 1 lacks sensitivity during earlystage changes to the small airways (1) . Peak aerobic capacity (VO 2 peak) is largely affected by structural changes to the lung and is used to determine prognosis and assess lung transplantation eligibility (2) . Although there is evidence to suggest that VO 2 peak is a significant determinant of CF health-related quality of life (3), it has yet to be established as a surrogate marker of disease severity. The aim of the study was to determine the impact of VO 2 peak and FEV 1 on the number of days spent receiving intravenous antibiotics (IVA). Methods: Sixteen adults with CF (9 male, 7 female; 19-60 years; mean ± SD: age 30 ± 11 y) performed a VO 2 peak assessment following the modified Bruce protocol in accordance with European guidelines (4) . Spirometry was conducted within 3 days of the exercise assessment. Inclusion criteria required patients to be deemed at least 4 weeks clear of a pulmonary exacerbation on the day of testing. The number of IVA days were determined during 6 months postexercise assessment. Data were analysed using the Pearson's correlation coefficient, One-way between-subjects analysis of variance, and post hoc test. The alpha level of significance was set at 5% (P <0.05). Results: There was a significant negative correlation between VO 2 peak and IVA days (r 14 = −0.83, P <0.001), with VO 2 peak accounting for 68% of the variation in IVA days. There was a significant negative correlation between FEV 1 and IVA days (r 14 = −0.68, P = 0.004), with FEV 1 accounting for 47% of the variation in IVA days. The mean number of IVA days for the excellent VO 2 peak group (7 days, s = 5) was lower than the mean for the good (11 days, s = 10), average (14 days, s = 10), poor (15 days, s = 1) and very poor (27 days, s = 8) groups. There was a significant effect of VO 2 peak on IVA days (F 4,11 = 4.16, P = 0.027). The very poor group's mean IVA days (27, s = 8) was significantly higher than the mean IVA days of the excellent group's (7, s = 5), where the 95% CI of the mean difference between the very poor and the excellent group's was from 2.5 to 36.9 IVA days. There was no significant difference between the mean IVA days of the poor, average and good groups. The main finding of the study was that VO 2 peak determined the number of IVA days to a greater extent than FEV 1 . Structural lung damage diminishes the arteriovenous oxygen difference which largely governs VO 2 peak, and therefore may be a more sensitive marker of disease severity than FEV 1 . In the future, VO 2 peak testing should be regarded as the preferred indicator of disease severity than FEV 1 . Further research including large cohorts is required to identify whether improving VO 2 peak with exercise training leads to significant reduction in hospital admissions. 3 1. Paediatric Respiratory, Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 2. South Bank University, London, United Kingdom; 3. Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom Introduction: There is emerging evidence that Tai Chi (TC), an ancient Chinese martial art, has beneficial effects in some respiratory conditions. Our previous pilot study in 10 adults with CF suggested some benefit in quality of life score (CFQ-R) and sleep quality. Aims: 1) To assess the impact of learning TC on physical outcomes, quality of life, sleep quality and general wellbeing. 2) To compare these outcomes with delivery of training via individual face-to-face (F2F) teaching at home (group 1) or individual internet-based (IB) teaching via Skype® (group 2). Methods: Children and adults were recruited from CF clinics at the Royal Brompton Hospital to a randomised controlled trial. Participants were randomised to receive TC teaching via F2F or IB, delivered in eight sessions over 3 months. Those in the IB group had a 3-month run-in period of continuing usual activities. Those in both TC groups were given a DVD and handbook to aid learning and asked to practice 10 minutes a day. Measures were recorded at baseline and three months of lessons, and included the CFQ-R, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, and the Five Facets Mindfulness Questionnaire. Height, weight, and lung function (FEV 1 and FVC) were recorded at the same time points. Results: Participants: n=40 (group 1: n=23), males: n=11, median age: 20 y, (range: 6-51 y), median height: 1.6m (range: 17.7-87.6m), median weight: 54.6kg (range: 17.7-87.6kg), median FEV 1 : 76% (range: 28-106%), median FVC: 92% (range: 46-118%). Comparison of TC versus usual activities (FEV 1 , FVC and BMI) is not significant. Comparison of group 1 between start and end of lessons: BMI: +0.5kg/m 2 , FEV 1 : -1.8%, FVC: -1.3%, (nonsignificant). Comparison of group 2 between start and end of lessons: BMI: +0.32kg/m 2 , FEV 1 : +1%, FVC: +1.7%, (nonsignificant). Comparison of group 1 with group 2 at end of lessons showed significance in FVC only (p<0.03). Change in questionnaire scores for both groups from start to end of lessons is not significant. Conclusions: This is the first randomised controlled trial of Tai Chi in CF. A slight clinical improvement in FVC was found in the Skype® group. All participants completing TC training maintained their lung function. The slight improvement in BMI was not statistically significant. This study shows that internet-based teaching is acceptable to all ages and can be a safe method of teaching complex instructions to patients who cannot join group lessons. Mewa, S. 1 ; Elarabi, M. 1 ; Griffin, K. 2 ; Mahendira, L. 1 ; Sykes, J. 2 ; Norris, E. 1 ; Stephenson, A. 2 ; Tullis, E. 2 ; Rubin, L. 1 1. Rheumatology, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2. Adult CF Program, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada Background: An increased life expectancy in adult CF patients has led to complications not previously recognized such as arthralgias, arthritis, fractures, and osteoporosis. The prevalence of inflammatory arthritis and musculoskeletal (MSK) manifestations in CF is not well characterized. Furthermore, the usefulness of markers of bone turnover in the evaluation of CF patients is unclear. Objectives: To assess MSK burden, the prevalence of serologic and biochemical markers of bone turnover, and to assess the relationship of chronic infection, body mass index (BMI), pancreatic status, and CF pulmonary disease as measured by FEV 1 to the MSK system. Methods: A prospective cohort study of adult CF patients followed at the St Michael's Hospital (SMH) Adult CF Clinic was conducted. Subjects completed validated MSK-specific questionnaires (MDHAQ, WOMAC, Osteoporosis and Fracture History), were examined for tender and swollen joints, and had serum rheumatoid factor (RF), antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anticyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and C-terminal telopeptide (CTX) measured. The data were linked to the Toronto CF database, which captures longitudinal measurements of FEV 1 , BMI, diabetes, microbiology, pancreatic status, bone density, and vitamin D levels. Spearman's correlation was calculated to investigate the correlation between two continuous variables and the Mann-Whitney test or Fisher's exact test were used for categorical variables. Results: In total, 190 subjects (47.4% female) were included. The median age was 31.5 years (range: 18.4-72.9); FEV 1 was 62% predicted (range: 19-121% pred); and BMI was 22.9 kg/m 2 (range: 14.3-39 kg/m 2 ). Mean Rapid3 (MDHAQ) score was 1.33 (0-6.86) and 47.9% of patients had a WOMAC score of 0. Four subjects had at least 1 swollen joint and 30 had at least 1 tender joint. Eight subjects (4.2%) were RF+, 14 (7.4%) anti-CCP+ and 23 (12.1%) were ANA+. Two subjects had swollen joints and positive antibodies (RF and/or anti-CCP). The median CTX was 295 ng/L (Range: 40-1153 ng/L) with 20 patients (10.5%) having an abnormally elevated CTX suggesting increased bone loss. No statistically significant association between FEV 1 and antibody status was found. S. maltophilia and Burkholderia cepacia complex (BCC) were associated with a significantly higher anti-CCP titre (p=0.01 and p=0.04 respectively); patients infected with BCC had a borderline significant RF titre (p=0.09). No significant correlations were found between CTX and BMD, clinical factors or vitamin D level. Conclusion: In adults with CF, a very small proportion of patients have abnormal rheumatologic serology and/or evidence of inflammatory arthritis. The prevalence of confirmed seropositive inflammatory arthritis in our study (1.0%) was similar to the general population (~1%). The relationship between S. maltophilia, BCC and serology warrants further investigation. CTX does not seem to be associated with other important CF clinical measurements. Background: Lung transplant is a widely accepted treatment for cystic fibrosis (CF) end-stage lung disease. The US lung allocation score (LAS) system prioritizes transplant candidates based on calculated risk of mortality. Despite their relative youth, CF candidates have the second highest rate of waitlist mortality. This suggests that the LAS may not accurately reflect the risk of waitlist mortality for CF candidates, and that the optimal timing of listing for lung transplant has not been established. The Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients (SRTR) includes variables from the time of wait-listing through the posttransplant period for all US transplant candidates and recipients. The CF Foundation Patient Registry (CFFPR) includes nearly 90% of the US CF population. The CFFPR includes disease-specific variables (ie, microbiology) not captured by the SRTR, and longitudinal information in the years before wait-listing. Objectives: To link the SRTR with the CFFPR to create a novel database and describe the characteristics of CF patients before transplant. Study Design: Any SRTR candidate in the CFFPR, 2004-2013, was included, encompassing SRTR candidates 1987-2014. Using a deterministic matching algorithm including name, birthdate, sex, race, death date, state of residence, and zip code, CFFPR candidates were matched to SRTR candidates and recipients. We report results for transplant recipients in the post-LAS implementation era, 2006-2014. Results: In the SRTR, 2006-2014, 1889 recipients were matched to recipients in the CFFPR. These CF transplant recipients were 49% female; ~89% were aged ≥18 years. CF was diagnosed before age 5 in 85% of the cohort and after age 18 in 5%. F508del homozygous was found in 54.8%, and 5.6% had class IV/V mutations. Fifty-three percent underwent transplant in 2006-2010 and 47% in 2011-2014 . Median BMI for recipients aged >18 years was 19.8. In the year before transplant, median FEV 1 was 30% predicted, median number of pulmonary exacerbations was 2.0, number of days receiving IV antibiotics was 28, and non-invasive ventilation was used in 25% of the cohort. CF-related complications included CF-related diabetes (38%), impaired glucose tolerance (10%), cirrhosis (3%), osteoporosis (12%), GERD (31%), depression (24%), and sinus disease (28%). The following microorganisms were detected in the respiratory tract: P. aeruginosa (65%), of which 82% was mucoid P. aeruginosa, MRSA (27%), S. maltophilia (14%), A. xylosoxidans (10.4%), NTM (3.5%), and any B. cepacia complex (4.3%). Summary: The strength of this novel database is its ability to more fully characterize CF patients who undergo transplant. Data in this database may help optimize timing of referral for transplant and identify additional variables that may better predict risk of waitlist and posttransplant morbidity and mortality for the CF population. Funding Introduction: Lung transplantation is a life-saving procedure in CF and can extend survival. Post-lung transplant median survival has been reported to be 10 years in Canada and 8 years in the US. In this study, we compared the clinical and demographic characteristics of patients just prior to lung transplantation between Canada and the US to determine if any pretransplant factors differed between the two countries, which may provide insights into the reported differences in posttransplant survival. Methods: Canadian and US CF Registry data from 1986-2013 were used for this study. Patients with prior nonlung organ transplants were excluded. GLI reference equations were used to calculate FEV 1 percent predicted. CDC growth charts were used to calculate BMI percentile for children aged 2-19, and for adults BMI was calculated using kg/m 2 . Patients were classified as underweight if their BMI percentile was less than 12% (for children aged <20 years) or if their BMI was less than 18.5 kg/m 2 for adults. The most recent lung function and BMI prior to transplant was recorded. Sputum microbiology was based on ever vs never growth prior to transplant. Patients were classified as receiving BiPAP, home O 2 and feeding tubes if they had used these supports in the three years before transplant. Differences between the two countries were assessed using the Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test and the chi-square test as appropriate. Results: During the study period, 607 (10.2%) of Canadians and 3,428 (7.5%) of Americans with CF underwent lung transplantation. CF patients undergoing lung transplantation in Canada were slightly older (28.9 years vs 27.7 years; p<0.0001), with a lower proportion receiving transplant before the age of 18 years (6% vs 14%; p<0.0001), compared to the US. Median FEV 1 % predicted was similar between the two countries (p=0.95) but a greater proportion of recipients in the US were prescribed home oxygen (68% vs 55%; p<0.0001) and BiPAP (10% vs 4%; p<0.0001) compared to Canada. More patients in the US were underweight (42% vs 30%; p<0.0001) despite greater use of feeding tubes in the US (42% vs 21%; p<0.0001) compared to Canada. Infection with B. cepacia complex was more common among Canadian recipients (25% vs 1%; p<0.0001) while MRSA was higher among US recipients (28% vs 6%; p<0.0001). Conclusions: Prior to lung transplantation, Americans with CF are more likely to be undernourished and have more advanced lung disease based on higher rates of home oxygen and BiPAP use. Future studies are planned to compare post-lung transplant survival between the two countries and determine the impact of pretransplant factors on posttransplant survival. Support: CFF. Rationale: A significant number of pediatric patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) die on the waitlist for transplant and the survival benefit of the procedure is controversial (Liou TG, et al., N Engl J Med. 2007; 357(21):2143-52) . Modification of the selection criteria for transplantation for pediatric patients with CF could improve both pre-and post-transplant mortality. Previous research has demonstrated that the Cystic Fibrosis Questionniare-Revised (CFQ-R) is able to predict pre-and post-transplant mortality in adults (Quittner AL, et al. Ped Pulmonol. 2005; Solé A, et al. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2016; 35:789-94) and posttransplant mortality in children (Bernstein R, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015; 50(S41) :441). This study aimed to expand on previous research by evaluating the ability of the CFQ-R to predict waitlist mortality and to determine the ability of the parent-proxy version of the CFQ-R, given pretransplant, to predict pre-and post-transplant mortality, evaluated separately. Additionally, the sensitivity and specificity of the CFQ-R for both those waitlisted and transplanted was assessed. Methods: Pretransplant CFQ-R scores were collected as part of a larger study evaluating the impact of transplant on quality of life. Transplanted participants (n=28) and waitlist participants (n=35) were recruited from International Pediatric Lung Transplant Collaborative transplant centers and followed for five years. Cox regression was used to determine if CFQ-R scales (ie, Physical Functioning, Respiratory Symptoms) predicted length of survival after listing and if pretransplant parent-proxy CFQ-R scales (ie Vitality, Health Perceptions, Role/School Functioning) predicted length of survival at 4-years posttransplant. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves were used to evaluate sensitivity and specificity of significant CFQ-R domains for each group. Results: The parent-proxy CFQ-R Health Perceptions scale was a significant predictor of death for individuals on the waitlist (B=-0.94, Wald=4.52, p=0.03). Examined separately, the parent-proxy CFQ-R Health Perceptions scale (B=-0.19, Wald=4.26, p=0.04) and Role/School Functioning Scale (B=0.25, Wald=6.57, p=0.01) were significant predictors of survival 4 years posttransplant. The ROC curve for the parent-proxy CFQ-R Health Perceptions scale (AUC=0.71, SE=0.08, p=0.03) demonstrated good sensitivity/specificity for individuals on the waitlist. Similarly good sensitivity and specificity were found for the CFQ-R Respiratory Symptoms scale, posttransplant (AUC=0.86, SE=0.08, p=0.004) also demonstrated good sensitivity and specificity for individuals posttransplant. Conclusions: Two CFQ-R Scales (ie, Respiratory Symptoms, Health Perceptions) were significant predictors of mortality/survival for individuals on the waitlist and posttransplant. Both were able to balance accurate classification with minimal false positives and false negatives. Future directions include determination of a more specific cut-score for these scales in relation to mortality on the waitlist and posttransplant using a multicenter, prospective design. Introduction: Lung transplant (LTx) center volume is an accepted measure of expertise and has been reported as a predictor of outcomes after LTx. Lung transplantation for cystic fibrosis (CF) is frequently performed in smaller programs that are experienced with CF patients but lack high overall LTx volume. We sought to determine whether higher center CF and non-CF LTx volumes were equally associated with improved outcomes of LTx in CF. United Network for Organ Sharing data were queried for CF patients between 12-50 years of age receiving LTx from May 2005 until March 2015. Center LTx volume over this period was calculated separately for non-CF and CF LTx performed in patients of any age. A multivariable Cox proportional hazards model of patient survival was fitted to cases with complete data. This model included CF and non-CF LTx volumes as continuous variables, and a Wald test was used to compare their association with survival. Results: A total of 2,028 patients met inclusion criteria, of whom 717 (35%) died during follow-up and 1,928 had complete data on covariates. Sixty-eight centers were represented in the analysis, performing a mean of 32±30 CF LTx and 208±209 non-CF LTx (r=0.73). After multivariable adjustment, Cox regression demonstrated that greater CF LTx volume (HR=0.996; 95% CI: 0.992, 0.999; p=0.007) but not greater non-CF LTx volume (HR=1.000; 95% CI: 1.000, 1.001; p=0.636) was associated with improved survival in LTx recipients with CF. A Wald test confirmed that CF LTx volume was more strongly associated with improved survival than non-CF LTx volume (p=0.013). Conclusions: CF-specific expertise of transplant centers was associated with improved outcomes of LTx for CF, whereas general LTx expertise was not associated with CF patients' survival in multivariable analysis. Referral of CF LTx candidates to transplant programs having specific expertise with this population should be considered. Gray, A.; Palmer, S.; Finlen Copeland, A. Medicine, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA Introduction: Despite advances in care and improvements in median survival, respiratory failure accounts for >80% of deaths in individuals with cystic fibrosis. Lung transplantation is a viable treatment strategy for carefully selected patients with advanced lung disease due to CF that can potentially extend life; however, questions persist about the benefit of transplant, particularly in patients with very severe disease. We sought to determine if cystic fibrosis patients with urgent transplant indications who are at high risk of death, as defined by a high Lung Allocation Score (LAS), was associated with worse overall posttransplant survival at our center. Methods: We conducted a single-center retrospective analysis of all CF patients who underwent single organ, first lung transplant at Duke University Medical Center in the post-LAS era. Excluded CF patients were recipients of a multi-organ transplant or a retransplant or patients were not included in our research database. Patients transplanted from May 5, 2005 through December 17, 2014 were included, providing a minimum of 14 months of follow-up. Results: Our cohort consisted of 85 CF patients who were predominately white (98%) and female (65%) with a median age at transplant of 25 (IQR 20-34; range 15-60). All CF patients underwent bilateral lung transplant. The median LAS, a marker of disease severity representing the estimated risk of dying while waiting for transplant against the estimated odds of surviving the first year after transplant, was 39.62 (IQR = 36.62 -47.53). One-and five-year Kaplan-Meier overall post transplant survival estimates were 89% and 65%, respectively. Median observed follow-up was 1410 days (IQR 693 -2055). Using Cox Proportional Hazards Models, we examined the impact of LAS on overall posttransplant survival. LAS, considered as a continuous variable was not associated with worse survival (p = 0.52; HR 1.01, 95%CI 0.99-1.03). A high LAS, a marker of severely advanced disease (defined as ≥50, approximating the 75th percentile of LAS scores or 18 patients) also was not associated with worse posttransplant survival (p=0.19; HR=1.63, 95%CI 0.79 -3.37). One-and five-year Kaplan-Meier overall posttransplant survival estimates for the high LAS group vs. the low LAS were 83% and 65% vs. 91% and 65%, respectively (p=0.18). Conclusions: Individuals with cystic fibrosis can experience severe and acute flares of their disease which put them at imminent risk of death. The role of lung transplantation in this setting has been debated due to the concern that these patients may be "too sick" to survive the transplant. Our results demonstrate that the very advanced end-stage CF patients who are highly likely to die without transplant have comparable overall survival rates to more stable end-stage CF patients. In fact, the 65% five-year survival rate was identical in both groups and better than the median survival for all lung transplant recipients for non-CF diseases in the UNOS Registry. This suggests lung transplant is not only appropriate, but a judicious use of resources in carefully selected individuals with advanced lung failure due to cystic fibrosis at a high-volume, experienced lung transplant center. Furthermore, CFTR is expressed in ventricular myocytes and reduced CFTR activity could potentially predispose to LV dysfunction. Objectives: To determine the prevalence of 1) CAD, and 2) LV systolic dysfunction in CF patients with advanced lung disease. Methods: We reviewed all adults with CF at a large academic CF program (Vancouver, BC) that underwent lung transplant evaluation since 1990. Those with an echocardiogram, coronary angiogram, or noninvasive cardiac stress test were included. Coronary angiograms are performed at our centre in pretransplant subjects above the age of 40 years regardless of risk factors. We recorded demographic data, presence of CAD risk factors, history of ACS, and cardiac test results. The prevalence of CAD, LV systolic dysfunction (defined by an ejection fraction (EF) of 55% or less on echocardiogram and/or coronary angiogram) and associated risk factors were reported. Statistical testing was performed to determine if there were differences in clinical characteristics between those with vs without CAD, as well as those with normal vs low EF. Results: Between 1990 and 2016, 73 adults with CF had lung transplant records available for review. Of these, 62 had echocardiograms and 20 had coronary angiograms. Of those with coronary angiograms, the mean age was 41 years (range 21-59), 11 (55%) were male, and the mean % predicted FEV 1 was 29.8 (SD 9.7). No atherosclerosis was observed on coronary angiogram for the 20 patients despite significant CAD risk factors (13 [65%] had CFRD and 13 [68%] had dyslipidemia); LV systolic dysfunction was present in 14/62 (23%). Of these, 13 (93%) had mild LV dysfunction (EF 50-55%), 1 (7%) had moderate dysfunction, and all had global hypokinesis. There were no significant differences in age, sex, pancreatic status, concurrent pulmonary exacerbation, FEV 1, hypertension, CFRD, or dyslipidemia between those with normal vs reduced EF. Conclusion: Coronary atherosclerosis was not evident in our cohort of CF adults with advanced lung disease undergoing lung transplant evaluation despite the presence of multiple risk factors. LV systolic dysfunction was observed in one-quarter of cases and the mechanisms should be elucidated in future studies. O'Callaghan, L. 1 ; Molony, J. 2 ; Peng, Y. 2 ; Suthoff, E. 1 ; Snyder, J. 2 ; Waltz, D. 1 1. Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, Boston, MA, USA; 2. Chronic Disease Research Group, Minneapolis, MN, USA Objectives: To characterize the burden of disease for lung transplant (LTX) waiting list (WL) candidates and recipients with CF and to quantify the outcomes of WL candidates. Methods: This retrospective cohort study used data from the Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients Standard Analytic File for 2006-2014. The candidate analysis included patients (pts) in the United States with CF added to the WL from 2006-2012 with no record of previous LTX; the recipient analysis included the subset of candidates whose listing ended in a LTX before 1/1/2015. Age-stratified demographic and clinical characteristics of candidates and recipients were summarized. The WL outcomes analysis followed LTX candidates from listing date until the earliest of either removal from WL (any reason) or the date 2 years after listing. WL outcomes (LTX, death, improved health so LTX not needed, too sick for LTX, other) were evaluated at 1, 6, and 24 months postlisting and were stratified by age group, diabetes status, and primary payment source (private or public). Results: We identified 1781 WL candidates with median age 26 years (IQR: 21-34; age 0-5, n=5; age 6-11, n=45; age 12-17, n=198; age ≥18, n=1533), median percent predicted (pp) FEV 1 of 23.0 (IQR: 19.0-28.0), and mean BMI of 19.2 (SD: 2.9). A quarter (25%) had ppFEV 1 <20, 46% had diabetes and 7% received some life support. The 1393 LTX recipients (including those who waited >24 months) had characteristics similar to the WL candidate cohort. Within 1 month of listing, 21% of WL pts received a LTX (Table) . The median time to LTX was 3 months (IQR: 1-7). Most candidates (91%) were removed from the WL within 24 months, including 73% who received a LTX, 10% who did not survive, and 5% who became ineligible due to disease progression; 9% were still waiting after 24 months. Of those receiving a LTX within 24 months, 29% waited ≥6 months. More pts aged ≥18 years vs 12-17 years at time of listing received a LTX within 24 months (75% vs 65%, respectively), and pts whose primary payment source was private (n=1011) vs public (n=756) were more likely to receive a LTX earlier (24% vs 17% received a LTX within 1 month, respectively). Conclusions: The majority of pts on the WL received a LTX by 24 months; approximately 9% were still waiting and 15% had not survived or were ineligible due to disease progression. Nearly a third waited ≥6 months for a LTX. In addition, the disease burden of pts with CF listed for a first LTX is severe, highlighting the importance of maintaining health and delaying disease progression. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. can vary by seasonality and health trends may depend on time between visits, a strategy is needed to adjust the US data to mimic the data collected in the UK. Objective: To create a combined longitudinal data set for comparisons of the US and UK CF patient registries that minimizes differences in seasonality and time intervals between patient encounter records. Methods: Data from the UK and US registries from 2008 to 2014 were used. The UK data were analyzed to identify the proportion of visits per calendar month as well as the interval between a patient's recorded annual visits. The distribution of seasonality was compared to the US registry. A preliminary strategy was employed to select annual visits from the US data using an iterative, random selection algorithm that was inversely proportional to the number of available visits to mimic the distribution of month of visit and time between visits in the UK data. After selection of matching US encounters, the resulting seasonality and time intervals between selected records were compared to those from the UK data. Further analysis will explore additional approaches. Results: There were 34,699 and 11,050 patients followed in the US and UK registries, respectively, between 2008 and 2014. Before matching, there were substantial differences in the US and UK populations. Visits in the US were evenly distributed throughout the year (25.6, 24.6, 24.9, 24.9 percent by quarter) while visits in the UK occurred more frequently later in the year (20.0, 23.0, 27.0, 30.0 percent by quarter). In the UK, the median time between visits was 12 months with an interquartile range of 11 to 13 months. Results of the matching strategies regarding their ability to balance the distributions of seasonality and time between visits will be presented. Conclusions: When creating a longitudinal dataset of merged data from two international patient registries, it is necessary to minimize potential biases due to differences in data collection procedures. For the US and UK CF registries, the challenge is to reduce differences in seasonality and time between visits. Methods developed and lessons learned may be applicable to other efforts to combine data from national registries. Stephenson, A. 1 1. St Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; 2. Univ. of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 3. Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 4. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA; 5. Univ. of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA Background: Standardized comparison of the median age of survival between Canada and the US found that Canadian patients with CF live an average of 10 years longer than those in the US. Since nutrition and lung function are both important predictors of survival in individual patients, longitudinal trends in nutrition and lung function may help to elucidate the reasons behind the observed differences in survival. Objective: To compare longitudinal changes in lung function and nutritional status between Canada and the US. Methods: Canadian and US CF Registry data from 1990 to 2013 were used. Both registries contain demographic and clinical data for patients followed at CF centers. Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) was expressed as percent predicted using GLI equations. Body mass index (BMI) percentiles were calculated for children (6-19 years of age) using the Centers for Disease Control growth charts and BMI (kg/m 2 ) was used for those over the age of 19 years. All clinical measurements post-lung transplant were excluded. Median FEV 1 % predicted, BMI percentile and BMI were calculated for each year in each country. Analyses were stratified by three age groups: 6-19 years, 20-40 years, and over 40 years. Results: In total 7,940 Canadian subjects from Canada and 55,054 American subjects contributed to these analyses. Median FEV 1 and BMI were higher in Canada for all three age groups in 1990, and both outcomes improved at a faster rate in the US compared to Canada in all age groups (p<0.0001). The gap in lung function was the greatest for those over 40 years of age (48% in Canada vs. 37% in the US; p<0.0001), and remained higher in Canada compared to the US until the end of the study period. In contrast, for both the 20-40 year group and the pediatric age group the gap between Canada and the US closed in 2009 and 2003 respectively (Figure) . Similar trends were seen with nutrition, except that by 2012, there was no significant difference in BMI in those over 40 years and in children the US surpassed Canada in BMI percentile in the most recent study period. Conclusions: Canadian adults with CF have higher lung function and BMI measurements compared to those in the US; however the rate of improvement on a population level was faster in the US. The observed "catch-up" in nutrition may reflect the delayed introduction of improved nutritional support for CF patients, which began in the 1970s in Canada and was introduced in the US in the late 1980s. Funded by the US CF Foundation. Introduction: Ivacaftor (IVA), the first CFTR modulator to demonstrate improved CFTR function and a clinical benefit in patients with CF, is intended for chronic, lifelong use. This ongoing, observational, postapproval safety study uses data from UK and US CF registries to evaluate longterm clinical outcomes in patients treated with IVA in a real-world setting. The results from the 2014 data analysis are presented here. Methods: Patients treated with IVA in 2014 were matched 1:5 on age, sex, and CFTR genotype severity to comparator patients (COMP) who never received IVA. Key clinical outcomes included death, organ transplantation, hospitalization, and pulmonary exacerbations (PEx). Annual risks of each of the key outcomes were calculated as the proportion of patients in each cohort with the outcomes of interest at any time during the analysis year. Unadjusted relative risks comparing cohorts and corresponding 95% confidence intervals were calculated. Prevalence of complications from CF (ie, CF-related diabetes, hepatobiliary, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, or bone/joint complications) and of selected pulmonary microorganisms was also estimated. Results: The analysis included 1256 IVA and 6200 COMP patients from the US registry and 411 IVA and 2069 COMP patients from the UK registry. IVA and COMP patients were well matched with regard to age and sex. Average duration of IVA exposure was 2 years in the US and 1.3 years in the UK among treated patients. The annual risks of death, transplantation, hospitalization, and PEx were significantly lower in the US IVA cohort than in the US COMP cohort; trends were similar in the UK (Table) . Findings were consistent when analyses were stratified by age and percent predicted FEV 1 . In addition, prevalence of complications from CF and of P. aeruginosa and select other microorganisms tended to be lower in IVA cohorts than COMP cohorts in both registries. Conclusions: This annual analysis of US and UK CF registries data from 2014 found no new safety concerns and revealed favorable findings with respect to clinically important outcomes in patients treated with IVA in a real-world setting. These results indicate the potential of IVA for CF disease modification in a real-world setting. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. Introduction: Ivacaftor (IVA), the first CFTR modulator to demonstrate a clinical benefit in patients with CF, is intended for chronic, lifelong use. Here we present the results of the 2014 disease progression analyses using UK CF Registry data from an ongoing, long-term, postapproval observational safety study evaluating outcomes in patients treated with IVA in a real-world setting. Methods: Patients with a record of IVA use during the first year of commercial availability in the UK (2013) who continued treatment through 2014 and received no organ transplantation were matched (1:5) on baseline characteristics (age, sex, and genotype severity) with comparator (COMP) patients who had no record of IVA use. Baseline characteristics were ascertained using the patients' data from 2012, prior to IVA commercial availability in the UK. Outcomes of interest included percent predicted (pp) FEV 1 , pulmonary exacerbations (PEx), hospitalizations for PEx, BMI, CF-related diabetes (CFRD), and distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS). Results: IVA (n=277) and COMP (n=1365) patients were similar with respect to age, sex, lung function, and medication use at baseline. In 2014, mean ppFEV 1 change from baseline was +6.6 percentage points in IVA vs −1.5 percentage points in COMP patients, while mean BMI increased by +1.5 kg/m 2 for IVA vs +0.3 kg/m 2 for COMP patients. Mean ppFEV 1 , annual risk of PEx, hospitalizations for PEx, and prevalence of CFRD and DIOS are presented in the Table. Conclusions: UK patients with CF receiving IVA during the first 2 years of commercial availability had improved lung function and nutritional status and a decreased risk of PEx and hospitalizations for PEx relative to baseline and to COMP patients. IVA patients also had lower CFRD and DIOS prevalence than COMP patients. We observed a clinical benefit with IVA on disease progression among patients with CF in the real world. Sponsored by Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated. Sawicki, G.S. 2 Background: CFTR modulators are novel therapies directed at improving the function of CFTR. The first CFTR modulator approved for clinical use, ivacaftor (IVA), had rapid uptake among eligible patients with G551D CFTR mutations, with 64% of eligible US patients receiving therapy within 4 months after US FDA approval in 2012. Lumacaftor-ivacaftor (LUM-IVA) was approved by the FDA in July 2015 for treatment of CF patients age ≥ 12 years with homozygous delF508 CFTR mutations. Objective: To examine the uptake of documented LUM-IVA therapy among patients with CF in the US in 2015 and evaluate demographic and clinical differences in eligible patients with and without documented LUM-IVA therapy in 2015. Methods: Using data from the CF Foundation Patient Registry (CFFPR), we identified patients with homozygous delF508 genotype and at least one clinical encounter in 2015. Uptake of LUM-IVA use was defined as having at least 1 clinical encounter in which LUM-IVA was documented as a chronic therapy. Comparisons of eligible patients (ages ≥ 12) with and without documented LUM-IVA use were made using t-tests for continuous variables and chi squared tests for categorical variables. Variables of interest included age, state of residence, insurance status, and clinical characteristics (FEV1 % predicted and exacerbation rate). Results: 12,911 CF patients with homozygous delF508 mutations (69% ≥ age 12) were followed in the CFFPR in 2015. By the end of 2015, LUM-IVA use was documented in 3724/8895 (42%) of eligible patients (age ≥ 12 years and delF508 homozygous genotype). LUM-IVA use was documented in 33 patients younger than age 12, and 102 patients with other CFTR mutations (1% of the respective populations). Two hundred thirty-five (6%) patients had documented LUM-IVA use prior to July 2015, and 59% of patients with documented LUM-IVA therapy had their first documented use in July-September 2015. Eligible patients with no documented LUM-IVA use were more likely to be age ≥30 (32% vs 27%, p<.0001) and had fewer clinical encounters in 2015 (mean 4.0 vs 5.3, p=<0.001). Those with documented LUM-IVA therapy were more likely to have private health insurance (55% vs 47%, p<0.0001). Those without documented use of LUM-IVA had higher mean FEV1 (71.6% vs 69.5%, p=0.0002) and fewer courses of IV antibiotics in 2015 (mean 0.9 vs 1.1, p=<0.0001). There was wide variation in uptake of LUM-IVA by patient state of residence, with a range of 0% to 90% across states; in only 14 states did ≥ 50% of eligible patients have documented use of LUM-IVA by the end of 2015. Conclusion: Only a minority of delF508 homozygous CF patients in the US had documented use of LUM-IVA within 6 months of FDA approval. Uptake of LUM-IVA therapy is much lower than the rate of uptake of IVA among G551D CF patients following approval in 2012. This suggests that clinicians may be slower to recommend LUM-IVA therapy compared to historical precedent with IVA monotherapy in a different group of patients. Differences in LUM-IVA uptake appear to be based on lung function, age, insurance status, and geographic variation. Szczesniak, R.D. 1 ; Li, D. 2 ; Clancy, J.P. 3 1. Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 2. Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 3. Pulmonary Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA Objective: To identify phenotypes of rapid decline using longitudinal lung function measurements and to determine the extent to which these phenotypes are related to other clinical characteristics. Study Design and Participants: A longitudinal cohort study of patients 6-21 years of age with data available from the US CF Foundation Patient Registry for 1997-2011. Post-lung transplantation data and patients with less than two years of observation time were excluded from all analyses. Our primary outcome was mean quarterly FEV1% predicted. Other characteristics of interest included birth cohort, sex and first recorded FEV1% predicted, CF-related diabetes (CRFD), positive cultures for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aerueus (MRSA), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa), Burkholderia cepacia (BC), and socioeconomic status (SES). Methods: Patients were classified into distinct phenotypes by evaluating trajectories of rapid lung function decline using scores from sparse functional principal components analysis, a statistical approach for clustering longitudinal profiles of patients while accounting for missing or sparse data. Phenotypes identified using this approach were compared with respect to baseline and mortality characteristics. Results: There are three distinct phenotypes of rapid lung function decline, corresponding to high, moderate and low degrees of FEV1% predicted loss in the overall cohort (n=18,387). The majority of variation (first functional principal component: 94%) among the patient profiles can be characterized by differences in mean FEV1% predicted over time. Average degree of rapid decline is similar among the three phenotypes (roughly -3% predicted/year); however, average timing differs, with the mild, moderate and severe phenotypes experiencing rapid decline at 18.9, 16.1 and 12.9 years of age, respectively. Individuals with a mild phenotype of rapid decline have the highest initial FEV1% predicted but experience the greatest loss of lung function. Individuals with the severe phenotype of rapid decline are more likely to have infections (MRSA, Pa, and BC) at baseline or to develop them subsequently, compared to those with mild or moderate phenotypes of rapid decline (all P ≤ 0.001). Conclusion: There are distinct phenotypes of rapid CF lung disease progression. By identifying risk factors for these phenotypes, interventions may be more precisely targeted for subgroups at highest risk of lung function loss. Supported by: K25 HL125954. Li, D. 2 ; Clancy, J.P. 3 ; Szczesniak, R.D. 1 1. Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 2. Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 3. Pulmonary Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA Objective: To understand the link between the FEV 1 % (forced expiratory volume in 1 second as a percentage of predicted) decline and the risk for an onset of pulmonary exacerbation (PEx) in cystic fibrosis (CF), while allowing accurate inference regarding longitudinal FEV 1 % responses and improving prediction of PEx prognosis. Methods: We developed a flexible semiparametric joint model, which consists of a semiparametric mixed effects submodel for repeated FEV 1 % measurements, and a survival submodel for possibly censored PEx (time to event) data. Association between the two submodels arises through subject-specific random effects. The proposed joint model was contrasted with the traditional, separate model that analyzes the longitudinal and survival data separately. Each model was applied to clinical encounter data from the United States CF Foundation Patient Registry. Individuals 6-45 years of age with FEV 1 % clinical encounters were included. Data were included up to the time of the first PEx. Potential predictors included age, birth cohort, gender, first recorded FEV 1 %, socioeconomic status at baseline (SES); time-varying predictors were CF-related diabetes (CRFD), positive cultures for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aerueus (MRSA), Burkholderia cepacia (BC) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa). Computations were implemented via Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. Results are reported as posterior means and 95% highest posterior density (HPD) intervals. Model comparison and selection were based on the DIC criteria. Results: The overall cohort (n=7672) had 3349 individuals who had a PEx. The median time to the first PEx was 4.6 years. In the longitudinal submodel, initial FEV 1 %, and being in a more recent birth cohort (>1994) were associated with less FEV1% decline; having lower SES, CFRD, MRSA, BC and Pa were associated with more FEV1% decline. Within the event submodel, being male and having lower initial FEV 1 % was associated with a lower risk of PEx, while people having lower SES was associated with a higher risk of PEx. The posterior estimates of the random intercept and slope coefficients, which measure the strength of association between the two submodels, are negative and significantly different from zero, providing strong evidence of association between the two submodels and indicating that both the initial level and slope of FEV 1 % was negatively associated with the hazard of an onset of PEx. Less biased and more efficient statistical inferences were obtained via the proposed joint model. Conclusion: PEx is associated with lung function decline in CF. Subjects were more likely to be diagnosed with PEx if they have experienced loss of FEV 1 % over a preceding period. Pediatrics, Indiana Univ, Indianapolis, IN, USA; 2. CF Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA; 3. Pediatrics, Univ of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 4. Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth Univ, Richmond, VA, USA; 5. Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 6. Medicine and Pediatrics, Medical Univ of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA; 7 . Pediatrics, Univ of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA Background: Outcomes of pulmonary exacerbations (PExs) vary based on several factors, including treatment choices. Beginning in 2012, the CF Foundation Patient Registry (CFFPR) has included data on the presence or absence of PExs and the treatments prescribed at all clinical encounters. Our objective was to describe the treatments for PExs documented during clinic visits and the time to IV antibiotics following the initial PEx treatment. Methods: The eligible study population was made of individuals in the CFFPR with ≥1 PEx during a clinic visit in 2013 or 2014 at one of the 129 CF centers that completed PEx assessments at ≥90% of clinic visits. For this analysis, we selected the first or index PEx documented at a clinic visit that followed ≥1 clinic visit(s) without a documented PEx during this period. We excluded individuals if they received IV antibiotics between the baseline and index clinic visits. We describe the initial treatments prescribed at the index visit. To account for IV antibiotics that may have been scheduled at the index visit, we included any IV antibiotics started ≤14 days after the index visit as an initial treatment. We compared the proportion of individuals that received IV antibiotics between 14 and 30 days later according to the initial treatment choice. Results: The cohort included 12,789 people (mean age 17.8 years, 50% female, and 36% with ≥1 culture positive for P. aeruginosa in the prior year). The median time between the baseline and index visit was 84 days. There was a significant difference in mean FEV 1 % predicted between the baseline and index visits (77.0 and 70.4, respectively, p < 0.001). Overall, 68% of individuals were initially treated with antibiotics: oral antibiotics alone in 55%, IV antibiotics in 4%, both oral and inhaled antibiotics in 6%, and inhaled antibiotics alone in 3%. The percentage of treatments that included oral antibiotics was higher among individuals <18 years old, those who had higher baseline FEV 1 , and/or were not infected with P. aeruginosa. Of the 32% of individuals who did not initially receive antibiotics, 19% had ≥10% decrease in FEV 1 % predicted between the baseline and index visits. Between 14 and 30 days after the index visit, 6% of individuals treated with oral antibiotics, 14% treated with inhaled antibiotics, 12% treated with both oral and inhaled antibiotics, and 41% without documented antibiotics were subsequently treated with IV antibiotics. Conclusions: Oral antibiotics were prescribed as a first treatment for the majority of individuals with a PEx documented in clinic. However, onethird of individuals did not have documented antibiotic treatments within 14 days of the index visit. While data on receipt of oral antibiotics may be incomplete in the CFFPR, these findings are concerning given the negative outcomes associated with PExs. Funded by CFFT. McMahon, V.R.; Nelson, T.; Burgess, C.A.; Schellenberg, A.; Background: Due to the large geographic spread In British Columbia (BC), an IRT/DNA/IRT algorithm is used to decrease the number of newborns required to travel for sweat testing. Newborns identified as carriers of one CF mutation, with a normal repeat IRT (<40ng/mL), are considered at low risk of having CF (<1%). Parents of these newborns receive telephone counseling on the clinical and reproductive risks by the CFNBS Nurse (CFNBSN). In addition, these families have the option to attend for a sweat test to exclude the possibility of CF if residual anxiety remains. Reports suggest 30-75% of families of healthy CF carriers undertake parental carrier testing. Given the unique nature of the BC CFNBS program the aim was to evaluate the uptake of genetic testing in this low risk group. Aims: 1)To review uptake of parental carrier testing in families with newborns who are identified as unaffected CF carriers through CFNBS. 2)To examine potential factors associated with parental decision-making around genetic follow-up. Methods: A retrospective chart review was conducted for all newborns identified as low risk CF carriers through CFNBS between 2009 and 2014. Excluded were infants who were lost to follow-up or deceased. Demographics collected were: number of contacts with the CFNBSN, birth order, and attendance for the optional sweat test. Parents who underwent carrier testing were identified through the provincial genetics laboratory. Data were analysed using logistic regression and chi-square testing. Results: Of the 443 carrier infants identified, 157(35%) families pursued parental carrier testing, with 94(21%) families testing both parents. 76(17%) infants were seen for optional sweat testing. Those attending for optional sweat testing were more likely to undergo genetic testing (P=0.005). 41(54%) families tested both parents, while 14(18%) had one parent tested. Parents who had telephone contact with the CFNBSN were more likely to have carrier testing (p=0.002). As shown in the Table, the uptake of testing increased with the number of contacts with the NBSN. Birth order was known for 206 families. Parents whose CF carrier infant was a first child were more likely to pursue carrier testing (P=0.005). 58% of families of first-borns (n=118) obtained carrier testing as compared with 32% of families with 2 or more children (n=88). Our centre is aware of two CF diagnoses made in families subsequent to a child identified through CFNBS as an unaffected carrier: one family tested only one parent, and the other did not pursue carrier testing. Conclusion: Uptake of parental carrier testing was low at our centre. In-person counseling, increased contacts with the CFNBSN, and lower birth order affected the rate of parental carrier testing. The two CF diagnoses following carrier identification in an older sibling highlights the need for appropriate counseling and follow-up. A prospective study will be done to study factors affecting parental decision-making around genetic follow-up. Saunders, W.; Ruban, C. Public Health Sciences, UNC Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a condition characterized as an inherited disease of the mucus and sweat glands. It affects various areas of the body including lungs, pancreas, liver, intestines, sinuses, and sex organs. Currently, there is minimal research into CF, and our objective is to characterize CF patients, their healthcare utilization, and associated hospitalization costs. Given the increasing prevalence of rare diseases, it is important to understand better CF so that the condition can be better diagnosed and controlled. Methods: We utilized one year (2012) of the Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS). The NIS represents all inpatient stays at a random 20% sample of all hospitals in the United States. We grouped CF individuals by primary or secondary discharge diagnosis and then compared those with CF to all others regarding length of stay (LOS) and total cost. Finally, we looked into factors predicting increased LOS. Results: We estimated US prevalence for CF-related inpatient admissions at 11,975 cases. CF patients were younger, with an average age of 20.90 versus 48.59 years in their non-CF peers. Hospitalizations associated with CF had an increased LOS compared to non-CF patients (10 versus 4 days), with average costs per stay $51,017 greater. Differences were seen in loss of function (LOF) with CF patients, mostly in the major LOF category (45.89%), whereas non-CF patients were spread between minor, moderate, and major LOF (35.68%, 37.55%, and 21.17%, respectively). Significant positive predictors of increased LOS among CF patients included having either minor (IRR=2.23) or moderate (Odds Ratio (OR)=1.98) LOF, self-pay as the primary payer (OR=1.59) and depression as a comorbidity (OR=1.64). Conclusion: We have characterized CF and seen it associated with increased length of stay, increased cost, and more severe loss of function in patients compared to those without CF.  Edmondson, C. 1 ; Grime, C. 1 ; Prasad, S. 2 ; Wallis, C. 2 ; Cowlard, J. 3 ; Nwokoro, C. 3 ; Ruiz, G. 4 ; Balfour-Lynn, I. 1 1. Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 2. Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom; 3. Barts and The London NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom; 4. King's College London, London, United Kingdom Introduction: Since July 2007 cystic fibrosis (CF) newborn screening has been carried out in the South East of England. The English protocol is based on IRT-DNA-IRT, and those suspected of having CF are then referred to a CF centre for sweat testing. As new genetic mutations continue to be discovered we looked at outcomes of children with a normal sweat chloride (<30mmol/L) to ensure a diagnosis of CF had not been missed. We had previously presented results from 2 tertiary referral centres in the South East of England (Grime C, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2014; 49(S38) :385-6). We now present an extension of this project to include the four main tertiary centres in the South East of England. Methods: A retrospective review of referral documentation and computer records from 4 large paediatric specialist CF centres in London, followed by telephone contact and faxed questionnaires to the children's registered general practitioner (GP). Results: Between July 2007 and August 2013, 95 children who were screen positive for CF had a normal sweat chloride. Of these 4 (4.2%) were diagnosed with CF due to 2 disease-causing mutations on initial or extended genetic screening. 12 (12.6%) fulfilled the criteria for Group A Cystic Fibrosis Screen Positive Inconclusive Diagnosis (CFSPID), ie, 2 CFTR mutations, at least one of which, with unclear phenotypic consequences (CRMS in USA), and all remain under follow-up at their tertiary centre. Of these 12, one patient with p.Phe508del/p.Arg117His (7T) genotype was subsequently diagnosed with CF when his sweat chloride increased to 58mmol/L within the first year of his life and he developed respiratory symptoms. One disease-causing mutation was identified on initial screening in 10 of the remaining 79 children who were considered to be carriers. Of these remaining 79 children: 18 could not be traced, we are awaiting confirmed GP details on 13, GPs declined to complete the questionnaire for 3 and we could only infer that 9, who were registered with GPs (but had not returned questionnaires), had no respiratory symptoms through being unknown to their local tertiary respiratory service. Questionnaire outcomes were available on 36/79 (45.5%) children, all of which confirmed that they did not have any features of CF. However, 14/36 (41.6%) had significant health problems: 1 child died of a gastric bleed, 1 died of an unknown cause, 4 had cardiac diagnoses, 3 had global developmental delay or speech delay, 2 were diagnosed with McCune Albright, 2 had suspected chromosomal abnormalities but no confirmed diagnosis and 1 has a diagnosis of asthma. Conclusion: In total, 16.8% (16/95) of children referred who had a normal sweat chloride went on to be given the diagnosis of CF or CFSPID based on genetic results. To our knowledge none of the remaining children have so far been re-referred with concerns regarding a possible diagnosis of CF in this extended study. However, a substantial proportion of these children without CF, who had positive CF newborn screens, were found to have significant health problems subsequently. The French newborn screening (NBS) program combines immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT)-D3 /CF30 kit mutations if written informed consent (WIC) has been obtained/IRT-D21 safety net in case of no WIC, or no detected mutation plus ultrahigh IRT-D3. Infants with 1/2 mutations or no mutation and raised IRT-D21 were referred to the nearest CF center (CFC) for sweat testing (ST). Objective: To evaluate the tracking process set up by the national NBS structure in charge of all NBS programs (AFDPHE). Methods: For each infant screened positive who needed to be referred to a CFC, a pre-filled document was completed by the CF physician including outcome data, compliance with the algorithm, ST values, genotype, infant status (IS) (CF, CF screened positive inconclusive diagnosis (CFSPID), meconium ileus (MI), antenatal diagnosis (AND), non-CF, in process, lost to follow-up including deaths), symptoms, history of CF, time to initial visit at the CF center. The filled-out form was sent to the regional association and forwarded quarterly, after partial de-identification, to AFDPHE. A referent CF physician, with a data manager, was in charge of monitoring and collecting CF/CFSPID cases missed by NBS by a yearly questionnaire. All the practical aspects of the NBS program were discussed during a monthly board meeting and quarterly with the technical committee thus leading to changes in the algorithm (Munck A, et al. J Pediatr. 2008; 153:228-33) . The national database AFDPHE was linked to the French CF Registry. Results: Screening included 10,046,581 babies with two periods 2002-2004 and 2005-2014 ; the % of screened positive (SP) decreased from 0.72 to 0.49 with an improved PPV from 0.16 to 0.31 and stable sensitivity to CF at 95% and a similar ratio CF/CFSPID of 6:1. Among those SP, the tracking process identified a decreased rate of missing WIC from 2.3 to 2% and of infants lost to follow-up from 6.1 to 2.4%. Reported ST values in non-MI cases reached 95.5%. For those diagnosed as CF/CFSPID (n=2045), both mutations were found in 99.6% alleles after exhaustive genetic testing, if required. A conclusion concerning IS was pending in only 0.5% (39/7872). In CF/CFSPID, the initial visit to the CFC (excluding MI and AND) was ≤ 35 days, respectively, in 53%/26% (p<0.0001) and ≤ 56 days in 88%/70% (p<0.0001); infants were symptomatic in 63%/9% (p<0.0001). Time to initial visit for those diagnosed CF (w/o MI or AND) was 35 [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] days, but it increased to 42 [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] days in 2013; the technical committee analyzed for each case seen over 35 days (53.5%) the four main steps of the screening protocol and identified measures for improvement. The year after the median delay to initial visit returned to the baseline. Conclusion: French program performances are in agreement with European standards; its strengths lie in the high rate of definite IS, ST values and mutations identification, the efficacy for collecting CF cases missed by NBS, but we acknowledge a weakness in the delay to initial visit. Objectives: A two-tiered strategy is widely used for population-based CF screening using an algorithm based on elevated IRT followed by a DNA mutation panel. Limitations of this strategy include a high rate of false positives and the identification of carriers with CFTR allele variants who do not express the disease. Herein, untargeted metabolite profiling of retrospective dried blood spot (DBS) cut-outs was performed in order to discover novel metabolic signatures in affected CF infants as a way to improve the positive predictive value of newborn screening (NBS) that is also amenable to low cost MS/MS analysis. Methods: Retrospective analysis of DBS extracts from 54 normal birth weight newborn infants from Newborn Screening Ontario (24 confirmed CF cases; 30 screen-negative controls) were selected as a training set for biomarker discovery. Multisegment injection-capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (MSI-CE-MS) was used for untargeted yet high-throughput screening of polar/ionic metabolites with quality assurance. Randomized analysis of aqueous methanol DBS extracts using MSI-CE-MS in conjunction with univariate and multivariate statistical methods allowed for ranking of molecular features differentially expressed in affected CF infants. Unknown yet biologically relevant metabolites were identified by spiking with authentic standards and/or their chemical structures were elucidated by high resolution MS/MS. Results: Over 75 cationic metabolites were consistently detected in DBS extracts with acceptable reproducibility using MSI-CE-MS under positive ion mode detection. There was good discrimination in affected CF infants relative to healthy controls with a subset of eight statistically significant metabolites measured in DBS extracts after Bonferroni correction (p < 7.0 E-4), including three novel metabolite adducts elevated in the blood of CF infants. A validation cohort is currently underway to evaluate the screening performance of lead metabolites for early detection of CF with improved specificity. Conclusions: Untargeted metabolite profiling of DBS extracts revealed significant differences in the metabolic phenotype of CF infants that will improve the overall positive predictive value and cost effectiveness of NBS screening programs while providing new insights into the underlying disease pathophysiology of CF. Ooi, C.Y. 1 ; Sutherland, R.E. 1 ; Keenan, K. 12 ; Castellani, C. 2 ; van Wylick, R. 3 ; Price, A. 4 ; Boland, M. 5 ; Reisman, J. 5 ; Zuberbuhler, P. 6 ; Bjornson, C. 11 ; Chilvers, M. 7 ; Brusky, J. 8 ; Mateos-Corral, D. 9 ; Hughes, D. 9 ; Morgan, L. 10 ; Durie, P.R. 13 ; Ratjen, F. 13 ; Gonska, T. 13 1. Univ of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia; 2. Azienda Ospedaliera Univ Integ, Verona, Italy; 3. Queen's Univ, Kingston, ON, Canada; 4. Children's Hosp, London, ON, Canada; 5. CHEO, Ottawa, ON, Canada; 6. Stollery Children's Hosp, Edmonton, AB, Canada; 7. BC Children's Hosp, Vancouver, BC, Canada; 8. Royal Univ Hosp, Saskatoon, SK, Canada; 9. IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada; 10. Windsor Reg Hosp, Windsor, ON, Canada; 11. Alberta Children's Hosp, Calgary, AB, Canada; 12. Hosp for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; 13. Univ of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada Introduction: Infants with CF screen positive inconclusive diagnosis (CFSPID) or CFTR-related metabolic syndrome (CRMS) may turn out to have CF. Little is known about these individuals, including predictors of a later CF diagnosis. The role of laboratory testing, typically performed in patients with established CF, among children with CFSPID remains to be established. Based on a multicenter study (8 CF centres from Canada and Verona, Italy) that was established to prospectively evaluate children with CFSPID (Ooi CY, et al. Pediatrics. 2015; 135:e1377-85) , this study aimed to compare laboratory-test outcomes in subjects with CFSPID and CF. Methods: 99 CFSPID and 119 CF subjects were enrolled (June 2007-April 2016). 11 (11%) CFSPID subjects fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for CF (CFSPID→CF) while the diagnosis remained uncertain (CFSPID→ CFSPID) in 88 (89%). Serial serum electrolytes, liver biochemistry, fatsoluble vitamins, hematology and inflammatory markers measured during this study period were compared between CF and CFSPID, and between CFSPID→CF and CFSPID→CFSPID using general linear mixed models, which factored in repeated measurements over time into the model. Results: 839 blood analyses were performed in all subjects (median [IQR] age at time of measurements: 1.4 [0.5-3.0] years). All comparisons are summarized in the Table. Varying proportions of subjects with CFSPID were found to have abnormal measurements. However, there were no significant differences in laboratory outcomes between CFSPID→CF and CFSPID→CFSPID. CF subjects had significantly more abnormal liver biochemistry, bicarbonate and vitamin A levels than CFSPID. Conclusion: Routinely performed laboratory parameters in CF were not predictive or helpful in differentiating between CFSPID→CF and CFSPID→CFSPID. Although these tests may reveal abnormal results in a subset of children with CFSPID, the clinical relevance of this remains to be determined. Butcher, J.L.; Filbrun, A.; Merrick, E.; Ayyash, M.; Nasr, S. Background: Prior research clearly demonstrates that the cystic fibrosis (CF) newborn screening period is highly stressful for families. Retrospective research interviews with parents regarding their experiences suggest that families have different education needs at diagnosis with some preferring factual information and others desiring emotional support. This initial education period is an important time for building relationships with medical providers and sets the stage for long-term family adjustment. As such, having a method to tailor education at diagnosis based on an individual family's needs would be highly beneficial. Objective: The objective of this study was to determine whether measures of parental coping and family psychosocial risk could be used to predict families' education preferences at CF newborn screening diagnosis. Methods: Parents were retrospectively contacted by mail within five years of their child's CF diagnosis through newborn screening. After enrollment, parents completed the Coping Strategies Inventory (CSI) and the Psychosocial Assessment Tool (PAT). They also completed a semi-structured interview regarding their perspectives on the type, use, satisfaction, and timing of educational materials provided at diagnosis. Data were analyzed using one-sample and independent-sample t-tests for continuous variables and chi square for dichotomous variables. Results: To date, 21 families have been enrolled and completed questionnaires with enrollment ongoing. Interviews have been completed on 9 of these families. Participants were all mothers of 12 boys and 9 girls between the ages of 7 and 85 months (M=30.81, SD=19.58). Most (91%) of the children were Caucasian, and 85% lived in homes with two parents. One-third of the mothers (7/21) endorsed elevated family psychosocial risk on the PAT. Compared to the normative sample, mothers reported engaging in less emotion-focused coping (expressing emotions, seeking social support) at diagnosis. Preliminary data analyses suggest a trend (p<.06) for mothers who engaged in problem-focused coping at higher rates than the mean to spend more hours using educational materials in the first month and report greater satisfaction with educational materials provided. These mothers preferred that educational materials focus on the first year of life significantly more than mothers who had lower than average rates of problem-focused coping (p<.05). For mothers who engaged in emotion-focused coping at greater rates than the mean, there was a trend for them to spend less time using educational materials in the first month (p<.06). These mothers preferred to receive education over time rather than all at once at the first appointment (p<.03). Discussion: Preliminary results suggest that screening mothers' preferred coping strategies may be a way to tailor the timing and amount of education provided. Also of note, 1/3 of mothers reported family psychosocial risk that was elevated compared to a norm group of families of children with chronic illness suggesting that both family educational and psychosocial support is important following CF diagnosis through newborn screening. Supported by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Newborn Screening Quality Improvement Program. Objectives: Newborn screening (NBS) for cystic fibrosis (CF) enables earlier pro-active treatment, which improves prognosis. The ECFS Neonatal Screening Working Group (NSWG) was established to track current practices in NBS, support implementation of NBS and establish consensus on strategies to improve this public health intervention. NSWG last conducted a survey on NBS in Europe in 2005. We aim to provide 1) an update on NBS in Europe, 2) discuss differences between protocols, and 3) identify barriers to establishing NBS programmes. Methods: Three questionnaires were sent to key workers in all European countries in 2015. The key workers completed the appropriate questionnaire depending on the situation in their country. If NBS was undertaken, this might be a national programme or regionally implemented. If no NBS was undertaken, we enquired about plans and barriers to implementation. Results: 1) Compared to the 2005 survey, national NBS programmes in Europe have increased from 2 to 17 (including Russia and Turkey); 4 countries (Italy, Spain, Germany and Serbia) have regional programmes. In Spain from 2015, there is complete coverage of the population with these regional programmes. Germany will start a national NBS in 2016. 25 countries do not have NBS for CF. For 10 countries, a NBS programme is under consideration. 2) For the national NBS programmes, the following protocols are used: IRT-DNA-IRT (7), IRT-IRT (4), IRT-DNA (3), IRT-PAP-DNA (1), and IRT-PAP-IRT (1). 56% (9/16) are using a fixed cut-off for IRT. There was a big variability in IRT cut-offs, age at testing and second tier strategies. Protocols that include DNA testing had better PPV (mean 0.50, range 0.12-0.91) compared to those without (mean 0.24, range 0.03-0.48), but at the cost of recognising more infants with an inconclusive diagnosis and carriers. 3) Lack of financial support and cutting back health care budget are the main barriers to implementation of NBS, reported by 7 of 11, however 2 reported they expect to start a NBS programme within a year. Conclusions: NBS programmes are now covering the majority of the population in Western Europe. There are numerous protocols, which to some degree reflect the different economic and health systems as well as the genetic diversity of the European population. However the degree of variability is not optimal. There is an urgent need to provide a more robust framework on which to evaluate the impact of NBS for CF and provide clearer information and consensus on best practice. Keogh, R.H. 1 ; Szczesniak, R.D. 2 1. Medical Statistics, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom; 2. Div. Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Univ Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA Objective: To investigate how different measures of FEV1% predict survival in CF and whether incorporating FEV1% variability-in addition to level and rate of decline-improves prediction. Study Design and Participants: We used longitudinal clinical encounter data on FEV1% from the US CF Foundation Patient Registry for 2003-2013 among over 30,000 individuals aged 6 and older, alongside corresponding survival data for the same period. Methods: The aim was to predict 1-and 5-year survival among individuals who had lived up to a series of clinically relevant ages, ranging from 11-45 years, referred to as the "landmark" ages. Using the landmarking approach (van Houwelingen H. Scand J Stat. 2007; 34:70-85) , Cox proportional hazard models were fitted at each landmark age. Fitting was restricted to individuals alive and uncensored at each landmark age, using predictors derived from available longitudinal measures of FEV1%. We began by using the "usual" level of FEV1% and its slope of change at the landmark age as predictors, obtained by fitting a linear mixed model to FEV1% measures in a period prior to the landmark age of interest. Four measures of FEV1% variability based on the interval up to the landmark age, were considered as additional predictors: (i) the standard deviation (SD) of FEV1% measures; (ii) the residual SD obtained from the mixed model; (iii) the range of FEV1%; (iv) the median deviation from the best FEV1% measure during the interval (following Morgan WJ, et al. J Pediatr. 2016; 169:116-21) . We show results from using a 5-year interval prior to each landmark age. Models including different predictors were compared using the C-index (measuring the strength of association between predictors and outcome), the prediction error (using the Brier score) and by comparing predicted probabilities with observed data (model calibration). Results: The usual level of FEV1% at each selected landmark age is very strongly predictive of survival. Adding the slope of FEV1% as an additional predictor improves the predictive ability. Additionally including FEV1% variability as a predictor gives some further improvement, albeit quite small. Variability measure (iv) appears the least useful as an additional predictor, but it was difficult to distinguish between the other three variability measures. The FEV1% measures were more highly predictive of 1-year than 5-year survival. The C-index goes down across the landmark ages, indicating that the FEV1% measures are better predictors of survival at the younger ages. For prediction of 1-and 5-year survival from age 11 the C-index was approximately 0.95 and 0.89, respectively. For prediction of 1-and 5-year survival from age 25 the C-index was approximately 0.80 and 0.87, respectively. Calibration investigations showed that the predicted probabilities obtained from the models are close to the true probabilities. Conclusions: Usual level of FEV1% is strongly predictive of survival. However, improvements in predictive ability can be made by including the slope of FEV1% and a measure of FEV1% variability as additional predictors. Further work is needed to investigate whether including additional predictors can improve prediction, especially at older ages. Positive results are reported to the primary care provider with instructions to refer infants to one of 15 institutions for sweat testing and genetic counseling. Initial sweat testing often confirms or excludes a diagnosis of CF; however, intermediate sweat test results extend the period of diagnostic uncertainty for families and providers alike. There are limited data on the diagnostic outcome of these infants. This retrospective study examines diagnostic outcomes of intermediate sweat tests in an ethnically diverse group of infants referred to Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago over an 8-year period. Methods: A database was established at the onset of CF NBS to track outcomes of infants seen in follow-up of a positive CF NBS screen. Retrospective chart review was done for all infants who had initial intermediate sweat tests. Diagnostic outcomes and follow-up are presented in this study. Results: Illinois has approximately 620 positive CF newborn screen results annually. Twenty percent (n=800) of these infants were referred to Ann and Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital for follow-up from 2008-2015. The initial sweat test was normal (<30mEq/L) in 83% and positive (>59mEq/L) in 5% of infants. Ten percent of infants had an intermediate test result (30-59mEq/L), and were initially categorized as "possible CFTR-Related Metabolic Syndrome (CRMS)/CF". An additional 2% had one or more CFTR mutations or variants on NBS (or prenatal genetics) of variable or unknown significance (VUS), with a sweat test < 60mEq/L, and were also categorized as "possible CRMS/CF." By 6 months of age nearly 75% of infants with initial intermediate sweat testing had normal repeat sweat testing and were discharged from care. Two infants had positive repeat sweat tests and were confirmed to have CF at 10 weeks and 6 months of age respectively. Twenty-five infants were given a diagnosis of CRMS at 6 months of age based on persistent intermediate sweat tests and/or genetics of VUS. Two infants with an initial positive sweat test had repeat sweat testing (prompted by genetics of VUS), that was persistently intermediate and their diagnoses were changed to CRMS. Adherence to consensus guidelines for CRMS follow up has been variable; nearly 1/3 of infant famlies declined follow up, while those followed annually have a reassuring lack of symptoms reflective of inadequate CFTR function. Conclusion: Using the Illinois algorithm, 10% of infants with positive NBS results have intermediate sweat tests and should be followed to resolution, as any outcome is possible, including a diagnosis of CF. Adherence to guidelines for CRMS care after 6 months of age is inconsistent and represents an area for quality improvement. Additional study is needed on the outcomes of these infants long term. . Background: Fecal elastase (FE) measurements have become routine and relied upon for evaluating pancreatic functional status. A low FE is consistent with pancreatic insufficiency (PI) and has been used in some newborn screening programs as part of the diagnostic processes. However, the CFF Diagnosis Consensus Committee questioned the value of FE, especially in follow-up after newborn screening. Objective: To assess the variability of FE measurements in the first year of life and its utility as a secondary indicator in the CF newborn screening algorithm. Methods: The study population includes infants enrolled in FIRST (Feeding Infants Right… from the STart), a prospective observational study initiated in 2012 to enroll 200 infants at 6 CF Centers (Madison, Milwaukee, Boston, Indianapolis, Salt Lake City and Chicago) by 2017 to identify optimal feeding. As of 6/30/16, 137 infants have been enrolled at 1.6±0.8 mo. FE was measured at enrollment, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12 18 and 24 mo until 2 consecutive values are below 100 mg/g. We analyzed 409 FE measurements from 102 infants who reached 12 mo of age by 6/30/16. Results: Of the 102 infants, initial FE was measured at 1.2±1.5 mo; 50% were <50 μg/g, 26% between 50-99 μg/g, 11% between 100-199 μg/g, and 13% were >200 μg/g. One infant (2%) with homozygous F508del genotype had initial FE >200 ug/g, whereas 11 infants (26%) with heterozygous F508del and one infant (11%) with no F508del mutation had initial FE >200 ug/g. Of the 13 infants with initial FE >200 mg/g, subsequent FE values were always above 200 μg/g in 7 infants (64%). However, one infant's (8%) subsequent FE value fluctuated above and below 200 μg/g, and 3 infants' (27%) subsequent FE declined to <200 μg/g (one declined to 131 μg/g, the other two declined to <50 μg/g). Of the latter 4 infants, one is F508del homozygote and three are compound heterozygotes with one F508del mutation. Of the three compound heterozygotes, one infant had non-disease causing mutation (V754M or c.2260G>A) according to the CFTR2 database, another infant's second mutation was not found in CFTR2 database (c.2052dup), and the other infant's second mutation is not yet identified. Conclusions: In this cohort, 13% of infants with CF had initial FE above 200 μg/g before 6 mo of age; among them, 27% declined to <200 or <50 μg/g by 24 months of age. This apparent "false negative" rate appears high and should be considered in making decisions in adopting FE as a secondary criterion in CF newborn screening algorithm. ( Introduction: Newborn screening (NS) was implemented in our hospital 17 years ago. NS for cystic fibrosis (CF) provides the opportunity for cascade carrier testing of relatives when a positive case is discovered. Routinely all parents of a diagnosed patient are tested to confirm carrier diagnosis. Objective: To describe our experience in diagnosis of CF in parents/ relatives of children with CF discovered through NS. Methods: We examined clinical retrospective data of parents/relatives of children diagnosed with CF through NS. Results: A total of 110 CF children were detected by NS in our center during the last 17 years. All parents (n=220) were identified as heterozygous carriers of the corresponding mutation with the exception of three parents and a grandmother who, in addition to the corresponding mutation, presented other CFTR mutations in trans. In these two parents clinical symptoms (rhinosinusitis and bronchitis) and conception of the CF baby through in vitro fertilization (IVF) made suspicion of CF diagnosis that was lately confirmed by genetic testing. Family 3: Case index: NBS:+, ST=96 mmol/L, genotype F508del/ F587I. Genetic testing of the mother identified the same mutations as her affected son. She transmitted the F587I mutation and the F508del was transmitted from the father. Her ST was 75 mmol/L and a history of recurrent rhinosinusitis was present. Family 4: Case index: NBS:+, ST= 104 mmol/L, genotype F508del/712-1G>T. The mother was carrier of the 712-1G>T. The study of two siblings of the mother showed one carrying 712-1G>T 2 and the other 5T-12TG. Genetic testing of the grandmother of the index case identified both mutations: 712-1G>T/5T-12TG and ST: 78 mmol/L. She has a history of asthma and bronchiectasis and was finally diagnosed as CF at the age of 56 years of age after several years of follow up for respiratory disease. Conclusions: Carrier testing after a CF diagnosis through NS should be mandatory in order to identify true carriers, CFTR-RD or mild CF cases for better follow-up and familial genetic counselling. Hinojosa-Amaya, A.B. 1 ; Torres, R. 1 ; López-Uriarte, G.A. 1 ; Arredondo-Vazquez, P. 2 ; Villarreal-Perez, J.Z. 2 ; Bustamante, A.E. 3 ; Martinez de Villarreal, L.E. 1 1. Genética, Hospital Universitario UANL, Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico; 2. Servicios de Salud de Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico; 3. CEPREP, Hospital Universitario UANL, Monterrey, Mexico Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an hereditary autosomal recessive disorder whose early detection may decrease morbidity and mortality ( Van-Devanter DR, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2016; 15:147-57) . Newborn screening (NS) of CF is included in several programs worldwide. In Mexico detection of CF is not included (Yokoyama E, et al. Rev Invest Clin. 2013; 65:491-9) . Nevertheless in Nuevo Leon, a state located in northeast Mexico, the neonatal quantification of IRT started in 2011. Objective: Present the results of the NS of CF in Nuevo Leon, Mexico. Methods: This is a cross-sectional, observational, descriptive and retrospective study. Newborns from eight public hospitals belonging to the Health Services of the State of Nuevo León and the University Hospital Dr. Jose E Gonzalez, UANL, were sampled from September 2011 to October 2015. Births in these hospitals are around 40 000 births per year. Capillary blood samples were taken by direct heel puncture 24 hours after birth and placed on S&S 903 filter paper and transported to the Genetic department of the Medical School UANL. Immunoreactive trypsinogen was quantified by the fluoroimmunoassay technique (IRT Perkin Elmer). Cut-off values were obtained and a diagnostic algorithm was followed. For infants with results between 3 and 4 SD above the mean, a second sample was requested. Newborns with values ≥ 4SD were sent to an urgent evaluation for a pediatric pulmonologist in the Cystic Fibrosis Clinic, and a second sample was taken. If the result of the second sample was again above normal, the patient was sent to evaluation and confirmatory sweat chloride test was made using iontophoresis technique. Patients with altered samples and negative confirmatory tests were followed within a year to detect clinical features. Results: Cut-off values were established as: >80 ng/mL (between 3SD to 4SD) and >125 ng/mL (>4SD) adjusted according to the sample size. A total of 142,162 samples were analyzed. There were 295 (0.2%) positive first samples, from which only 236 (80%) second samples were obtained. A total of 25 (10.59%) second samples were reported abnormal and diagnosis was confirmed in 12 (63.15%) cases. In six (24%) cases the diagnosis was not confirmed due to four patients lost to follow-up, one died and the other had ichthyosis and the sweat test could not be done; in the other seven sweat chloride was negative and are followed up. We had three newborns with normal TIR, two developed meconium ileus and another developed clinical symptoms of CF so we classified them as false-negative cases (0.002%). In total we confirmed 15 patients with CF. Currently 11 (73%) patients are on surveillance and in good health, two (14.2%) patients died and one is lost. An incidence of 1/9,477 births was calculated. Conclusion: NS of CF in Nuevo Leon showed an incidence similar to the reported in the literature, indicating that the disease is present in the Mexican population and it should be included in NS. Early detection contributed to prompt management leading to good health in the majority of cases. Introduction: The management of cystic fibrosis (CF) requires an ongoing monitoring of patients, in which many markers related to the evolution of the disease are collected. The analysis of these markers allows us to describe the progression of the disease and anticipate the occurrence of clinical events. In the case of cystic fibrosis, one of the most important markers is the FEV 1 which is used to assess the disease severity and to detect patients eligible for lung transplantation. Such markers dynamically change over time. It is then important to take into account all the repeated measures of FEV 1 rather than its value at baseline, to better assess the relationship between the marker and survival and to better predict the risk of event in patients with CF. Objectives: The aim of this study is first to examine the relationship between the evolution of FEV 1 and the occurrence of death or transplantation in adult patients with CF. Second, to provide dynamic predictions of the risk of death or transplantation using the developed model. We developed a joint model with shared random effects to assess the relationship between repeated FEV 1 measurements and time-to-death or transplantation in patients with CF. The model combines two processes, a longitudinal process which describes the repeated measures of FEV 1 and a survival process which describes the event defined as death or transplantation. We analyzed data from the French Cystic Fibrosis Registry. Patients aged 18 or older on 31st December 2010, non-transplanted before the study period and for whom vital status was known on 31st December 2013 were included in the study. We performed a forward stepwise selection to identify baseline variables related to each process. The survival process was depended on the current level and the slope of FEV 1 . We used the retained joint model to provide dynamic predictions. Results: A total of 2045 patients were included in the study, among them 255 (12.5%) died or were transplanted during the study period. Younger patients, female gender, higher body mass index (BMI), and lower number of days of intravenous treatment were highly associated with an increased FEV 1 . Factors associated with a lower FEV 1 included: Burkholderia cepacia infection, Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection, long term oxygen therapy. Factors associated with death or transplantation included: Burkholderia cepacia, use of oral corticosteroids, high number of intravenous treatment days, lower BMI. The risk of death or transplantation was significantly depended on both the current value and the slope of FEV 1 . A lower FEV 1 at a specific time point was in favor of increasing death or transplantation in adult patients with CF. The model gave good predictive performances. Conclusion: Joint models provide more accurate and individualized predictions which can be updated with each additional FEV 1 value, this may be useful for clinicians to identify patients eligible for transplantation. Supported by Vaincre La Mucoviscidose. Introduction: All newborn screening programs begin with measurement of immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) in dried blood spots taken early in life. However, universally a portion of CF cases are missed because they have levels of IRT below program cut points. Lowering cut points improves program sensitivity, but no reasonable cut point has been found for screening to be 100% sensitive. We sought to enroll all U.S. programs into a survey to determine (a) the prevalence of CF cases missed due to IRT levels below program cutoffs, and (b) characteristics of the newborn population, screening programs, hospitals, laboratories, and specimen transit associated with risk of being missed by CF newborn screening because of a low IRT value. Methods: The study population included live births occurring after the introduction of CF newborn screening (prior to 2010) and before 1/1/2013 to allow for an 18-month follow-up period to identify missed cases. Programs were asked to provide: 1) CF newborn screening program-specific data; 2) individual-level data on low-IRT false negative (LFN) CF cases; 3) summary data on screen-positive confirmed CF cases; and 4) summary data on all screened newborns. Survey questions were designed to identify possible mechanisms for IRT degradation and other risk factors, including the hospital setting, transit to screening laboratory, laboratory analysis, child demographics, genotype, and the diagnosis. Risk factor distributions in LFN cases were compared with those in screen-positive CF cases (CF+), and all screened newborns (ALL). Results: To date, 13 states --collectively comprising 47% of U.S. births and 12,227,220 screened newborns--completed all or most of the survey. A total of 2,199 CF cases were identified by screening, with an additional 57 LFN cases reported, yielding an overall low IRT missed CF case rate of 2.5%. While IRT values were higher in LFN cases than in ALL (median 38ng/mL and 23ng/mL, respectively), only 12.2% of the LFN cases had an IRT value within 3ng/mL of the state's cut point. ALL, LFN and CF+ case groups were similar with regards to sex. The median infant age at blood collection was 2 hours longer than for CF+ cases, and 4 hours longer than for ALL; similarly median age at IRT testing was 0.2 and 0.4 days longer than for CF+ cases and ALL, respectively. Excess LFN births were found in the birth months of August and November and on the birth day of Saturday, compared to both CF+ cases and ALL. Conclusions: These preliminary findings suggest that the vast majority of LFN missed cases would not have been detected with a small adjustment to the screening IRT cut point. Older age at specimen collection and IRT testing, and the distribution by month and weekday, may point to aspects of the hospital and/or laboratory as important determinants of LFN cases. Supported by The Legacy of Angels Foundation and Health Resources and Services Administration. Introduction: In Germany, the Federal Joint Committee decided to implement a nationwide CF newborn screening in 2016. Evidence from recent European studies suggests that protocols using immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) and pancreatitis-associated protein (PAP) for cystic fibrosis (CF) newborn screening (NBS) may be successfully used as a purely biochemical NBS strategy. Pure IRT/PAP protocols can reach acceptable sensitivities and specificities, but this comes at the expense of a relatively low positive predictive value (PPV). The Dutch CHOPIN study (Vernooij-van Langen AMM, et al. Thorax. 2012; 67:289-95) has reported that using a three-tier strategy (IRT/PAP + extended gene analysis) results in a better PPV. The German authorities decided also for an IRT/PAP/DNA protocol, but due to the strict German gene diagnostic act, extended gene analysis was not desirable as 3rd tier. Objective: Assessment of the performance of different IRT/PAP/DNA CF newborn screening protocols using different mutation panels for DNA analysis as 3rd-tier reaching 80%, 90%, and 95% allele coverage in the German population. Methods: Raw data from the Heidelberg CF newborn screening cohort (2008-2015, approximately 400,000 newborns) were used for a post hoc analysis. The data were obtained in a previous study evaluating a pure biochemical IRT/PAP protocol with one IRT-independent PAP-cut-off and a safety net strategy (CF-NBS positive, if IRT ≥ 99.9th IRT percentile) according to Sommerburg et al. (J Inherit Metab Dis. 2010; 33(Suppl 2) :S263-71). During this study the results of the IRT/PAP protocol were compared internally to a standard IRT/DNA protocol run in parallel. To assess the efficacy and performance of the 3rd-tier step of an IRT/PAP/ DNA protocol mutation panels with 4 CFTR mutations covering 80%, with 10 CFTR mutations covering 90%, and with 31 CFTR mutations covering 95% of all alleles found in the German population were evaluated. Findings: The three-tier strategy IRT/PAP/DNA keeps main advantages of IRT/PAP, such as the detection of considerably fewer carriers and fewer newborns with CFSPID when compared with current IRT/DNA screening strategies, but shows in general a higher specificity and a higher PPV. However, the combined protocol achieves sensitivity similar to that of the two-tier IRT/PAP protocol only when a CFTR mutation panel with at least 95% allele coverage is used. Conclusions: Our results obtained in a cohort of more than 400,000 newborns support the use of an IRT/PAP/DNA protocol with a mutation panel with 31 CFTR mutations to achieve a sufficient sensitivity when compared to a two-tier IRT/PAP protocol. Zirbes, J.M.; Yacob, A.; Milla, C. Pediatrics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA Lung disease continues to be a dominating feature of CF, contributing significantly to its morbidity and mortality. CF newborn screening (CFNBS) provides an opportunity for early disease identification and intervention to avert the progression of lung disease. In California, CFNBS started in July of 2007. The screening algorithm implemented can detect previously known as well as novel mutations and variants of unknown significance, with corresponding varying degrees of CFTR dysfunction. This presents a diagnostic dilemma, as many will remain asymptomatic in early childhood, a condition categorized as CFTR-related metabolic syndrome (CRMS). Only through the systematic and detailed longitudinal study of infants with CRMS can an understanding of the associated risk for lung disease be better established. We hypothesized that biomarkers reflective of the inflammatory activity from lung disease will differ between CF and CRMS infants. We evaluated a panel of inflammatory biomarkers in a cohort of infants identified through CFNBS. Plasma samples were obtained as part of a longitudinal prospective study during a period of good health and freedom from exacerbation. A human cytokine Luminex 63-plex antibody bead kit (custom-built by eBiosciences, San Diego, CA) was used according to manufacturer's recommendations. Of particular interest inflammatory cytokines typically reported in CF lung disease such as IL-1β and IL-8 were not significantly different between the groups and found at low levels, perhaps as a reflection of their stable health and early stage in the disease process. However, we did notice differences in cytokines associated with immune modulation, response to infection and innate immunity. Statistically significant differences were noted between infants with CF and those with CRMS (boxplots for distribution by study group in Figure, all comparisons p<0.05), with CF infants demonstrating increased levels (in pg/mL) of the proinflammatory cytokines MIG, TNFα, VEGF, Resistin, and MIP1β, and lower levels of the immunemodulatory IL-22. We conclude that systemic inflammatory profiling in CF NBS infants demonstrates significant differences, with a benign profile for infants with CRMS suggesting a lack of significant lung disease early in life in this group. is an ongoing observational study that tracks longitudinal demographic, clinical and treatment outcomes of people with cystic fibrosis (CF) receiving care at CF care centers in the United States. The CFFPR captures patient death dates along with six options to specify primary cause of death. However, not all people with CF participate in the CFFPR and not all deaths of people with CF are recorded in the registry. Therefore, the true number of deaths caused by CF each year remains unknown. Objective: The objective of this analysis was to compare number of deaths and age at death as reported in the CFFPR from 2012-2014 with the Multiple Cause of Death File (MCOD), which are based on death certificates for US residents. The secondary objective was to compare causes of death reported through the CFFPR and MCOD. Methods: The CFFPR team annually validates death data with the care centers. The CFFPR captures one primary cause of death whereas the MCOD contains a single underlying cause of death and up to twenty additional multiple causes. This analysis included death data for people with CF from 2012-2014. For the CFFPR, this included all deaths of people with CF; for the MCOD, this included people whose death certificate listed CF as the cause of death, as identified by one of the ICD-10 diagnostic codes for E84.0 -E84.9 (cystic fibrosis). The CFFPR and MCOD data were then stratified and compared by age at death. Results: Between 2012 -2014, over 80% of CF deaths were reported in both the CFFPR and the MCOD (1,315 CF deaths reported in the CFFPR as compared to 1,611 CF deaths in the MCOD). Reported age at death varied between the datasets. For reported deaths between 1-60 years of age, the CFFPR data correlated with more than 87% of the MCOD data. However, in the very youngest and very oldest cases, there was less overlap. For reported deaths >75 years, there were fewer than five cases in the CFFPR, whereas in the MCOD, there were 42 cases, a difference of >98% in this cohort. For those under 12 months of age, the CFFPR had fewer than five cases, whereas the MCOD had 24 cases, a difference of nearly 17% in this cohort. Causes of death listed in the MCOD other than CF included: Respiratory Failure (unspecified or acute), Pneumonia, Cardiac Arrest, Other Lung Disorders, Diabetes-Related, Complications of Organ Transplant, Pneumonia, Cirrhosis of Liver, Kidney Failure and Disease of Pancreas (unspecified) . Data from the CFFPR shows more transplant-related deaths than the MCOD. Conclusions: The best correlation between the MCOD and CFFPR data is achieved for those individuals aged 1-60 years. It is possible that for those aged >75 years the MCOD has a higher probability of having incorrect ICD-10 death certificate code of CF. The difference in deaths counts during the first year of life may suggest that some of those who died did not receive care in the CF centers and therefore could not participate in the CFFPR. Further granular analysis of the MCOD data is needed and may indicate important trends and causes of deaths for people with CF. Background: Cystic Fibrosis Canada (CFC) invests in the future of CF care by funding research, and supports those living with CF today, through its Healthcare Programs. To augment this work, CFC introduced a structured Quality Improvement (QI) program for CF clinics. Methods: Following a national QI conference in May 2013, all Canadian CF clinics were invited to participate in the new CFC QI program, launched in October 2013. Endorsed by the Board of Directors, and with leadership assistance and guidance from CFC's Director of Healthcare Programs, twelve clinic teams have participated in the first three one-year cohorts of the program, during which time they have met regularly to learn about, and conduct improvement work with QI experts. The program was developed in collaboration with The Dartmouth Institute Microsystem Academy, given their expertise in QI initiatives, specific to CF. Tools, concepts and methods have been taught to address clinic activities and outcomes. Each team has worked closely with an assigned QI coach, who assists with curriculum learning and motivates and guides each team in their QI efforts. Markers of measurability have been identified and tracked in order to quantify changes and demonstrate improvement. Results: With the introduction of the QI program and the subsequent awareness among all clinics, the national landscape now has a distinct focus on QI. With a refreshed mind-set, clinics are not just delivering care, but identifying ways to improve it. Some of the largest clinics in the country were early participants, but smaller clinics -including one of the smallest in the country -were also eager to be involved. Participation has been from 6 provinces, including all CF clinics in BC. With new improvement capacity, CF clinics have identified and are addressing themes for improvement including increased knowledge of, and adherence to airway clearance techniques; frequency of treatments for improved FEV 1 measurements; better nutrition and increased BMI measurements; delivery of care for sick patients who present outside of standard outpatient clinic times; the reduction of waiting times during clinic visits; increased access to medical and nursing support; better follow-through and monitoring of ancillary clinical testing; the process of screening for depression and anxiety. Early results suggest improvements in clinical outcomes; work on other themes is underway. The most common concern expressed by participants has been the time commitment, which is considerable; however, this has not deterred involvement, and it is anticipated that efficiencies gained will save time. With a vast difference in clinic population sizes -from fewer than 20 to over 300 -the program has been adapted for participating teams, especially with respect to measurability. Conclusions: Nearing the end of the initial three-year launch of the program, uptake among clinics has been good -more than a quarter of all CF clinics in Canada have participated -and the program has been wellreceived. Although still early, encouraging progress has been observed in patient outcomes, and continued improvements are anticipated. A commitment from clinics is required to participate in this initiative; however, the benefits are considerable, and the potential for long-term, national improvements is great. To investigate ways to overcome clinic time constraints and conflicting agendas that can interfere with successful implementation of the program. Methods: To increase enrollment and participation in the program, the following steps were taken: 1-Outpatient Social Worker / CF RISE Champion (SW/C) had patients sign into the CF RISE patient portal while in clinic to ensure their participation and to help troubleshoot any problems with registration. 2-SW/C sent individual reminders to patients 1-2 days prior to their clinic visit to complete portions of the program (reminders sent via e-mail or text-from-computer with patients who agreed to this at enrollment). 3-During hospital admissions, SW/C met with patients to introduce the program at bedside and encourage participation. 4-SW/C oriented the inpatient team including the nursing staff and inpatient SW to the program to help remind and encourage patients to participate. 5-SW/C coordinated with the inpatient Nurse Coordinator to involve the Get Well Network (GWN) -inpatient bedside computer system. The GWN created a link to gain easier access to the CF RISE website, as well as allowing for a messaging system to individual patient rooms. SW/C coordinated when reminders were appropriate with a new pop-up message being able to be sent to the individual's bedside TV/computer. Results: Enrollment improved with patients signing up on the patient portal while in clinic or during an admission. Participation also improved in using reminders prior to clinic visits, as well as reminding patients to complete portions during any hospital admissions. To date, 41 patients out of 59 total (ages 16-21) are successfully enrolled into the program. Patients have expressed a sense of accomplishment in increasing their CF knowledge base. Parents have also responded favorably to our preparation efforts and have expressed relief in having something tangible to focus on. We anticipate that this will lead to a reduction in anxiety and stress related to the transition process as it allows for meaningful discussion and successful goal completion. Discussion: The program has been very well received by patients and parents. In addition, the program has been a welcomed addition to our transition program. Both the pediatric and adult teams have been excited about the results of the program with better patients' knowledge and independence. Finding creative ways to remind and help patients participate in this program has been well received by patients and has been rewarding for the medical team. Capitalizing on using clinic and inpatient time to get patients to participate has been helpful. Our next steps are to incorporate some direct quotes from this age range to share with the whole center, hoping to encourage participation from patients who may be less motivated. Aims: To validate PortCF ICFs at our site, assess our current PortCF informed consent/enrollment process, and identify quality issues/barriers to compliance. Methods: First step was to create a list of patients currently enrolled in PortCF to identify and validate ICFs. Original ICFs were filed chronologically by year of consent from 2003-2010, and alphabetically 2010-present. All original ICFs (n=698) were scanned for electronic archival. All ICFs for active patients (n=189) were uploaded into PortCF. All original ICFs were refiled alphabetically. Next, methods for obtaining, recording, and filing ICFs were reviewed. Previously the consent process was completed by clinicians and research staff and a list was kept of enrollments only, including ICF date. Several barriers to the ICF process were identified including multiple individuals involved with no set process, inconsistent communication between staff consenting and staff enrolling the patient into PortCF, inefficient filing system and inadequate tracking of ICFs. Results: Internal ICF audit identified one active patient enrolled in 2011 for which an original consent could not be located. He was consented at his next clinic visit. Two patients were identified who were not re-consented pursuant to a 2010 protocol amendment, due to legal guardianship issues. Of note, the amendment did not affect their participation in PortCF and they are no longer seen at our center. These events were reported to the Children's Hospital of Wisconsin IRB. We improved our processes for consistency and efficiency, and to prevent future errors from occurring. In our new process, ICF is only obtained only by a research team member. This includes the CF Registry Coordinator (CFRC) who is a research coordinator, the lead Research Coordinator, or the Research Manager. Once the ICF is signed, the CFRC then a) updates a tracking spreadsheet; b) sends a copy of ICF to medical records; c) scans ICF for electronic archiving; d) files original ICF alphabetically; e) enrolls patient in PortCF; f) uploads ICF into PortCF. New lists have been created to track patients who declined consent or are not enrolled and those who have not been approached for initial consent or require re-consent due to age. The lists are accessible to the care team. We have had no further issues with PortCF ICFs. Conclusions: Internal audit revealed overall high compliance with PortCF ICF documentation. All but 1 patient had an ICF on file and all patients signed the current IRB-approved ICF. To prevent future errors and standardize workflow, process improvements were implemented to remove barriers and improve efficiency in the PortCF informed consent and enrollment process. Next steps will be to assess the ICF process/documentation for other studies. Nasr, S. Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA Introduction: Tremendous advances in CF care have resulted in a vast improvement in the health, lifespan, and quality of life of individuals with CF. Unfortunately, optimal medical care is time consuming and complex and involves medications and treatments administration through multiple modalities through the day. Maintaining the daily medication regimen is difficult for many people with CF and their families. Previous research has demonstrated that rates of medical regimen adherence for people with CF are around 50%. Patients and families cite a number of barriers to adherence including educational deficiencies, family stressors, scheduling difficulties, and defiance. Quality Improvement (QI) initiatives are crucial to help overcome barriers and successfully manage daily therapies. Objective: To review the development and cultivation of QI Culture, at the CF center at the University of Michigan (U of M). Methods: Members of the CF Center Team include 11 pediatric pulmonologists, 3 pediatric pulmonary fellows, 5 respiratory therapists, 4 nurses, 2 social workers, 2 dieticians, 1 psychologist, 1 clinic coordinator, 2 medical assistants, 1 physical therapist and 1 pharmacist. There is an active Family Advisor Board (FAB). The QI process includes: 1. The Center participated in CFF eLLC in 2010. That provided formal QI teaching to the group led by the coach that was assigned to our group and through our QI discussions. 2. QI work has been involving all CF team members. 3. QI projects are selected after reviewing the center CF Registry data to identify opportunities for improvement. 4. The center aligns QI efforts to result in measurable improvement in clinical outcomes (process improvement tied to clinical outcomes with key drivers). 5. The center consistently involves patients and families in identifying, designing, and /or implementing improvement efforts through the FAB, Family Education Night and through discussions in clinic. Results: Formal teaching of all team members has helped in creating a culture of QI in our center. Including people with CF and their families as integral members of the care team has helped in having the support and buy-in from them. This partnership has been helping in improving and prioritizing individual's treatment plans and improving their quality of life. QI projects/ interventions include: a. BMI improvement b. Assessment of barriers to adherence c. Using prescription refill data to improve adherence to medications d. Improving annual lab work testing in all patients and OGTT testing in ≥ 10 years old e. Using home spirometries (Spiro PD) to monitor and improve adherence f. Improving adherence to CFF guidelines for clinic visit attendance g. FAB: creating inpatient high calorie menu Discussion: Cultivating a QI culture in our center was possible through formal QI teaching to the whole team. That empowered the whole team to participate in QI work. It also led members of the team to come up with their own QI ideas. By involving parents and patients in the QI work, they were able to come up with their own QI ideas. Involving all the stakeholders in the QI process will ensure sustainability of the QI work in our center. Prior research has shown that malnutrition is associated with reduced lung function and increased mortality in adult cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Maintaining optimal nutrition is an essential part of CF care. Only 50% of our adult CF patients are at their goal BMI and therefore we undertook a quality improvement (QI) project to improve the nutrition status of our adult CF population. Methods: We first secured financial support via a Geisinger QI grant to provide protected time for our CF dietitian. We also benefited from a CF Foundation-supported QI coach to help launch our project. A multidisciplinary team, including an adult CF patient, was assembled in June 2015 to perform a microsystem assessment (MA) and patient knowledge assessment (KA). Our global aim statement was to improve the percentage of our adult CF patients who are at goal body mass index (BMI) from 50% to 75% by June 2017. We incorporated the results of our MA and KA into an action plan. Results: The MA revealed the clinic's BMI data were not accurate as height and weight were not being measured precisely. The first intervention was to re-educate the nursing staff on accurate anthropometric measurement techniques. A digital stadiometer was installed in the CF clinic. Height measurements were monitored for the next 6 months and variability between clinic visits was recorded with the average difference between visit per patient reduced from 1.75±1.31 to 0.38±0.35 cm. The KA revealed a linear relationship between BMI and CF nutrition knowledge. Patient comments identified nutritional barriers of time and cost of food and/or supplements. The MA was notable for inconsistent provider nutrition recommendations, including use of oral supplements and discussion of feeding tubes. Based on these findings we designed a multi-faceted 4-stage CF nutritional algorithm that incorporates patient education and standardizes nutrition interventions based on severity of malnutrition. For each patient the CF dietitian tracks education received, nutrition goals, interventions recommended, and stage on the algorithm. Nutrition status of each patient is discussed in the pre-clinic multidisciplinary meeting, and we incorporate nutritional information, algorithm interventions, and goals for the next appointment into the CF clinic note template. Educational materials that describe nutritional supplements and financial resources were developed. Over the first 6 months of our nutrition initiative the average BMI of our adult patients has increased from a median of 22.0 to a median of 22.6. Conclusion: Nutrition is an essential component in adult CF care. We targeted measurement, process, and knowledge issues in our CF clinic to improve the nutritional status of our CF patients. We are now collecting reliable BMI data, and our nutrition protocol is starting to address gaps in patient education and ensuring consistent application of nutrition interventions. Our patients' BMI is improving but we have more work to do to achieve our goal of 75% of patients reaching target BMI by June 2017. Supported by a Geisinger Health Plan Quality Pilot Fund and the CF Foundation. Approximately 200 patients with CF are admitted each year to a 15-bed inpatient Respirology unit, which can accommodate only 11 inpatients with CF at a time. In the 15 years prior to 2013, the Program saw a 60% increase in the number of patients, yet the staffing for physiotherapist (PT) remained steady at two full-time equivalents (FTE). The PTs on the CF team have some responsibilities for other pulmonary inpatients and outpatients, as well as cross-covering PT absences on other clinical units. To improve the quality of care for our patients, in 2013 we developed a model to forecast the number of FTE PT required for the clinic size then. We also applied the same model after we have obtained an additional FTE PT to validate its accuracy. Methods: Data were recorded daily on the number of proposed and observed treatment sessions separately for inpatients with CF and non-CF, based on our priority matrix (high vs moderate); the numbers of outpatients with CF and non-CF we saw; and the time we spent on coverage for other clinical units, patient-care rounds, administrative/teaching/research activities, and overtime. We used these data to estimate the total time PTs were available for patient care and the time spent on each inpatient. We then used the total number of proposed treatment sessions for inpatients with CF and non-CF and the total time needed for both patient care as well as other duties to forecast the required number of FTE PT. Data were adjusted for the time we spent on covering other clinical units and for the time other PTs covered inpatients on the Respirology unit. Only data from weekdays were included. Public holidays and days with insufficient data were excluded in the calculation. Median (25th-75th percentile) were tabulated. Results: In 2013, data were collected by two PTs over 10 weeks. Data from 48 days were available for calculation. The number of FTE PT required for the clinic size at that time was forecasted to be 2.4 (2.3-2.7). The percentage of treatment sessions actually done for inpatients with CF was 91.7% (85.7-100%) of proposed sessions for those in the high priority category and 33.3% (0-66.7%) of proposed sessions for those in the moderate priority category. This information was used to advocate for increase funding for PT staffing. After one extra FTE PT was added, data were collected by three PTs over a 21-week period between 2015 and 2016. Data from 82 days were available for calculation. The same model informed us that we needed 3.1 (2.3-3.5) FTE PT for the current clinic size. The percentage of treatment sessions performed for inpatients with CF was 100% (90.9-100%) of proposed sessions for those in the high priority category and 50% (0-80%) of proposed sessions for those in the moderate priority category. Conclusions: This model effectively estimated the number of FTE PT needed for the increasing size of a large CF clinic. With increased FTE, PT was able to complete a larger percentage of proposed treatment sessions. The model can be used by other clinics to accurately forecast their staffing needs. (51):51-567). The University of Kansas Hospital is a CFF-accredited care center, providing care for 210 adult CF patients with an 18-bed inpatient unit. Due to an above average prevalence of multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in our adult CF population, we studied real-time infection control practices, relative to CFF and CDC guidelines, and developed an intervention to improve staff infection-control compliance. Objective: To assess and improve multidisciplinary staff adherence to current guidelines for the proper use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and use of a "Safe Zone" (2.5-square foot area within a patient's room door) in the care of CF inpatients. Methods: A quality improvement initiative was developed using the plan-do-study-act (PDSA) cycle to assess PPE and Safe Zone compliance. Seventy one-hour audits were conducted during day and night shifts over one week each on a CF inpatient unit. Audits were conducted pre-and post-intervention; staff members were not informed when audits were being conducted. Data from the pre-intervention audit informed the development of the interventional procedures. The intervention consisted of: educational materials (i.e., infection control brochures for patients with CF, a patient education board, door signs related to infection control, and an infection control in-service video for unit staff). Additionally, "Safe Zone" decals were applied to the floor of each room according to institutional standards for infection control. Unit staff members were mandated to complete the educational program and sign a compliance contract. A post-intervention audit was performed 2 weeks following the intervention to determine if PPE and Safe Zone compliance had improved. Results: The pre-intervention audit included 879 observations with 194 incidents of improper PPE and Safe Zone use by hospital staff (77.9% compliance). One hundred percent of unit staff completed the educational component of the intervention (n=50). The post-intervention audit included 573 observations with 42 instances of improper PPE and Safe Zone use (92.7% compliance). When analyzed by professional disciplines, nursing compliance improved from 79% to 92%, dietary staff improved from 75 to 93%, and non-dietary/non-nursing staff ("other") improved from 75% to 95% compliance. Chi-squared test for differences of proportions showed statistically significant improvement within each group noted above (p<1.1x10 -7 ; p<0.012; p<8.0x10 -6 , respectively). Conclusions: This study provided baseline knowledge of infection control compliance in an inpatient CF care center. Implementing Safe Zone decals, patient education, and hospital staff education improved PPE and Safe Zone use adherence to greater than 90% in all disciplinary groups studied. Our interventions are feasible in most care facilities and can be implemented to improve adherence to infection control measures widely. Carden, J.; Antony, V. Pulmonary and Critical Care, UAB, Birmingham, AL, USA Background: The UAB Adult Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Program started in 2000. In July 2011 the Adult CF Program was reorganized to improve adherence to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's (CFF) guidelines. Since then the care team has annually reviewed the CFF Year End Center Report, which is generated from the Port CF Database, to identify areas for improvement. In the summer of 2015 the team reviewed the 2014 Year End Report and found that 67.9% of patients 18 years and older were receiving hypertonic saline as compared to 92.5% of patients at the top 10 care centers. Daily use of inhaled hypertonic saline is recommended by the CFF guidelines. We initiated a quality improvement (QI) study to increase hypertonic saline use to rates comparable to those of the top 10 care centers. Purpose: The purpose of this quality improvement project is three-fold: first, to increase awareness of CFF Care Guidelines related to hypertonic saline usage; second, to determine if the usage rates in Port CF are an accurate reflection of the patient population; third, to evaluate each patient that is not currently on hypertonic saline and determine if the therapy should be added. The clinical coordinator initiated a chart review of each patient that was scheduled for a clinic visit in the fall quarter of 2015 and flagged those patients without hypertonic saline in their medication list. During the CF Care Conference, the CF care team evaluated flagged patients for hypertonic saline indication. If the patient was a good candidate, then a test dose of 7% hypertonic saline was administered in clinic. If it was tolerated then the prescription was generated. If it was not tolerated then the patient was given a 3% test dose. If the patient did not tolerate 3% or refused the therapy, a note was made in their chart. Results: A chart review of 133 patients was performed during the fall quarter of 2015. Before any intervention, 93 patients (69.9%) were on hypertonic saline and 40 patients (30.1%) were not. This demonstrated that the data in Port CF are reflective of our patient population, as Port CF showed 67.9% of patients were on hypertonic saline. The 40 patients that were not on hypertonic saline were evaluated in clinic; eight (20%) were started on 7% hypertonic saline, 15 (37.5%) were started on 3% hypertonic saline, 10 (25%) reported they did not tolerate 3% or 7% hypertonic saline, and seven (17.5%) refused therapy. After the intervention 116 patients (87.2%) were on hypertonic saline. Conclusion and Future Direction: Our QI-based intervention increased the number of patients on hypertonic saline from 69.9% to 87.2% in three months. The Center is now within five points of the top 10 care centers in the country for this metric. These improvements will be maintained long-term as it is now standard of practice for the Adult CF Team to review the medication list at each clinic visit and determine if the appropriate therapies, including hypertonic saline, have been prescribed. The Children's of Alabama/University of Alabama at Birmingham (COA/UAB) Pediatric CF Center utilizes equipment review to assess patient and family competence. This information is used to direct teaching or equipment changes for the patient and family to improve. The high frequency chest wall oscillation (HFCWO) devices are part of our CF population's lung health routine. The HFCWO devices have historically been discussed and reviewed in conversation without the actual device in the clinic setting. However, proper function and fit of the machine and actual vest garment are crucial for effective treatments. During a 3-month period in 2015 a pilot group of patients/parents were asked to bring their home HFCWO devices to clinic. Troubleshooting and adjustments were made to customize and improve HFCWO for patients' home use. Objective: To measure satisfaction of hands-on review and improve proper home use of the HFCWO devices. Methods: A respiratory therapist (RT) made contact with patients/parents via phone in which they were asked to bring their HFCWO devices to clinic for review and adjustments. This request was made 24 hours to 7 days before the appointment. There were 45 total patients involved in the pilot. During the clinic visit sizing of the garment was assessed, setting changes were made, and overall equipment review was completed. A satisfaction survey was given to the parents/patients to complete on the same day as the equipment review. Results: Of the 45 total patients involved in the pilot, 22 brought in their device and received adjustments to HFCWO settings for more personalized therapy. 14/22 (64%) needed new equipment due to damage to tubing, inoperable device, or improper garment size. Only 2/22 had no adjustments needed. 12/22 satisfaction surveys were completed at the time of HFCWO assessment. Among the responses 100% answered that the HFCWO device review was helpful and they would likely bring in their device to clinic for a yearly review. Conclusion: A significant number of patients/parents agreed to bring in their HFCWO device to clinic for review and evaluation. 91% of the devices assessed needed changes or adjustments. The device assessment in clinic was found to be not only beneficial for the parents/patients but also for the CF team to provide better standards of care. Based on the success of the project, our center has implemented annual HFCWO device review along with physical assessment of other respiratory equipment that is used in the home setting. has an active quality improvement initiative to develop a transition program based on best practices. Our goal was to identify barriers to effective transition to improve patient outcomes and experiences. Methods: An anonymous survey was administered electronically to members of the pediatric and adult CF care teams. This survey evaluated the caregivers' attitudes toward best practices in transitioning care. Patients who had transferred care from the Pediatric to Adult CF Program at Indiana University between 2013 and 2015 were also surveyed regarding 16 components of the transition program, as well as 7 impressions, pre-and post-transfer, of the adult team. Ratings were done with a Likert scale from 1 to 5 (1, strongly disagree; 5, strongly agree). SPSS (version 23, Chicago, SPSS Inc.) was used to analyze the data. Results: The patient response rate was 51% (32/63), pediatric providers 64% (18/28), and adult providers 83% (10/12). Overall, patients were least likely to feel as though their providers discussed transition prior to the age of 18 (2.72 ± 1.46), although most agreed that the pediatric team did discuss transition once the age of transition was reached (4.47 ± 0.88). The question "My pediatric team provided education regarding the transition process to me and my family" had statistically significant variance (p = 0.05) based on age at transition. There were several areas of statistical significance comparing feelings about the adult health care team before and after transfer of care (see Figure) . Pediatric providers felt least strongly about using charting flow sheets or readiness assessments during patient encounters (1.92 ± 1.11 and 1.92 ± 0.76, respectively). They did feel, however, that an initial meeting for introduction of the adult team was helpful (4.00 ± 1.04). The adult care team agreed that the use of readiness assessments to address needs and goals in self-care were less likely to be completed (2.25 ± 1.26). Conclusion: These data highlight areas for improvement for our program that include addressing transition prior to age 18 and providing more consistent education about the transition process. It appears that young adults have concerns about the adult program that improve after transfer. While generalizability of this single-center data is limited by a small sample size, the information provides a starting point to implement changes for improvement. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is the most common comorbidity in patients with CF. As survival increases, the incidence of CFRD will likely correspondingly increase. It is associated with added mortality; however several small studies have demonstrated improvement in lung function and BMI with insulin therapy. The oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is the standard of care for screening, however it is associated with a historically low rate of patient compliance. Emerging literature has suggested that detection and treatment of postprandial hyperglycemia, diagnosed by a 1-hour glucose challenge test (GCT), may be beneficial, however overall research is limited. Objectives: Our center's OGTT completion rate for adults in 2013 was well below the national average, at 4%. Root cause analysis suggested that this very low rate was related to patients forgetting to fast, inconvenience of the test itself, and lack of patient understanding of importance of the test. A recent systematic review suggested that a 1-hour GCT may be a more sensitive screening test for CFRD (Waugh N, et al. Health Technol Assess. 2012; 16:1-179) . The objective of this quality improvement initiative was to implement an algorithm comprising patient education, a reminder system, as well as compressing the OGTT to a GCT with a shorter fasting period, to improve compliance rates in adults with CF. This would also have the benefit of detecting postprandial hyperglycemia, a possible precursor state to CFRD. Methods: The University of Massachusetts Center for Cystic Fibrosis has 34 patients age 18 and greater, with CF without CFRD. At each of their quarterly visits they were assessed for need for CFRD screening, and educated by their physician on the importance of the testing. They were contacted the night prior to their next visit by the pulmonary fellow, screened for any acute illness that would preclude testing, and reminded of the test and to remain nothing by mouth (NPO) for four hours prior. Additionally, they were given the option to come for the GCT on a morning prior to their visit or to a separate testing facility if it were more convenient. When the fasting patient presented to clinic, a fingerstick glucose was measured. If this value was >108 mg/dL, the patient was referred for a formal OGTT. Otherwise, the patient then consumed 50g of oral glucose solution, and a one-hour post value was obtained. If this value was <140mg/dL, no further testing was performed. If the value was ≥140 mg/dL, the patient was asked to return for a full 2-hour OGTT with a 12-hour NPO period. Results: The 2015 completion rate increased from 4% in 2013, to 23.5% with the quality improvement intervention. Two of the GCTs did suggest previously unrecognized CFRD and patients were referred to endocrinology for further testing and treatment. Conclusions: The combination of patient education, compressing the test to a GCT with referral for OGTT if results were abnormal, and instituting a patient reminder system moderately increased screening compliance. There remains room for significant improvement, and further root cause analysis is ongoing to increase screening to more optimal levels. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is the most common comorbidity of cystic fibrosis (CF), with prevalence that exceeds 40% in CF adults. It negatively impacts nutritional status, lung function, and mortality. CF Foundation Care Guidelines recommend annual screening with a 2-hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Our OGTT screening rates were below the national average in our adult CF patients and there was no process in place to allow timely Endocrine evaluation of CFRD patients. We initiated a Quality Improvement (QI) project to further improve the diagnosis and management of CFRD at our center. Methods: We developed a formal multidisciplinary CFRD QI program in early 2013, including adult CF and Endocrine clinicians and an adult CF patient with CFRD. Our goal was to improve screening rates with OGTT, facilitate timely referral to Endocrine providers for CFRD management, and systematically monitor screening for microvascular complications of CFRD. We targeted a goal of at least yearly Endocrine visits for all CFRD patients. In order to increase adherence with annual screening OGTT, we arranged for patients to have testing done at our facility, typically in coordination with the CF clinic visit. We educated our patients about CFRD screening in advance and placed reminder calls to patients prior to scheduled visits. Once CFRD was diagnosed, we enhanced our process for timely Endocrine referrals and follow-up visits by sending electronic messages to the Endocrine clinic schedulers. We coordinated CF and Endocrine physician appointment dates when possible. Furthermore, Endocrine clinic diabetic educators often had same day availability to meet with patients in need of optimization of CFRD management or teaching. We improved microvascular screening by incorporating assessment for CFRD complications into our CF clinic template note and reviewed this during pre-clinic multidisciplinary meetings. Results: Our baseline OGTT screening rate was 11-46% (2011-2012). After implementing our QI project our OGTT screening rate increased to 60% (2013) and then again to 88% (2014) ; it remained at 86% in 2015. During this past year 70% of our adult CFRD patients were evaluated by an Endocrine clinician. Our median hemoglobin A1C improved from 6.4% in 2013 to 6.2% in 2014; it was estimated at 5.8% in 2015. Our median BMI increased from 21.6 kg/m 2 in 2013 to 22.4 kg/m 2 in 2014, and remained stable in 2015. Our adult CF clinic note template now includes microvascular screening, prompting providers to order labs or referrals if deficiencies are noted during visits. Conclusion: Our Adult CF center's OGTT screening rate has improved dramatically and our patients now have increased accessibility to Endocrine clinicians and diabetic education. This is reflected in our decreasing A1C measurements and improving nutritional status. Most of our adult CFRD patients have seen an Endocrine provider at least once this past year, and we anticipate further success with continued collaborative efforts. We have standardized our approach to monitoring CFRD complications. In the coming years we will strive to maintain an OGTT screening rate of 90% and an A1C < 7%. Background: In 2000, the Children's of AL (CoA) CF Center partnered with the University of AL at Birmingham (UAB) adult pulmonary team to start an adult center and transition program. The program evolved and included workgroup (WG) meetings between adult and pediatric (peds) teams, patient tours of the adult facility, and a transition clinic. Now the UAB/CoA CF center follows 128 patients ages 18-29 years with a median FEV1% of 71.8 and median BMI of 23. Methods: In 2014 the team revisited transition efforts with the goal of becoming more unified as a CF center. This started with a retreat in the fall of 2014 and focused on collaborative QI work. The retreat was jointly planned and well attended by all disciplines. Following the retreat, the WG expanded and began meeting monthly in order to rapidly implement change ideas and a shared drive was established to house improvement work. Patient and staff satisfaction surveys were administered and transition outcomes were tracked over time. Results: After the retreat, the team established a purpose statement and co-produced a list of transition expectations with patients and caregivers. Patient satisfaction survey results indicate satisfaction with preparation for transition and the care they receive at the adult center. Concerns include infection control, staying healthy through transition, being treated with respect and establishing a trusting relationship with the adult team. Staff knowledge and satisfaction surveys show adequate knowledge of transition and 100% agreement that the process is better than 12 months ago. Overarching theme from staff recommendations includes continued collaboration between the adult and peds teams. Since 2014, 8 young adults have transitioned. The mean time between the last peds visit and first adult visit is 98 days (range 51-198). The mean FEV1% for this group at last peds visit was 68% and the mean BMI was 21.8. 50% of this group received a tour of the adult facility prior to transition. Improvements that are now standard practice include: annual joint retreat and education day, monthly transition WG meeting, annual in-service for peds inpatient staff, visit from adult team member in peds clinic or during hospital stay before transition, tracking of transition outcomes, and development of educational tools such as a flyer highlighting similarities and differences between the two centers. Conclusions: A joint retreat between the adult and peds teams facilitates a collaborative approach to generate QI goals. Monthly WG meeting helps the team maintain momentum with QI work. Receiving feedback from patients, caregivers and staff about the transition process helps to ensure the focus of QI work includes things important to consumers. Our next steps include: development of a transition checklist, administration of a satisfaction survey to patients 6-12 months after transition, and provision of an information packet to patients from the state Title V program outlining benefit changes that occur at transition. Agreement between providers and patients was found in regards to usefulness (patients: 92% [11/12]; providers: 91% [10/11]) and working together to make decisions (patients: 67% [8/12]; providers: 73% [8/11]). Providers were more likely to agree/strongly agree that the dashboard helped discuss what mattered most to patients (providers: 91% [10/11]; patients: 75% [9/12]). Patients commented that the dashboard empowered pre-visit planning and development of an agenda driven by their goals/concerns, allowing for deeper evaluation and questions during clinic. The ability to trend health metrics side-by-side coupled with ongoing tracking, goals, reminders, and after-visit summary were also positives. Areas for improvement from patients/parents included confusing wording and potential disruptions in authentic conversation. Provider positives included strengths in preparation for visit, adding structure, focusing on patient concerns, usefulness of sharing graphs for FEV1 and BMI and streamlining clinic flow. Concerns from the provider perspective included adding clinician agenda, time for explanation, duplication of EMR and CFF Patient Registry reports, graphs that include more than simple trends, refinement of goal setting/action plan wording, and desire for alerts/notifications to assist with future planning. Conclusions: Frequent testing identified feasibility and utility of a dashboard for enabling coproduction. Areas for improvement were addressed through rapid PDSA cycle methods. Pilot testing prepared the dashboard for IT enablement and prepared sites for testing a high-tech version. Acknowledgments: Supported by Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (Grants #71211 & 72313) and CFF (Grant #OCONNO04Q10). Objective: To characterize patient knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs around IC practices associated with CF care at a tertiary care medical center (KUMC). Methods: We conducted voluntary, semi-structured interviews in a convenience sample of patients with CF. The sample included all adult patients with CF admitted to the KUMC CF inpatient unit during a oneweek study period. Surveys containing 17 qualitative and quantitative questions were administered. Survey questions focused on knowledge, source of knowledge, provider and self-reported patient-adherence to IC guidelines. Demographic data for each patient interviewed were collected from the medical record. Qualitative data were transcribed and coded for common themes. Results: 18 of 19 eligible patients participated, yielding a 95% response rate. 75% of subjects stated they had received and understood education on CF IC practices, primarily from healthcare providers. The most important aspects of IC as perceived by patients were hand hygiene, avoiding contact with other patients with CF, and use of personal protective equipment by staff. 60.9% of patients felt healthcare providers and staff were primarily responsible for IC, while 26.1% identified themselves as most responsible. Participants reported a significant difference in hospital staff adherence to guidelines when measured by role of staff member (e.g. nursing vs dietary staff), and a complementary investigation of IC practices showed supporting objective evidence for these observations (unpublished data). Assessment of patients' adherence to IC guidelines revealed 75% of patients self-reported always adhering to infection control guidelines in the hospital, CF clinic, or other medical settings, while 37% of patients reported adherence at home, and 33% reported adherence in public places. Face-toface contact between persons with CF was avoided by 83.3% of participants (who reported having rare or no contact in the inpatient or outpatient setting). Some patients (11.1%) cited living with a person with CF; the remaining 5.6% reported volitional occasional contact with others with CF. Conclusion: In general, patients with CF received and understood education regarding IC practices, identified and agreed on the most important aspects of IC, and reported good adherence with IC practices in the hospital and CF outpatient clinic. Most patients received their IC education from healthcare staff, although many were unaware that the information provided was obtained from specific CFF guidelines. These findings underscore the importance of engaging patients and their families in regular discussions about IC. Reasons for volitional contact with others who have CF may relate to psychosocial needs, and should be further studied. Our study was limited by convenience sampling, and future investigation in a validation cohort should be considered. and University of Tennessee Medical Center (UTMC) became one of eight teams in the OneCF Learning and Leadership Collaborative (LLC). This OneCF team evaluated current processes throughout the lifespan of a CF patient in East Tennessee to identify opportunities to improve transition from pediatric to adult care. The first action was to hold the graduating patient accountable for making his or her appointment with the adult clinic. At the patient's last pediatric appointment, he or she is asked to make their first adult appointment and provide the date and time before discharge. This solved two problems by decreasing the amount of time that patients go without CF care and providing a definitive end date for pediatric care. Next, the OneCF team began to concentrate on communication between the pediatric and adult teams. Although the two teams met semi-annually and medical records were faxed, patients were not discussed among the team members. Aim: To improve the consistency and quality of communication between the pediatric and adult CF teams while providing seamless transfer of care. Methods: Through the LLC, the team systematically addressed the communication issues, specifically at the time of transfer from the pediatric to the adult program. The first step was the addition of patient reports to the agenda of a center meeting. The pediatric coordinator and team provide a summary of each graduating patient; the adult coordinator provides updates on the patients who transferred the year prior. A hand-off tool was developed using the Plan, Do, Study, Act quality improvement method. Plan: A template was created to include information that is valuable to each discipline when caring for a new patient. Do: The one-page document includes six boxes for information: Nursing, Respiratory Care, Physical Therapy, Social Work, Nutrition, and Other. It serves as a summary page and is sent with each patient's medical record. Study: A Data Collection Plan Worksheet was used to develop a survey to evaluate its effectiveness. Each fall, the adult team answers: 1) On a scale from 0 -4, with 0 being not at all helpful and 4 being extremely helpful, how helpful was the information provided for the newly transitioned ETCH patient? 2) If you did not feel fully prepared to care for the patient, what additional information would have been helpful? Act: The tool will continued to be modified based upon the surveys' results. This multi-disciplinary patient summary is now an expected element of the transfer record. Results: The multi-disciplinary hand-off tool accompanied the medical record for patients transferring from ETCH to UTMC; 80% in 2014 and 100% in 2015. The primary goal was to provide essential information for the adult team to care for these patients. In 2015, 5 patients were transitioned to the adult team. A total of 29 surveys from the adult team were returned evaluating the information provided in the tool: 27 surveys rated the information Extremely Helpful and 2, Very Helpful for a total score of 3.9/4. Suggestions to improve the tool include the addition of age, height/ weight, and clinical trial participation. Thomas, R.G.; Chmiel, J. Pediatric Pulmonology, Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, Cleveland, OH, USA Introduction: Airway infection remains an important contributor to cystic fibrosis (CF) lung disease. Antibiotic therapy has contributed significantly to increased survival in CF. However, CF patients generally require higher dosing than those without CF because of differences in organism minimum inhibitory concentration, antibiotic airway penetration, and altered medication pharmacokinetics secondary to their CF. This can make dosing of antibiotics difficult and time consuming. We created the CF antibiotic dosing calculator (CFADC) with the goal of making dosing faster and easier for this patient population. Methods: The CFADC is an Excel file, saved to the shared computer drive for the pediatric pulmonary department. The calculator contains four pages for IV and oral dosing for adults and children respectively. For children, the calculator functions by inputting their weight. It then calculates a recommended dose and a dosing range based on published recommendations for CF antibiotic dosing. Maximum dosing is capped at the maximum daily dose and the maximum weight that can be entered is capped at 50kg. For ease of oral dosing the CFADC additionally recommends rounded doses for both tablet and oral solution within the calculated dosing range. For IV dosing the calculator rounds the dose to the nearest vial size to minimize wasted medication. The CFADC was put in use for 6 months then an anonymous survey was given to the pulmonary physicians and CF center staff. The providers were asked to estimate the time it took them to dose the antibiotics with and without the calculator. They were also asked to rank the ease of deciding a dose and their confidence in that dose on a scale of one to ten, with ten representing the easiest and most confident, with and without the calculator. Responses were collected and analyzed using a two-tailed t-test. Results: The survey was completed by 9 providers. One provider failed to answer questions regarding ease of use or confidence in dosing. The time to calculate the dose decreased by 3.06 minutes (p=0.006). We also showed a trend towards increased ease and confidence of dosing. Only one provider felt the ease of dosing and their confidence decreased (Table) . Conclusion: The CFADC decreased the time to dose antibiotics in children with CF. We also showed a trend towards improving the ease of dosing the medications and provider confidence in the dosing. The calculator could have the additional benefit of decreasing dosing errors improving adherence to recommended dosing, and creating more uniform dosing among providers at our center, however this was not studied at this time. Further improvement could be made to ease of dosing by creating an application providers could download to their phones. The CFADC has the potential to create easier, safer and more consistent dosing in patients with CF. Provider mean dosing time in minutes. Provider mean dosing confidence and ease of dosing on a scale from 1 to 10 with 10 representing the easiest and most confident. It is vital to each clinic visit and serves as a marker of the quality of care delivered. It also highlights areas of care that need improvement. In order to better serve patients with cystic fibrosis, the pediatric center at Children's Health distributed a clinic-specific patient satisfaction survey from March to May of 2015. Results of this survey were analyzed and an area that was suboptimal was the ability to easily schedule quarterly appointments. The CF Foundation's (CFF) clinical care guidelines recommend that people ages 6 and older visit their care centers at least four times a year. In order to comply with CFF recommendations and increase patient satisfaction in this area, it was imperative to implement proactive scheduling that could be done with minimal patient or caregiver burden. Methods: Our quality improvement (QI) project focused on obtaining an EMR-generated report from January 2015 to July 2015 and again from July 2015 to January 2016. The report tracked the number of CF patients seen in clinic during that time period and the number without a scheduled follow-up appointment. These reports were utilized by the schedulers to call and schedule patients for quarterly visits. Based on these reports and concurrent patient satisfaction surveys conducted by Children's Health, it was determined that the schedulers should enter the patient rooms during clinic visits and schedule an appointment prior to discharge to assure that follow-up could be made in a timely fashion. Results: Initial January 2015-July 2015 report demonstrated that of 209 different patients seen, 49 or 23.4% did not have scheduled follow-up appointments. The second report run from July 2015-January 2016 showed that of 214 different patients seen, 61 or 28.5% left without a follow-up appointment. Even though the second quarter percentage increased, there was positive change noted with the patient satisfaction results. In the 1st quarter of 2015 the Children's Health score for patient satisfaction regarding obtaining appointments was reported at 66% and by the 4th quarter of 2015 satisfaction increased to 100%. Patient satisfaction increased due to appointments being made prior to clinic discharge and because schedulers were proactively calling families. In situations where appointments were not promptly scheduled, patient satisfaction still improved because families were given explanation and assurance for a quick resolution. Reasons for delay were often unopened physician templates or attempts to coordinate care between providers from different disciplines. Conclusion: This QI project identified a need in clinic to reduce the number of families that leave clinic without scheduling appointments. We are attempting to reduce this burden by scheduling in the room prior to discharge and if needed, having schedulers call soon after visit. Moving forward, monthly monitoring of unscheduled appointments will be completed to decrease the number of patients who are not seen on a quarterly basis. Currently all 50 states screen for cystic fibrosis on the newborn screen. In Texas, CF screening was added to the panel in 2009. High levels of immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) protein in the blood may be a marker of cystic fibrosis. Texas uses an IRT/DNA algorithm, with initial screening using IRT and second screening, if required, screening for 40 common mutations. In some cases, understanding the possible outcome on a newborn screen and when to obtain a sweat chloride test on a newborn can be challenging. This confusion can lead to delayed diagnosis of cystic fibrosis and delay initiation of treatment. The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation awarded the pediatric center at the University of Texas-Southwestern Medical Center/ Children's Health a screening improvement program (SIP) grant in order to optimize the diagnosis and early treatment of newborns. This quality improvement project involves educating pediatricians, family medicine practices and NICUs in our catchment area to enhance their understanding of CF, newborn screening, and when to refer patients for sweat testing and for disease-specific care. Method: The initial step was the creation of an algorithm and a CF flier that detailed when to obtain a sweat test and when to refer patients to CF clinic. Secondly, we have created a 24-hour hotline via Children's Health paging system as well as a CF-specific email account for providers to utilize for questions. The CF flier and algorithm was given to the Children's Health physician liaison group to disseminate to all the pediatrician offices in our catchment area. Our nurse practitioner, with the assistance of the physician outreach program, has been to various primary care provider (PCP) offices to answer questions and review CF information. The algorithm has also been added to the Children's Health policy tracker as a quick reference guide. Results: Since initiation and distribution of educational material, we have had 9 newborns referred into clinic. Historically, the greatest delay was getting NICU babies to be tested and seen in a timely fashion. With this initiative, we have had earlier communication with NICUs in the community and have been able to send a CF provider, with privileges to outside NICUs, to provide consultation. This has allowed for better parental understanding of diagnosis and assisted in improved transition from NICU to the CF clinic. We have had 3 newborns referred earlier due to visiting PCP office. We have been able to offer these patients expedited sweat testing and a clinic appointment within 48 to 72 hours of confirmation. Neither the email nor the hotline has been utilized as much as direct contact to the clinic. Conclusion: Our goal for the coming year is to continue our collaboration with Children's Health in providing ongoing education and strengthening relationships with community physicians. We will also work diligently with the screening team at Austin to help identify newborns with CF and get expedited clinic referrals and visits.  Objective: Our cystic fibrosis center undertook a process improvement project in 2014 to enhance the immunization status of our patients against Streptococcus pneumoniae. Administration of PVC-13 (Prevnar-13) and PPV 23 (Pneumovax) is recommended for certain high risk patients by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) and American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP). Chronic lung disease is one of these high risk categories. The UK CF Trust and Canadian CFF do include the pneumococcal vaccines in their recommendations for CF patients; however, this has not been a part of the standard CF guidelines given to centers in the US. In a twelve-month period of time (2014) we were able to move from 7% of our population fully immunized per the guidelines to 64% fully immunized, albeit our specific aim had been to have 75% of our population immunized with both vaccines. (Morse MR, et al. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015 ;50(S41)392). In the second year of our project (2015), we sought to standardize the process so we would not lose the gains we had made and potentially improve our results even further. Methods: A variety of Plan-Do-Study-Act cycles were conducted. Algorithms that had been devised the previous year were improved. An electronic medical record system was installed. The Excel® data base from the previous year was continued and run charts made with reports of the data disseminated quarterly as opposed to monthly during the first year. In addition, comparative data between caregivers were added and presented periodically to stakeholders. Results: At the end of 2014, 64% of our patients had received the PPV-23 as compared to 7% at the beginning and 85% had received the PCV-13 as compared to 53% at the beginning. We lost ground during the 2nd year but by the end of the 2nd year or 2015, we returned to the level of our previous gains, with 66% of our patients being fully immunized, i.e. had received both vaccinations. Through an influx of patients who had previously received the PCV 13 our rates for the 2nd year ended up at 97%. Conclusion: We had difficulty sustaining the gains made during the year following our project of immunizing CF patients against invasive pneumococcal disease (IPD). We continued to meet hurdles ingrained in a longstanding hospital culture that could not be overcome without the project leader returning to champion the project. Without the recommendations of immunizing against IPD per the ACIP and AAP guidelines by the US CFF as other countries do, other measures that are required compete for attention and will not receive priority without a champion. Rowbotham, N.J. 1 ; Elliot, Z. 2 ; Morley, R. 3 ; Smyth, A. 1 1. Division of Child Health, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom; 2. Parent of children with CF, Nottingham, United Kingdom; 3. Cochrane, York, United Kingdom Introduction: We do not always have the evidence to support treatment decisions in CF. Presently there is no cohesive strategy to fill these evidence gaps, with research being driven by financial interests or those of investigators. Traditionally, patient views have not been considered when setting research agendas. Our objective, in partnership with the CF community, is to collect and prioritise these uncertainties for future research questions. Methods: We are undertaking a James Lind Alliance (JLA) Priority Setting Partnership (PSP) (http://www.jla.nihr.ac.uk). Through a free text survey, available globally to all with an interest in CF, we are collecting research questions. In parallel we have conducted a systematic review to identify the "known knowns" and "known unknowns" in CF treatment decisions, allowing us to exclude suggested research questions which have already been answered. Using a framework approach, true treatment uncertainties will be collated. Utilising a Delphi method through a second online survey, and then a final workshop, participants will prioritise these collated uncertainties and the top ten questions for clinical research in CF will be agreed. Unlike PSPs for other conditions, online conferencing methods will be utilised to avoid cross-infection, which we believe will widen participation. The timeline below shows the CF JLA PSP process. Results: In just over a month of the first survey going live we have had 367 responses with 799 questions submitted. Through advertising via social media we have gained submissions from all over the world, with the top two countries for responses being England (52%) and USA (22%). 49% respondents are people with CF and their families and friends and 50% clinicians. A variety of themes have been identified including nutrition, physiotherapy, medication, management of exacerbations, life-style, health care systems and even the role of politics. We will present a shortlist of the top 30 questions as voted for by the CF community. Conclusions: This exercise is engaging the CF community around the globe, giving a unique opportunity to help set the future research agenda. PSPs in other disease areas have led to major research funding for many of their top ten questions. The JLA CF PSP is supported by CF Trust, Univ. Nottingham, Nottingham Hospitals Charity. NJR is supported by an NIHR Academic Clinical Fellowship. The authors present on behalf of JLA CF PSP Steering Group. Timeline outlining the JLA CF PSP process. Background: Adults with CF expressed a desire to have a program in which they could use their real-life knowledge and compassion to mentor peers, not to share clinical information but to facilitate sharing the experiences of living with CF and its impact on life milestones, such as transitioning to college, dating, job experiences, etc. In association with the CFF Adult Advisory Committee and a Mentoring Development Committee, a pilot program was developed with the following aim: to offer an accessible, sustainable mentoring program that meets the needs of the CF community and achieves high levels of satisfaction for mentors, peers and CFFaccredited care centers. Methods: A survey was conducted among CF care centers to identify existing mentor programs and to assess the need/desire for a national effort. Next, a scan of non-CF organizations' peer mentoring was conducted. A plan was made to recruit 3 Adult CF Programs in each of the 4 time zones. A standard operating procedure document was developed. Training materials were created. The online platform allows self-paced course content, quizzes, and communication with the instructor. Content includes confidentiality, boundaries of mentoring, resources, effective listening, and positive communication strategies. Mentor-peer matching is based on the mentoring topic and considers peer preference in the following domains: health status, adult vs early diagnosis, age, gender, time zone, employment status, and interests. A central coordinator arranges all matches but the content of the discussions is the responsibility of the mentor-peer dyad. A Mentoring Advisory Group was convened to respond to program feedback and issues. The program was designed to be scalable if successful. Results: Most existing CF mentoring arrangements were informal and respondents were enthusiastic about development of a formalized program. The mentoring programs at USC (CF), Stanford (general), Imerman Angels (cancer), The Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation (spinal cord injury), Kidney Foundation of PA (chronic renal disease), MS Society, and Alzheimer's Association were reviewed. The common thread is content on how to be an effective, empathetic listener and share experiences in a non-authoritarian way. Twelve adult care programs were included in the pilot phase: Baylor College, Columbia University, Intermountain, Medical University of South Carolina, National Jewish, Northwestern, Oregon Health Sciences University, St. Luke's, Stanford University, University of Iowa, University of Pennsylvania, and USC/Keck. Preliminary results to be presented at NACFC will include number of mentors trained, site satisfaction with process, site assessment of program burden, number of peers accessing the program, number of matches made, average and range of duration of mentorship, and a variety of satisfaction scores. Conclusion: By listening to the voice of the adult community and working cooperatively, CFF resources can be used to create programs that leverage the power of personal experience with CF to provide peer-to-peer support. Preliminary results indicate that this program is feasible, creates a minimum of work at care centers, and most importantly, leads to a high degree of mentor-peer dyad satisfaction. Thomas, L.K.; Kimberly, B.; Rodgers, T.F.; Lauderdale, S.; Mims, C. Pediatric Pulmonary, Children's of Alabama/ University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA Inpatients with cystic fibrosis (CF) at the Children's of Alabama/University of Alabama at Birmingham (COA/UAB) pediatric CF center are cared for either by a medical resident or nurse practitioner (NP) team, both led by an attending physician. The outpatient CF team identified issues with continuity of care when caregivers or pharmacists called the CF center after discharge with problems such as lack of prior authorizations (PAs), unwritten prescriptions, lack of knowledge of where to get medications or prescriptions sent to the incorrect pharmacy. These issues caused delays as long as 2 weeks in reception of discharge medications. Therefore the inpatient and outpatient CF teams along with the Title V program, Children's Rehabilitation Service (CRS) which provides insurance supplementation for qualified patients developed a plan to improve discharge planning for medication prescriptions. Methods: The inpatient NPs and pharmacist, the outpatient nurse coordinators, and CRS social workers met to: 1) understand the role of each team member, 2) determine the process for CRS involvement with discharge planning, 3) determine the process for specialty pharmacy prescriptions, 4) identify what medications require a PA and who is responsible, and 5) develop a communication plan for discharge medications among the three groups. As a result of the meeting, an Excel file for documentation of new medications, refill needs, PA status and discharge date was placed on a secure shared drive for daily updates and review. CRS also developed a new role of hospital liaison to coordinate updated patient needs. Communication among CRS and the inpatient and outpatient teams has become a standard process. 116 patients/parents were surveyed regarding their knowledge of the discharge home plan and their ability to recite this plan as well as difficulty with prescription fills. They overwhelmingly agreed that they knew the home plan. About half of them reported that they were asked to recite the plan before discharge. Although very few reported difficulty receiving discharge medications, the outpatient nursing phone notes were used to measure delays. In January 2015 when the discharge planning meeting occurred, 48% of patient records revealed delays in discharge medications. Following the face-to-face meeting and implementation of the shared discharge document, delays were rapidly decreased to 28% in only 1 month and currently are at an average of 10% with some months without recorded delays. Discussion: A face-to-face meeting resulted in not only improved awareness of roles and processes but also a daily communication plan with improved motivation and knowledge of the plan to avoid delays in discharge medications. Most importantly, delays in discharge medications have greatly decreased. This is particularly impressive given rapid changes in policies of 3rd party payors and specialty pharmacies. In 2015, COA/UAB pediatric CF program established the practice of discharge goals set by the primary pulmonologist. It was recognized by program leadership that increased isolation of the inpatient team from the outpatient team due to the physical expansion of our facility may have resulted in patients being discharged prior to meeting specific nutritional or respiratory health goals that were expected by the primary pulmonologist. Discharge goals were instituted to improve communication and define patient-specific goals to determine resolution of pulmonary exacerbation (PE) or nutritional endpoints set by the primary pulmonologist. Methods: Discharge goals were initially set by the primary pulmonologist. However, as this practice became standardized, long-term goals were developed between the patient and /or parent and the team outpatient RT. Admission, discharge and follow-up FEV1% predicted (FEV1%) were collected on those patients admitted for PE who were able to reproduce reliable lung function test results. Goals were also established for patients unable to perform spirometry and included weight gain and symptom control. Patients were also given a survey related to satisfaction with hospitalization. Results: In 2015, 131 unique patients were admitted for 266 hospitalizations with 2782 inpatient days and an average stay of 10.76 days. In 2014, 200 unique patients were admitted for 228 hospitalizations with 2428 inpatient days and an average stay of 10.86 days. In 2015, 85% of patients reached their discharge goal. The most common reasons for unmet goals included patient goals not aligned with that of primary pulmonologist and special events for the patient. In 2015, the average change in FEV1% from admission to discharge was 5.47% and from discharge to clinic follow-up (average of 30 days) was -0.74% compared to 2014 in which improvement in FEV1% during hospitalization was 12% and change from discharge to f/u was -5.1%. Further statistical analysis is in process at the time of this writing. The hospitalization survey was completed at 52% of 221 encounters. The majority of patients reported on a Likert scale that the hospital experience had improved over their last hospital experience and that discharge goals were discussed with them. Conclusion: Established discharge goals improved communication between the inpatient and outpatient teams at least at admission when the goal was shared by the primary pulmonologist to the inpatient team. Pre-determined discharge goals did not seem to negatively impact patient satisfaction with the hospitalization experience and since goals had not been established for discharge in the past, potentially improved communication with patients. Although the improvement in average FEV1% from admission to discharge was lower in 2015 compared to 2014, the decrease in FEV1 at follow-up was less as was the number of unique patients requiring admission. Discharge goals are now a standard of care and we have a goal to increase jointly established FEV1% goals from 37% of the population to all patients able to reliably perform pulmonary function testing. Background: Our patient and staff satisfaction surveys showed that our patients felt they were waiting too long in clinic during quarterly visits and our staff viewed clinic as a very stressful place to work. Upon closer review of cycle time, we noted that our average cycle time was 125 minutes, but contact time with providers was only 61%, giving the patients the impression that there was a lot of wasted time. Our aim was to improve our patients' knowledge of and adherence to prescribed pulmonary therapies. We have found a global knowledge deficit among our patients as well as patient and staff dissatisfaction. Methods: We assembled a multi-disciplinary team including CF center director and associate director, coordinator, dieticians, social worker, respiratory therapist (RT), nurse practitioner, PortCF data coordinator, and a CF patient and her mother. The team conducted an assessment of clinic functioning by reviewing patient and staff satisfaction by anonymous survey and collecting cycle time data. We then set global and specific aims for improvement, examined clinical, functional, satisfaction, and cost-related measures using a Clinical Value Compass, completed a driver diagram to better understand factors which affect patient adherence, and began rapidly testing ideas for change using the Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) model. Interventions: Using PDSA as our approach, we have tested the following ideas: • Tracking sign-in and sign-out times for each patient for all providers in our multi-disciplinary clinic; • Utilizing one team member as a "flow master" to keep providers moving; • Trialing three different CF patient action plans in clinic to better communicate the treatment plan with families; • Based on tests, handwritten treatment plans added to the burden of care and lengthened the clinic visit without adding significant value to the patient, so we are developing an electronic version modeled after our preferred handwritten version; • As cycle time was highly variable between different patients, depending on arrival time, we are testing a new clinic template to improve flow; • Bringing sick patients into clinic on dates and times outside of the multidisciplinary clinic to lighten clinic burden; • Adding the CF Rise program to our clinic to help measure knowledge deficits and improvement; • Screening patients and their parents for anxiety and depression via our social worker and our team psychologist; • Instituting a specific RT educator who reviews airway clearance protocol, cleaning, and order of therapy with families at each quarterly visit; • Re-educating staff in the areas of infection control, respiratory therapy guidelines, and preschool treatment guidelines with improved staff satisfaction noted. Results: We have noted significant improvement in cycle time, contact time with providers, patient satisfaction scores, and lung function measurements. We also are seeing our efforts recognized outside of our microsystem, with recent requests to participate in QI initiatives regarding inpatient care of patients with CF. This project was supported by CFF through the Fundamentals Learning and Leadership Collaborative. Schechter, M.S. 1 ; Schmidt, H.J. 1 ; Williams, R. 1 ; Norton, R. 2 ; Taylor, D. 2 1. Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Richmond at Virginia Commonwealth University (CHOR@VCU) , Richmond, VA, USA; 2. Respiratory Therapy, CHOR@VCU, Richmond, VA, USA Background: Much of the variation in pulmonary outcomes that exists among patients is due to individual characteristics, but a significant component appears to be dependent upon CF center care. Previous investigations, including the CF benchmarking program and several observational data base analyses, suggest that CF centers that are successful at attaining better FEV 1 have higher expectations of outcomes they can achieve and a systematic approach that ensures a consistent and proactive response to pulmonary exacerbations. Recognizing opportunities for improvement in pulmonary management at CHOR @VCU, we attempted to incorporate this philosophy into a multifaceted program to improve CF outcomes that could be bundled and shared with other interested CF centers. Methods: The reorganization of CF pulmonary care at CHOR @VCU began in mid-2013 and included the following components: 1. Use of CF Foundation Patient Registry Smart Reports to track FEV 1 over time during preclinic meetings 2. Development of a pulmonary algorithm to define the therapeutic response to changes in FEV 1 . 3. Creation of a spreadsheet tool that calculates change of FEV 1 from baseline at every visit, completed by our respiratory therapist. 4. Use of run charts to track adherence to the algorithm. 5. Use of run charts to demonstrate the effect of the intervention on average FEV 1 of the population. The outcome measure we used was the rolling average of the best FEV 1 over the previous 12-months for each patient followed in the pediatric program. Rolling 12 month averages were calculated using center data downloaded from PortCF and then entered into a program in STATA, a commonly used statistical software package. This output was then illustrated in run charts generated in Excel. Results: A run chart of changes over a 3-year period is shown below. Mean of the best FEV 1 for children 6-13 years of age rose from 95.6% predicted (%P) in January 2013 to 108.4%P in March 2016; for children 13-18 it rose from 69.9%P to 90.6P%; and for all children 6-18 it rose from 83.7%P to 100.9%P. Discussion: Improvements in pulmonary outcomes can be accomplished relatively rapidly using basic quality improvement principles, including interdisciplinary team goal setting, standardized and proactive approaches that ensure consistent recognition and treatment of pulmonary exacerbations, and the use of data to follow the effectiveness of the process. We believe that the steps involved would be easy for other CF Centers to adopt and adapt to their own settings. Supported by CFF SCHECH14QI0. Mean of each patient's best FEV 1 over the previous 12 months Background: Differences in CF center care account for much of the variation in nutritional outcomes that exists among CF patients. Findings from the CFF benchmarking program suggest that CF centers that are successful at attaining better growth have higher expectations of achievable outcomes and a systematic approach that ensures a consistent response to small falloffs in BMI percentiles. We attempted to incorporate this philosophy into a multifaceted program to improve CF outcomes that could be bundled and shared with other interested CF centers. Methods: The reorganization of CF nutritional care at CHOR @VCU began in mid-2013 and included the following components: 1. Use of CFF Patient Registry Smart Reports to track nutritonal measures over time during preclinic meetings 2. Development of a nutritional algorithm to define the therapeutic response for children with less than satisfactory BMI and weight-for-length (WFL) percentile 3. Use of run charts to track adherence to the algorithm 4. Use of run charts to demonstrate the effect of the intervention on nutritional measures of the population The outcome measure we used was the rolling average of the best BMI or WFL (children <2 years) over the previous 12 months for each patient followed in the pediatric program. Rolling 12-month averages were calculated using center data downloaded from PortCF and then entered into a program in STATA, a commonly used statistical software package. This output was then illustrated in run charts generated in Excel. Results: The mean of the best WFL rose from 52.7 in January 2013 to 70.9 in March 2016; BMI percentile (BMIP) in children 2-10 years old rose from 64.1 to 65.7; in those 11-19 years it rose from 44.5 to 56.8. More importantly to us, the percentage of patients with best WFL<50 th %ile over the previous 12 months dropped from 57.1 to 28.6; the percentage with best BMIP<50 dropped from 42.1 to 29.1; the percentage with best BMIP<25 dropped from 19.3 to 5.5; and the percentage with best BMIP<10 dropped from 7.0 to 3.6. This is shown in the Figure below. Discussion: Improvements in nutritional outcomes can be accomplished relatively rapidly using basic QI principles, including interdisciplinary team goal setting, standardized and proactive approaches that ensure consistent recognition and early treatment of children with less than satisfactory nutritional status, and the use of data to follow the effectiveness of the process. We believe that the steps involved would be easy for other CF centers to adopt and adapt to their own settings. Supported by CFF SCHECH14QI0. Introduction: There is a clear association between BMI and lung function in adult patients with cystic fibrosis (CF). The CF Foundation recommends a BMI of ≥ 22 kg/m 2 for adult women and ≥ 23 kg/m 2 for adult men with CF. While higher BMI is correlated with higher lung function, there is also an association between lower BMI and poor clinical outcomes, including lower lung function. For this reason, the UAB Adult CF Center defines "urgent nutritional need" status as BMI of < 18.5 kg/m 2 in women and < 19.8 kg/m 2 in men. Objective: To improve nutritional status as measured by BMI in the severely malnourished urgent need category of patients with CF in the Adult CF Center. Methods: A multidisciplinary nutrition algorithm was implemented for patients classified with urgent nutritional need status. The algorithm focused on improving BMI through nutrition-focused clinic visits with a registered dietitian, social worker, physician, and nurse practitioner in shorter clinic follow-up intervals of 4-6 weeks. Nutrition interventions included: dietary counseling on increasing calories, use of commercial beverages, optimization of enzymes, referrals to other specialists, appetite stimulants, and initiation or optimization of supplemental tube feeds. Patients met with a social worker for assessment of financial status and depression/anxiety screening. Each patient received a written nutrition action plan at the end of each visit that summarized nutritional recommendations and interventions, medication changes, and provided specific caloric and weight gain goals. Results: At least two visits on the algorithm were completed by 22 patients (11 female, 11 male) identified as having urgent nutritional need status. Three visits were completed by 18 patients (11 female, 7 male). Only 45% of patients that completed a second visit and 17% of patients that completed a third visit returned to clinic in the recommended 4-6 week follow up interval. The average weight gain following initiation of intervention algorithm between initial visit and visit 2 was 1.2 kg. The average net weight gain between initial visit and visit 3 was 1.9 kg. Average BMI for females at initial visit was 17.4 kg/m 2 (n=12) and average BMI for males at initial visit was 18.5 kg/m 2 (n=12). By visit 2, average BMI for females had improved to 17.7 kg/m 2 (n=11) and average BMI for males improved to 19.2 kg/m 2 (n=11). At visit 3, average BMI for females had improved to 18.1 kg/m 2 (n=11) and average BMI for males improved slightly at 19.3 kg/ m 2 (n=7). One-third of patients (32%) that completed at least two visits on the algorithm moved out of the urgent nutritional need category. Conclusions: Implementation of a multidisciplinary urgent nutritional need algorithm, use of a written nutrition action plan, and a unified team message on improving nutrition led to improvements in nutritional status in the most malnourished subset of patients in the Adult CF Center. Despite limited adherence to the recommended closer follow-up interval, improvement in weight gain and BMI status was achieved. Future work will continue use of this pathway with a focus on sustaining weight gain and further optimizing nutritional status in subsequent visits. Sadeghi, H.; Keating, C.; DiMango, E.; Altman, K.; Tsang, S.; Sewell, W.; Robinson, V.; Pincus, M. Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA Introduction: Life expectancy has been increasing for individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF) and there are now more adults than children with the disease. A formal transition program for transfer of care from the pediatric CF center to the adult CF center did not previously exist at our center. This created obstacles such as patient and family anxiety and apprehension in transferring of care, missed or delayed appointments at the new center and lack of adequate communication among healthcare providers. The newly developed transition program aimed at: 1) Sharing responsibility between the pediatric and adult CF teams to secure a smooth transition of care; and 2) Improving preparedness for transition of patients with CF and their families with positive impact on patients' outcomes. Objectives: A survey was conducted to focus on patients' opinions regarding perceptions of the transfer process, timing of transfer to adult care and educational needs within the transition process. Methods: As part of the One CF Learning and Leadership Collaborative 2 grant, a transition team at Columbia University Medical Center was organized that consisted of providers from pediatric and adult cystic fibrosis care centers, an adult with CF, a parent of a child with CF and a coach. Patients who had transferred from the Columbia pediatric CF center to the adult CF center in the previous four years and patients 14 years and older were surveyed over a one-month period. The survey looked at their opinions and perceptions of the transfer process, timing of transfer and education within current transition process. Results: Of the seventeen patients who participated, five were ≤18 years of age, eleven were >18 years and one did not document age. None of the respondents felt that transfer should occur before high school graduation. According to the participants, the mean ideal age of transfer was 18.7 years. 70% were prepared for self-care, 65% were prepared for independence, 59% felt comfortable communicating with adult providers, 41% knew the location of adult clinic, 35% were prepared for relationships/ sexuality discussions, 35% felt prepared for insurance issues and 29% were comfortable making appointments with the adult clinic. Conclusions: CF patients felt that transfer to the adult center was best after high school graduation. The majority of patients reported confidence in self-care and independence. Based on our survey results, the pediatric program needs to better prepare adolescents for medical insurance issues and on topics related to relationships and sexuality during the transition process. For a successful transition, providers need to assess developmental needs and knowledge gaps, and individualize timing of transfer based on preparedness. In the future we hope to also evaluate outcomes after transition to adult care. Acknowledgement: Supported by CFF One CF Learning and Leadership Collaborative 2 grant. Johnson, T. Pulmonary, Nationwide Childrens Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) care is very complex, requiring skills in almost all life realms to do well. Many teens continue to rely on adult caregivers to manage their care. People with CF now survive into adulthood and require certain skills to maintain good health and satisfying lives. The pediatric and adult CF teams at Nationwide Children's Hospital recognized the need to develop and trial a multidisciplinary approach to successfully transition those with CF from pediatric to adult care. Objective: Our objective was to establish a smooth transition from pediatric to adult care for patients with CF, without decreased healthcare status. We defined a cohort of patients (age 17.5 to 20 years), with the goal to completely transition 50% by 12/31/15 with the remaining patients transitioning by the end of a 2-year cycle, or by age 20. Methods: A multidisciplinary team, including a parent member, identified skills and information crucial for self-care. Each team member identified a process within his/her area of expertise to assess and teach. Patients in the cohort (N=20) were identified from the CF Foundation Registry. Patients completed a Sawicki Readiness Questionnaire at enrollment, and identified the order in which they preferred transition topics, allowing the participants to have input in the process. Patients were tracked weekly. The team member responsible for the individual topic met with the patient during a clinic visit; a discipline-specific quiz was administered with follow-up teaching. The quiz was re-administered, with additional teaching if needed, until a score of 100% was obtained. Once all topics were completed, a handoff visit with patient, caregivers and both pediatric and adult program providers was performed. The patient was then eligible to be seen in the adult clinic and completed a second Sawicki questionnaire and satisfaction survey. BMI, FEV1, visits scheduled and calls initiated by the patient will be tracked for 2 years. FEV1 and BMI data will be compared to patients 20 through 22 years of age who did not complete the formal transition process. Results: At present 7 of 20 patients have completed the process and moved to the adult clinic. Average time to graduation was 15.8 months (range 11 to 20 months). Average change in Sawicki scores was 8.4 points (range 0 to 23 out of 100) with areas of greatest change being Tracking Health Issues followed by Managing Medications and Appointment Keeping. Patient satisfaction with the process was high, with all but 4 items on the satisfaction survey answered 4-5/5. Conclusions: Development of the program was time consuming but is now standardized and incorporated into visits. Identification of specific CF team members to track patient progress is imperative. Assessment and teaching can be done within the existing clinic visit structure. A two-year timeframe is adequate to complete the process for the majority of patients. The process occurs in the pediatric CF clinic, but requires excellent communication between adult and pediatric teams. Patient and family satisfaction is high; readiness for self-care improved during the transition process. Pociask, J.J.; James, J. Occupational Therapy Department and Cystic Fibrosis Care Center, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA Background: In May 2015, the Cystic Fibrosis Care Center identified decreased habitual physical activity for this inpatient population and recruited the expertise of our OT team to address this deficit. Adolescence is a transitional time of life and requires a need for developing habits, roles, and routines to support emerging independence. Adolescents with CF face additional challenges and barriers to participation in healthy lifestyles related to Areas of Occupation in the Occupational Therapy Practice Framework: Domain and Process (AOTA, 2014). OTs (Occupational Therapists) have a specific skill set unique to fostering increased independence and participation in meaningful activities. An inpatient OT program based on goal-setting was created and implemented to address these needs. Hypothesis: We hypothesize that participation in an inpatient goalsetting OT intervention for adolescents with CF will promote independence and increased participation in meaningful activities. Methods: OTs evaluated patients aged 14-22 with CF during inpatient stay. Evaluation includes motivational interviewing, administration of Children's Assessment of Participation and Enjoyment (CAPE), completion of Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised (CFQ-R) and creation of written daily schedule. Participants are asked to engage in self-reflection to create short-and long-term goals. OTs collaborate with patients on goal setting activities and facilitate engagement in meaningful activities both during hospitalization and after discharge. OTs provide therapeutic use of self and tailor treatment sessions to tap into the individual's intrinsic motivation to facilitate the self-awareness needed to make lifestyle changes. Results: From May 2015-April 2016, 24 patients participated in the OT program. 100% of these patients required some level of verbal cueing, to create goals. 96% of patients successfully completed the task of setting short-and long-term goals. 96% of patients were able to identify factors related to CF that created barriers to their independence and participation in typical and preferred adolescent activities. Goals were categorized based on Areas of Occupation in the OTPF. Categorization of goals revealed themes related to emerging independence. Highest frequency of goals and desire for independence related to Health Management (75%) followed by Work (50%), Leisure (33%), Education (29%), and Household Establishment & Management (25%). Health Management goals included independent treatment management at home, making one's own doctor's appointments, and increased physical activity. Conclusions: We conclude that an inpatient goal-setting OT intervention promotes independence and goal setting for adolescents with CF. However, most need more support in the area of health management. We speculate that OTs can play an important role in the promotion of independence and participation in meaningful activities for adolescents with CF and support their transition to adulthood. OTs use a combination of psychosocial, emotional, and physical interventions that can promote independence and the self-efficacy required to manage one's own life with a chronic illness. Chemtob, C.H.; Layish, D.; Calimano, F.; Summo, K.; Serr, D. CF Center, Central Florida Pulmonary Group, Winter Park, FL, USA Objective: Improve the screening processes for cystic fibrosisrelated diabetes (CFRD). The process begins with identifying patients without CFRD who need yearly screening and ends with OGTT results obtained and addressed. Setting: The Central Florida Pulmonary Group Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center serves 160 patients within a private practice setting. Background Information: The incidence of CFRD has been reported to be as high as 34.9% (2014 data). The rate of CFRD in our patient population is significantly higher than the national average at a rate of 42.9%. Despite the high incidence of CFRD, the average annual rate of screening nationwide is only 30% (2014). Our clinic's screening rate was significantly lower than the national average. We screened only 12.7% of the nondiabetic patients who required this test in 2014. Methods: The specific goal of our project was to increase the number of patients screened for CFRD from 12.7% to 26% in one year. The initial step was to study our clinic processes in general. First we increased the number of CF clinics by 50%. We initiated appointment reminder calls which allowed the CF Coordinator to instruct patients to get laboratory tests, including OGTT done prior to visit. To track lab results in "real time" we document in Port CF within one day of clinic visits. After making improvements to our clinic processes in general, we began to take steps to specifically address CFRD screening. We explored doing OGTT testing in the office but decided that this was not feasible. An action plan was developed to improve our CFRD screening process. First, the CF annual lab order sheet was revised to make it easier for staff to order labs and OGTT testing. The staff was educated on CFRD and the importance of OGTT screening. Patient education on CFRD and OGTT testing was completed by MDs and registered dietitian and patient education materials were provided. Financial and insurance resources for testing were provided by Social Worker. Additionally, a list of endocrinologist and the insurance accepted was developed to serve as a resource for referrals after diagnosis. Results: We compared the 2014 Center Report to 2015 data from Port CF. The 2015 Center Report was not available, so we ran reports from Port CF to analyze our results. The data showed a dramatic increase in CFRD screening from 12.7% in 2014 to 50% in 2015. In 2015, as a result of improved screening processes, 12 patients were diagnosed with CFRD. The rate of CFRD in our patient population is now over 50%. Conclusions: By changing our clinic processes to address problems identified in the clinic in general and specifically with CFRD screening, we were able to dramatically improve CFRD screening from 12.7 to 50% from 2014 to 2015. In doing so we improved patient care by diagnosing 12 new cases of CFRD. In 2016, we will aim for a CFRD screening rate of 75%. We would like to thank the CFF for allowing us to participate in the FUN LLC QI program and we are grateful for the guidance and encouragement our coach, Dr. Zanni, has provided. St. Onge, I.; Corrigan, M.; Coates, A.; Fletcher, C.; Manchester, N.; Abbott, A.; Tyrrell, S.; Wyatt, C.; Cairns, A. Barbara Bush Children's Hospital, Maine Medical Center, Portland, ME, USA Objective: To improve inpatient pediatric CF care, outcomes, and patient experience by improving communication and coordination of care. Our specific aims were to increase family satisfaction with communication among the CF team, to improve patient experience, to increase adherence, and to improve respiratory therapy (RT) and physical therapy (PT) services. Methods: This prospective observational time series was conducted at our small academic children's hospital between Sept 2014-Sept 2015 and supported by institutional senior management. A series of parallel interventions were planned and implemented by our improvement team which included a hospital vice president, project manager, resident and attending physicians, nurses, therapists, dieticians, social workers, child life, and parents. To improve communication, interdisciplinary rounds were initiated five days per week, personalized schedule boards were updated during rounds, and daily afternoon huddles with the team were introduced. To improve the patient experience our CF Family Advisory Board created an informational brochure discussing what to expect during the hospitalization, and our dieticians developed a high-calorie CF menu. To increase adherence a reward program was offered to the patients. Using our electronic medical record (EPIC) a clinical scorecard was established to track outcomes. FEV1 % increase and % weight gain were tracked as measures of clinical improvement. To improve RT services, a needs assessment was completed comparing the total number of pediatric inhaled therapies with current RT staffing. To improve PT services, a CF Bootcamp with expanded exercise options was established and FitBits were given to patients ages 10 and above to monitor exercise. Data were tracked using EPIC, RedCAP software, and pediatric HCAHPS family surveys after discharge. Results: During the study period, 48 patients were admitted for CF pulmonary exacerbations. Interdisciplinary rounds were successfully completed 5 days per week an average of 98% of the time. In the HCAHPS surveys, 92% of patients rated the hospital experience highly (national HCAHPS average is 79%). FEV1 during admission increased by an average of 8% (goal 15%), and the amount of weight gain during admission for patients below the 50th percentile was 4% (goal 3%). Since the start of the adherence program in June 2015 satisfaction data showed that 85% of 7 families who completed surveys felt their child was more compliant, and 90% of the 26 nurses surveyed felt patients were more adherent with fewer barriers to care. We successfully demonstrated the need for a full time RT on the pediatric unit and the position was approved. Fitbits were distributed to 21 patients as part of the CF Bootcamp program. Conclusions: We successfully improved CF inpatient care as measured by improved weight gain, family satisfaction, and enhanced PT and RT services. Keys to success included Family Advisory Board involvement in the planning of the project, multidisciplinary bedside rounds to improve communication, and the use of a reward system for adherence. Our next step is expansion of inpatient exercise programs. Ong, T. 1, 2 ; Cassidy, J. 2 ; McNamara, S. 2 ; Davis, C. 3 ; Gibson, R. 1, 2 ; Lion, K. 3, 2 1. Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; 2. Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA; 3. Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA Background: Clinical practice in the management of cystic fibrosis (CF) is shifting with the evolution of CFTR modulators. Kalydeco (ivacaftor), the first approved medication of this class, has shown persistent benefits in lung function and other disease markers with concurrent rapid adoption by the CF community. Recent approval of Orkambi (lumacaftor/ ivacaftor) has expanded availability to patients with the most common mutation in CFTR, but safe medication use is challenging to navigate with concern for associated adverse effects. Objective: To implement a standardized CFTR modulator assessment tool in clinic to determine modulator use, assess knowledge of routine monitoring, and capture side effects. Methods: A quality improvement tool, Monitoring Medication Safety in Cystic Fibrosis (MOMS-CF) was developed with the clinical team. The MOMS-CF tool assesses patient knowledge of CFTR modulator eligibility and monitoring, and reviews adherence and side effects associated with modulator use. Medication reconciliation and health-related quality of life (CFQ-R) are also assessed. Patients eligible for modulator therapy are screened prior to clinic, and clinic packets are populated with the MOMS-CF tool. Providers review the tool with patients during clinic visits. Results: Nineteen of 55 patients eligible for CFTR modulators at our center have been assessed by the MOMS-CF tool since initiation in March 2016. Seventeen patients (89%) were eligible for Orkambi. Two of 19 patients (11%) did not know they were eligible for therapy. Two patients knew of eligibility, but declined prescriptions. Of the 15 patients prescribed therapy, 11 had received medication. Four patients did not have cataract screening or monitoring labs. Of those with medication, 82% reported daily adherence, and 1 reported taking medication 4 to 6 days a week. Eight of 11 patients denied stopping other therapies while taking Orkambi or Kalydeco. One patient reported using airway clearance less often. Five patients reported symptoms since starting modulator therapy, including increased cough (4), chest pain (2), chest tightness (1), trouble breathing (2) , and stomach pain (1) . Four patients felt symptoms were related to starting medication, but have continued therapy. One patient with increased coughing discontinued the medication and has not restarted. Median CFQ-R respiratory domain scores for patients on modulator therapy were 69.5 . Conclusion: We successfully developed and implemented a tool that standardizes assessment of CFTR modulator use in real world practice. The MOMS-CF tool provides detailed ascertainment of modifiable patient level factors that may impact CFTR modulator use. Objective: To evaluate measures of fitness and core strength in CF patients who participated in ≥3 exercise program visits. Methods: Eligible patients are ≥5 years of age and at baseline health status each visit. The program is designed for fitness and cardiopulmonary evaluation by a Certified Athletic Trainer every 6 months prior to CF clinic appointments. Fitness education, exercise recommendations and goal setting also occur each visit. Among the metrics collected are Bruce protocol stage, time (minutes), and VO2 max (mL/kg/min); static hold core strength tests (superman, V-sit, plank-time in seconds (sec)); resting and active vitals (heart rate, respiratory rate, and SPO2); and CFQR and HAES scores. Means and standard deviations were calculated for all continuous demographic variables and frequencies and percentages were calculated for categorical variables. Linear mixed models and a generalization of paired t-tests were used to assess the patient metrics over time while participating in this program. Results: From January 2012-April 2016, 59 patients had fitness and cardiopulmonary evaluations done at 154 visits. A subset of 26 patients has completed ≥3 visits. Characteristics of the subset of 26 patients are generally similar to the total cohort of 59 patients, including mean age of 11.1 years (SD 2.9), mean FEV 1 % predicted of 98.5 (SD 16.2) , and were 65% female (overall cohort 56% female). The 26 patients completed 111 exercise visits: 9 patients had 3 visits (34.6%), 6 patients had 4 visits (23.1%), 8 patients had 5 visits (30.8%), 1 patient had 6 visits (3.8%), and 2 patients had 7 visits (7.7%). The mean time between visits was 332.5 days and ranged from 140-1169 days. There was slight improvement in V-sit of 4.81 sec/year (y) (p < 0.01) and an increase of 3.60 sec/y for superman, although this was not statistically significant (p = 0.08). Bruce protocol improvements include: stage increased an average of 0.36 stages/y (p < 0.01), time increased an average of 1.02 min/y (p < 0.01), and VO2 max increased an average of 4.10 mL/kg/min per year (p < 0.01). Discussion: Improvements in Bruce protocol stage, time, and VO2 Max suggest that patients with 3 or more visits had increased endurance while in the program. One measure of improved core strength (V-sit) reached statistical significance, but others (superman and plank) did not. Limitations include variable time between visits and small sample size. Patient nonadherence to exercise recommendations is another potential limitation, but has not been assessed. Time variability between visits is primarily related to system and scheduling issues. Future focus of the program includes assessing adherence to exercise recommendations, reducing and standardizing time between visits to decrease variability, and increasing sample size to determine if these or other improvements in fitness are sustained over time. Sawicki, G.S. 1 1. Boston Children's Hosp, Boston, MA, USA; 2. Riley Children's Hosp, Indianapolis, IN, USA Background: Individuals with CF are often unprepared as they transition care to adult providers and may have poor understanding of routine CF care, medication regimens, health insurance, and college/career development options. To meet the ongoing health challenges in young adults with CF, transition preparation starting in adolescence is essential. Objective: Using a multidisciplinary quality improvement (QI) approach, we established a program to facilitate the transition of patients from pediatric to adult care within our large pediatric and adult CF care programs. Methods: This QI project was initiated in conjunction with the CFF funded OneCF LLC2 in 2014. Our team included multi-disciplinary clinicians as well as a 25-year old with CF and 2 parents of young adults with CF. A needs assessment for survey was sent to young adults recently transferred to the adult CF team, parents of adolescents in the pediatric program, and our health care providers. A process map for transition was established and a OneCF Center transition policy was developed. Fifty patients age ≥19 years old followed by the pediatric team were identified as the initial transition cohort. A letter was sent to families communicating the goals of the transition program, CF patients were assigned a "transition coordinator" from within our teams, and existing transition tools including CF RISE were implemented. A quarterly transition meeting involving both the pediatric and adult teams was initiated to systematically discuss transition cohort patients, identify potential obstacles for transition, and to establish a mutually agreed upon plan and time frame for transfer. Results: The transition needs assessment survey was completed by 46 parents, 8 clinicians, 6 young adults. 85% of adults responded that such a program would have made changing from pediatric to adult care easier. 80% of parents surveyed felt it important for their child to understand how to manage therapies and communicate with their CF health care team before transitioning to adult care. 100% of parents felt it is important for patients to receive age-appropriate care under the care of an adult provider when time is right, 87% of providers felt the development of a formal transition program would make transfer easier and 100% felt it is important to have a formal transition program. Of the 50 patients identified, 15 have initiated CF RISE, a web-based knowledge and transitional care skill assessment. Forty percent of the cohort have been presented at our joint team meeting with 7/50 (35%) transferring care successfully to our adult team. Conclusion: Using a multidisciplinary approach involving our clinical care team and patient-family input, we established a formal transition program that prepares individuals followed in our pediatric CF program to transition to the adult program. A patient satisfaction survey is planned for a year after transfer to those who established care with our adult program. We anticipate that this program will improve transition preparation, care coordination, and communication within our OneCF Center programs. Stalker, H.J. 1 ; Jonasson, A. 1 ; Hopfer, S. 2 ; Moffett, K.S. 3 ; Schuler, P. 1 ; Collins, M. 2 ; Zori, R. 1 ; Delgado, S. 1 ; Hart, K.J. 4 1. Pediatrics, Univ of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA; 2. Univ of Connecticut, Farmington, CT, USA; 3. Pediatrics, West Virginia Univ, Morgantown, WV, USA; 4. Utah Dept of Health, Salt Lake City, UT, USA Introduction: Notification of a positive newborn screen (NBS) results in tremendous anxiety and uncertainty in parents from their first contact from the NBS program until resolution of the screen. Much of this anxiety is related to the fear of the unknown and an unrealistic expectation as to risks that their child might have CF. Most NBS programs mandate genetic counseling, but this service can be quite variable depending on the Center. Genetic counseling is frequently not provided by genetic counselors (GCs) due to funding constraints or availability of a genetic counselor within the CF treatment centers. A GC is not a routine part of most pulmonary clinics, and as such, must be brought in from another program. In smaller or more rural centers, access to a GC might not be possible. The use of telemedicine has allowed access to genetic counseling services in many regions that would not otherwise have had access to these services either geographically or financially. There are two major issues that are significant to the provision of better GC services to families who are identified through the CF NBS program: reducing inappropriate anxiety by ensuring that families have appropriate information about the screen, the risks of CF, and the process that will be involved in coming to diagnostic resolution about their child, and ensuring that families have a better understanding of the genetic implications of having a child identified as being a carrier for CF, the possibility of having a future child who has CF, and the screening of other family members that is appropriate given the specific structure of the family and the specific mutations identified. Methods: We have provided GC via telemedicine to patients identified as having abnormal newborn screens for CF at four disparate locations across the country: UF, UConn, WVU and the State of Utah. Following provision of GC, families completed a satisfaction survey regarding the quality of the information provided to them, and their comfort with the use of the telemedicine modality for provision of this information. Further evaluation of knowledge about CF was based on the Ciske index and an interview that was analyzed for content themes. Results: Analysis of satisfaction survey revealed enthusiasm and comfort for the process of GC and for its provision via telemedicine. Overall comfort was rated at 4.77 out of 5 across 10 questions related to satisfaction. Analysis of Ciske data revealed that knowledge of genetic issues related to CF was generally quite good. Conclusions: Provision of GC via telemedicine is well tolerated and appreciated by families faced with an abnormal NBS for CF with no differences noted between the centers involved in this study. Families report increased understanding of the process of NBS and decreased anxiety about the process. Analysis of the Ciske knowledge acquisition tool revealed good understanding about the implications of the CF gene in the family. The ability for one GC to provide services throughout the country makes this a financially viable approach to provision of a much-needed service. Lehman, A. 1 ; Sakon, C. 1 ; Kane, C. 2 1. Pharmacy, University Hospital, Indiana University Health, Indianapolis, IN, USA; 2. Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA Background: The presence of pain has been well documented in the adult cystic fibrosis (CF) population (1) (2) (3) (4) . Optimal pain management for patients with CF has not yet been studied. However, several disadvantages to opioid medications exist including tolerance, possible overdose, and potential for abuse. Additionally, opioids have known side effects such as respiratory depression, constipation, nausea, and sedation -some of which are especially problematic in the CF patient. Finally, opioids may suppress cough which may hinder full effectiveness of airway clearance. Purpose/Objective: In May 2013, in response to growing concern of opioid abuse in our patient population, a non-surgical pain treatment algorithm was approved by the IU Health Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center and inpatient pulmonary physicians. The algorithm emphasized a multi-modal approach with regimens that include non-opioid pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic treatment options (5) . The objective of our study was to evaluate the impact of the algorithm to reduce opioid prescribing. Methods: We conducted a retrospective chart review of patients with cystic fibrosis who were admitted to the hospital one year pre-and postalgorithm initiation, respectively, June 2012 -May 2013 and June 2013 -May 2014. Opioid name, dose, route, and frequency were collected from electronic medication administration records. All opioid doses were converted to a single daily oral morphine equivalent dose for comparison purposes. Patient pain scores and duration of hospital stay were also collected. Results: One hundred eighty-four admissions were included in the study (121 pre-algorithm and 63 post-algorithm). In the period following algorithm initiation, the average daily morphine dose decreased by 28.2% (65.5mg versus 91.2mg). The number of doses given intravenously decreased by 37.4% (43.7% versus 69.8% of all doses administered). Daily average pain scores were similar pre-and post-algorithm (3.3 versus 3.4, respectively) . Average length of stay was similar pre-and post-algorithm (13 days versus 15 days, respectively). Conclusions: At our center, implementation of a non-surgical pain treatment algorithm along with prescriber support reduced opioid prescribing without negatively impacting pain scores. Background: Low vitamin D stores are common in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients due to decreased absorption and insufficient intake. At our CF center, serum vitamin D is routinely checked as part of annual labs. Since 2010, a quality improvement (QI) goal for our center has been to improve patients' vitamin D stores, but we did not have a supplementation protocol to correct low levels. In 2011, 76% of our patients had at least one vitamin D level obtained as part of their annual labs. Since our QI initiative began, levels obtained increased to 96% in 2015. We used the 2012 evidence-based guidelines on the management of vitamin D recommended by CF Foundation as our supplementation protocol. Using this protocol we monitored and supplemented vitamin D in our patients with low levels. After implementation, in 2013, 55% of our patients had sufficient vitamin D levels. Objective: The purpose of this study was to evaluate if our current protocol is effective in providing adequate vitamin D supplementation, and if so, what dose was effective in maintaining sufficient serum levels. Methods: This is an IRB-approved QI study. All patients treated in the CF Center at Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Scottish Rite from January to December 2015 who had vitamin D levels drawn were assessed. In patients with a sufficient serum vitamin D level, recommended supplemental vitamin D dose was recorded and averaged into a daily dose. Supplemental vitamin D was defined as the amount of vitamin D taken in addition to any CF-specific vitamins or multivitamins. Data were excluded for patients with self-reported poor adherence, and for patients not taking a CF-specific vitamin or supplemental vitamin D. Results: In 2015, 163 vitamin D levels in 170 eligible patients were obtained. Of these 163 eligible patients, 116 (71%) were sufficient. After implementing exclusionary criteria, 47 of the 116 patients were taking supplemental vitamin D and were included in this analysis. Supplemental vitamin D dose ranged from 800 International Units (IU) -10,000 IU daily. The average supplemental daily dose was 2812 IU (SD±2392 IU). Discussion: Since its initiation in 2010, the goal of our QI project has been to improve routine vitamin D monitoring and serum vitamin D levels in our patients. From 2013-2015, patients with sufficient serum vitamin D increased from 55% to 71%, respectively, suggesting our current protocol is meeting vitamin D requirements in the majority of our patients. This prompted us to examine the supplemental vitamin D dose in our patient population. We found that patients maintained sufficient serum levels when supplemented with an average of 2812 IU vitamin D in addition to any CF-specific vitamins or multivitamins. Adherence, vitamin D formulation and degree of malabsorption may explain the wide range in supplemental vitamin D dose required (800 IU-10,000 IU daily). Our goals for 2016 are to further educate patients on the importance of vitamin D and thus improve adherence to the recommended regimen. Finally, utilizing these results we plan to further investigate and implement a standard maintenance dosing protocol of approximately 3000 IU daily in all of our patients. Parkinson, H.F. 1 ; Reilly, C.C. 2 ; Channon, K. 1 ; Elston, C. 1 1. Cystic Fibrosis Team, Kings College Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 2. Physiotherapy, Kings College Hospital, London, United Kingdom Introduction: Advances in medical management mean life expectancy in CF continues to improve. With this the number of patients living with complex end-stage disease is increasing. Kings College Hospital is a specialist CF centre for the care of 227 adults. In addition to standard care, the CF team provides a multidisciplinary home care service which is offered to patients across the full spectrum of disease severity. This aims to provide additional, convenient support to patients in managing their disease. Patients are seen at home for a number of reasons. In the last 12 months there has been a 50% increase in referrals to support patients living with end-stage disease. This study aimed to explore the role of physiotherapy in supporting these patients in their own home. Method: Retrospective review of physiotherapy provision within the CF home care service (April 2015-April 2016) for patients where end-stage support was the primary reason for the visit. Descriptive data included number of patients seen, total time spent with patients and whether the visit avoided an additional hospital attendance. The interventions performed were coded and summarised using descriptive statistics. Results: 141 visits were completed to 65 patients. Of these, 32 visits (9 patients, FEV1 17-32% predicted, all requiring supplemental oxygen and NIV) were for end-stage support. The mean (range) number of visits per patient was 3.5 (1-10) and duration of each visit was 91 (45-150) minutes. Over half (56%) of these visits prevented an additional hospital attendance. In the context of the overall service, 23% of visits were for end-stage support; however, this accounted for 48.5% of the total home care service time. 154 interventions were identified and coded into 14 categories (Figure) . The majority (>70%) of interventions focused on the complex symptoms and support required to manage the unpredictable nature of end-stage disease, including the practicalities of living with oxygen and NIV at home. Conclusion: Reviewing end-stage patients in their own home facilitates the delivery of complex respiratory interventions that would otherwise require attendance at hospital, thus reducing patient burden. The time spent on delivering these visits must be acknowledged, however this time allows the delivery of personalised care and context-specific interventions focused on addressing the day-to-day challenges patients with end-stage CF face at home, which cannot be replicated in the outpatient clinic. Seffrood, E. 1 ; Albee, K. 1 ; Becker, C. 1 ; Harmelink, J. 1 ; Iannacchino, K. 2 ; Pfeil, D. 1 ; Rock, M.J. 1 1. Pediatric Pulmonology/CF Center, American Family Children's Hospital, Madison, WI, USA; 2. Dartmouth Institute, Lebanon, NH, USA Introduction: The Pediatric CF Center at American Family Children's Hospital in Madison, WI was awarded a Learning and Leadership QI Grant (Fun LLC) from the CFF in June 2015 to focus on a nutrition or pulmonary QI project. The first task was to examine our patient registry data. A review showed a downward trend in nutritional outcomes in our 0-2 year olds. Mean weight to length (w/l) in 2006 was close to the 75th%ile whereas mean w/l in 2014 was at the 50 th % ile. If the downward trend continues, w/l will fall below the CFF goal of w/l at the 50th%ile or above on the CDC Growth Charts. Aim: To improve the process of achieving optimal nutrition for our 0-2 year olds with CF. By working on this process we will improve w/l and eventually FEV1. The positive relationship between weight and lung function is well known. Many studies show the earlier goal w/l is achieved, the healthier people are in the long run. Subjects: We included all patients diagnosed with CF under the age of 2 years by June 2015. We did not include patients with CRMS or those in the NICU. Total patients = 15. Of those, 11 are male (73%), 4 are female (27%), 13 are PI (87%), 2 are PS (13%), and 6 (40%) had a w/l <50th%ile with a mean w/l of 49.8% for the entire group. Methods: We have completed several Plan-Do-Study-Act cycles (PDSA) focusing on different aspects of clinical care. Cycles included: 1) adding a pre-clinic huddle, 2) standardizing length measurements in clinic; infants are hard to measure and getting a false high length sends caregivers and practitioners wrong information about growth, 3) calling all patients with a w/l <50th%ile 2 weeks after the clinic visit to review patient specific goals, 4) requiring all patients to complete a 3 day food record to determine calorie intake and make targeted recommendations to reach goal of 150-200% of the Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA), 5) improving timeliness of rooming patients, 6) improving organization and accountability of stocking rooms to increase efficiency, 7) providing written material on w/l and BMI and how it positively correlates to lung function, 8) providing earlier and better information about tube feedings through a family-to-family letter. Results: Although still in progress, to date our mean w/l has increased to 63.56%. The average variability in length measures was 0.7 cm so it is now mandatory to take an average of 3 measures. Of the 6 patients with a w/l <50th%ile, the average calorie intake went from 147% of the RDA to 187% and 1 patient received a feeding tube. Additional results of changes are pending. Conclusions: Standardizing our length measurements, calling patients to follow up on goals, evaluating food records, holding pre-clinic huddles, and increasing communication with families have become a routine part of clinic care and have improved w/l in 0-2 year olds. Having dedicated time to meet and work on a QI project with the help of a coach has enabled us to bring several ideas into reality overall benefitting the nutritional status, and in the long run the lung function of patients with CF. Supported by the CFF Fun LLC Grant. Background: Good nutrition in infants with cystic fibrosis is imperative to positively impact lung function and quality of life. Our center identified the under-one age group as a specific target for improving nutritional outcomes. As a large center with many physicians and dietitians managing CF patients, we noted each provider/dietitian team had a non-standardized approach for managing infants. Our center developed a specific algorithm for patients under one year of age to standardize care within our center with the goal of improving nutritional status in our younger patients. Objective: Our primary aim was to increase the weight-for-length percentile in our infant population to the recommended CF goal of ≥ 75th percentile. Our secondary aim was to measure the compliance with the use of our nutrition algorithm. Methods: A multidisciplinary quality improvement committee specifically focused on creating an algorithm to be used with new patients diagnosed through newborn screening during the first year of life. The committee specifically chose to focus on maintaining infants' enzyme dose above 1500 units of lipase per kilogram per meal as well as use and rapid step-up of higher caloric concentration of the infants' milk (expressed breast milk or formula). The two components for measuring adherence of the algorithm were enzyme dose and formula/expressed breast milk concentration. The outcome measured was the weight-for-length percentile. We compared infants diagnosed via newborn screening for two years prior to implementation at their one year of life mark compared to the one year of life mark for patients treated since implementation of the algorithm. Results: Our team has had 9 patients that have reached their first birthday since implementing the new nutrition algorithm. Average weight-forlength in patients on the first birthday prior to the start of our algorithm was 60.8 (n=22). After implementation of the algorithm the average weightfor-length percentile was 75.34 (n=8). Compliance with increasing enzyme dose was 100% at 6 months of age and 75% at one year of age. Compliance with higher calorie formula was 75% at 6 months and 75% at 12 months. Conclusions: In our limited sample size, we have been able to successfully increase the average weight-for-length percentile in infants at one year of age. Our committee has also shown that in a large center with many different personnel taking care of patients, a specific center-based algorithm can be beneficial in standardizing care. Future Plans: Our center plans to continue following the nutrition algorithm in our patients under one year old and following outcomes to see if providing higher enzyme doses before malabsorptive symptoms occur and increasing caloric concentration of the infant's diet will further improve nutrition status and have sustainable benefits without adverse events. Parad, R.; Murphy, K.; Langner, E. Newborn Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA Background: NBS, the process of testing blood collected on filter paper after birth and identifying babies at risk for life-threatening disorders, is a complex public health process that has been in place in the U.S. for over 50 years. To be effective, collection and transport of the sample, lab testing, and result reporting must be timely, as diagnostic and treatment delays impact neonatal outcome. The Secretary's Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newborns and Children (ACHDNC) recommends that NBS results for time-critical disorders should be reported by the 5th day of life. For this to be accomplished, NBS must be collected and transported to the newborn screening lab -a multistep intrahospital process also known as the "pre-analytic" phase of NBS -when a newborn is 24-48 hours of age. Aims: 1) Develop a hospital-based QI process toolkit to minimize the risk of missing or delaying the collection and transport of NBS samples at Brigham and Women's Hospital (BWH), Boston, MA. 2) Disseminate this toolkit to other MA birth centers which can use it to analyze and optimize their own performance on timeliness of NBS sample collection and transport to reduce the statewide risk of delayed and missed samples. Methods: Using standard QI approaches, we developed a pre-analytic process chart and REDCap database to track data on NBS sample draws for all BWH births from 2/1/15-5/1/16. Using time of sample collection and transport, we calculated pre-intervention baselines for the metric "% samples not sent on the appropriate day (AD)" (24-48 hours after birth). Responses of this metric to interventions of 4 Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycles were assessed and impact graphed using an SPC p-chart. We decreased the number of NBS samples sent to our state NBS lab outside of the AD window from 40% to 3% through 4 PDSA cycles. This improvement translates into decreasing the time from birth to NBS sample arrival at the state lab from over 3-4 days to 2-3 days, allowing for more rapid generation of NBS results and reporting. Discussion: To improve pre-analytic performance within our hospital, we developed an NBS QI toolkit which identified problems and facilitated interventions to address those problems and provided data to assess the effectiveness of the intervention over time. The toolkit will be disseminated to MA birth hospitals through NeoQIC, a statewide NICU QI network, where it can be adopted by other hospitals to map a detailed process, determine baselines, identify problem points, and track progress. We will measure the effectiveness of the toolkit by comparing metrics pre-and postdissemination. Minimizing pre-analytic time metrics for sample collection and transport of NBS samples can be accomplished by our proposed process, potentially cutting days off the time from birth to result reporting, and minimizing delays in diagnosis and treatment of CF and other life-threatening disorders. Supported by a CF Foundation Newborn Screening Quality Improvement Grant. Study data were collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at BWH, J Biomed Inform. 2009 Apr;42 (2):377-81. Background: It is widely agreed upon that nutritional status is an important, independent determinant of lung function and survival in individuals living with CF. The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) established the goal body mass index (BMI) for men to be a minimum of 23kg/m 2 and for women to be a minimum of 22kg/m 2 . However, nutritional knowledge and understanding of basic dietary concepts is low and there is a lack of awareness about the link between diet and disease. These problems can be attributed to poor education, inadequate adult-centered educational materials, or misconceptions by the care team. Methods: A review of the CFF Patient Registry data showed that 15% of the CF patient population at the Adult CF Program of Colorado had a BMI of 19kg/m 2 or less. To assess nutritional knowledge and attitudes in these patients, a questionnaire was developed from other validated questionnaires, such as CFQ-R and CFQoL, but was not validated itself. The questionnaire was administered between June 1 and November 30, 2015 to patients that presented in clinic with a BMI less than 19kg/m 2 . Results: During the 6-month period of administration, the questionnaire was completed by 31 subjects with a BMI less than 19kg/m 2 : 16 females and 15 males. This equals an overall return rate of 62% of possible patients. The results identified key areas of improvement. Subjects' knowledge of CFF-recommended BMI was low at 12.5% for females and 33% for males, while correct knowledge of their own BMI range was higher at 62.5% for females and 87% for males. Calorie content of foods was incorrectly identified by 56% of females and 60% of males. Twenty-seven percent of males also incorrectly identified high calorie beverages. Body image issues were reported by females (25%), but not males (0%). A feeding tube has been used by only 6% of females and 33% of males. Though 100% of both females and males know when to take enzymes, the symptoms of not enough enzymes were incorrectly identified by 25% of females and 20% of males. Conclusion: Educational efforts focused on adult nutrition are needed. Existing materials are written with young children or adolescents in mind. As the CF population gets older, age-appropriate materials that discuss dietary requirements need to be developed. Teaching moments about BMI and food choices should be incorporated into care visits by a multidisciplinary team. Additionally, the care team needs to be aware of how the patient manages nutrition-related behaviors, both psychosocially and physically. Collaboration with pediatric centers is crucial to ensure the relationship between nutrition and pulmonary function is communicated to both parents and patients prior to transition. Dunn, K.M. 6 ; Hovater, C. 6 ; George, C. 6, 1 ; Polineni, D. 6, 2 ; Riekert, K.A. 6, 3 ; Sawicki, G.S. 6, 4 ; Stark, L.J. 6, 5 1. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA; 2. University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, KS, USA; 3. Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 4. Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 5. Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 6. CFFT STRC Steering Committee, Bethesda, MD, USA Background: The Success with Therapies Research Consortium (STRC) was created to study how to help people with CF and their families better balance completing CF treatments and living life. STRC studies involve different levels of daily effort, risk and reward than traditional clinical drug and device trials. Objective: To gather stakeholder feedback on appropriate compensation levels for STRC studies. Methods: 35 adults with CF, 35 caregivers, and 17 STRC researcher team members (RTMs; eg, principal investigators, research coordinators) completed an online survey about hourly compensation, reimbursement for expenses, and compensation for ongoing consultation. The survey for people with CF and their families was sent to the CF Foundation Adult and Family Advisors network; responses represented 48 different CF care centers. The survey results from RTMs represents 16/21 STRC sites. Results: The majority of adults/caregivers (84%) and RTMs (77%) agreed that $30/hour is an appropriate compensation rate for STRC studies. For simple studies (eg, a ten-minute survey), adults/caregivers (79%) and RTMs (82%) agreed that $10 was appropriate minimum compensation. However, several adults/caregivers preferred $25, citing existing time burdens, value of their input, and other organizations' compensation standards. For long or complex studies, most respondents (88% adults/ caregivers and 90% RTMs) agreed that additional pay should be considered but were divided between a completion bonus (40% adults/caregivers and 58.8% RTMs) or escalating pay structure (34% adults/caregivers and 12% RTMs). Comments noted that escalating pay might be more effective without penalizing participants who withdraw from a study due to unforeseen illness. Over 70% of respondents agreed participants should be reimbursed for mileage, parking, and meals -even if visits coincide with a clinic visit. 50% to 92% of respondents agreed that a $30/hour rate was appropriate for research consultants -including serving on a patient and family advisory board -regardless of whether the consultant was a person with CF, caregiver, or RTM. Throughout the survey, comments emphasized the time and financial burden of CF generally and study participation specifically. Compensation for research participation and consultant service was seen as necessary to encourage broader, more diverse engagement in research. Conclusions: Overall, adults/caregivers and RTMs agreed on study compensation parameters. Adults/caregivers stressed that the time and financial burdens of CF should be factored in when considering compensation for study participation. This stakeholder feedback will shape STRC compensation guidelines. Funding Source: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics Inc. Objective: Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients often require intravenous antibiotics for treatment of lower respiratory tract infections using totally implantable venous access devices (TIVADs) and peripherally inserted central venous catheters (PICCs). Complications may be associated with substantial morbidity, and specific patient characteristics or care practices related to complications have not been clearly established. Vascular and infectious complications of TIVADs and PICCs in CF patients have been described primarily in single-center studies. In this study we examine variation in complication rates within a regional CF consortium. Methods: We conducted a retrospective review of PICCs and TIVADs in both adults and children over an eight-year period at three CF centers in Northern New England. Demographic factors including genotype, co-morbid conditions, pulmonary and nutritional status when the line was placed, and microbiology results were collected. Line-specific information included line type, lumen size, number of lumens, and use of anticoagulation. Vascular complications were defined as line occlusion or venous thrombosis. Infectious complications included blood stream infections and local cellulitis. A survey was administered to attending physicians at each site to assess practice variation. PICC complications were modeled using multilevel logistic regression with line nested within patient. Time to complication was modeled using a Cox proportional hazards regression for patients' first TIVAD recorded during the study period. Results: Of 592 patients (368 pediatric, 224 adult), 256 had lines in place during the study period. We evaluated a total of 912 lines (851 PICCs, 61 TIVADs). The overall rate of vascular and infectious complications with PICCs was 2.38 events/1000 catheter-days (TCD) and 0.41 events/TCD, respectively. The overall rate of complications with TIVADs was lower than for PICCs: 0.25 events/TCD and 0.20 events/TCD for vascular and infectious complications, respectively. The median survival of TIVADs was 514 days and did not vary significantly by center, (p=0.85). Interestingly, we observed a range in the overall PICC complication rate per TCD across centers varying from 1.96 to 12.96. We found the probability of a line complication in a treated patient varied across centers (0.026 to 0.141, p=0.001). The physician survey showed inconsistency amongst the three centers for anticoagulation for treatment of thrombosis or prophylaxis for recurrent thrombosis. Conclusion: Use of central venous catheters in CF patients is associated with vascular and infectious complications. The rate of complications per catheter day is higher in PICCs than in TIVADs. We observed significant center effects in complication rates for PICC lines but not for TIVADs and inconsistency in practice patterns between centers for management of thrombotic complications. Tracking complications in the CF Foundation Patient Registry may identify centers of excellence in line management. The caregivers are primarily responsible for carrying out the complex daily treatment of a patient with cystic fibrosis (CF) along with ensuring treatment regimens, appointments, prescription refills, and making sick calls. During the transfer to an adult clinic, patients are expected to manage their disease. Discussion of key self-management skills occurs between caregivers, healthcare providers, and patients. The objective of this project was to compare pediatric versus adult patient ratings of key self-care skills for transfer. Methods: A "Self Care Skills Worksheet" was adapted from existing tools (Wood D, et al. Acad Pediatr 2014; 14:415. Reiss JG, et al. Pediatrics 2005; 115:112. Sawicki GS, et al. J Pediatr Psychol. 2011; 36:160) . The worksheet identified 9 key self-care skills for transfer readiness, including: 1) contact CF clinic, 2) call provider with unusual/unexpected changes in health, 3) call provider if cannot get prescribed medication, 4) reorder medication before prescription runs out, 5) call provider if cannot/do not get equipment/supplies, 6) call equipment/supplies company with problems, 7) notify provider's office with insurance changes, 8) ask provider/staff to clarify when you do not understand, and 9) inform provider/staff when you are uncomfortable. Responses were ranked on a Likert scale: I always do this (4), I am learning to do this (3), I don't know how to do this, but I want to learn (2) , I don't know how to do this (1), I don't need to do this (0). The worksheet was administered June-August 2015 to patients ages 14-25. A median [interquartile range] score for each skill was compared between patients in pediatric vs adult care. A p-value of 0.05 was utilized to determine significance. We hypothesized that adult patients would endorse higher ratings than pediatric patients. A total of 22 patients completed the worksheet (pediatric=10, adult=12). Four key skills were significantly different (p < .05) between pediatric and adult patients: call provider with unusual/unexpected changes in health (2.5 [0, 4.0] vs 4.0 [4.0, 4.0] ), call provider if cannot get prescribed medication (1.0 [0, 2.5] vs 4.0 [3.0, 4.0] ), reorder medications before prescription runs out (2.0 [0, 4.0] vs (3.0 [3.0, 4.0] ), and call provider if cannot/ do not get equipment/supplies (2.0 [0.8, 2.3] vs 4.0 [3.0, 4.0] ). Scores on the remaining items did not differ between pediatric and adult patients. Conclusion: Pediatric patients self-rated as lower in four key skill areas, notably in areas requiring communication with health care providers. This highlights the need for transition education to not only focus on selfmanagement of treatments, but to also teach effective medical communication skills. Future directions include utilizing the self-care skills worksheet to identify areas of educational need during transition, and retrospective skills building in recently transitioned adults. Lindsay, K.L. 1 ; Revilla, E. 1 ; Tangpricha, V. 2 ; Stecenko, A. 3 1. Egleston, Childrens Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA, USA; 2. Med., Emory Univ, Atlanta, GA, USA; 3. Ped., Emory Univ, Atlanta, GA, USA Background: The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) recommends use of oral vitamin D3 (D3) for all individuals with CF to maintain serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD) ≥ 30 ng/mL. Although daily or weekly dosing is suggested, specific doses are only given for daily and are based on 3 age groups (< 1 year; 1 to 10 years, and > 10 years). This age-based dosing for the pediatric population may not be as effective as a weightbased dosing, as a child may triple their weight between 1 and 10 years, or between 10 years and adulthood. Also, a weekly dose could result in increased compliance and reduced pill burden. Therefore, based on the effectiveness of a weekly dose of 50,000 IU of D3 in adults (Khazai NB, et al. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009; 94:2037-43) we calculated a weekly dose protocol for pediatric patients based on weight. Objective: To determine the efficacy of weekly, weight-based, D3 dosing in maintaining 25-OHD ≥ 30ng/mL in CF pediatric patients. Methods: We dosed oral D3 weekly per the protocol shown in the Table. We measured 25-OHD at least annually in all patients, regardless of season. If 25-OHD was < 30 ng/mL, we first determined if the patient was compliant with the maintenance dosing regimen. If noncompliant, then 5 daily doses of D3 were given at the same dose as the maintenance dose, then the maintenance dose was resumed. If the patient was compliant, the maintenance dose was increased by 10,000 IU, 5 daily doses of the new maintenance dose were given, and then the new maintenance dose was given weekly. We used only maximum D3 which was independently verified to show that it contains the amount on the label (Tangpricha, unpublished data, 2013) . Results: Of the 177 patients who were eligible (eligible = weight ≥10 kg), 160 patients (90%) had a 25-OHD level done in 2015. Of these patients, 129 patients (81%) were classified as sufficient (25-OHD ≥30 ng/mL), 22 patients (14%) as insufficient (25-OHD=20-29 ng/mL), and 9 patients (5%) as deficient (25-OHD <20 ng/mL). Mean 25-OHD for all patients was 42.0 ng/mL and the range was 9.1 -95.4 ng/mL. Of the 31 patients with insufficient or deficient levels, 27 (87%) had a repeat level done, and 20 (74%) achieved 25-OHD ≥ 30ng/mL. The mean 25-OHD of these 27 patients increased from 25 to 39 ng/mL. Conclusions: Weight-based, weekly dosing of vitamin D3 is a safe and effective strategy for maintaining optimal 25-OHD in pediatric patients with CF. This is evidenced by our data that 81% of our pediatric patients were Vitamin D-sufficient using our weekly dosing regimen and three-quarters of the 19% who were insufficient or deficient became sufficient using our daily repletion dose. None of our patients had a 25-OHD level greater than the recommended maximum of 100 ng/mL. Schwab, L. 1 ; Zobell, J. 2 ; Collingridge, D. 3 ; Gregersen, Y. 4 ; Russell, H. 5 1. Intermountain Specialty Pharmacy, Midvale, UT, USA; 2. Intermountain Cystic Fibrosis Pediatric Center, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 3. Intermountain Healthcare, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 4. SelectHealth, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 5. Intermountain Primary Children's, Salt Lake City, UT, USA Background: Intermountain Specialty Pharmacy (ISP) works in conjunction with Intermountain Cystic Fibrosis Pediatric Center to streamline the counseling and delivery process for patients to improve adherence. Barriers to medication adherence for cystic fibrosis (CF) patients include cost, access, and poly-pharmacy. The primary purpose of this study was to compare medication possession ratios (MPR) pre-and post-implementation of an integrated pharmacy team designated to CF starting on January 1, 2016. The second purpose was to compare hospitalization rates and MPR between ISP and non-ISP pharmacies for 2015. Dornase alfa was evaluated due to its evidence of increasing lung function in patients (Flume P, et al. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2007; 176:957-69) . Methods: A retrospective claims analysis was performed for patients filling at ISP in order to calculate MPR pre-and post-January 1, 2016. To be included, patients were pediatric CF patients (<18 years), had SelectHealth® insurance, and must have had at least one pharmacy claim for dornase alfa in both 2015 and 2016. Patients must been admitted for hospitalization due to a pulmonary exacerbation to be included for the hospitalization analysis. Descriptive statistics will be utilized to describe the characteristics of the CF population. Further analyses will be performed with 2016 data and updated results will be included. Results: Out of the 30 ISP patients identified for MPR evaluation, the mean monthly MPR was calculated to be 91% in 2015 compared to 98% in 2016 (p=0.006). In comparison, the mean monthly MPR for non-ISP patients was 69% in 2015, compared to 70% in 2016 (p=0.947). A generalized estimating equations (GEE) analysis calculated a statistically significant difference in adherence for ISP vs. non-ISP patients (p<0.001). A total of 49 patients in 2015 were identified as having at least one dornase alfa claim in 2015 and 2016; this represents roughly one-fifth of the CF center's population. Of these 49 patients, 16 patients filled at ISP and 33 patients did not fill with ISP. Of the 16 total ISP patients, 6 were hospitalized during 2015 in comparison to 20 out of the 33 non-ISP patients. The average MPR in 2015 for ISP patients hospitalized was 91% versus 97% for patients not hospitalized. For non-ISP patients, the average MPR was 66% and 81%, respectively. A Spearman's rho test calculated the correlation between average MPR and hospitalizations for ISP patient to be -0.341 (p=0.052). Conclusions: In terms of adherence, the study demonstrated that ISP patients are 5.8 times more likely to take their medications as directed in comparison to non-ISP patients. Although the correlation between MPR and hospitalization with ISP patients was not statistically significant, a trend was noted. As MPR increases, hospitalizations were noted to decrease, as expected. A dedicated integrated pharmacy team specific to managing CF increases medication adherence, and appears to result in a decrease in hospitalizations compared to patients filling at a non-specialty pharmacy. DuBose, L.; Peace, R.; Clarke, C.; Gaffney, C.; Snodgrass, S.M. Pediatric Pulmonology, Greenville Health System, Greenville, SC, USA Background: The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation guidelines recommend quarterly CF clinic visits for ongoing multidisciplinary evaluations, close surveillance, and early interventions in exacerbations and other complications. Our center serves the upstate of SC, and portions of NC and GA. We believe distance to our center, cost of gas, appointment availability, no shows, excessive appointment duration, communication barriers, and low socioeconomic status have contributed to a decline in quarterly visits noted in previous years. This also adversely affected collection of annual labs, PFTs, and surveillance cultures. This trend was an identified area for improvement as part of our ongoing center QI assessment, and in review of center-specific registry data, specifically in patients aged 7-17 years. We believe this was one factor in inhibiting our ability to deliver timely and high quality CF care. Objective: To establish a QI project testing our hypothesis that offering a $50 gas card when 4 quarterly visits were completed would increase appointment compliance and improve resultant collection of cultures, PFTs, and our center data sets. Methods: A QI project was developed including clerical staff involvement and all clinical CF team members. Patients who were already receiving care as of January 1, 2015 and continued to receive care through December 31, 2015 were included. We utilized our website, quarterly newsletters and clinic staff to educate our families about why clinic visits and early intervention were so important. This had been occurring regularly, but an increased emphasis was placed on this and a more systematic review process was put in place at our regular CF team meetings. A punch card was also used to track visits and included review with patients and families. Our social worker and clerical staff worked closely to schedule and reschedule patients that were not meeting their quarterly visit goals. Case management of high risk families began to occur at a much higher rate as appointment compliance became a part of our team meeting discussions. We also placed greater emphasis on scheduling some patients more frequently to account for a missed visit. Scheduling also occurred with more flexibility for CF clinic slots. Results: Our center specific data for patients aged 7-17 years with 4 visits, 4 cultures and 2 PFTs improved as follows: 12.5% in 2010, 12.5% in 2011, 28.6 % in 2012, 58.6% in 2013, 66.7% in 2014 and 94% in 2015. Conclusion: A QI project focused on improving regular visit compliance that included a financial incentive was very effective in improved center-specific registry outcomes. In reflecting, CF team behaviors and discussions changed markedly during this QI project in a way we believe was highly impactful, likely more so, in addition to the offered financial incentive. We also anticipate this will be a positive and sustained cultural change within our center. Other unanticipated effects included increased budgeted hours for SW and a more regular and structured weekly CF team meeting. While we know anecdotally the that monetary reward was a factor for change, future use of this is not guaranteed, or may be targeted to the most in need and high risk. Wesson, S.J.; Smith, E.; Egener, N. National Jewish Health -Saint Joseph Hospital, Denver, CO, USA Background: Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) receive many antibiotics throughout their lifetime to treat pulmonary infections. Over time, they can develop allergies to antibiotics that may be considered optimal for effective treatment. Patients with history of type-I hypersensitivity reaction to an antibiotic can be desensitized to that drug if clinically necessary. Desensitization induces a temporary immune-tolerant state, allowing for safe administration of the allergenic medication until scheduled doses are stopped. It is accomplished by administering increasing doses until the therapeutic dose is reached and tolerated. Due to risk for allergic reaction during this process, 1:1 nursing care is necessary. However, severe reactions are rare (Legere H, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2009; 8(6),418-24) . CF patients are traditionally transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for this procedure and once completed, move back to the pulmonary unit (PU). This process was noted to cause delays in patient care, decreased patient and staff satisfaction, increased risk for handoff errors, and misuse of ICU resources. Purpose: The purpose of this project is to allow CF patients to remain on the PU for desensitization when clinically appropriate. With this process change, we aim to expand nursing skills, improve patient and staff satisfaction, maintain patient safety, and retain successful outcomes. Methods: In collaboration with PU hospitalists, a non-ICU protocol for antibiotic desensitization was developed. It includes an order to call rapid response for a severe reaction. Patients must have had a prior successful desensitization to the drug to desensitize on the PU. Staff nurses are trained by shadowing a desensitization in ICU and completing a skill check off with a competent nurse. A post-implementation survey of was utilized to evaluate the effects of this change on staff and patient satisfaction. Results from a staff satisfaction survey issued prior to the process change were utilized for comparison. Participating patients were interviewed. Outcomes of ICU vs PU desensitizations were reviewed for potential outcome differences. Outcomes: The process change took effect in March 2016. By the end of April 2016, four patients had been desensitized on the PU. One patient was desensitized in ICU per developed criteria. All five were successful with no moderate or severe reactions. All four patients desensitized on the PU had been desensitized in ICU on prior admissions. All participating patients had a positive response when asked their opinion about the process change. Seven PU nurses completed training. They report feeling nursing skills have been elevated. The staff felt this was a positive change in process for desensitizing. Nurse satisfaction survey response to the question "my job makes good use of my skills and abilities" went from 83% favorable to 100% favorable post-implementation. Conclusions: This project resolved many delay issues due to beds/ staff limitations, patient care transfers, and handoffs. Overall, the change has been a success demonstrated by consistent patient outcomes, positive patient response, and increased staff satisfaction. Loveless, M.O. 1 ; Allada, G. 2 ; Satcher, V. 2 ; Block, R. 3 ; Gold, J.A. 2 1. Public Health, Oregon Health & Science Univ., Portland, OR, USA; 2. Medicine, Oregon Health & Science Univ., Portland, OR, USA; 3. MNR Analytics, Portland, OR, USA Background: Quality of care for adults with CF is dependent on the effectiveness of specialized interdisciplinary teams. Understanding how the structure and function of individual teams affects the interface of CF patients may explain some of the variance in patient outcomes. Applied network analytics provides tools for qualitative and quantitative assessments of CF teams and the patient-team interface. In a single-site CF program we field-tested a novel network mapping tool to assess process measures, workflow analysis and the patient interface. Method: The study site was a university teaching hospital with a regional outpatient CF clinic and a hospitalist-led inpatient care team model supported by consulting pulmonary faculty and fellows (with or without CF specialists). Outcome data from the CF registry and unit-specific quality improvement projects were reviewed. Patient value stream graphics (inpatient and outpatient) were created and critical workflows related to specific quality measures were analyzed. The medical team survey was completed by 119 hospital personnel involved in inpatient CF care and 24 CF outpatient clinic personnel and network graphics and network descriptive analytics were created using Gephi O.8.1. The patient-team interactions were evaluated with a supplemental survey of 30 patients in the OP clinic. Results: The surveys of the healthcare teams had a high response rate (est. 50% inpatient, 86% outpatient). The network map demonstrated the inter-relations of the outpatient team and inpatient service and several critical roles were identified (pulmonary fellow, resident, CF nurse practitioner). The patient survey revealed patient dependence on key personnel, especially the CF care coordinator. Standard descriptive network statistics (density, centrality) were generated. A clinical microsystems network mapping approach for evaluating the functional structure of individual CF teams is feasible, potentially scalable and may help CF teams wishing to better align resources and improve communication. Mapping made the complexity of CF care explicit, especially the risk of communication errors, and could benefit programs that operate with two medical teams (inpatient and outpatient) and depend on personnel with variable expertise in CF patient care. Support: NCFF grant. Objective: To give an update on the national deployment and report survey findings between January 2015 and April 2016. Methods: A total of 276 CF programs (pediatric, adult, and affiliates) were invited to join the national deployment. There are 2 versions of the survey: Pediatric (parent or caregiver of a child with CF) and Adult (person with CF 18 years and older). In 6-month intervals, following a clinical care encounter to an accredited program, a letter or email is sent to the parent or the adult with CF to invite him/her to complete a survey. Data were analyzed using the top box approach (% of respondents selecting the positive response choice or choices). Comparing programs' results was done using variance component analysis to establish program standard deviation for each survey question and comparison was made with the 50th percentile comparative value. Results: Out of the 276 programs, 164 CF programs (59% of total) are deploying the survey. In January 2015, 45 programs started collecting surveys; as of April 2016, 104 programs are collecting data (63% of programs agreed and 38% of total). Across the participating programs, 11,054 people with CF were invited to compete a survey and 3,417 responded (response rate of 30%). Results were similar between pediatric and adult respondents for many survey questions. Three questions from the domain of experience with care team had the best results: Courtesy and respect (93%), Easy to understand explanations (92%), and Spent enough time (92%). Some of the lowest reported experiences were asking about mental health (50%), being able to maintain body weight (64%), and knowing whether you were 6 feet from another person with CF (66%). Areas of significant difference between pediatric and adult respondents include pediatric report more visits to their CF center (84%, 4 or more visits per year vs. 72%), ACT treatments working (84% vs. 68%), and being able to manage CF (90% vs. 78%). Conclusion: The results from the national CF patient and family experience care survey show CF program strengths as well as improvement opportunities. As more programs deploy the survey and track results, there are a number of strategies to improve experience of care promoted by national patient experience institutions: cultivating respectful partnerships; establishing infrastructure to support and engage all stakeholders; encouraging all stakeholders-patients, providers, institutional leaders-to review results; leveraging social media and networks to build a culture of improvement and participation; and benchmarking with programs exceling at experience of care. People with CF and their family members bring their own point-of-view and expertise to a clinical encounter and they also provide valuable reflections and insights into their working relationship with the healthcare team, fresh eyes to the process of care delivery, and knowledge about managing their disease. Measuring patient and family experience of care can reveal which care processes at a CF clinic are working well and which can be improved. In January 2015 all accredited CF care centers (276 pediatric, adult and affiliate programs) were invited to participate in the national deployment of the CF patient and family experience of care survey. The survey is designed as a continuous data collection to enable programs to measure and monitor the experience of care over time and compare their results with other CF programs. A feedback system was implemented to enable teams to review results, plan future improvement work, and evaluate the impact of their work. Objective: To share the roll-out of a feedback system between January 2015 and April 2016. Methods: In collaboration with vendor partner, Quality Data Management, an on-line reporting tool was developed using their established tool Quality Desktop TM (QD). QD provides 3 types of data displays: thermometer (results in comparison to others), bar chart of the distribution of the question's responses, and statistical process control charts. Additionally, comments to open-ended questions can be reviewed. Between January 2015 and July 2015, 45 programs collected 820 pediatric (parent or caregiver of child with CF) and 529 adult (people with CF 18 years and older) questionnaires, which created a benchmark cohort. A 50th percentile comparative value was calculated for each survey question and variance component analysis established a program standard deviation used for program comparison. QD was available to programs in September of 2015 after attending a QD training session. Results: The benchmark dataset was updated in February 2016 (1579 pediatric and 738 adult respondents). As of April 2016, 89 people from 59 programs received QD training (need at least 15 respondents). People have accessed QD an average of 5 times. QD can be accessed anytime although user feedback indicated that it took too much time to review all the information. In response a push report -a low-tech paper version of the results -was drafted in February 2016 and sent to 6 CF programs and a 2nd version was sent to 20 CF programs. At the request of programs, the latest push report includes program variation charts, data over time, and verbatim comments from patients and families. In April 2016, 67 programs with 15 or more respondents were emailed their program's push report. Conclusion: Feedback from CF programs was crucial in developing meaningful push report from the patient and family experience of care survey data. Much is unknown about how CF programs are using QD and the push report to celebrate positive program attributes and to strategize about how to improve processes of care that patients are reporting as being less than ideal. Gregoire-Bottex, M. 1 ; Hollenbeck, P. 1 ; Anjorin, N. 1 ; Bonnema, S. 2 1. Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Western Michigan University School of Medicine, Kalamazoo, MI, USA; 2. Nutrition, Bronson Methodist Hospital, Kalamazoo, MI, USA Background: Vitamin D deficiency has a prevalence of up to 90% in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) due to malabsorption, decreased UV light exposure, and poor intake. Deficiency causes poor bone health, reduced lung function and increased pulmonary exacerbations. In 2012, the CF Foundation adopted new guidelines following evidence that prior recommendations were insufficient at maintaining normal serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH) D) levels (Tangpricha V, et al. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012; 97(4) :1082-93). Objectives: Only 7.7% of CF patients at our center had a normal 25(OH) D) in the first quarter Q1 2014 (13% Q1/Q2 2014). Therefore in June 2014, we began a process improvement to enhance monitoring, assessment, and treatment of inadequate vitamin D levels in patients with CF. The aim was to have 75% of CF patients consistently maintain a normal 25(OH)D). Methods: The CF team reviewed the literature and the guidelines, attended sessions on motivational interview, focused on adherence and administration of medication, visits scheduled ahead of time, pharmacist provided prepackaged medication (MedPack) and 25(OH)D results and dose adjustment mailed to patients/parents. Data on 25(OH)D levels was abstracted from patient records between Q1 of 2013 to Q4 of 2015. SAS 9.4 was used for all analyses and graphic generation. Results Conclusion: Ongoing monitoring, data collection, teaching and process evaluation are important for continued improvement due to the many factors affecting 25(OH)D vitamin D levels in patients with CF. The most important factors for our improvement was reduced staff turnover, follow-up assigned to CF dietician, stricter monitoring, using higher vitamin D3 doses and addressing adherence with MedPack and reminders. Kubiak, S. 1 ; Stitt, G. 1 ; Jones, S. 1 ; Wong, A. 1 ; Berger, R. 1 ; Abdulrazak, N. 1 ; Roboff, J. 1 ; Uluer, A.Z. 1, 2 1. Boston Children's Hosp., Boston, MA, USA; 2. Brigham and Women's Hosp., Boston, MA, USA Introduction: Once-daily tobramycin (ODT) is often used for acute pulmonary exacerbations (APEs) from gram-negative organisms in CF. Due to ODT's narrow therapeutic index, our institutional practice is to monitor peak and trough serum concentrations as markers of efficacy and toxicity. Data suggest current target serum trough concentrations may be excessive and area under the concentration-time curve (AUC) monitoring may be more predictive of ODT exposure (Begg E, et al. Br J Clin Pharmac. 1995; 36:605-9) . Further data found that AUC values are frequently elevated despite trough levels of <1mg/mL (Coulthard K, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2007; 6:125-30) . We initiated a quality improvement pilot to evaluate the precision of these reported values vs. calculated pharmacokinetic (PK) parameters of 1-hour (hr) peak and 24-hr AUC to assess the accuracy of ODT monitoring in CF at our institution. Objective: The primary objective was to evaluate the accuracy of traditional peak and trough monitoring for ODT at our institution by comparing reported values to calculated PK values. The second objective was to determine if peak and trough measurements within goal range correlated to goal AUC. Methods: From 5/2015 From 5/ -3/2016 , reported peak and trough levels were compared to patient-specific PK calculations of peak and AUC measurements in adult patients with CF who were initiated on ODT as part of their antibiotic regimen for treatment of an APE. Troughs were obtained immediately prior to the 2nd dose, and peaks were scheduled 30 min after the 30-min infusion of the 2nd dose. A random level was scheduled 6 hours after the 2nd dose. Peak and AUC values were calculated using the 1-hr and 6-hr levels. Goal serum concentrations were 1-hr peak 20-40mg/L, 24-hr trough<1mg/L, and 24-hr AUC 80-105[(mg*hr)/L]. Results: We evaluated 27 discrete courses of ODT in 21 patients. Based on calculated PK parameters (AUC 80-105[(mg*hr)/L] and peak 20-40mg/ L), 8 (29.6%) were therapeutic. Of these 8 cases, 7 (87.5%) appeared therapeutic based on reported peaks and troughs. Of the 27 courses, 16 (59.3%) were supratherapeutic based on calculated PK parameters (peak >40mg/L and/or AUC >105[(mg*hr)/L]), but only 2 (12.5%) had reported peaks indicating supratherapeutic dosing. Based on calculated PK parameters, 3 of the 27 courses (11.1%) were subtherapeutic (peak <20mg/L and/or AUC<80[(mg*hr)/L]). Reported peaks reflected subtherapeutic doses in 2 out of 3 courses (66.7%). All patient courses maintained troughs <1mg/L. Of 27 evaluated courses of ODT, 16 cases (59.3%) appeared to be within goal range based on reported peak and trough measurements, but were not within goal range when PK parameters of peak and AUC were calculated. A trend towards potential nephrotoxicity (SCr increase ≥0.2mg/dL from baseline) was seen in patients who had troughs ≥0.2mg/L and AUC >105[(mg*hr)/L]. Conclusions: Compared to calculated PK values, reported peaks and troughs in patients receiving ODT are not accurate monitoring parameters of drug exposure and clearance. In order to ensure accurate assessments of efficacy and toxicity, the use of patient-specific PK calculations should be the standard of care in monitoring patients on ODT. Study coordination is a multifaceted job vital to the clinical research industry, yet across institutions there is a lack of standardized education and training to prepare these invaluable study team members for their role. There have been successful efforts to close this gap between adequate preparation and disproportionate expectations of RCs. The Johns Hopkins (JH) Study Coordinator Apprenticeship and Mentoring Program is a hallmark of this work towards standardizing RC education and training. The CFF provides similar mentoring programs and training resources to CF study teams. Further assessment of RC training experience is needed to shape such program objectives. Methods: This qualitative study evaluated JHMI research team training experience and perceptions through electronic survey. The survey was e-mail delivered via Qualtrics, an online survey software. The survey questions explored areas such as training, job description, length of employment, and perceptions of preparation for the RC role. This study was approved by the JH Institutional Review Board. Data analysis was aided by Qualtrics. The same survey will be distributed through the CFF network. Results: The survey was completed by 157 JHMI research team staff. Over 80% of JHMI respondents felt they need additional training to perform in their role, and identified barriers such as lack of specific training availability and protected time allotted to complete such trainings. Although the majority of respondents prefer in-person interactive workshops for training, there is minimal variance among reports of receiving in-person training during the early stages of employment. JHMI's RC Training Program (RCTP) serves to train and educate research teams through in-person interactive workshops, yet 68% of respondents have not completed the RCTP. Additionally, there were over 10 official job titles for those who perform RC responsibilities and the majority of respondents have been research staff at JH for 1-3 years. This lack of standardization among job titles is a barrier to staff receiving appropriate training as some job titles do not reflect RC responsibilities. Collection and analysis surveying RCs of the CFF network is ongoing and results will be available in July. We expect to identify common and discordant themes among the training and perceptions of JHMI RCs and CFF RCs. Conclusions: Results of the JHMI RC group survey piqued interest of JHMI leadership in determining a correlation between staff who obtained certification and whether or not certification self-motivated them to seek out and obtain additional training and education. Understanding RC training experience and perceptions will inform the direction of JH Study Coordinator Apprenticeship and Mentoring Program, CFF RC Training initiatives, and other institutions' attempts at standardizing RC education and training-ultimately closing the gap between preparedness and responsibilities. patients has led to the importance of pediatric providers and centers to begin priming patients at a young age to learn how to care for themselves in preparation for their transition to an adult health care system. A successful transition requires patients to learn skills necessary for self-management, self-advocacy, and health care decision making. A way these skills are typically assessed is through a transition-readiness assessment (TRA) and at our CF center one of the biggest disparities was the knowledge of cleaning and sterilizing airway clearance equipment (CSACE). A quality improvement (QI) approach was utilized to focus on this self-management skill to gradually develop appropriate goals between the respiratory therapist (RT), patients, and their caregivers as a collaborative team. Methods: A Key Diagram Driver (KDD) and process flowchart were developed to organize and implement this QI project for patients ages 10-13 years and their caregivers. An 8-item survey was created to obtain baseline information on the families' barriers to CSACE, who is primarily responsible, and how often the patient is involved in the process. Assessment checklists were created as a method to continually evaluate the knowledge of the techniques used in the household to properly CSAC equipment. A handout with the proper cleaning and sterilizing steps was produced for the families as an easy reference to use at home for further practice. A demonstration video was recorded by a patient at our CF center as a way to illustrate to the other age-appropriate patients that they too have the ability to learn this self-management skill. After a successful trial with 2 eligible patients the following process was implemented: Visit 1) baseline survey, assessment, and education; Visit 2) re-assessment, re-education, and demonstration video; Visit 3) re-assessment, re-education, and patient's own demonstration video reviewed by the RT for inaccuracies; and Visit 4) an annual re-assessment. Results: Baseline data have been collected on 42 patients and it is expected a few additional patients' data will be obtained along with those patients' Visit 2 prior to October 2016. The proposed outcomes include: 1) ranking list of barriers from the baseline survey; 2) increased assessment scores; 3) knowledge and skill set maintained annually; 4) improve effective partnerships and engagement with RT, patients, and caregivers; and 5) decrease the CSACE disparities on the TRA. Conclusion: Increased attention and awareness to properly CSACE, with systematic teaching for all patients and caregivers, will encourage greater independence and knowledge. Immediate hands-on feedback helps reinforce learning and promotes behavior change as well as encourages an effective partnership with the patients and their caregivers. An improvement of knowledge and skills has begun to be seen in the patients that have completed Visit 2 indicating the possibility of impacting the patients' score on the TRA. Brozik, E.; Webb, B. Pediatrics, West Virginia University Medicine, Morgantown, WV, USA Introduction: Early diagnosis of cystic fibrosis is crucial to improving outcomes. With the implementation of newborn screening (NBS), the prospect of early diagnosis has become a reality. The corollary to NBS is performing the sweat chloride test as early as possible. In 2015, our CF center had an average 17-day delay between notification of NBS result and an appointment for sweat chloride test. Background: In West Virginia, the primary care physician (PCP) has historically been responsible for notifying the CF center once they receive an abnormal NBS result. Once the center is notified, the sweat chloride test is coordinated with the lab and the patient's family. A closer look at this process revealed several barriers to timely sweat chloride testing. Objective: Decrease the time interval between a positive NBS result to sweat chloride testing so the average age of the patient at time of testing falls within the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation guidelines of within 2-4 weeks of birth. Methods: We worked with the West Virginia State Lab to have them notify our center of abnormal NBS results at the same time the PCP is notified. It was then planned that the nurse coordinator would contact both the PCP and family directly to discuss the result and schedule the sweat chloride test, genetic counseling and follow-up with a CF attending physician. We also incorporated six reserved sweat-testing slots with physician follow-up each week. We tracked the following data: 1) demographics; 2) date NBS resulted; 3) date NBS received from lab; 4) date result discussed with PCP; 5) date result discussed with family; 6) date patient scheduled for sweat chloride. Results: The average delay between a positive NBS and a sweat chloride test decreased from 17 days to 10 days. The average time from birth to a sweat test decreased from 36 days to 26 days. Conclusions: State lab notification to our CF center of positive NBS results contributed to a decreased interval time between a positive NBS and a sweat chloride test. Our state has recently increased the number of nurses handling NBS so this may decrease the interval between the time a test is resulted to the time we are notified of it. Further improvement may be attained with an increase in availability of sweat chloride test/provider appointments. Currently, our on-call physicians staff all of these patients. However, the addition of an Advanced Practice Provider to our center will allow for increased availability. A final barrier continues to be access to care and transportation as some families cannot coordinate travel despite their best efforts. The issue continues to be an ongoing effort as we work to diagnosis our patients as quickly as possible. Homa, K. 2 ; Sabadosa, K. 1 ; Lomas, P.H. 3 ; Ashare, A. 4 ; Dowd, C.G. 3 ; Marshall, B. 3 1. The Dartmouth Institute, Lebanon, NH, USA; 2. Consultant for CFF, Orford, NH, USA; 3. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA; 4. Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH, USA Background: The International Committee on Mental Health in CF published clinical practice guidelines for screening and treating depression and anxiety on behalf of the US CF Foundation (CFF) and the European CF Society (Quittner AL, et al. Thorax. 2016; 71:26-34) . To jump-start implementation of the guidelines the CFF awarded funds to 84 accredited programs to support the role of a mental health (MH) coordinator (MHC) in January 2016. National CF patient and family experience of care survey data are being collected at 35 of these programs. A question about MH is included in the survey: "During your most recent visit, did the heath care team ask about your mental or emotional health?" The survey invitation is sent every six months to patients and families. Objective: To detect initial MH process improvement using data from the CF patient and family experience of care survey. Methods: National deployment of the CF patient and family experience of care survey began in January 2015. There are 104 accredited programs participating as of April 2016 and on average 50 respondents (SD = 19) per week with a total of 3417 respondents. A total of 3151 respondents answered the MH survey question. The 3 response choices include: Yes definitely, Yes somewhat, and No. Percentage of respondents selecting "Yes definitely" was examined in a statistical process control (SPC) chart for 2 groups of programs: the 35 programs receiving MHC funding and 69 programs not participating in the MHC intervention. A chi-square test was used to determine whether a program's result significantly increased. Programs that had a significant improvement were asked about initial implementation strategies. Results: The SPC chart for the 35 programs with MHC funding showed a significant improvement in respondents reporting being asked about MH from 46% to 62% coinciding with the start of the funding (beginning of year 2016). The SPC chart for the 69 programs without funding for a MHC showed only random variation in which 50% of the respondents were asked about MH. Although some programs had too few respondents for a reliable chi-square test, 3 programs with MHC funding had a significant increase (p<0.05) from 36% to 63%, from 41% to 64%, and from 43% to 73%. Strategies reported were: a general increased attention to MH or being more diligent about asking patients and families to complete a MH screen. Conclusion: The CF patient and family experience of care survey provides data to track the early progress of accredited programs implementing the MH care guidelines. Patients and families are reporting attention to addressing MH during clinical encounters. As the role of the MHC is further developed within the context of CF care delivery, continual monitoring of results from the CF patient and family experience of care survey may signal further improvements in MH care. More MH data will become available to supplement survey data as screening rates and other MH questions will be captured and reported from the CFF Patient Registry. Frederick, C.A. 1 ; Fries, L.M. 1 ; Roach, C.M. 2 ; Cogswell, A. 3 ; Smith, B.A. 4 1. Pulmonary, Women & Children's Hospital of Buffalo Lung and Cystic Fibrosis Center, Buffalo, NY, USA; 2. Pulmonary, University Pediatric Associates, Buffalo, NY, USA; 3. Pediatrics, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA; 4. Psychiatry, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA Introduction: Depression in CF is associated with adverse health outcomes such as lower FEV 1 (Fidika 2014 , Ploessl 2014 , lower BMI (Snell 2014), and vitamin D deficiency (Smith 2014) . For these reasons, the International Committee on Mental Health in Cystic Fibrosis published a consensus statement including the recommendation for routine depression screening (Quittner, 2015) . In 2013, the CF Center at the Women & Children's Hospital of Buffalo began routine depression screening. We previously evaluated health outcomes related to incidence of depression and hypothesized that rate of decline of health outcomes since our screening initiation would be worse in depressed individuals. We evaluated the effect of depression on patient health outcomes including FEV 1 % predicted, BMI, 25-OH D levels and hospitalizations. Methods: Individuals with CF, ≥12 years old, were assessed annually from 2013-2015 for symptoms of depression using the Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2). If the PHQ-2 score was ≥ 3, the PHQ-9 was used to screen for additional symptoms, depression severity and suicidality. Patients who screened positive for depression received further assessment and intervention based on severity. Health outcome measures (FEV 1 % predicted, BMI, at the time of annual screening and incidence of hospitalization in the year prior were recorded. Results: Data from 2015 screening showed 11 of 77 adults (14.3%) and 7 of 23 teens (30.4%) screened positive for depression. There was no difference in FEV 1 % predicted in adults who screened positive for depression vs. those who did not (67.6 vs 65.9%). Mean FEV 1 % predicted was lower in teens who screened positive for depression vs. those who did not (62 vs 97.4%, p <0.01). There was no significant difference in mean BMI in adults (24.4 vs 23.4 kg/m 2 ) or BMI percentile in teens (45th vs 55th) who screened positive for depression vs. those who did not. Lower vitamin D was measured in individuals who screened positive for depression vs. those who did not (30.5 vs 36.1, p<0.05). Increased incidence of hospitalization was noted in screen-positive teens (71.4% vs. 25%, p=0.04), however this finding was not present in adults. Longitudinally, from 2013 to 2015, combined data was analyzed. Predicted FEV 1 % decline was significantly greater in individuals who screened positive for depression vs. those who did not (mean FEV 1 73.6 to 64.2% vs. 71.4 to 70.2%, p=.03) . No significant changes in BMI were measured over time. Lower vitamin D levels remained present in screen-positive individuals but did not change over time. Conclusion: Depression screening in CF is relevant to important health outcomes. Over 3 years, lower FEV 1 % predicted was consistently found in depressed teens. Over time, a strikingly steeper decline in FEV 1 was seen in adults and teens who screened positive for depression. These findings support the recommendation to screen and treat for depression in CF as education and treatment may potentially impede lung function decline and improve health outcomes. Funding: CFFT grant SMITH14QI0. Methods and Interventions: Beginning in 2012, the Adult Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Team began a quality improvement project that focused on standardizing the delivery of inpatient care. First, the outpatient CF Team worked with inpatient colleagues to implement standardized care. For nutrition, the adult ideal body weight equation was adjusted to include a disease-severity factor. For airway clearance therapy (ACT) CF center respiratory therapists (RTs) provided re-training to all hospital RTs for ACT modalities and inhaled medications (this recently included IPV). For pulmonary exacerbations, the inpatient ACT goal became 6 h/day. Hospital implementation of EPIC electronic medical record (EMR) allowed for a standard order set. CF-specific teaching was provided to hospitalists. Then, in 2015 admissions were centralized to a specific respiratory-focused floor. The CF Team provided education to nurses, staff, pharmacy, physical therapy, and diabetic educators assigned to this floor. Finally, infection control practices were reviewed and standardized. Results: In 2012 average length of stay (LOS) for adult CF inpatient admissions was 9 days. After instituting the above interventions, LOS decreased to 8.4 days in 2014. After the 2015 implementation of patient admissions to a single floor, LOS decreased to 6.3 days. Subsequently, this LOS has been consistent in 2016 (6.0 days). PortCF data from 2014 show that antibiotic duration has not changed (13.5 d). Because the current literature lacks additional metrics to determine the effectiveness of a hospitalization, this proposal will evaluate change in CRP levels during hospitalization, change in lung function (e.g., FEV1 returns within 90% of baseline) during hospitalization, and improved lung function after hospitalization for pulmonary exacerbations. For admissions to treat distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS), time until next episode of DIOS will be evaluated. Overall, PortCF data show continued improvement in lung function and BMI for adult patients. Anecdotally, patients commented that continuity of case-management and social work services have improved after admissions were centralized to a specific floor. Conclusions: Hospital admissions require the coordination of multiple care providers, and delivery of several interventions. Here, we present a multidisciplinary approach to improve the consistency of care. It appears that cohorting patients in one location allowed for standardization of care and decreased LOS. Further analysis will provide information to evaluate whether this result translated into improved metrics for care. Piccorelli, A. 1 ; Stanek, J. 2 ; Nick, J.A. 3 1. Statistics, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA; 2. Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA; 3. National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA Introduction: An accurate prediction model, called a nomogram, would be valuable in clinical care and research trial design to predict survival of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Although several models have been developed to predict survival of CF patients, none allow the physician to graphically demonstrate the probability of a patient's outcome during an appointment. The motivation for these nomograms is their ability to allow for graphical presentation of a prediction model that integrates patient measurements, labeled predictors. Each predictor is modeled by a scale, with each possible value/category of that predictor corresponding to a specific number of points based on the prognostic significance of the value/category. The model is represented graphically with the scales of the predictors and how they combine to calculate the continuous probability of a particular outcome illustrated. This enables physicians or researchers to make educated, accurate patient-specific determinations of prognosis and therapy decisions and allows them to communicate the prognosis to the patient in an effective manner. Methods: A dataset was analyzed of 277 pediatric and adult CF patients from Akron Children's Hospital. A Cox regression model was developed to predict survival based on the characteristics of these CF patients. Age was used as the event time in the model. The age of patients was defined as either age at last appointment for patients who were alive at the time of this study, or age at death. Patients alive at the time of the study were considered to have censored survival times. An indicator variable, Death Status, was used to differentiate between censored survival times and ages of death. Based on previous survival models of CF patients, the following predictors were included: gender, BMI, race, baseline FEV 1 , cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) status, Pseudomonas aeruginosa status, methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) status, length of diagnosis in years, number of hospitalizations since diagnosis, and Burkholderia cepacia status. Predictors with a Wald test significance level less than 0.05 (p ≤ 0.05) were included in the final model. Results: A Cox regression model was developed that identified the following variables as significant predictors (p ≤ 0.05) of survival: baseline FEV 1 , length of diagnosis, number of hospitalizations, and CFRD status. These were included in the final model along with gender; a known predictor of survival for CF patients. The final model had a concordance index of 0.91, meaning 91% of the ordered predicted survival times were in concordance with the ordered observed survival times. The model was used to construct a nomogram that predicted the probability of 5-year survival based on how a CF patient's characteristics informed the predictors. Conclusion: A Cox regression model can be used to construct a nomogram to predict survival for CF patients. Since there were only 26 deaths among the 277 patients used in the study, a larger sample size will enable us to develop a model to predict survival with more significant predictors. The current study will be expanded to include the entire CFF Patient Registry, with results available by the fall. During the TM call the patient is shown education slides, their individual lung statistics highlighting: sputum culture results, chest x-rays reports, and lung function trends from the past 5 years. This education tool was presented with the purpose of educating patients and improving outcomes. There is a potential for increased patient satisfaction. Methods: Patients are identified in pre-clinic meetings. Patients with outstanding annual assessments are identified. A respiratory assessment is a required element of an annual visit and involves the CF RT to observe the patient performing their ACT. Patients that elect a TM assessment, n=29, were sent invitations to participate on a previously agreed upon time and date. Their FEV1 was tracked for the percent of predicted prior to the TM call and the FEV1 following the TM education session. In addition, participants were asked to complete a pre-and post-satisfaction survey. The patient was provided a URL link to an on-line questionnaire and asked to describe their understanding of their ACT; if they have the necessary tools necessary to perform the prescribed therapies, and whether or not they felt the therapies were an onerous burden. N=22 answered the pre-survey. Following the TM encounter, patients were asked to participate in a post-survey; questions included: Did the encounter improve their understanding of ACTs; How does TM compare to a face-to-face visit; and Would they participate in another TM education session. N=19 completed the post-survey. Results: Of the patients that showed an improvement in FEV1 percent predicted (n= 13) the average improvement was a 6% increase in FEV1. A decrease in FEV1 percent predicted (n=8) revealed a 6% decrease in FEV1. Two patients' FEV1 pre-and post-encounter stayed the same, and 6 patients have yet to complete a post-TM PFT test. In the pre-encounter satisfaction survey (n=22): 23% reported full understanding of their ACTs, 77% reported some understanding, 77% reported that they have the necessary tools to perform their ACTs. When asked if their ACT took too much time out of their day: 74% reported that they took too much time. In the post-encounter satisfaction survey (n=19): 74% reported that the telemedicine session improved their understanding of their ACTs. 63% reported that a TM encounter was as good as a face-to face visit. When asked if they would participate in another TM education session 95% said they were absolutely interested. Discussion: We saw no improvement in FEV1 percent predicted prior to TM and after the call. There may be other health benefits that we can track. Patients do report that they are satisfied with this type of education option and would participate in other TM education opportunities. Center Network has developed rapidly and included 121 Core Centers and 50 Affiliate programs in 2014. Recent improvement efforts focused on the role of Affiliate programs within the network and strategies to strengthen these programs. Objective: Analyze data from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Patient Registry (CFFPR) to explore whether clinical outcomes differ for Affiliate versus Core programs within the Care Center Network. Methods: The eligible population was individuals with data in the CFFPR for at least one year between 2005 and 2014. Outcomes of interest were FEV1 percent predicted for all eligible individuals aged 6 and older, body mass index (BMI) percentile for individuals aged 2 to 19 and BMI for individuals aged 20 and older. Individuals younger than 18 were classified as pediatric and individuals aged 18 and older were classified as adult. For each year they were in the study, individuals were assigned a program based on the program that provided the most care for them in that calendar year. Data were analyzed at the program level and patient level to assess if there were any differences between patient outcomes at Affiliate programs and Core Center programs (which include both the pediatric and adult programs within a Core Center). Results: In 2014, 3,006 patients (2,016 pediatric, 990 adult) were seen at the 50 Affiliate programs compared to the 25,670 patients (12,121 pediatric, 13,549 adult) that were seen at the 121 Core Centers. Overall, mean outcomes values at Affiliate programs tend to cluster among the lowest values in the Care Center Network. This is especially evident for pediatric lung function where 15 of 40 eligible Affiliate programs fall into the lowest quartile representing over 37% of Affiliate program patients between 6 and 17 with a lung function measure. Patient level data show substantial improvements in pulmonary and nutritional outcomes over the past 10 years for all patients, regardless of where they receive their care. Despite these gains, mean FEV1 % predicted is significantly lower among pediatric patients that receive their care from Affiliate programs compared to Core Center programs (Table) . Conclusions: There are opportunities to improve clinical outcomes at Affiliate programs within the CFF Care Center Network. Pulmonary function among pediatric patients presents the greatest opportunity as it continues to show significantly lower values than patients seen in Core Center programs. Further analysis on differences within the Affiliate programs is needed to identify targeted areas where quality improvement initiatives can have the largest impact on improving all clinical outcomes. 1, 4 1. Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 2. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Rome, Italy; 4. Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA Background: Treatment with ivacaftor for CFTR gating mutations resulted in improved weight, pulmonary function, growth status and other outcomes. The response to ivacaftor for those with pancreatic insufficiency (PI) compared to pancreatic sufficiency (PS) is unknown. Aim: To determine if response to 3-month ivacaftor treatment in subjects with CFTR gating mutations differed by pancreatic status. Methods: Subjects (≥5 years old) with one or more CFTR gating mutations were recruited from the USA, Canada and Italy. Pancreatic status was (Δ LS means ± SE, P: 425.0 ± 57.2, P<0.0001, resp) with no significant change over time in daily intake for control. Percent calories from protein decreased over time, with no significant difference in this decline between groups. Change in percent calories from protein was a significant predictor of HAZ change, F(1,125)=12.93, p<.0005, but not WAZ change although there was a trend towards significance, F(1,127)=3.06, p=.08. Percent calories from fat significantly increased between BL and 6 months, but there was no significant impact of treatment group by time for fat intake, and changes in fat intake did not predict changes in growth. Carbohydrate intake did not have a significant association with growth. Conclusions: The BN group significantly increased daily energy intake. Protein intake was the only macronutrient significantly associated with changes in HAZ, with a trend observed for association with WAZ. Percent intake from protein intake decreased at posttreatment and the children had a concomitant decrease in their HAZ. Future research is needed to examine the interrelationships between macronutrient intake and the impact of protein intake on growth in preschoolers. Supported by NIH grants R01DK54915, NOT-OD-09-056, K24DL59973, and T32DK063929 (PI: Scott W. Powers). Pohl, J. 1,2 ; Robson, J. 1, 2 1. Pediatrics, Gastroenterology and Nutrition, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 2. Primary Children's Hospital, Salt Lake City, UT, USA; 3. Pediatrics, Gastroenterology and Nutrition, UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital, San Francisco, CA, USA; 4. Pediatrics, Pulmonary, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA Objective: To determine whether early childhood growth measures, using CDC versus WHO scales, are associated with different long-term cystic fibrosis (CF) outcomes. The current Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF) recommendations for children diagnosed with CF prior to age 2 years are to strive for weight-for-length >50 th percentile based on CDC growth curves (Stallings VA, et al. J Am Diet Assoc. 2008; 108:832-9) . These recommendations have not been applied using the WHO growth curves, which are now standard for measurement of children <2 years in the United States. Methods: This was a cohort study, using the CFF Patient Registry for participants born 1990-1994 and followed at a CF center from age 2 through age 18 years (n=3014). Patients were categorized at age 2 by weight-for-length (WFL) <50 th percentile on both WHO and CDC measures; WFL≥50 th percentile on WHO but not CDC; and WFL≥50 th percentile on both WHO and CDC. Primary outcome was FEV 1 percent predicted (FEV 1pp ) at age 18; secondary outcomes included BMI, total hospital days, and lung-transplant-free survival. Results: At age 2, 42% were ≥50 th percentile on WHO and CDC charts, 15% were ≥50 th on WHO not CDC, and 43% were <50 th percentile on both. Multivariable linear regression analysis showed there was a stepwise increase of FEV 1pp at age 18 across the three WFL categories, lowest in those with WFL <50 th percentile on both WHO and CDC measures (83.6, and highest in those with WFL ≥50 th percentile on both measures (89.7, 95% CI: 84-95.4), with a positive linear test of trend (p<0.001). Survival analysis demonstrated that the highest WFL category also had a greater chance of lung-transplant-free survival (p<0.001) into adulthood (Figure) . Conclusions: Children with CF who reach WFL ≥50 th percentile on both CDC and WHO measures by age 2 have improved pulmonary, growth and survival outcomes in adulthood, when compared to lower early growth categories. In seeking to maximize long-term pulmonary and survival outcomes, CF care teams should continue to utilize CDC growth curves for patients under 2. Supported by: the Cystic Fibrosis Fellowship Training Grant (D.U. and J.R.) and the NIH T32 Fellowship Training Grant (D.U. and J.R.). 4 1. Department of Pediatrics, Univ. MN Masonic Children's Hospital, Minneapolis, MN, USA; 2. Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA; 3. Univ of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 4. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 5. Univ and Children's Hospital of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA Background: The spectrum of liver disease in cystic fibrosis (CF) is wide, ranging from mild transaminase elevation in many to multi-lobar cirrhosis with portal hypertension in 5-10%. Progressive liver injury may be associated with decrements in patient reported outcomes before liver disease is clinically apparent. This analysis examines serial Health Related Quality of Life (HRQOL) measurements in children with and without evidence of newly diagnosed CF-related liver disease. Methods: Children age 3-12 y with CF without previously identified cirrhosis or portal hypertension were enrolled in a prospective, multi-center study of ultrasound (US) to predict hepatic fibrosis. Consensus US patterns were assigned by 3 radiologists as normal (NL), heterogeneous (HTG), homogeneous (HMG), or nodular (CIR); parents were informed of results. Assessment of parent-and child-reported (age≥ 5 y) HRQOL by PedsQL TM 4.0 generic core scales and CF Questionnaire-revised (CFQ-R) was obtained at baseline, prior to knowledge of US pattern, and then annually in patients with abnormal patterns and matched controls. HRQOL scale scores were compared by US pattern at baseline and between baseline and 1 y post-enrollment. Results: US findings at baseline in 704 subjects (Male 47%, mean age 7.7±3.0 y) were NL (82%), HTG (9%), HMG (6%), and CIR (3%). At baseline, patients in the CIR group had lower mean parent-report PedsQL TM 4.0 Physical Summary scores (CIR 75.3±27.9 vs NL 85.8±16.0, p=0.002) and Social Scale scores (CIR 77.1±19.7 vs NL 86.8±16.0, p=0.005). All PedsQL TM 4.0 self-report and remaining parent-report scores did not vary by US pattern. Parent-report CFQ-R scores differed for Body Scale (CIR 68.3±25.2 vs NL 80.3±22.8, p=0.02), Eat Scale (HMG 85.1±21.1 vs NL 70.3±30.3, p=0 .003) and Weight Scale (HMG 79.5±33.0 vs NL 54.9±36.1, p<0.0001). Self-report CFQ-R scales did not differ by US pattern. Comparison between baseline and 1 y parent-report PedsQL TM scores demonstrated a decline in scores for patients with HMG US pattern, with self-report scores less significant. Parent-reported CFQ-R scores were stable over the interval, with self-report Emotional Scales scores improving in the NL group (Table) . Conclusions: Differences were noted in generic and disease-specific HRQOL scores by US pattern at baseline. Subjects with CIR had lower QOL scores before clinical liver disease. Scores were stable over a 1-year period in the CIR group. Scores in the HMG group declined by parent but not self-report. This suggests "silent" liver involvement in CF has an effect on QOL. Methods: Thirty-five children (2-18 years) with CF and 23 age-and sex-matched children without CF were recruited from Sydney Children's Hospital, Australia and consented to complete the Australian Child and Adolescent Eating Survey (ACAES). The ACAES is a validated 120-item semi-quantitative Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) that reports usual dietary consumption for the previous six months. Additional socioeconomic data were collected including net household income, level of parental education and postcode. Results: Age, gender distribution, household income and maternal level of education were comparable between the CF and control groups (p>0.05). Children with CF consumed an average of 152.1+/-6.7% of their estimated energy needs compared with controls 122.5 +/-7.9% (p = 0.006). Non-core foods contributed significantly more to their total energy intake compared with controls (43.5 +/-2.1% vs. 35.7 +/-2.8%, p=0.0029). Conversely they consumed significantly less energy from core-foods (56.5% +/-2.1% vs. 64.3% +/-2.8%, p = 0.029). However there was a clear gender effect with males with CF accounting for much of the difference when compared to males without CF (consuming significantly more energy from non-core foods and significantly less from core foods, p = 0.024). There was no difference seen in females. Neither children with CF or controls met the current Australian Dietary Guidelines for core food intake, however children with CF were significantly more likely to meet the requirement for meat (p=0.024). Sociodemographic factors were not related to the intake of core and non-core foods. Conclusion: Children with CF, especially males, had nearly half of their habitual daily energy intake provided by nutrient poor, non-core foods and fell short of meeting their requirements for nutrient dense core foods that have an established role in the prevention of chronic disease. Care needs to be taken to ensure the CF diet does not become a junk food diet. 3 1. Behavioral Health and Nutrition, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA; 2. Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA; 3. Cincinnati Children's Hosp Med Ctr, Cincinnati, OH, USA Objective: To examine macronutrient intake among children ages 2-6 years diagnosed with CF. Targeting macronutrients may have many health and growth benefits, including offsetting the catabolism associated with chronic illness and acute infections. Methods: Seventy-eight children aged 2-6 years (mean=3.8 y) with CF and pancreatic insufficiency participated in a randomized clinical trial conducted at 7 CF centers that compared a behavioral and nutrition treatment (BN; n=36) to an education and attention control treatment (n=42) aimed to improve energy intake (EI) and growth. Dietary intake was assessed at baseline and post-treatment (month 6) using 7-day weighed food diet records recorded by parents. Dietary data were analyzed using Nutrition Data System for Research software. Given daily total EI was not statistically different at baseline between conditions, groups were collapsed to examine daily total average EI and percent EI from macronutrients at baseline in this secondary data analysis. Results: Mean total EI was 1462 (329) kcal/day and the average Estimated Energy Requirement (EER) was 109.5% (25.8). Only 18% of children were meeting the 120% EER at baseline, and 40% were meeting the 35% of daily EI from fat minimum recommendation. In terms of macronutrient intake, an average of 35.3% (6.1) of EI was derived from fat, 12.7% (1.7) from protein, and 52.0% (6.1) from carbohydrates. The average protein intake was 45.9g (12.1) per day, with all children achieving recommended benchmarks. There was a negative relationship at baseline between carbohydrate and fat intake, r= -0.97, p<.001. Dinner was the meal with the highest percent calories from protein consumed at 15.6% (6.8) and fat at 38.6% (13.2). Snack had the highest percent calories from carbohydrate consumed at 64.2% (19.0). Conclusions: Preschoolers were achieving a similar percent EER documented in previous studies. Many children were not meeting the 2002 CF Foundation nutrition guidelines benchmark of at least 35% of daily EI derived from fat. All children met the 2016 CF Foundation preschool recommendations for daily protein intake (g). To promote optimal growth and health for preschoolers within CF nutrition care, these data suggest highlighting the importance of developing a family dinner routine during the preschool years, which may further boost opportunities for fat and protein intake. Partnering with families to identify substitutions for high carbohydrate foods and beverages, particularly during snack, may also create more opportunity for children to consume optimal protein and fat. Supported by NIH grants R01DK54915, NOT-OD-09-056, K24DL59973, and T32DK063929 (PI: Scott W. Powers). McCrory, B.E.; Harper, H.; McPhail, G.L. Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA Background: Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) are commonly prescribed proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), despite studies that link PPIs with potentially severe adverse effects. Studies have shown that a large portion of CF patients have gastroesophageal reflux (GER), which is treated with chronic PPI therapy. Patients with CF may also take a PPI as adjuvant therapy with pancreatic enzymes to improve nutritional status. This project was designed to evaluate the incidence of adverse effects associated with chronic PPI use, as well as evaluate the dosing, indication, and duration for the use of PPIs in CF patients at our center. Methods: Retrospective chart review of PPI use and incidence of adverse effects in the CF population at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC). Patients were identified as either currently receiving PPI therapy for at least 6 months in duration (PPI group) or never received PPI therapy (control group) from June 1, 2014 to May 31, 2015. Data was collected retrospectively on these identified study patients from June 1, 2012 to the end of the inclusion time period or from the date of their first PPI prescription to the end of the inclusion time period (whichever was shortest in duration). Data collected includes serum magnesium, serum calcium with corresponding albumin levels, number of pulmonary exacerbations, C. difficile toxin test results, serum vitamin B12, serum ferritin, and DXA scan results. Results: There were 126 patients in the PPI group and 49 patients in the control group. Baseline characteristics were similar between groups, except for age and sex. Mean baseline FEV1 values (percent predicted) in the PPI group was 99 ± 16%, compared to 105 ±12% in the control group (p=NS). Indication, dose and duration of PPI therapy were collected (see Table) . In the PPI group, 21 patients (17%) had an incidence of hypomagnesemia compared to 1 patient (2%) in the control group (p=0.097, number needed to harm (NNH) = 7). In the PPI group, 75 patients (60%) had at least one pulmonary exacerbation compared to 12 patients (24%) in the placebo group (p<0.001, NNH = 3). There was no significant difference in the incidence of hypocalcemia, low bone mineral density, or positive C. difficile toxin between the two groups. Vitamin B12 and ferritin levels could not be evaluated due to lack of data. Conclusions: PPI therapy was predominately prescribed for both indications of GER and enzyme enhancement in our CF population. Chronic PPI therapy should be used cautiously in patients with CF, as there could be an increased risk of serious adverse effects. In the CF population, there is particular concern for increased risk of pulmonary exacerbation and potential hypomagnesemia. Values expressed as mean ± SD (minimum -maximum), unless otherwise stated (group 1) and patients 1-12 years with a BMI or WT/length < 25% (group 2). Method: After IRB approval, we implemented HV for families who met criteria and consented. Group 1 had initial and follow-up HV at 1 year of age and group 2 had 1 HV. Prior to the HV, each family completed the following surveys: CF knowledge, CF nutrition knowledge, Coping Health Inventory for Parents (CHIP), and Behavioral Pediatrics Feeding Assessment Scale (group 2 only). The CF team SW, RD, RRT, and/or counselor attended the HV and reviewed survey results with patients/families. At each HV the family was provided a scale to track weekly weight. At the clinic visit following the HV, surveys were repeated. The family and CF team members involved in the visit also completed satisfaction surveys. Results: As of December 2015, 11 out of 16 infants diagnosed through NBS were enrolled in group 1. Survey results showed overall correct responses for CF and nutrition knowledge. Positive satisfaction with the HV was reported by families and the CF team. The family coping survey (CHIP) provided information that allowed the CF team to tailor the conversation to each family's coping style. CHIP results revealed that parents did not prioritize care coping behaviors. Parents reported that the development of an early, strong and close relationship with the medical team helped them cope with a chronically ill child. No difference in nutritional parameters has been noted between enrolled and non-enrolled patients. Enrolled infants had an overall higher number of hospital admissions and came to clinic more frequently. No significant impact has been shown regarding nutritional status, lung function, frequency of clinic visits, hospital admissions, or phone contacts after completion of the HV. Five patients have been enrolled in group 2. There have been significant barriers to carry out enrollment in group 2. Conclusions: The overall goal of increasing patient/care provider interactions between CF clinic visits has been achieved; however, no impact on clinical outcomes has been noted. This may be attributable to the small sample size. The increase in hospital admissions and clinic visits in group 1 may be related to an increase in early illness recognition. The CHIP results have allowed the CF team to focus on the importance of parental self-care as this is often neglected. Failure to enroll group 2 patients for HV has caused the CF team to consider a different intervention for this group which is in its early stages of development. Introduction: Underweight individuals with cystic fibrosis (CF) commonly have one or more barriers contributing to their low weight. These factors fall into several categories and include both medical and non-medical issues. Correctly identifying these specific barriers is essential to finding the most appropriate interventions to promote weight gain. Body mass index (BMI) is often used as a marker of nutritional status. Optimal BMI for CF patients is >22 kg/m 2 for females, >23 kg/m 2 for males. In the context of a CQI initiative to improve nutritional status, we surveyed our patients to identify barriers to optimal nutrition. Objective: To identify barriers interfering with optimal BMI status in adult patients with cystic fibrosis. Methods: Patients enrolled in our CF center's listserv were invited by email to complete a 21 question survey using an online survey website. Participants were allowed 16 days to complete the survey and were given two email reminders. Survey questions were developed by the CQI team under topics including demographics, medical problems, mental health, financial status and enjoyment of eating. The collected responses (n=129) were filtered into BMI groupings of <21 (n=46), 21-26 (n=63) and >26 (n=20). Response summaries within these groups were analyzed for data trends. To ensure the sample obtained represented the center's population, incidence of diabetes in the entire sample was compared to Port CF data and was found to be similar. Results: Given our aim to improve nutrition status we focused on data trends within the BMI <21 group. Compared to the other BMI groupings, this group was found to have increased incidences of diabetes (51%), GI symptoms (48%), decreased appetite (39%), financial barriers (41%) and stated that they need more encouragement (16%) and more ideas (20%) surrounding eating. Incidences of other medical and non-medical issues were similar among all three BMI groupings. Conclusions: Our results suggest that underweight individuals at our center experience a greater incidence of diabetes, GI symptoms, decreased appetite, and financial hardship and would like more encouragement and ideas surrounding eating. Focusing on specific problems associated with low BMI status may be the best way to promote weight gain and overall nutritional improvement within this group. Notably this risk identification may also help to identify patients who are at risk for weight loss based on their comorbid diagnoses, symptomology, financial status or reported barriers to eating. As a next step of the CQI initiative, a one-page information sheet outlining financial resources available to CF patients was developed as financial hardship was identified as one of the most prevalent barriers to optimal nutrition. CF team members will distribute the one-page information sheet and review financial resources with patients with BMI <21 in clinic during 2016. Objective: Kids with cystic fibrosis (CF) have problems maintaining a healthy weight related to their disease status, which could increase parental stress and negatively sway perceptions of mealtime behaviors. Evidence-based and CF-specific treatments have been shown to reduce parents' perception of mealtime problems, but these involve a high degree of family burden (eg, travel, extra clinic visits) and clinics (eg, staff time commitments). Our purpose was to pilot a new intervention addressing parenting stress and parents' negative mealtime perceptions using video-based telemedicine to reduce trips to the clinic and an individualized problemfocused curriculum to promote efficiency. Methods: So far, we have recruited 6 families of kids with CF (2-12 years old) who are struggling to gain weight. Families received a clinic-provided iPad and participated in monthly video-based telemedicine sessions lasting 30 minutes each. Two providers fielded each session based on family need (eg, behavior versus nutrition problem) and availability. To determine need, families completed a brief assessment prior to each telemedicine session. They completed the Pediatric Inventory for Parents (PIP) and the Behavioral Pediatric Feeding Assessment Scale (BPFAS) at baseline and 3 months; 6 months data are pending. Descriptive statistics are presented along with effect sizes (Cohen's d with Morris and DeShon's dependence correction); t-tests were not performed because of the small sample size. Results: At baseline, mean age of children was 5.6±3.87 years, mean BMI z-score was -0.42±0.66 kg/m 2 , and half were girls. Parents' mean PIP-Frequency score was 104.8±17.9 at baseline and 94.5±26.75 at 3 months, showing a slight decrease in the frequency of stressful events (d=0.44). In contrast, parents' mean PIP-Difficulty score was virtually unchanged from baseline to 3 months (85.6±23.7 and 85.25±32.4, respectively d=0.01). With respect to mealtimes, parents' mean BPFAS Parent-Frequency score was 16.6±4.82 at baseline and 12.75±2.06 at 3 months and their mean BPFAS Child-Frequency score was 44.4±9.86 at baseline and 41±8.2 at 3 months, both suggesting slight decreases in the perceived frequency of mealtime problems (d=1.92 and d=0.36, respectively). Additionally, there was a decrease in the number of Child Problems reported (M= 2.4±2.1 and M=0.5±0.58, baseline and 3 months, respectively, d=1.17) and in the number of Parent Problems reported (M=0.8±0.84 and M=0.25±0.5, baseline and 3 months, respectively, d=0.62). Overall, qualitative analyses indicate parents endorsed behavioral challenges over nutritional concerns for 62% of sessions (kappa= 0.80). Conclusions: Initial data suggest our problem-focused and video-based telemedicine intervention may help to reduce parenting stress and parent-perceived mealtime problems. Six-month follow-ups will be completed in June 2016. Final results will include a comparison of parents' questionnaire scores from baseline to 6 months. Results will be used to inform an intervention manual which could be tested in a larger clinical trial. Regalado Lam Chew Tun, R. 1 ; Porhownik, N.R. 4 ; Taback, S. 2 ; Oleschuk, C. 3 1. Dept. of Nutrition, Health Sciences Centre, Winnipeg, MB, Canada; 2. Dept. of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada; 3. Diagnostic Services of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada; 4. Dept. of Respirology, Health Sciences Centre, Winnipeg, MB, Canada Background: The effect of a high dose oral cholecalciferol repletion strategy in vitamin D insufficient adults with CF is still unknown. Therefore, we assessed the effectiveness of our current approach, giving oral vitamin D 3 supplementation at a dose of 10,000 IU from Monday to Friday for a total of 50,000 IU D 3 weekly in vitamin D insufficient adults with CF. Methods: We performed a retrospective chart review of all 59 adult CF patients between the ages of 17 and 64 years routinely followed at the CF Adult Program of Winnipeg Health Sciences Centre. The Winnipeg CF Clinic is located at latitude 49.8994° N, 97.1392° W. All patients had been diagnosed with CF on the basis of sweat chloride testing, genotyping or both. Adults with CF who had undergone lung transplantation (n = 4) or who were known to have cirrhotic liver disease (n = 1) or had weekly dosing of vitamin D 3 below 50,000 IU (n = 10) or had weekly dosing of over 50,000 IU (n = 3) or who did not have repeat vitamin D testing (n = 7) were excluded. This study was approved by the University of Manitoba Health Research Ethics Board. Through consultation with the endocrinologist, our clinic vitamin D repletion protocol for treating CF adult patients who have serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD) < 75 nmol/L (< 30 ng/mL) was to prescribe vitamin D 3 10,000 IU orally from Monday to Friday (or the weekly equivalent of 50,000 IU) for 12 weeks in addition to their regular CF vitamin that supplied from 800-2000 IU vitamin D 3 daily. Cholecalciferol was conveniently administered orally as either one capsule 10,000 IU or one tablet 10,000 IU. All patients were instructed to obtain follow-up serum 25-OHD levels postcompletion of treatment. Serum 25-OHD concentrations were measured by a semi-automated liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Results: Of the 59 adult patients at our CF clinic, 35 patients (59%) had below optimal serum 25-OHD levels. Of the 35 patients identified, 10 patients with insufficient serum 25-OHD levels between 25-75 nmol/L (10-30 ng/mL) fulfilled the inclusion criteria. A significant increase in serum 25-OHD levels was observed (P < 0.01) from mean value of 54.1 ± 14.8 nmol/L (21.6 ± 5.9 ng/mL) at baseline to 79.3 ± 22.8 nmol/L (31.7 ± 9.1 ng/mL) ≥ 2 months post intervention. The current treatment approach was successful in treating vitamin D insufficiency in 70% of the patients with low 25-OHD levels. Conclusion: The results of this study demonstrate that a large number of adults attending Winnipeg Health Sciences Centre CF Clinic have serum 25-OHD levels below 75 nmol/L (30ng/mL). This supports the need for dedicated and individualized approach to manage this condition. High dose therapy of vitamin D 3 , although a more aggressive treatment approach, may result in achieving optimal levels of serum 25-OHD in adults with CF. O Reilly, M.G. 1 ; Dempsey, C. 1 ; Morgan, M. 2 ; Slattery, D. 2 1. Nutrition and Dietetics, Children's University Hospital, Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 2. Respiratory, Children's University Hospital, Dublin, Dublin, Ireland Introduction: REE represents the calories required over a 24-hour period by the body during an inactive period. REE is 10-20% greater in CF patients than in healthy controls (Vaisman N, et al. J Pediatr. 1987; 111: 496-500; Buchdahl RM, et al. J App Phys. 1988; 64:1810-6) . The reasons for this are poorly understood. The objective of this study was to evaluate factors that may influence REE in CF. Methods: REE was measured using the Quark RMR indirect calorimeter in 35 patients between 9.5 and 15.2 years of age (females = 12) at respiratory baseline during routine review. Other parameters collected at this time point included lung function (FEV1), weight, height, BMI, genotype and presence of a gastrostomy tube. Results: Mean REE was 107% of predicted. The increase was greater in females (110%) than males (102%) but this was not statistically significant. There was no significant difference in REE in the pubertal group versus the non-pubertal group. There was a small positive correlation between FEV1 and REE. Increased weight was associated with higher REE. Those homozygous for ΔF508 (17/35) had lower % REE than those with other genotypes (105 vs 121) but these results were not statistically significant. Those with PEG tubes (12/35) had lower REE than those without (105 vs 115) and also had a lower FEV1 (60% vs 91%). Conclusion: Overall, while REE was elevated in this study it was lower than seen in other studies suggesting good overall health in this group. The higher REE in females is well documented in other studies but is not significantly higher in this group suggesting a narrowing of the gap between genders. Puberty would not seem to exert an obvious impact on requirements in this group. The higher REE seen in those with better FEV1 and non-homozygous ΔF508 genotypes was novel and it would be useful in future to interpret this alongside body composition and physical activity levels. Perhaps their health encourages improved exercise levels with higher muscle mass and thus higher REE. It is possible that those with PEG have lower REE due to reduced physical effort/muscle mass as a result of decreased lung function. Future studies should investigate muscle and fat mass and activity levels in tandem with REE. Background and Objective: The University of Alabama at Birmingham/Children's of Alabama (UAB/COA) pediatric CF program implemented the CF Foundation's (CFF) guidelines for bone health with an algorithm adapted for our program. In order to test the effectiveness of these guidelines within our program, we examined the associations between vitamin D supplementation, serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (D25), and bone mineral density (BMD). Methods: We used a retrospective chart review to evaluate patients that were prescribed high dose vitamin D supplementation from 2010 to 2015. D25 and BMD were assessed at baseline and 2 years postsupplementation. The sample included 30 participants composed of 15 females and 15 males with a mean age of 13.7 ± 2.39 years at baseline. There were two groups, group 1 = 2000IU, and group 2 = 3000IU. The mean D25 status for group 1 at baseline was 25.063 ± 5.196 ng/mL. After two years the mean D25 increased to 28.188 ± 6.01 ng/mL. The 3000IU group at baseline was 23.786 ± 7.465ng/mL. After two years the mean D25 increased to 26 ± 11.891ng/mL. Descriptive statistics were generated as well as correlational analyses and multiple linear regression to examine potential relationships between D25 concentration with BMD of the lumbar spine, and total body after 2 years of maximum dose supplementation. Independent t tests were run to compare any differences in groups regarding supplementation doses. Results: At baseline, serum D25 levels were found to be significantly associated with BMD at baseline of the lumbar spine (P= 0.049) and total body (P=0.037). However, associations were not seen following the two years of supplementation. No significant differences were noted between the group receiving 2000 IU and the group receiving 3000 IU. Lean body mass (LBM) was found to be significantly associated with BMD at baseline of the lumbar spine (P=0.0003) and total body (P<.0001). Significant associations between BMD and LBM remained 2 years after supplementation of the lumbar spine (P=0.009) and total body (P=0.0002). Conclusions: Baseline associations showed a link between low D25 and BMD. Although supplementation for patients with deficient levels could result in improvements in BMD, our population never reached the suggested D25 of at least 30ng/mL. Surprisingly, there were no differences noted between groups receiving either 2000 or 3000 IU, concluding increased supplementation was not effective in our patient group. Adherence to the prescribed regimen is always a question that should be addressed. Significant association between LBM and BMD showed the importance of body composition in maintaining bone health and isn't emphasized enough in CF. This finding strengthens previous recommendation on weight bearing exercise, and should be highly emphasized to patients. Future research in this area should focus on interventions for preventive care and achieving adequate D25 to attain optimal bone health. Background: Children with CF are predisposed to essential fatty acid (EFA) abnormalities, characterized by low levels of linoleic acid (LA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), altered arachidonic acid level (AA), as well as elevated pathologic triene (20:3n-9) level and triene to tetraene (T/T) ratio. Little is known whether dietary EFA intake is adequate in young children with CF and current CFF infant care guidelines reported insufficient evidence to recommend for or against LA and DHA supplementation. Objective: To evaluate EFA status in the first 2 years of life and its association with dietary intake. Methods: The study population consists of infants enrolled in FIRST (Feeding Infants Right… from the STart), a multicenter prospective observational study initiated in 2012 at 5 CF Centers (Madison, Milwaukee, Indianapolis, Salt Lake City, and Boston) to identify optimal feeding for infants with CF. A total of 172 erythrocyte specimens from 75 infants who have reached 2 years of age by 06/30/16 were analyzed for FA composition (56 at 3.7±0.2mo, 56 at 12.9±0.2mo, and 60 at 23.3±0.3mo). Types of feeding at 4mo and food records at 24mo were obtained. Expressed as a percentage (by weight) of total FA, EFA abnormalities are defined as EFA deficiency (EFAD) where T/T ratio>0.02, EFA insufficiency (EFAI) where 0.01<T/T ratio<0.02, and elevated triene where triene>0.1% of total FA. Results: Of the 75 subjects, 8 had meconium ileus (MI), 61 did not have MI but were pancreatic insufficient (PI), and 6 were pancreatic sufficient (PS) (defined as fecal elastase consistently >200μg/g). The prevalence of EFAD+EFAI and elevated triene increases with age, p<0.001 (27% & 41% at 4mo, 54% & 54% at 12mo, and 78% & 87% at 24mo). Of the 36 subjects with FA composition analyzed at all 3 ages, only 4 were EFA sufficient throughout; 89% had EFAD/EFAI at least once in the first 2 years of life. Mean erythrocyte LA level increased with age, p=0.041 (10.2% at 4mo, 10.6% at 12mo, and 10.7% at 24mo), whereas both mean DHA (p<0.001) and AA (p=0.002) levels decreased with age. Mean DHA was 5.7% at 4mo, 4.8% at 12mo, and 3.4% at 24mo; mean AA was 18.3% at 4mo, 17.4% at 12mo, and 17.3% at 24mo. Within the PI group at 4mo (n=45), breastfed infants tended to be EFA sufficient compared to formula fed infants and infants on both feeding types. At 24mo, LA intake as % of total calories is positively correlated with erythrocyte LA, r=0.357, p=0.057. Mean LA intake was 6.4g/day; factoring in 15% of fat malabsorption, mean LA intake equates to 5.4g/day, which is well below the AI of 7g/day. No subject above LA intake of 8g (115% of AI) had EFAD and the prevalence of EFAD among those with LA intake <8g is 26%. Mean alpha linolenic acid intake was 0.9g/day, which is above the AI of 0.7g/day. Conclusions: This preliminary analysis showed that EFA abnormalities are common in young children with CF. At 24mo of age, EFA insufficiency is prevalent even though EFA intake meets the AI. Routine testing and early intervention can detect and potentially correct EFA abnormalities. Objective: Previous study of 196 pediatric CF patients done at CHU Ste-Justine CF Clinic showed that 2% of all patients had serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) deficiency (<27.5nmol/L), 66% had low levels (27.5-75nmol/L) and 32% had optimal levels (≥75nmol/L). Results of this study led to a new vitamin D supplementation protocol at our clinic. As part of the new protocol, all patients over 1 year received additional 1000 IU vitamin D, for a total of 1800 IU daily. Those who did not reach optimal levels with this supplementation received additional 10000 IU vitamin D once a week. The objective of this study is to document change in serum vitamin D levels in our CF pediatric population following our new protocol established in May 2012. Methods: Retrospective chart review of vitamin D supplementation and 25(OH)D levels of 137 patients, 126 pancreatic-insufficient (PI) and 11 pancreatic-sufficient (PS) one year after protocol implementation. Results Background: Resting metabolic rate (RMR) is increased in people with cystic fibrosis (PWCF). However the reasons for this are poorly understood. A result of increased RMR is malnutrition which, in CF, is associated with reduced lung function. Prognosis for PWCF has improved over the years, due in part to more aggressive symptomatic treatment and the introduction of new drugs such as ivacaftor. Objective: To assess the parameters influencing RMR, lung function and nutritional status in PWCF as these are key prognostic indicators in these patients; and to examine the impact of ivacaftor on outcomes in PWCF with the G551D mutation. Design: The study population consisted of 46 PWCF aged 6.8 to 17.1 years. RMR was measured prospectively by indirect calorimetry on 17 patients during routine review, while 29 patients had their RMR measured retrospectively between 2011 and 2014. Other parameters collected included lung function (FEV1), anthropometric measurements, genotype, bacterial colonisation, physical activity level, comorbidities, fat soluble vitamin status and presence of a PEG tube. Statistical analysis was carried out using SPSS for Windows, Version 22.0. Outcomes: Mean RMR was 112% of predicted. Mean BMI was on the 44.4th centile and mean FEV1 was 86.7%. There were no statistically significant associations between any of the parameters assessed and RMR. A significant positive association was found between BMI and FEV1 (r= 0.347, P= 0.010). Those with a PEG inserted were found to have a significantly lower BMI centile (30th vs. 51st, P= 0.011) and FEV1 (69% vs. 95%, P=0.001) than those without a PEG. This difference in FEV1 persisted after controlling for BMI. Those homozygous for ΔF508 had a significantly lower FEV1 than those heterozygous for the mutation (77% vs. 98%, P=0.025), and patients who were colonised with MRSA had a signifi-cantly lower FEV1 than those colonised with Staphylococcus aureus (62% vs. 93%, P=0.022). In addition, diabetic patients had a significantly lower FEV1 than those without diabetes (46% vs. 91%, P=0.001). Five patients were taking ivacaftor and they had a significantly higher FEV1 than those not taking the drug (110% vs. 84%, P=0.037). A trend toward improvement was observed in all other parameters assessed in relation to ivacaftor, with the exception of height centile. Interestingly, patients who were active and patients with sufficient vitamin D levels demonstrated improved health parameters. However these results were not statistically significant. Conclusion: The study group appear to be maintaining relatively good growth and lung function. The introduction of ivacaftor appears to be of significant benefit to those with the G551D mutation. An increase in RMR was observed as expected, however the parameters affecting RMR remain poorly understood. Aitken, M.L.; Ramos, K.J.; Kapnadak, S.G.; Lopriore, A. University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA Background: Maintaining optimal nutrition and healthy weight is very important for patients with CF. Despite this, there is limited information about adult CF patients' perspectives regarding their nutrition and exercise needs. We wished to systematically gather patients' perceptions of their dietary/physical activity and needs, with a goal to create patient-centered data allowing for improved quality of care. Methods: A 14-question survey was designed regarding nutrition and physical well-being of adult (≥18 years) CF patients. The survey was piloted by CF patients at the University of Washington for feasibility and clarity. Respondents found that the survey took fewer than 10 minutes to complete. All patients seen by the registered dietician (RD) in clinic were asked to complete the survey, which included questions addressing patients' nutritional concerns, how useful they felt dietician support had been, time spent on food preparation, exercise frequency, and a choice of health-improvement programs they would find most valuable. Results: 28 patients, 14 men and 14 women, completed the survey (age range 20-60 years). 21/28 (75%) were pancreatic insufficient. The average FEV1% was 61% (range 20%-99%). Women's average BMI was 23.7 kg/m 2 (range 16. 2-35.4 kg/m 2 ) with 6/14 (42%) below CFF Guidelines and 4/14 (29%) overweight. Men's average BMI was 24.9 kg/m 2 (range 17.0-35.4 kg/m 2 ) with 6/14 (42%) below CFF guidelines and 7/14 (50%) overweight. 8/28 (29%) had CFRD, five using insulin. Oral nutritional supplements were used by 16/28 (57%) to aid in maintaining a healthy weight. 9/28 patients took probiotics, but only 2/9 (22%) on a daily basis. The majority of patients found the RD visits to be helpful, 25/28 (89%). Patients' time spent on daily food preparation varied with 43% spending 10-30 minutes, 32% spending 30-45 minutes, 21% spending greater than 45 minutes and 4% less than 10 minutes daily. 25/28 (89%) patients reported routine exercise, with 60% exercising more than 30 minutes daily. Walking and strength training were the most popular forms of exercise. Most of the patient's primary nutrition concerns were related to maintaining a healthy weight with 9/28 (32%) choosing weight gain and 7/28 (25%) choosing weight loss as the primary concern. The other nutritional concerns were blood glucose control (19%), nutritional education (13%) and digestive health/enzyme use (11%). In terms of nutrition and fitness programs, 10/28 (36%) chose increased access to online nutrition education and fitness information, and 8/28 (29%) would like to have a CF cookbook emphasizing healthy foods. Conclusions: Our preliminary data of patient-centered nutritional and exercise needs show that most patients have a BMI meeting CFF guidelines. Interestingly some are overweight and wish weight loss. Most patients regularly exercise, and most would like to have improved online access to CF-specific nutritional education, as well as increased fitness knowledge specific for patients with respiratory disease. Lamers, C.R. 1 ; van der Feen, C. 1 ; van der Doef, H.P. 1,2 ; van der Ent, C.K. 3 ; Houwen, R.H. 1 1. Pediatric Gastroenterology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands; 2. Pediatric Gastroenterology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands; 3. Pediatric Pulmonology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands Background and Aims: Ursodeoxycholic acid might prevent progression of cystic fibrosis-related liver disease, but objective parameters for its effect are lacking. Methods: An observational study of pediatric cystic fibrosis patients was performed. Each patient had at least two measurements of liver stiffness by transient elastography, at least one year apart, between January 1, 2009 and April 30, 2016 . For each patient the difference between the first and last measurement available was calculated and expressed as Δ stiffness in kPa per year, to evaluate the effect of ursodeoxycholic acid. Results: Paired measurements of liver stiffness, with a median interval of 37 months, were done in 126 patients. In 90 patients no ursodeoxycholic acid was given; initial liver stiffness was 4.2 (IQR 3.8-4.7) kPa. In 36 patients on ursodeoxycholic acid liver stiffness was 9.7 (IQR 6. 3-14.4) kPa. In this group 6 patients had cirrhosis; initial liver stiffness was 22.5 kPa. In 20 patients ursodeoxycholic acid was started because of heterogeneous liver ultrasound in combination with either hepatomegaly and/or increased liver enzymes (Colombo criteria); initial liver stiffness was 9.3 (IQR 6.8-13.6) kPa. In 10 patients ursodeoxycholic acid was started because of other reasons, generally isolated raised transaminases; initial liver stiffness was kPa. In the group without ursodeoxycholic acid liver stiffness increased with 0.19 (IQR -0.08 to 0.48) kPa/year. Liver stiffness also increased in the group with cirrhosis: 4.56 (IQR 0.68-14.64) kPa/year. However in the 20 patients in whom ursodeoxycholic acid was started because Colombo criteria were met, a decrease of liver stiffness with 0.48 (IQR -1.53 to 1.01) kPa/year was observed, which was significantly different from the increase of liver stiffness in the group without ursodeoxycholic acid (P=0.01). In the 10 patients who had ursodeoxycholic acid for other reasons liver stiffness increased with 0.19 (IQR -0.49 to 0.78) kPa/year. Conclusion: These data suggest that ursodeoxycholic acid might be able to reduce liver stiffness when used in patients with well defined, mild liver disease. Perez, A.; Drumm, M.L. Pediatrics, CWRU, Cleveland, OH, USA CFRD incidence has increased as CF patients' longevity has risen, but even more striking is that ~75% of CF patients exhibit some form of glucose intolerance that cannot be readily explained. The CF mouse does not exhibit pancreatic insufficiency, therefore represents a good model to study insulin regulation by tissues in the CF context without pancreatic atrophy. We found that F508del mice fasted for 6 hours had lower basal glucose values than their WT littermates. To further investigate this, glucose tolerance tests (GTT) were performed on 8-week-old (male and female) F508del, R117H, and WT mice (C57BL/6J background) after a 12 hour overnight fast. The Table indicates that not only were the basal glucose values significantly lower in the CF mice, but the area under the curve (AUC) was also lower, indicating that CF mice were disposing of the glucose more rapidly than WT. Lower basal glucose values in CF mice correlated with higher ketone values, indicating they were oxidizing more fat than WT. Glucose and ketone values measured in the same mice under fed conditions, one week later, returned to pre-experimental levels, but still lower or higher, respectively, in CF mice. Lower fasting glucose in CF mice could be due to smaller glycogen pools since CF mice are smaller, and have less fat and muscle mass than WT. The female mice were tested again at 14-16 weeks of age, and sacrificed either fed or fasted for 6 hours or 12 hours. Total glycogen was measured in the livers of these mice (g glucose whole liver/kg body weight): WT fed 2.38 ± 0.08, n = 5; 6 hour fast 0.61 ± 0.1, n = 16; 12 hour fast 0.02 ± 0.01, n = 14. R117H fed 2.97 ± 0.16, n = 4 * ; 6 hour fast 1.2 ± 0.22, n = 7 * ; 12 hour fast 0.007 ± 0.004, n = 5. F508del fed 2.59 ± 0.2, n = 4; 6 hour fast 1.16 ± 0.15, n = 12 * ; 12 hour fast 0.02 ± 0.01, n = 7. * p ≤ 0.009. Livers from CF female mice had more glycogen than WT, either in the fed state or after 6hr fasting, yet blood glucose levels were lower, indicating that CF mice may have a problem releasing glucose from stored glycogen. Calorimetry was used to measure respiratory quotient (RQ) in F508del and WT male mice, 11 weeks old for 48 hours (4 each), last 12 hours without food. RQ indicated that in the presence of food, CF mice preferentially burned carbohydrates at night but fat during the day, more so than WT. When food was withdrawn at night, CF mice switched to fat stores sooner that WT. Our data indicate that pancreatic sufficient, young CF mice are able to use readily available carbohydrates as energy substrate and are more sensitive to their utilization presumably by the periphery (indicating enhanced insulin sensitivity at that age). However, they are less effective at accessing their stored glycogen and deplete dietary carbohydrates faster than WT. This metabolic scenario could contribute to glucose intolerance seen in CF patients even in the absence of CFRD. Supported by NIH grant DK097829. Background/Objective: Adequate nutrition is crucial to the health and well-being of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. There are generally two ways that CF patients use to calculate pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy (PERT) for each meal. By far the most popular is based on weight, lipase/kg patient/meal. A typical range is 500-2500 lipase unit/kg patient/meal. This may, however, not be the best way to assess required enzyme dosing and not the best for optimization of nutritional status. The alternative strategy is to calculate the grams of fat in each meal, and then to base pill strength on a known lipase units per gram of fat per meal. This is not commonly undertaken, although is an alternative that has been endorsed by the CF Foundation. This study's purpose is to assess the potential benefit in cystic fibrosis patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI) who use a smartphone app to manage dosing of pancreatic enzymes in order to optimize health and nutritional status. Methods: This was a cohort study that evaluated the benefit of using a pancreatic enzyme management smartphone app. Inclusion criteria included: 18 years of age or older, diagnosis of pancreatic insufficiency, currently using PERT, and who own a smartphone. A smartphone app was developed using the fat to lipase ratio to regulate number of enzymes taken with meals and snacks determined by the number of fat grams using an internal food catalog. Patients with EPI and smartphone devices provided verbal consent during clinic hours. Participants were asked to complete an initial gastrointestinal and stool questionnaire followed by a five-day food and pancreatic enzyme diary. Using this information, participants were provided with a fat to lipase ratio and instructed to use the smartphone app for seven days. At the end of this period, participants will complete a follow-up gastrointestinal and stool questionnaire to assess changes in reported symptoms. Results: We have enrolled five participants to date. On the initial stool questionnaires, participants reported approximately 3 stools daily with an average of 4 gastrointestinal complaints daily. One participant has completed the study. On the initial questionnaire, this patient reported approximately 4.3 stools and an average of 7 GI complaints daily. On the final assessment, this patient reported a 100% reduction in GI complaints, 47% fewer bowel movements, and improved weight gain after 1 week of using the smartphone app. Further information is needed from the remaining participants in order to assess potential benefits of the pancreatic management smartphone app. Discussion: While the study is still ongoing, the initial results show promise in resolving gastrointestinal complaints and weight gain. We hypothesize these results will continue to prove the efficacy of a smartphone app to manage pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy and optimize the nutritional status of pancreatic insufficient cystic fibrosis patients. Methods: We studied all 251 eligible children enrolled in an ongoing multicenter, prospective study investigating the utility of early abdominal ultrasonography (US) to predict later cirrhosis (PUSH study, NCT01144507). Children with pancreatic insufficient CF age 3-12y with heterogeneous liver on US (HTG, n=63) were matched 1:2 with children with CF and normal US (NL, n=125). We also included children with nodular livers (NOD, n=24) and bright homogeneous livers (HMG, n=39) at baseline. We used baseline blood work and US data, expressed US spleen size as age-adjusted z-score (SSAZ), calculated the AST to platelet ratio index (APRI) and the fibrosis index based on 4 factors (FIB4), and undertook univariate analysis and multivariable modeling. Results: Univariate analysis showed significant differences between US groups for platelet count, ALT, AST, GGT, APRI, FIB-4, and SSAZ (Table) . Multivariable regression models were developed for NOD vs. NL with AUROC 0.95 for a final model that included GGT and SSAZ, and 0.94 for a final model with FIB4 and GGT. Models were tested to distinguish HTG vs. NL but only GGT remained in the final model (AUROC 0.71). The best model to distinguish NOD vs. HTG included FIB4 and alkaline phosphatase (AUROC 0.80). HMG vs NL was distinguished by a model with age at US, ethnicity (Hispanic vs not), body mass index z-score and ALT (AUROC 0.83). Conclusion: Liver US appearances in children with CF correlate with changes in simple biomarkers of liver disease, with values for HTG intermediate between those of NL and NOD. Multivariable models of simple biomarkers have excellent discriminating ability for NL vs NOD. Our findings are supportive that US grades may correlate with the development of liver disease that causes changes in blood work and spleen size variables. Our future studies will explore longitudinal changes in simple biomarkers in children who transition between US grades over time, such as from NL to HTG and HTG to NOD. 1992; 151:84-7) , and increased risk of early death (Rodman et al. Medicine (Baltimore). 1986; 65:389-97) . Objective: The Baylor College of Medicine (BCM) Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center is a large adult center in Houston, Texas. There are 255 active patients in the 2015 registry data set, 99 of which have been diagnosed with either impaired glucose tolerance or CFRD. In light of the significant impact CFRD has on morbidity in adults with CF and the prevalence in our clinic population, it was determined that an organized multidisciplinary approach to diagnosis and management of this cohort is essential to improve clinical outcomes. We hypothesize that the formation of a CFRD multidisciplinary clinic and committee will lead to more timely diagnosis and improved management of CFRD. Methods: We formed a multidisciplinary committee in November 2015 composed of members from the CF center team and adult endocrine section including physicians, nurses, dietitians, administrators, and diabetes educators. This multidisciplinary committee has met monthly with an agenda that includes: 1. development of algorithms for timely diagnosis and monitoring; 2. operational changes that will streamline the care of patients with CFRD; and 3. case management discussion of complicated CFRD patients. Results: As a result of the committee's effort, we have created an endocrine referral protocol and CFRD care algorithm as well as formed a comprehensive CFRD clinic including CF and endocrine care providers and a diabetes educator. This CFRD clinic is offered monthly and allows patients to see a pulmonologist for routine CF care, an endocrinologist for diabetes maintenance, receive diabetes education and nutritional evaluation in consecutive appointments. Providers are able to discuss the care of the patient in person in real time, leading to maximized communication between care teams and improved efficiency in patient care. Conclusions: We hypothesized that the formation of CFRD committee and multidisciplinary clinic will lead to more timely diagnosis and improved management of CFRD. We plan on presenting our data pre-and 6 and 12 months post-clinic creation to evaluate the number of patients completing yearly 2-hour OGTT, the number of patients with IGT or CFRD completing outpatient endocrine appointments each quarter, and percent of patients using insulin pumps to control diabetes. We will also trend clinical outcomes, such as lung function, nutritional status, and hemoglobin A1c as a marker of diabetes control. Shoff, S.M.; Lai, H.J.; FIRST STUDY GROUP,. Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA Background: Fatty acid (FA) composition of breast milk (BM) is influenced by maternal diet. This variability raises concerns whether exclusive breastfeeding provides adequate amount of essential FAs (EFA) for infants with CF. According to Dietary Reference Intakes, the Adequate Intake (AI) for the principle EFA, linoleic acid (LA), for infants 0-6 mo is 4.4 g/day. The AI is estimated based on an average daily BM intake of 780 mL that contains 31 g of total fat (55% of calories from fat). When factoring in 15% fat malabsorption, CF infants who are exclusively breastfed would not have adequate LA intake unless BM intake is increased to ~900 mL/day, or LA content in BM is enriched to 5.1 g/780 mL. Objective: To determine FA profile in BM and its association to maternal dietary FA intake. Methods: FIRST (Feeding Infants Right…from the STart) is a multi-center prospective observational study initiated in 2012 at 5 CF centers (Madison, Milwaukee, Boston, Indianapolis and Salt Lake City) to identify optimal feeding for infants with CF. In 2015, the BM sub-study was initiated. As of 6/30/16, 12 mothers (age 32±4 y) were enrolled and 39 BM samples collected at 4.6±2.3 mo postpartum were analyzed. Maternal dietary intakes were also obtained by food frequency questionnaires (n=28). Six (50%), 2 (17%) and 4 (33%) women exclusively breast fed for <1 mo, 1-2 mo and 4-5 mo, respectively. Results: Caloric density averaged 21.3 kcal/oz but varied greatly among BM samples (15.1 to 36.1 kcal/oz). Protein averaged 0.3 g/oz (6.7% calories) and ranged 0.2-0.6 g/oz (3.3-12.1% calories). Total fat averaged 1.2 g/oz, (47.7% calories) and ranged 0.5-2.7 g/oz (27-67% calories). Average caloric density and protein content were similar to, but fat content was lower than, the values used to establish the AI for healthy infants. EFA content also varied greatly. LA averaged 0.18 g/oz (range 0.06-0.36) and represented 15.3% of total fat (range 9.3-20.6%). Linolenic acid (LNA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) averaged 0.015 g/oz (range 0.00-0.03) and 0.003 g/oz (range 0.001-0.009), respectively. Based on the above compositional data, 780 mL of the BM from these samples would provide an average of 4.7 g of LA, which meets the AI, but 47% of the samples would contain less, with the lowest providing only 1.6 g of LA in 780 mL of BM. Taking into account 15% fat malabsorption, 71% of the BM samples would not be able to provide sufficient LA for infants with CF. Maternal LA intake averaged 13.1±4.3 g/day and 57% of the mothers' LA intake was below the AI for lactating women (13 g/day). The ratio of dietary LA to LNA was 10±3, indicating typical American diet. LA content in BM (as % of total fat) was positively correlated with maternal LA (r=0.5, p=0.02), total polyunsaturated FAs (r=0.4, p=0.03) and total fat (r=0.4, p=0.03). Conclusions: This preliminary analysis indicated that most of the breast milk samples appear to contain insufficient linoleic acid for CF infants. Future analysis will assess the association between breast milk EFA and infants' EFA status, which may help explain EFA deficiency in infants with CF. LA content in breast milk and maternal diet was significantly correlated, thus can be increased by supplementing maternal diet. Funded by CFFT-LAI14A0, R56DK109692. Background: Anemia is a complication of chronic diseases, but its prevalence and clinical implications have not been defined in adults with CF. Normal ranges for hemoglobin used by clinical laboratories do not account for demographic and clinical attributes of CF patients that could influence hemoglobin levels. The objectives of this study were to determine the prevalence of CF-related anemia using data from the US CF Foundation Patient Registry (CFFPR), to elucidate associations between anemia and comorbidities, and to identify variation in mean hemoglobin concentrations reported by US CF care programs between 2010 and 2013. Methods: We defined CF-related anemia by race and gender in CFFPR registrants ≥18 years of age as a hemoglobin value below the fifth percentile of mean values for adults in the Scripps-Kaiser and National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) databases. We modeled the likelihood that anemic adults with CF had specific clinical attributes compared to those who were not anemic. We characterized program-specific variation in mean hemoglobin readings. Results: Of the 12,467 adult registrants with ≥1 hemoglobin measurement between 2010 and 2013, at least 40% of White males, 45% of White females, 35% of Black males, 40% of Black females, 15% of Hispanic males, and 30% of Hispanic females were anemic. Lower hemoglobin values were associated with lower FEV 1 . Mean hemoglobin concentration across CF care programs was 13.34 gm/dL (Figure) . White males with anemia were at least twice as likely as White males without anemia to have had cirrhosis, FEV 1 <40% predicted, any hospitalizations between 2010 and 2013, and to have been treated with prednisone. Compared to White males without anemia, those with anemia were 1.65 times more likely to have had a BMI <23 kg/m 2 , 1.61 times more likely to have had massive hemoptysis, 1.20 times more likely to have had a pulmonary exacerbation (PEx), and 1.11 times more likely to have CF-related diabetes (CFRD). White CF females with anemia were at least twice as likely as White CF females without anemia to have used prednisone and to have had cirrhosis. Few clinical correlations were apparent for Blacks and Hispanics with and without anemia. Conclusions: Anemia is a prevalent complication in adults with CF and is associated with specific patient attributes. Variation in hemoglobin concentration among US CF care programs requires further explanation. secondary to the unethical nature of withholding a necessary treatment. Most data are derived from the pediatric population demonstrating a positive impact on Body Mass Index (BMI) and potentially pulmonary function tests. Only a few studies have examined the demographics of the aging adult population and the need for long-term enteral tube placement. The indications for invasive placement of a Gastrostomy-tube (G-tube), Jejunostomy-tube (J-tube), and Gastro-Jejunostomy-tube (GJ-tube) are not standardized and are variable in their outcomes. Purpose: To assess the incidence of G-tube, J-tube, or GJ-tube placement in adult CF patients; to assess patient demographics, outcome, and mortality data on this specific cohort Materials and Methods: Retrospective, observational, single adult CF center experience. Inclusion Criteria: Conclusions: A significant proportion of patients required a permanent enteral feeding tube in our cohort. The majority had only a mild increase in their BMI 4-6 months after placement. Most patients had a severe obstructive defect prior to placement with only minimal improvement at 4-6 months after insertion. Limitations include a small sample size and minimal longitudinal data. Background: Some studies have reported decreased cystic fibrosis (CF) pulmonary exacerbation and hospitalization rates, decreased gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms and inflammatory markers, and improved quality of life with probiotic use. However, little is published about clinical use of probiotics in CF, and prescriptions are not tracked in the National Registry. We have noted anecdotally that some patients take probiotics without supervision, and not much is known about patient beliefs around the efficacy and side effects of these agents. Objective: We aimed to explore the rationale for probiotic use/nonuse and to look for associations between probiotic use and patient characteristics, care patterns and health status within the Northern New England CF Consortium (NNECFC). Methods: We surveyed a population of 575 CF patients at 4 centers within the NNECFC. Surveys were completed during regularly scheduled outpatient visits, inpatient stays, or via email using a web-based questionnaire (REDCap). We assessed probiotic use, rationale for not using probiotics, and self-reported GI symptoms. We queried the CF registry for the demographic, socioeconomic, GI, and pulmonary status of each participant along with responder-specific medical therapies, microbiology and exacerbation frequency. Differences between subgroups were analyzed by t-test, Mann-Whitney U, or chi-square test, as appropriate. The study was approved by each institution's IRB. Results: 213 subjects (37%) completed the survey. The frequency of reported probiotic use varied significantly between centers (24-83%, p<0.001). Among those taking probiotics, 66% reported daily use; 85% of the remainder reported use only while on antibiotics. Among patients not using probiotics, 66% noted a lack of knowledge of these products or reported that the CF team had not recommended them. There was no difference in socioeconomic status, pulmonary function, microbiologic colonization, antibiotic use, or exacerbation rate between probiotic use groups. Patients who had diarrhea while on antibiotics, those who had sought urgent care for GI issues, and those taking supplemental tube feeds were significantly more likely to report probiotic use (p <0.001, p=0.036, and p=0.045, respectively). Conclusions: In this CF population, lack of knowledge about probiotics and not receiving recommendations for use from the CF care team were the major reasons for not taking them. Those taking probiotics were significantly more likely to report GI symptoms and associated medical care. Due to the cross-sectional design of our study, this does not imply causality. Unlike prior smaller studies (1,2), we did not detect a difference in pulmonary function, rate of exacerbation or nutritional status between probiotic use subgroups. Likewise, there was no relationship between probiotic use and socioeconomic status. Further studies are needed to confirm and evaluate these relationships and to compare practices between centers. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive disease in Caucasians. In a recent consensus statement, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation emphasized that adequate nutrition is a vital element in preserving lung function and survival in patients with CF. Malnutrition is a common problem in patients with CF as a result of their inability to meet nutritional demands. Improving the nutritional status of patients with CF has been shown to have a positive effect on pulmonary function, respiratory status, body composition and survival. Few studies have investigated the outcomes and efficacy of nutritional supplementation via percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube feedings. Methods: After obtaining IRB approval, we performed a retrospective chart review of the electronic medical record of Johns Hopkins All Children's Hospital CF center. This study was an extension of an ongoing quality improvement project which had been started to improve and maintain BMIs of patients with CF to >50th percentile following the 2005 CF Foundation guideline recommendations. This revealed 28 malnourished patients with CF aged 18 years and younger who received dietary supplementation via a PEG tube for nutritional failure between 2010 and 2014. Data were then analyzed to see if there were any improvements in percent of predicted FEV1 comparing the year prior to the year after. Results: We had 28 patients with cystic fibrosis who received supplementation with PEG tubes for nutritional failure. Of these 57% were males and 96% Caucasian. There was no observed significant change in percent predicted FEV1 when compared prior to PEG tube placement and at oneyear follow-up (p=0.10). However, data obtained immediately prior to PEG tube placement and one year post-operatively showed a significant rise in BMI percentiles (p=0.009). Conclusion: Our data suggests that PEG placement for nutritional rehabilitation significantly improved BMI at one-year follow-up (p = 0.009). Percent predicted FEV1 (p = 0.10) showed no change. Percent predicted FEV1 may have been affected by confounding factors, including advanced lung disease. Longer follow-up may be needed to observe significant changes in lung function. Background and Aim: Fecal loss of bile acids (BA) is compensated for by de novo synthesis, which is regulated through a finely tuned homeostatic control mechanism to maintain a near constant body BA pool. One of its key elements is the direct activation of the nuclear receptor FXR in ileal epithelial cells by reclaimed BA: active BA uptake through ASBT (apical sodium-dependent BA transporter) triggers the production and release of the hormone FGF19 (FGF15 in mice), which represses hepatic expression of CYP7A1, the rate-limiting enzyme in cholic acid (CA) synthesis. Because cystic fibrosis (CF) is associated with enhanced fecal BA excretion and a concomitant increase in de novo synthesis, we hypothesized that FXR signaling is attenuated in the CF intestine. Methods: Intestinal and hepatic expression of FXR-regulated genes was assessed in Cftr null mice and control littermates, both in the absence and presence of CA. Results: In CF ileum, we found strongly reduced expression of Fgf15, despite a normal ileal BA content and normal ASBT protein and transcript levels. Ex vivo, CA-dependent induction of Fgf15 was similar in CF and control ileum, but, in vivo, dietary CA supplementation failed to restore Fgf15 induction in CF mice. Attenuation of intestinal FXR/FGF15 signaling was associated with a blunted hepatic trophic response and impaired repression of hepatic Cyp7a1 expression. Antibiotic treatment, which previously was shown to reduce fecal BA excretion in CF mice (Wouthuyzen-Bakker, et al. Pediatr Res. 2012; 71:4-12) fully restored Fgf15 expression in CF ileum. Conclusions: In CF mice, quantitative and/or qualitative changes in the gut microbiome lead to loss of FXR-dependent feedback control of hepatic BA synthesis. Acknowledgement: Supported by the Dutch CF Foundation (NCFS) as part of the HIT-CF program. It has been well established that CF mice exhibit reduced weight and reduced fat accumulation compared to wild-type (WT) controls (1) . We have previously demonstrated that CF epithelial cells and tissues exhibit reduced microtubule acetylation that can be corrected by inhibition of the cytosolic histone deactylase family member HDAC6. We generated F508del mice lacking the expression of HDAC6 (F508del/Hdac6) to determine what CF phenotypes could be attributed to microtubule alterations in vivo. One phenotype that is corrected in F508del Cftr mice by the ablation of HDAC6 is the restoration of fat accumulation and the associated increase in weight gain. The hypothesis of this study is that CFTR dysfunction in adipocytes impairs adipocyte differentiation through modulation of microtubule stability. To test this hypothesis, we utilized CF 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes developed by the Drumm laboratory where the CFTR gene was disrupted through the CRISPR/Cas9 system along with WT controls. Consistent with epithelial cells, CF 3T3-L1 cells exhibited 0.13 +/-0.02 fold reduction in acetylated tubulin levels compared to controls. It was also determined that the pre-adipocyte marker Krüppel-like factor 2 (KLF2) was expressed 2.6 +/-0.4 fold greater in CF 3T3-L1 cells compared to WT cells. This increase in KLF2 expression is likely significant since it has been demonstrated that elevated KLF2 expression prevents pre-adipocytes from differentiating into adipocytes (2) . Quantitative RT-PCR also shows KLF2 mRNA levels were increased in CF 3T3-L1 cells 2.4 +/-0.4 fold over WT levels. Since F508del/Hdac6 mice are able to store fat, we examined whether HDAC6 inhibition could impact KLF2 expression. HDAC6 inhibition with tubastatin inhibited KLF2 expression in CF 3T3-L1 cells in a dose-dependent manner. Conversely, destabilizing microtubules with nocodazole in WT 3T3-L1 cells results in a dose-dependent increase in KLF2 expression. These data suggest that microtubule stabilization via HDAC6 inhibition improves pre-adipocyte differentiation and allows for fat deposition in vivo. To verify these findings in primary tissue, epididymal fat from WT, F508del, and F508del/Hdac6 mice was examined for KLF2 expression. Consistent with the CF3T3-L1 cell model, KLF2 expression was significantly increased in F508del mice fat compared to WT mice and restored to WT levels in F508del/Hdac6 mice. These data show that HDAC6 inhibition restores KLF2 levels to WT levels in both primary CF fat tissue and in a CF pre-adipocyte cell model. It remains to be determined if elevated KLF2 expression in CF is responsible for reduced fat accumulation in CF mice or simply a marker of differentiation signaling that is sensitive to HDAC6 inhibition. Introduction: Liver disease is the second leading cause of mortality in CF and contributes to significant morbidity in many patients due to associated liver fibrosis and cirrhosis. Current CF Foundation guidelines for CF liver disease (CFLD) screening include annual serum labs (LFTs, GGT, CBC, coags), with further workup indicated if AST/ALT are >1.5x normal, or there is evidence of nutrition-independent coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia. Transaminases, while good indicators of non-CF liver disease, do not correlate well with CFLD, thus current screening primarily identifies end-stage liver cirrhosis when synthetic function is compromised and portal hypertension has developed. We suspect current guidelines are ineffective at detecting CFLD at early stages of fibrosis. Identifying early liver fibrosis will be of great importance to develop interventions aimed at halting CFLD progression to end-stage liver disease. Aim: To assemble a multi-modal and practical screening protocol that can be implemented at CF centers to identify early CFLD. Methods: A literature review was performed to identify biomarkers, serum labs, and imaging modalities that have shown accuracy in identifying liver fibrosis in CF. This resulted in a change to our pediatric CF center CFLD screening protocol. Any elevation in AST/ALT or GGT>35 U/L on two separate occasions resulted in referral to Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, where detailed evaluation of liver function was performed. APRI and FIB-4, serum indices of liver fibrosis and portal hypertension, respectively, were calculated and interpreted based on CF-specific cutoffs. Ultrasound (US) with Doppler and acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) were added for patients ≥6 years-old and pancreatic insufficient, and any patient with persistent lab abnormalities. In those with fibrosis on US, magnetic resonance elastography imaging (MRI) was performed to determine fibrosis staging. Results: Our modified screening protocol was well-accepted by families and CF center staff, prompted increased discussion about CFLD, and increased consultations with GI. Increased scrutiny of labs helped to identify individuals with pre-cirrhotic CFLD, many of which would have been missed with current CF Foundation guidelines. US with ARFI provided valuable information on the contour of the liver, potential presence of regenerative nodules, and fibrosis. Of those that went on to MRI, 100% of new diagnosis CFLD had elastography consistent with F0-F2 fibrosis. Conclusions: CFLD is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in CF, in part because of our inability to detect liver dysfunction prior to end-stage liver disease. Our preliminary experience demonstrates that the utilization of validated hepatology tools can help advance our ability to detect early stages of liver fibrosis. This becomes important in optimizing nutrition, correctly dosing and testing the efficacy of correctors/potentiators, and preventing the potentially lethal impact of end-stage liver disease. Objective: Eliminate the summer decline in nutritional status in our children with CF. Interventions: In spring 2014, we shared anticipatory guidance about the problem and showed patient-specific BMI graphs to help facilitate discussions with families regarding barriers to adequate summer weight gain. In spring 2015, we added interventions that included online tracking (Orchestra App), frequent phone calls, and we increased the frequency of clinic visits for patients not meeting CF nutritional goals. Measurements: Primary outcome measure was percentage of patients in our CF center ages 2-19 years with a BMI percentile ≥ 50 th during the years 2011-2015 comparing April/May data to August/September data (to capture the center level change during summer months). Results: The percentage of patients ages 2-19 years with a BMI percentile ≥ 50 th declined on average from 59.1% to 53.4% (14% relative decline) between April/May through August/September (average n= 189 patients) during the years 2011-2013. During 2011-2013, an average of 27 patients each summer had a BMI decline from above the 50th to below the 50th percentile (the CFF goal nutritional status). Between April/May 2014 through August/September 2014 the trend did not change, and the percentage of patients with a BMI percentile ≥ 50th declined from 56.9% to 51.7% (12% relative decline). From April/May to August/September 2015 with the bundled interventions, the percentage of patients ages 2-19 years with a BMI percentile ≥ 50th improved, changing from 57.7% to 58.2%. Discussion: In our CF center, BMI status declined during the summer months of the years 2011-2013. This trend did not improve with anticipatory guidance in 2014. A quality improvement bundle of tracking, frequent phone contacts, and frequent clinic visits resulted in significant improvements in summer BMI outcomes in 2015. McDonald, C.M. Dietitians, Primary Childrens Hospital, Salt Lake City, UT, USA Enteral feeding is often employed to supplement oral intake and improve the nutritional status of a child or adult with CF. However, scarce data exist to inform the management of feeding after gastrostomy placement. Current practice for the initiation of enteral feeding in CF patients aged 1 year and older was described by two online surveys, both conducted October 2015. The anonymous respondents provided convenience samples of CF health care professionals who participate in the cf-nutrition@listserv. Dartmouth.edu. The first survey received 94 responses with 34 for the subsequent survey, representing pediatric (40%), adult (30%) and combined (30%) CF centers. Most respondents (74%) followed both inpatients and outpatients and most (79%) worked at CF centers within the USA. Of all respondents, 39% worked in large CF centers (>200 patients), 35% in medium centers (100-200 patients) and 26% in CF centers with fewer than 100 patients. The reported percentage of enterally fed patients at individual CF centers varied widely, range 1-60%, mean 14%, median 10%. Respondents indicated that standard, polymeric, age-appropriate formulas are most commonly used to initiate enteral feedings (58%). Semi-elemental, age-appropriate products are introduced less often (25%). Home-prepared or blenderized formulas are rarely used as the initial feeding after gastrostomy placement. The majority of respondents (64%) report initiating enteral feeding with a concentrated formula (1.5 or 2.0 calories/ mL). Enteral feeding for a CF patient generally provides between 1/3 to 2/3 of total estimated calorie and nutrient needs. Overnight continuous drip feeding with daytime high calorie, high nutrient density oral diet is reported for 83% of CF patients who receive enteral feeding. Regardless of the formula type, most respondents (93%) recommend the use of pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy (PERT) with either bolus or continuous drip feeding; 3% do not use PERT with semi-elemental formula and 35% do not use PERT with any continuously fed formula. PERT dosing is calculated either as a meal dose (38%) or per gram of fat in the formula (59%). For those who administer PERT with enteral feeding, 86% of respondents recommend dosing PERT prior to beginning the enteral infusion and 66% report dosing PERT at the conclusion of the feeding. Approximately half (48%) of respondents who recommend PERT with continuous enteral feeding suggest PERT administration during feeding or mixed into the formula. Most (60%) recommend PERT dosing if the patient wakes during the night. Crushing nonenteric-coated enzymes (30%) or dissolving/crushing enteric coated pancreatic enzymes (30%) for addition to the formula was reported. Many respondents reported a combination of PERT dosing methods, but this percentage could not be calculated. In general, individual patient medical/surgical history and anticipated tolerance are the primary considerations (84%) in selecting an enteral standard Port CF data collection form were used to determine exposure to a specific PERT. Patients with suspected FC were asked to give informed consent to collect additional data for an independent adjudication committee to confirm the diagnosis. Results: At the end of the 2-year enrollment period (July 2012-July 2014), 25,343 patients with CF comprised the base study population (total time in study, 25,732 person-years [PY] ). Mean ± SD age at study entry was 19.5±14.4 years (median, 17.1 years; range, <0.1-86.2 years); 51% of patients were male and 93% were white. A total of 21,452 patients (85% of base population) received PERT sometime between study entry and the first 2 years of the trial (20,531 PY). The mean daily dose of any PERT was 374,586±377,749 lipase units (median, 349,491 lipase units; 90th percentile, 671,125 lipase units). Eight patients exposed to PERT had suspected FC; 1 case of FC was confirmed by the adjudication committee, 6 were not confirmed, and 1 was indeterminate. The incidence rate of confirmed FC was 0.49/10,000 PY (95% CI, 0.01-2.71) in patients with CF currently receiving PERT; the incidence rate of confirmed or indeterminate FC was 0.97/10,000 PY (95% CI, 0.12-3.52) in the same population. There were no suspected or confirmed cases of FC among the 3891 patients who were not exposed to PERT during the first 2 years of the study. Conclusions: A rigorous, prospective study of a large well-defined population, including most patients with CF in the United States, demonstrated low incidence of confirmed FC in patients with CF receiving PERT at the doses observed in this 2-year interim analysis. Subsequent interim analyses every 2 years will continue to further define the incidence of FC and assess potential risk factors for its occurrence. Acknowledgments: Allergan, Janssen, and AbbVie funded the research. Allergan and AbbVie contributed to its design, and were involved in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data, and in the writing, review, and approval of the publication. All authors contributed to and maintained control over the final content. We recognize Daniel Fife and Gerhard Leitz, of Janssen, for valuable input to study design and interpretation. Michael J. Theisen, PhD, and Natalia Zhukovskaya, PhD, of Complete Publication Solutions, LLC, provided medical writing support, funded by AbbVie. The manifestations of CF gastrointestinal tract disease frequently begin during infancy, when pancreatic exocrine insufficiency (PI) results in profound nutrient malabsorption and malnutrition leading to growth failure and even intestinal obstruction. Despite aggressive, early nutritional intervention and pancreatic enzyme replacement and other therapies, early growth failure remains common among infants with CF, suggesting that PI is not the sole contributor to growth and nutritional failure. The identification of these growth and nutritional determinants in children with CF therefore remains a key research goal in CF care. A growing body of evidence supports a role for the gut microbiota in nutrient harvest and metabolism, and these microbiota are often altered in a variety of disease states. Therefore, infant GI tract microbes may be important determinants of CF nutritional outcomes. We recently showed that infants and children with CF had GI microbiota that differ markedly from those of children without CF, and that this dysbiosis correlated with fecal measures of fat malabsorption and inflammation, further supporting a role in early CF growth and GI function. Methods: We hypothesize that the intestinal microbiomes among children with CF correlate with severity of malabsorption, intestinal inflammation, gastrointestinal signs and symptoms, vitamin and mineral deficiency, and growth. To test these hypotheses, we are defining the fecal microbiomes of 250 infants with CF who participated in a multicenter study of infant nutrition (Baby Observational NUtrition Study (BONUS)) using high-throughput metagenomic sequencing. With these resources, we are (1) defining the fecal microbiomes, composed of the microbiota (the species of microbes present) and metagenomes (the microbial genes present, which reflects the metabolic capacity of the microbiota), of four stool samples per subject over the first year of life, and (2) determining the relationship of fecal microbiomes, and their evolution over the year of study, with nutritional, biochemical, and clinical parameters (including weight and height for age Z-score, rate of growth among subjects, serum vitamin levels, fecal nutrient and metabolite content, GI symptoms, and measures of intestinal inflammation). The microbiome analysis uses the Illumina HiSeq DNA sequencing platform coupled with a combination of bioinformatic analytical methods, with statistical analysis to identify correlations with metabolomic and clinical measures. Results: Data for this study will be generated before the 2016 NACFC and no later than October 25, 2016. Conclusion: Our goal is to define the impact and, eventually, the role of the infant CF GI microbiome in growth and nutrition, with the hope of identifying interventions that will improve early growth, and thus long-term outcomes, in CF. Funded by the NIH (R01 DK095869). Objective: A paucity of research exists on the longitudinal trends in bone mineral density (BMD) for adult CF patients. Current standard of care guidelines for Canada recommend that dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scans be performed once every five years for the average adult CF patient, with more frequent scans recommended for those with indication of osteopenia or osteoporosis. Traditional methods for analyzing longitudinal data, such as mixed models, operate under the assumption that there is a single overall population trajectory, and the presence or absence of certain variables may add or subtract minor differences to either the population baseline or slope over time. In this study, we aim to use a novel statistical approach for clustering patients into distinct groups based on trends in bone density over time. Methods: Femoral neck BMD (BMD-FN, g/cm 2 ) and demographic and clinical data were collected on patients who had at least one DXA scan between 1998 and 2014 at the Toronto Adult CF clinic at St. Michael's Hospital. Data were restricted to pre-lung transplant DXA scans between the ages of 25 to 48 after peak bone mass was reached and prior to menopause. A latent class mixed model approach was used to classify patients into distinct classes based on common trends of bone density over the life course. The optimal number of classes and functional form was chosen by minimizing the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). Results: There were 390 patients who met the criteria. The median age at DXA scan was 28.4 years (range 25-47). Patients were classified into two distinct classes based on the decline in BMD-FN over time. Class 1 consisted of 308 patients (84.2%) and indicated that the majority of patients showed a very slight decline in BMD-FN over the life course, with a decrease of 0.004 g/cm 2 per year. The second class, comprising 58 patients (15.9%), was made up of patients whose BMD-FN declined at a much faster rate of 0.02 g/cm 2 per year. This decrease is much more dramatic than that found using a standard mixed model approach suggesting the steepest decline was 0.008 g/cm 2 per year. Six patients (10.3%) in Class 2 either had or went on to develop osteoporosis in the femoral neck compared to only 3.6% in Class 1. Further analysis will be performed to determine what clinical and demographic characteristics define group membership. Conclusions: Conventional statistical techniques for longitudinal trends may mask the fact that not all patients follow the same trajectory. We identified two distinct groups of patients, one of which showed a slow decline in bone loss over time and for whom stringent screening is likely not beneficial. This technique has potential to identify different trends for any longitudinal outcome. Background: Gut microbiota refers to the trillions of microorganisms in the human GI tract that play a central role in health, including in energy and macronutrient metabolism, nutrient capture and immune function. Emerging research suggests that gut microbiota may be disrupted in individuals with CF. CFTR-knockout mice displayed significantly less bacterial richness and diversity (parameters that usually associate with a healthy gut microbiota) compared to WT animals. Vitamin D deficiency, a common comorbidity in CF patients, may influence composition of the gut microbiota. Vitamin D deficiency can increase the severity of intestinal inflammation in the mouse colon that can be reversed by vitamin D supplementation. Similarly, in humans, high dose vitamin D supplementation resulted in a marked reduction in typical opportunistic pathogens and an increase in gut microbiota richness. Whether vitamin D affects the gut microbiota in CF is not known. Objective: To assess the effects of a high-dose vitamin D3 bolus regimen on the composition of gut microbiota in adult patients with stable CF lung disease who are vitamin D insufficient (plasma 25(OH)D < 30 ng/mL). Study design: This is a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, interventional pilot study in 45 adults with CF. Patients with CF who are ≥ 18 years of age and can tolerate oral medications without contraindication to high dose vitamin D meet inclusion criteria. Major exclusion criteria are hypercalcemic disorders, use of systemic antibiotics in the last 4 weeks or use of immunosuppressants. Recruited patients will be classified into two groups -those with plasma 25(OH)D level < 30 ng/mL and those with plasma levels ≥ 30 ng/mL. Subjects with vitamin D insufficiency will be block randomized to either receive placebo or 50,000IU of oral vitamin D3 weekly for 3 months. Baseline stool samples will be obtained in all subjects, DNA isolated and the gut microbiota analyzed using primers for V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA. Repeat 25(OH)D levels along with stool samples will be collected 3 months after the initial intervention for the entire cohort. Endpoints: The primary outcome measure is the microbiota composition and richness before and after supplementation with high dose vitamin D using the Unifrac metric and ecological diversity measures (Shannon index). Secondary outcome measures will be lung function as measured by FEV1 and the number of pulmonary exacerbations at baseline and 3 months after supplementation. Summary: We will determine, for the first time in CF patients, whether high-dose vitamin D administration favorably modulates the gut microbiota over a 3-month treatment period. We will also relate changes in the gut microbiota to changes in lung function over this time. Beta-cell dysfunction in cystic fibrosis (CF) is widely accepted as the cause of cystic fibrosis-related diabetes. It has been hypothesized that CFTR expression in beta-cells plays an intrinsic role in insulin secretion. Support for this hypothesis is largely based on the finding that CFTR inhibitors impair insulin secretion and chloride transport in beta-cells and/or isolated islets. We have also shown that isolated islets from newborn CF ferrets have impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS), a finding that could be taken to support an intrinsic role for CFTR in islet insulin secretion. We sought to further investigate the mechanism of altered insulin secretion by CF ferret islets and to define the cell types within the pancreas and islets that express CFTR. Using single molecule fluorescent in situ hybridization (smFISH), we localized CFTR RNA expression in ferret and human pancreas and/or isolated islets. We found no evidence for CFTR expression in endocrine cells. Rather, a high level of CFTR RNA was expressed within CK7+ pancreatic ductal cells in both isolated islets and intact pancreas. Islets from neonatal CF ferrets demonstrated significantly blunted first (P<0.05) and second (P<0.05) phase insulin secretion as compared to non-CF controls. Similarly, knockdown of CFTR mRNA in wild-type adult ferret and human islets, using recombinant adenovirus expressing a CFTR-shRNA, demonstrated impaired GSIS as compared to a control shRNA. Importantly, while others and we have observed that CFTRinh172 reduces insulin secretion by islets, we find that this compound also significantly reduced insulin secretion and glucose-stimulated Ca 2+ -fluxes by CFTR-KO ferret islets, questioning the specificity of this inhibitor-based approach. To investigate the mechanism of altered insulin responses by CF islets, we evaluated transcripts involved in beta-cell function and maturation. Quantitative-RNA analysis demonstrated significantly lower insulin and glucagon transcripts in CFTR-KO islets but unchanged levels of glucose-sensing RNAs (GCK, GLUT2, and GJA9). Similarly, CFTR knockdown in WT ferret islets reduced insulin RNA expression. RNAs involved in transcriptional regulation of beta-cell maturation and proliferation (Neurod1, Ngn3, Pax4, Reg3a, and Serpinhb1) were increased in CFTR-KO islets, while PDX1 and MafB expression remained unchanged. Interestingly, the expression of the exocrine duct marker CK7 and markers of stellate cell activation and inflammation (alpha-SMA, Acta1, and TGF-beta1) were significantly increased in CFTR-KO islets. Consistent with this observation, newborn CF pancreata demonstrated higher levels of activated stellate cells (Desmin/alpha-SMA positive) as compared to non-CF. These results suggest that CFTR impacts beta-cell function via a paracrine mechanism through islet-associated duct and/or stellate cells. Elucidation of the signal pathway(s) by which CFTR mutant ductal cells affect islet function requires further investigation. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is a common complication of CF and is a major risk factor for CF-associated morbidity and early mortality. The traditional hypothesis is that CFRD is caused by progressive destruction of the exocrine pancreas, which leads to collateral damage of pancreatic islets. However, there is little direct evidence for this "collateral damage" hypothesis. A recent study showed that CF patients who were pancreas-sufficient had enhanced acute insulin response to arginine stimulation, suggesting that insulin secretory capacity in pancreassufficient patients is enhanced rather than impaired. These data support an alternative hypothesis that CFTR may have an intrinsic role in the regulation of β-cell insulin secretion. To explore the mechanisms of dysregulated insulin secretion in CF, we created an inducible β-cell specific Cftr knockout mouse and a β-cell transfection system to overexpress CFTR. Methods: Pancreatic islets were isolated from control and Cftr knockout mice to evaluate responses to glucose stimulation and islet cytosolic calcium ([Ca 2+ ] i ) responses. CFTR expression in β-cells was determined by single-cell RNA sequence in dispersed islet cells. CFTR function was further investigated by overexpression of CFTR in dispersed islet cells using a lentiviral transfection vector. Results: Using single β-cell RNA sequence analyses, we found that Cftr was expressed in approximately 20% of β-cells, and is not detectable in remainder of β-cells. The function of CFTR-positive cells were examined by measurement of single islet cell [Ca 2+ ] i . About 20% of β-cells were sensitive to CFTR inh -172 with elevated basal [Ca 2+ ] i . After inhibition of CFTR, these cells have delayed response to glucose stimulation and failed to return to baseline after removal of glucose. Mice with knockout of Cftr had normal β-cell mass, but islets isolated from these mice exhibit elevated [Ca 2+ ] i in presence of 3 mM glucose, suggesting an increased sensitivity to glucose stimulation. Islet perifusion showed that Cftr-/-islets had an increased sensitivity to glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and a delayed turn-off of insulin secretion after glucose withdrawal. In contrast to wild-type mouse islets, Cftr-/-islets failed to show the normal transient increase in [Ca 2+ ] i in response to thapsigargin, suggesting an alteration in ER calcium handling. β-cells with overexpression of wild-type CFTR showed impaired responses to glucose stimulation. Inhibition of the overexpressed CFTR by CFTR inh -172 restored the glucose responsiveness. Summary: CFTR is expressed in subpopulation of β-cells. Knockout of CFTR resulted in elevation of basal [Ca 2+ ] i , and showed both increased sensitivity to glucose stimulation and delayed turn-off of insulin secretion. These data strongly suggest that CFTR functions cell autonomously to regulate β-cell function, most likely in the process of β-cell re-polarization. This study is supported by CFF. Background: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is associated with worse cystic fibrosis (CF) outcomes. The impact of the CFTR potentiator, ivacaftor, upon insulin secretion has received limited attention, but improved glucose tolerance has been appreciated. Objective: This pilot study aimed to understand the impact of ivacaftor therapy upon insulin secretion, incretin secretion, and glucose tolerance in pancreatic exocrine sufficient (PS) and insufficient (PI) individuals with CF. Design/Methods: Oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTT), mixed meal tolerance tests (MMTT), and glucose-potentiated arginine-induced insulin secretion tests (GPA) performed prior to and 16 weeks after initiation of ivacaftor treatment were compared in CF participants age ≥ 6y, who were in their usual state of health, and who had at least one CFTR gating or conductance mutation. First phase insulin secretion was quantitated by acute C-peptide response to arginine, 0.07g/kg IV over 1 min: ACR arg =C-peptide (mean at 2, 3, 4, and 5 min -mean at -5 and -1 min) prior to glucose clamp. Glucose-potentiated secretion (ACR pot ) was defined by acute C-peptide response during ~230 mg/dL plasma glucose (PG); β-cell secretory capacity (ACR max ) was defined by response at ~340 mg/dL glucose. β-cell sensitivity to glucose was characterized by the glucose concentration at which half-maximal insulin secretion was achieved: PG50=(1/2AIR max -β)/ (AIR pot -AIR arg /PG 230 -PG fasting ). Insulin sensitivity (M/I) was determined by dividing the mean glucose infusion rate required during the 230 mg/dL glucose clamp (M) by the mean pre-stimulus insulin level (I) between 40-45 min of the glucose infusion. Area under the curve (AUC) for the first 30 min of MMTT was calculated for glucose, C-peptide, glucagon like peptide-1 (GLP), and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP). Results: Preliminary data are available in 11 subjects (6M/5F; 3PS/ 8PI; 10 normal/1 impaired glucose tolerant) of median (min-max) age: 13y (6-42), BMI-Z: 0.66 (-2.4-2) , and FEV1%-predicted: 102 (39-122). Glucose tolerance normalized in the IGT subject. Following ivacaftor therapy, first phase insulin secretion (ACR arg ; median (min-max): 1.1 (0. 2-3.4) Conclusions: Insulin secretion improved following four months of ivacaftor therapy in a relatively young group of PI and PS participants with largely normal glucose tolerance, while incretin secretion remained unchanged. These improvements in β-cell secretory capacity suggest ivacaftor either directly affects β-cell function or augments insulin secretion indirectly through improvements in other CF outcomes. Additional studies are needed to delineate the direct and indirect roles of CFTR in β-cell function. Supported by a grant from CFFT. Methods: We performed a retrospective chart review of all patients ages 2-21 years who underwent lung transplant at BCH from Jan 2000 to Jan 2015. As part of routine clinical care, patients undergo DXA scans at the time of transplant evaluation and annually after transplant. Results from up to 4 DXA scans (including most recent) were obtained from each patient, along with clinical data at the time of scan including anthropometric measures, diagnoses, medications, pertinent lab results, and fractures (confirmed by x-ray). Linear regression was used to identify predictors of low BMD at the time of transplant evaluation. Repeated measures analyses were used to compare BMD Z-score changes over time. Results: Fifty-one patients were studied. Age at transplant was 14.7±4.8 y (mean±SD), 49% were female, and 61% had CF. At the time of lung transplant evaluation, BMD Z-score was -2.2±1.4, and 48% of patients had a Z-score ≤-2.0. BMD Z-score at the time of transplant evaluation was correlated with FEV1 (r=0.42, p=0.04) and height SDS (r=0.69, p<0.001). Nine patients (17%) sustained a fracture prior to transplant (6 spine, 1 hip, 2 extremity). BMD Z-score declined in the first year after treatment and gradually returned to near-baseline by the third post-transplant year, but Z-scores did not normalize (Figure) . This pattern was significant at the total hip (p=0.017) with marginal significance at the spine (p=0.13). Height Z-score, 25(OH)D, and number of rejection episodes significantly affected BMD Z-score change, and multivariable adjustment for these covariates further strengthened this pattern at the hip (p=0.016) and spine (p=0.07). Fifteen patients (29%) suffered 18 fractures in the post-transplant period (7 spine, 3 hip, 3 rib, 5 extremity), occurring 1.6±1.6 y after transplant. Conclusion: Pediatric patients have a high prevalence of low BMD and fractures at the time of lung transplant evaluation. BMD Z-scores decline even further in the year after transplant and gradually return to pretransplant level by the third post-transplant year, but BMD does not normalize after transplant. Fractures in the 2 years after transplant are common and occur at sites associated with significant morbidity. These findings support increased efforts to optimize bone health in pediatric lung transplant patients. Mean BMD and SE before and after lung transplant ON, Canada; 5. Univ of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; 6. Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve Univ, Cleveland, OH, USA; 7. Pediatrics and Genetics, Johns Hopkins Univ, Baltimore, MD, USA; 8. Pediatric Endocrinology, Johns Hopkins Univ, Baltimore, MD, USA Background: CF-related diabetes (CFRD) affects 10-15% of adolescents, 40% of adults, and 80% of those >50 years old with 2 severe CFTR mutations conferring early onset pancreatic insufficiency (PI). However, the risk of CFRD is variable and depends on many factors including 5 CFRD risk genes (SLC26A9, TCF7L2, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B; Blackman SM, et al., Diabetes. 2013; 62:3627-35) . CFRD occurs more frequently in individuals with evidence of liver dysfunction, which affects up to 30% of people with CF, but also progresses to cirrhosis with portal hypertension early in life (median age 10 y) in 3-5% (severe CF-liver disease, CFLD), sometimes requiring liver transplantation. Objective: To compare the rate of, and risk factors for, CFRD in two of the largest cohorts to date of CF individuals with severe CFLD vs no liver disease (CFnoLD). Design: Individuals with severe CFLD were recruited by the Genetic Modifier Study of Severe CF Liver Disease (n=463). CFnoLD individuals (n=3,292) were recruited by the North American CF Gene Modifier Consortium. All had CFTR genotypes conferring severe exocrine PI. CFRD risk genotypes were obtained from the Consortium. Outcomes were defined using clinical records and censored at organ transplant except where noted. Results: The severe CFLD group was younger (mean age 18 vs 21 y), more likely male (62% vs 53%), and more likely to have CFRD (34% vs 18%) at an earlier age (median diagnosis age 15 vs 21 y), compared to CFnoLD. Using Cox proportional hazard regression (to account for age differences), CFLD was a strong risk factor for CFRD (hazard ratio; HR=3.4, 95% CI 2.8-4.1, P=1.9×10 -37 ). CFLD was a greater risk factor for early onset CFRD (diagnosed before age 15; HR=6.6, P=3.4×10 -4 ), especially if CFRD occurring after liver transplant was not excluded (HR=8.0, P=4.3×10 -5 ). In the CFLD cohort, CFRD was independently correlated with female sex (HR=1.7, P=0.002) and earlier diagnosis of CFLD (HR=1.03 per year, P=0.03). A risk score of the top variants at the 5 published CFRD modifier loci was associated with CFRD in genotyped cohorts of both CFnoLD (n=3,185; HR=1.2 per allele, P=3.6×10 -15 ) and CFLD (n=339, HR=1.2 per allele, P=0.039); no interaction with CFLD (P=0.5). CFLD itself was not associated with the 5 SNP CFRD genetic risk score. Conclusions: Diabetes occurs earlier and in a greater proportion of people with CFLD, especially those with CFRD risk gene variants. These data are consistent with a model in which severe CFLD predisposes to CFRD via pathways not involving the 5 CFRD risk genes included in this analysis. The CF Foundation recommends annual diabetes screening starting at age 10, but we recommend such screening start at CFLD diagnosis if before age 10. Supported by CFF and NIH. The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) anion channel in the ductal epithelium of the pancreas plays a critical role in transporting bicarbonate into the lumen of ducts. Bicarbonate anions alkalinize the ductal lumen and in turn inactivate the pancreatic digestive enzymes secreted by the pancreatic acinar cells. The loss of function of CFTR in cystic fibrosis (CF) causes a pH imbalance in the lumen and the persisting acidic environment is thought to prematurely activate digestive enzymes leading to inflammation, fibrosis, and loss of beta-cell function. We have developed a CFTR-KO ferret model that develops very similar pancreatic pathology to that seen in human CF patients. Using the CF ferret model, we sought to understand how the earliest phases of CF pancreatitis and exocrine dysfunction lead to endocrine pancreas abnormalities that influence insulin secretion. We hypothesized that neuroendocrine regulation during this phase is abnormal due to inflammation and that altered production of certain neuropeptides can negatively impact pancreatic endocrine function. Previously we have shown that newborn CF ferrets have impaired glucose tolerance and poorly regulated insulin secretion (impaired first phase insulin and accentuated second phase insulin secretion) despite normal islet cell mass (J Clin Invest. 2012; 122:3755) . Because isolated islets from CF newborn ferrets have similarly dysregulated insulin secretion, we hypothesized that the proinflammatory environment of the CF pancreas impairs functionality of islets. We screened plasma, urine, and pancreas for neuropeptides associated with inflammation and found calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) and bradykinin (BK) were both present at elevated levels in newborn CF ferrets. Therefore, we sought to determine if CGRP and/ or BK impair islet hormone regulation and if so the mechanism of action. To study the action of BK on islets, we first localized bradykinin receptor 2 (BDKR2) on the endocrine hormone secreting cells of islets and found it localizes to alpha-cells in humans and ferrets but in mice and rats BDKR2 localized to beta-cells. Interestingly, in older CF ferrets BDKR2 localized to both beta-cells and alpha-cells. Since CF rats and mice lack pancreatic exocrine and endocrine disease observed in CF humans and ferrets, we sought to understand how BK might differentially affect insulin and glucagon secretion in ferrets and mice. Under low glucose conditions, BK treatment reduced glucagon secretion by ferret islets (2-fold, P<0.05) while decreasing insulin secretion by mouse islets (10-fold, P<0.05). By contrast, under high glucose conditions BK enhanced the secretory index of glucagon (4-fold, P<0.05) while reducing the secretory index of insulin (2-fold, P<0.05) in ferret islets. Studies dissecting the effect of CGRP on islet hormone secretion are underway and preliminary studies suggest that CGRP enhances insulin secretion by ferret islets under low glucose conditions. We hypothesize that these neuropeptides influence glucose sensitivity of the islet and may contribute to the poorly regulated insulin responses observed in early CF pancreatic disease. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) patients are at risk for kidney injury even before undergoing lung transplantation, because of prolonged exposure to aminoglycosides and complications of diabetes mellitus. The usual equations estimating the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) such as Cockroft or MDRD Formula are not adapted in CF population due to patients' low body weight (Beringer PM, et al, J Cyst Fibros. 2009; 8:19-25) . The aim of our study was to measure precisely the GFR of CF adult patients before lung transplantation. Methods: Iohexol or inulin clearance was realized in 21 adult CF patients, when they entered the lung transplant waiting list (n=17) or when the patient was considered by the clinician at high risk for renal disease (n=4). No patient was treated with aminoglycosides at the time of GFR measurement. BMI, history of diabetes mellitus and high blood pressure were recorded. Exposure to intravenous aminoglycoside within the 5 years before GFR measurement was calculated. Urine samples were collected to check for proteinuria and albuminuria. Results: Our population was predominantly male (57%). Mean age at GFR measurement was 31 years old (Ranging from 23 to 49y). Mean BMI was 19kg/m 2 (Ranging from 16 to 25). Only one patient had a history of high blood pressure, and 43% of patients were diabetic. 14% of patients had albuminuria of more than 30mg/L and none of them had proteinuria. Mean days of exposure to IV aminoglycoside therapy within the 5 years before GFR evaluation was 169 days (Ranging from 60 to 280 days). Tobramycin was the most-used aminoglycoside at the mean dose of 7.6mg/kg/day. GFR was measured using iohexol for 15 patients and inulin was used for the remaining 6 patients. Mean measured GFR was 107mL/min/1.73m 2 . Only 2 patients had a measured GFR <90mL/min/1.73m 2 . For these two patients, GFR estimation using CKD EPI was unable to detect the moderate decline in kidney function (estimated GFR >90mL/min/1.73m 2 ). Conclusion: Despite prolonged exposure to high doses of aminoglycosides associated with a high prevalence of diabetes mellitus, no major decline in GFR is observed in our cohort. More data are necessary to determine if CKD EPI equation is adequate to estimate GFR in adult CF patients. Repeated GFR measurements using iohexol or inulin after lung transplantation could allow evaluation of degradation of renal function after transplantation and to determine risk factors for poorer renal outcome. and the secretion of insulin, glucagon, GIP and GLP-1. PP injection differentially inhibited glucagon (p< 0.01) and enhanced GIP secretion (p<0.01) in CF animals. Using a second approach, we created a recombinant adeno-associated virus that expresses ferret PP and performed intramuscular injection of AAV2/1-PP in wild-type ferrets (6-7 weeks of age, N=3, 8.4e8 DNAase resistant particles/gram body weight). AAV2/1-PP infected ferrets demonstrated plasma PP levels ~6 fold (p<0.001) higher than uninfected controls at 2-3 weeks of age. MMTT studies on these animals at 3 weeks post-infection demonstrated improved glucose tolerance (p<0.01). Ongoing studies are evaluating whether recombinant PP expression enhances glucose tolerance in CF ferrets. We are also further delineating the mechanism of improved glucose tolerance in non-CF animals using euglycemic hyperinsulinemic glucose clamps with tracers to evaluate glucose metabolism in the liver and peripheral organs. Such studies may provide new insights into mechanisms of PP action on glucose metabolism and CFRD pathogenesis. This work was funded by the National Institutes of Health grant NIDDK R24 DK96518-01 to JFE. Introduction: Absolute insulin deficiency causes growth failure and nutritional decay. In cystic fibrosis, insulin secretory defects are common also in normotolerant patients. We evaluated whether prepubertal insulin secretory defects are predictive of reduced adult height. Methods: We performed OGTT in 40 pre-pubertal patients (22 females) without previously known diabetes. At recruitment patients were 8.5-12.7 yrs old (age 11.4±09, mean±sd), 83% pancreatic insufficient on enzyme replacement. Insulin secretory (beta cell responsiveness to glucose) and insulin sensitivity parameters were derived from modelling of glucose, insulin and c-peptide profiles evaluated at 30min intervals for 3h, and were evaluated according to reference values for sex and age recently developed in the CF Center of Milan (Battezzati A, et al. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015;100:2963-71). After 9.6±1.9 years follow-up, adult height was recorded (age 21.0±0.9 years). Results: In a regression model adjusted for sex, OGTT glucose concentrations were unrelated to adult height. In contrast, the 30min insulin concentration was a predictor of adult height (p=0.024) and BMI (p<0.001). Similar results were obtained when BMI z-score was added to the model among predictors to take into account nutritional status at the time of OGTT. Adjusted for sex, beta cell function was a tendential predictor of final height as well (p<0.056). Females with beta cell function below the 25th centile for sex and age, had a lower final height (151.9±4.3 vs 160.9±7.8 cm, p< 0.01). Conclusion: These results confirm the anabolic role of insulin promoting linear growth indipendent of glucose tolerance status. Insulin secretory defects evaluated with OGTT are associated to reduced final height even when they do not preclude normotolerance. Their detection should warrant interventions to ensure full growth potential achievement, among which insulin therapy could be considered. Supported by grant FFC 21_2013 from Italian Cystic Fibrosis Research Foundation. Stalvey, M.S. 1,2 ; Havasi, V. 1,2 ; Tuggle, K. 2, 3 ; Wang, D. 5 ; Birket, S. 2, 4 ; Rowe, S.M. 2, 4 1. Pediatrics, Univ. of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA; 2. UAB Gregory Fleming James Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, Birmingham, AL, USA; 3. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA; 4. Medicine, Univ. of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA; 5. Pathology, Univ. of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, USA Despite improvements in lung health and nutrition, reduced growth and osteopenia are common in CF and cause serious morbidity. Data suggest CF causes an inherent defect in bone metabolism, and the etiology may reside in the expression of CFTR in osteoblasts. Reduced linear growth occurs in CF despite normal lung health, and potentiation of CFTR by ivacaftor in CF children with G551D results in improved growth. The mechanism for an intrinsic defect has not been proposed. Utilizing Cftr-/-rats and wild-type (WT) littermates, we studied differences in growth and bone metabolismin absence of significant pulmonary and pancreatic disease-longitudinally from weaning into adulthood. To determine mechanism, we evaluated differences in cartilaginous growth plates secondary to CFTR-deficiency. Cftr-/-(n=6) and WT (n=4) male rats underwent in vivo DXA imaging every 2 weeks, from 5 weeks to 17 weeks of age. Animal weight, femur and tibia length, as well as bone mineral density (BMD), were compared over time via linear regression analysis. IGF-I and urine N-telopeptide of type 1 collagen were collected. We compared histologic differences in the cartilaginous growth plate in femurs of Cftr-/-(n=7) and WT (n=6) male rats 3-6 weeks of age. Between 5 and 17 weeks of age, WT rats gained weight at a greater rate than Cftr-/-rats (p<0.01). Tibia and femur length were both reduced in Cftr-/-rats at 5 weeks (tibia: 29.01±0.44 vs 32.28±0.40, and femur: 22.22±0.47 vs. 24.61±0.45 mm; p<0.01) and persisted through 17 weeks (p<0.0001 for both). Tibia and femur BMD were both reduced in Cftr-/-rats compared to WT from 5 weeks (tibia: 0.063±0.0 vs. 0.071±0.0, femur: 0.093±0.0 vs 0.111±0.0 g/cm 2 ; p<0.05) to 17 weeks (p<0.0001 for both). Histologic comparison of growth plates revealed a 43% reduction in femur growth plate thickness of Cftr-/-rats (p<0.05), suggesting an underlying cause. We observed no difference in proliferative zone thickness or average number of proliferating cells/column. However, hypertrophic zone thickness, mean volume of hypertrophic cells and mean hypertrophic cell volume standard deviation were reduced in Cftr-/-rats (p<0.05 for all). Analyses of markers of anabolic function and bone turnover are in progress. Growth and bone density is impaired in CFTR-deficient rats, despite lack of pancreatic and overt pulmonary disease. Prior data suggesting a defect in bone metabolism did not provide a mechanism for differences in growth. However, alterations in cartilage differentiation and function at the growth plate-from proliferative zone into hypertrophic zone-provide a novel mechanism for growth restriction seen in CF. Combined with recent clinical data indicating improved growth in children with the G551D CFTR upon initiation of ivacaftor, our findings implicate a mechanism for direct influence of CFTR on bone length, providing an improved understanding for impaired growth. The authors acknowledge UAB CF Animal Model Core, the Histomorphometry & Molecular Analysis Core and the Small Animal Phenotyping Core, as well as funding support by NIH P30 DK072482. Objective: To compare continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) measures in CF youth before and after initiation of ivacaftor/lumacaftor. Methods: CF patients with and without cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) who underwent CGM as part of a research protocol within 12 months prior to starting ivacaftor/lumacaftor were recruited to undergo repeat CGM within 12 months post-initiation of ivacaftor/lumacaftor. HbA1c data were also collected at time of CGM wear. Exclusion criteria included changes in dose of medications affecting glucose metabolism (e.g. insulin, atypical antipsychotics, etc.) within the 3 months prior to CGM, and hospitalization or systemic steroids within the prior 6 weeks. CGM data were analyzed in 24-hour and night/day periods, and intra-individual pre/ post CGM measures were compared using the Wilcoxon signed-rank Test. A p-value of <0.05 was considered significant. Results: CGM data pre and post-initiation of ivacaftor/lumacaftor were available in 5 participants [median (range) age = 14(11,16) y; 4/5 male; 2/5 with CFRD]. Median (range) time of CGM wear prior to CFTR modulator initiation was 6 (1,7) months and postmodulator initiation was 6 (6,8) months. Median HbA1c prior to modulator initiation = 5.2% (5.0,5.5) , and postmodulator initiation HbA1c = 5.4% (5.1,5.6 ); p=NS. The two participants with CFRD were on basal insulin only (glargine ~0.1 u/kg/d) pre-and post-ivacaftor/lumacaftor. Mean glucose, peak glucose, time spent >140 mg/dL and glycemic variability (as measured by standard deviation) were not significantly different before and after ivacaftor/lumacaftor, although there were trends toward less hyperglycemia post-treatment, particularly in mean overnight glucose (Table) . Conclusions: CGM changes in this small pilot study were not statistically different pre/post ivacaftor/lumacaftor, although trends toward decreased hyperglycemia were noted. Recruitment into this study is ongoing. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is a frequent comorbidity that produces impacts on pulmonary function (PF) and nutritional status (NS) which can be detected 3 to 6 years previous to diagnosis. Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) defined as a fasting glycemia (FG) <126 mg/dL and 140-199 mg/dL 2 hours after administration of glucose on an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), correlates with lower PF and poorer NS, although it is not clear whether these can be tracked retrospectively. Other glucose tolerance alterations such as indeterminate (INDET) category (normal FG and 2 hour, with values over 200 mg/dL during the test) can be detected by a complete OGTT. We hypothesized that patients with IGT and INDET have worse PF and NS and that these are present previously to the detection of the alteration. Objective: To assess glucose tolerance in a group of children and adolescents with cystic fibrosis (CF) followed at a CF center and the retrospective association with PF and NS data. Methods: Patients 8-18 years old were referred for complete OGTT. They were divided into 4 groups according to glycemic status (normal, CFRD, IGT and INDET). Retrospective data on PF (FEV 1 percent predicted (FEV 1 %) and absolute (FEV 1 a) values) and NS (Z-score BMI) at the moment of the test (0), one (-12), two (-24) and three (-36) years previous were collected from records as well as sex, age, CF mutations and bacteriology. Shapiro-Wilk test was used to evaluate normality of variables, and parametric or nonparametric tests to compare means. Results: 34 patients were recruited from May 2015 to April 2016, 23 male (67, 6%); mean age 12.71± 2.86 y; homozygous F508del: 11 (32.4%), heterozygous F508del:16 (47%). Three patients (9%) were pancreatic sufficient (PS). Four patients were diagnosed with CFRD (11.8%), 16 normal (47%), 10 IGT (29.4%) and 4 INDET (11.8%). There were no significant differences in sex, age, bacteriology or CF mutations between groups. No significant differences were found in FEV 1 % between normal and IGT at 0, -12, -24 or -36, but FEV 1 a values were significantly different at -24 and -36 (p=0.01/p=0.049). Significant difference in Z-score BMI was found between normal and IGT at -24 and -36 (p=0.024/p=0.008), which persisted after the 3 PS patients were excluded (p=0.045/p=0.017), and almost reach significant difference at 0 and -12 (p=0.05/p=0.055). In the comparison within groups, significant differences were found in FEV 1 % at 0 vs. -12 (77.67 ± 27.49 vs 89.92 ± 29.60, p=0.013) and Z-score BMI at 0 vs. -12 (-1.22 ± 1.82 vs -0.59 ± 1.45, p=0.005) only in the IGT group. Conclusion: IGT subjects deteriorated in their PF and NS in the year previous to the diagnosis and had a worse NS compared with the normal group. Differences in PF between groups were inconsistent, probably due to the small sample size. Complete OGTT allowed us to detect INDET subjects to follow them prospectively. We previously reported increased CFRD screening (25% to >75%) as well as increased diagnoses of CFRD (10% to 23%) at our center from 2010-2015. Objective: To determine changes in BMI z-score, FEV1%, and FVC% in patients diagnosed with CFRD before and after diagnosis and insulin start. Methods: Data from 2010-2015 were extracted from our local CF database to determine the number of youth diagnosed with CFRD during this time frame. Patients were diagnosed with CFRD by oral glucose tolerance testing (FPG ≥126 mg/dL or 2h glucose ≥200 mg/dL) or persistent hyperglycemia ≥200 mg/dL during hospitalizations. Data were analyzed to determine slope of BMI%, FEV1%, and FVC% 6 months before and after an inflection point, defined as date of insulin start or CFRD diagnosis (a subgroup of patients were never started on insulin for varying reasons). Mixed models were fit to BMI z-score, FEV1% predicted and FVC% predicted to evaluate changes in slopes before and after start of insulin or CFRD diagnosis (in those not on insulin). Age at diagnosis, sex, and ivacaftor/lumacaftor therapy were included as covariates. Random coefficients were included for subjects' specific intercepts and slopes pre/post inflection points. Results: A diagnosis of CFRD was made in 50 youths, 21 (42%) male, 47 (94%) F508del/F508del or F508del/other. BMI z-score, FEV1%, and FVC% of those started on insulin (62%) were compared to those not on insulin. There were no differences in the demographics between those on insulin vs those not on insulin. Model estimates for the slopes of the BMI z-score were no different between those started vs not started on insulin prior to (0.01 (0.03) vs -0.04 (0.04), p=0.33) and after inflection (-0.15 (0.1) vs -0.25 (0.1), p=0.56). Slope of FEV1% predicted prior to inflection was no different between those started vs not started on insulin (-0.9 (0.6) vs -1.8 (0.9) p=0.43), but after inflection, those on insulin had less steep decline in FEV1% compared to those not on insulin (-2.4 (0.9) vs -5.8 (1.6), p=0.05). As a covariate, ivacaftor/lumacaftor significantly shifted the average BMI z-score 0.17 (0.1), p=0.02, but gender and age at diagnosis were not associated. Conclusions: Youth diagnosed with CFRD continue to exhibit declines in BMI z-score, FEV1%, and FVC%. Insulin treatment, however, was associated with a trend in slower FEV1% decline. 4 1. Dept. of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; 2. CF Centre, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; 3. Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; 4. Dept. of Endocrinology, Koege Hospital, Koege, Denmark Background: CF patients are at increased risk of osteoporosis. Despite daily cholecalciferol supplementation of 1600 IU, vitamin D levels are often inadequate (<75 nmol/L). Vitamin D (25OHD) is important for bone health. In the general population it increases bone strength and reduces fracture risk. Objective: To determine the prevalence of osteopenia and osteoporosis and bone metabolic status from BMD in the Copenhagen cystic fibrosis population and evaluate calcium metabolism, prevalence of decreased 25OHD levels and its importance for bone health. Methods: Retrospective cross-sectional study of CF patients attending the Copenhagen Cystic Fibrosis Centre. Inclusion criteria: all adult nonlung transplanted patients >19.9 years of age, who had at least one DXA scan performed at Rigshospitalet between 2010 and 2015. Latest DXA scan results for spine and femoral BMD, T-and Z-scores were collected. Anthropometric, biochemistry and clinical data from the same year as DXA scan were extracted from the Danish CF Registry. Correlation analyses were performed using Pearson's r, and stepwise multivariate linear regression (MLR) was performed to identify factors associated with BMD and Z-scores. Results: 125 patients (62 women) were included in the study. Median (IQR) age was 32.1 (24.6-39.1), BMI 22.1 (19.8-24.1), Z BMI -0.2 (-1.2-0.46) and median percent predicted FEV1 (%FEV1) 65.6 (50. 4-83.5) . 90 patients were homozygous for the F508del mutation and 121 were pancreatic insufficient (defined as taking PERT). BMD was normal in 73 patients (58%) (WHO criteria), 32 (27%) patients had osteopenia and 19 (15%) patients had osteoporosis. Median 25OHD level was 49.5 nmol/L (32-71). Median serum PTH, phosphate, calcium and magnesium were all within normal range. In univariate correlation analysis %FEV1 and Z BMI correlated to both spine BMD: r=0.49, p<0.001, r=0.5, p<0.001, respectively, and femoral bone BMD: r=0.41, p<0.001 and r=0.51, p<0.001, respectively. PTH correlated negatively but weakly with femoral bone BMD, r=-0.22, p= 0.02 while 25OHD did not correlate significantly at any bone site. Z-scores in spine and femoral bone correlated positively with %FEV1 and Z BMI. PTH and age correlated negatively to femoral bone Z-scores. Stepwise MLR analysis contained the variables %FEV1, Z BMI, calcium, PTH, CFRD and gender. Z BMI, %FEV1 and CFRD were independently associated to femoral bone BMD, adjusted R 2 =0.33, while only Z BMI remained significantly associated with spine BMD, adjusted R 2 =0.25. Spinal Z-score was independently associated to %FEV1 and male gender, however adjusted R 2 was only 0.14. CFRD, %FEV1 and male gender independently predicted femoral bone Z-score, adjusted R 2 =0.27. Conclusion: Osteopenia and osteoporosis are common and were present in nearly 50% of the adult CF population. Median 25OHD levels were below recommended values. Clinical parameters associated with worse health outcome in CF (low %FEV1, low Z BMI and CFRD) were associated to decreasing BMD and Z scores. Moonnumakal, S.P.; George, C.; Poole, A.L. Pediatrics-Pulmonary, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA Background: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is a common complication of cystic fibrosis (CF). CFRD differs from type 1 and type 2 diabetes in pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. The likelihood of a CFRD diagnosis increases with age, affecting 20% of adolescents and 40-50% of adults. Patients with CFRD are more likely to have poor nutritional outcomes, decreased lung function, and decreased survival. Presently, clinical care guidelines outline diagnostic criteria and management for CFRD. However, there remains a paucity of data characterizing the population at the time of diagnosis, particularly since the advent of more aggressive screening in the 2010 guidelines. The objective of the study was to provide an in-depth descriptive analysis of pediatric CF patients at the time of diagnosis. Methods: We performed a retrospective chart review of all current pediatric CF patients diagnosed with CFRD at the Baylor College of Medicine CF Center in Houston, TX. Exclusion criteria were patients without diagnostic information available and prior lung transplantation. Screening of patients occurred according to current guidelines. Patients diagnosed with impaired glucose tolerance were not considered for this study. Demographic and clinical data were obtained from time of diagnosis. Descriptive statistical methods were used to analyze data. Results: Of 345 pediatric patients at the center, 34 pediatric patients had a diagnosis of CFRD. Four patients were excluded due to lack of clinical data from the time of diagnosis; thus, 30 patients were analyzed in the study. The mean age of diagnosis was 12.3 years, but 27% (n=8) were diagnosed <10 years of age. The male/female ratio was 57%/43%. The racial breakdown was 60% Caucasian, 27% Hispanic, 3% African-American, and 10% Other. Socioeconomic status, categorized by insurance type, was 40% Private, 50% Medicaid/CHIP, and 10% Other. At least one F508del mutation was present in 93% of patients while 67% were homozygous F508del. At the time of diagnosis, the mean BMI was 39%ile, and the mean FEV1 was 73% predicted. Diagnosis occurred in the outpatient setting with annual screening labs 43% of time, whereas 57% were diagnosed during inpatient hospitalization. Two-hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was diagnostic for 50% of the patients. Of these, only 13% had fasting plasma glucose (FPG) ≥126 mg/dL while 87% had 2-hour OGTT glucose ≥200 mg/ dL. The mean FPG was 101 mg/dL while the mean 2-hour OGTT glucose was 255 mg/dL. Casual blood sugar ≥200 mg/dL was diagnostic for 47% of the patients, with a mean diagnostic glucose of 363 mg/dL. A single patient unable to perform OGTT was diagnosed by screening HbA1c. The mean HbA1c at time of diagnosis for all patients was 6.5%. Insulin was required at the time of CFRD diagnosis for 87% of the patients. Conclusions: Pediatric patients with CFRD have unique characteristics. More than ¼ of patients were diagnosed ≤10 years old, the recommended age of screening. Of patients diagnosed with CFRD, a high percentage had either one or two F508del mutations. More patients were diagnosed in the inpatient setting than outpatient setting via annual screening labs. Elevated casual blood sugar was diagnostic almost as often as OGTT. Most patients required insulin at the time of diagnosis. Objectives: The prevalence of CF-related diabetes (CFRD) is estimated to be 20% in adolescents and 40-50% in adults. Often CFRD is first seen during acute pulmonary exacerbations, steroid therapy, or when enteral feeding is commenced. Onset of CFRD is often asymptomatic, however, other clinical markers are frequently noted, such as weight loss or a decline in lung function. The oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is the gold standard for diagnosis of CFRD in patients over 12 years in the UK, local policy is to start screening for CFRD at age 10 years using OGTT. Continuous Glucose Monitoring (CGMS) measures subcutaneous interstitial glucose levels continuously, and this test has recently been introduced at our center if clinical concern regarding unexplained deterioration of weight and lung function is raised. The aim of this study was to review the incidence of CFRD using CGMS to diagnose CFRD in comparison to OGTT. Methods: Review of CGMS and OGTT data for all patients tested as part of annual review over the last 12 months at our center. CGMS excursions and 2-hour OGTT results were compared to the World Health Organisation Classification as normal <7.8mmol/L, impaired 7.8-11.1mmol/L and CFRD >11.1mmol/L. Results: There were 22 children with CF (9 male) aged 10-18 years included, 5 of these also had CGMS due to clinical concern. Of the 5 children who completed CGMS in the last year, 1 patient was diagnosed with CFRD from their CGMS, and 4 with impaired glucose tolerance. The child diagnosed with CFRD by CGMS would not have been identified by OGTT. Only 1 of 4 patients identified with impaired glucose tolerance by CGMS, would have been diagnosed using OGTT, and the level was borderline at 7.8mmol/L; only 1 of 22 children had an OGTT that was not normal. Furthermore, 4 patients had asymptomatic hypoglycaemia diagnosed, 2 of these had a one-off low value on CGMS, and 2 had low 2-hour OGTT readings. Conclusion: CGMS was well tolerated by all children. Results show that CGMS diagnoses glycaemic abnormalities more frequently in patients identified with clinical concern compared to OGTT. Earlier screening of CFRD using CGMS may identify glycaemic abnormalities earlier, which may prevent the clinical decline of patient before CFRD occurs. Hyperglycemia is associated with increased morbidity and mortality while effective blood sugar control improves lung function, weight maintenance and overall health in individuals with CF. While insulin deficiency due to pancreatic β-cell destruction is a well-known contributor to CFRD, the role of glucagon, produced by pancreatic α-cells, has not been well characterized. Dysregulated glucagon secretion may contribute to overall glucose intolerance in CF, as it does in type 1 diabetes (T1D). Therefore the present study seeks to characterize glucagon responses to a standardized mixed meal challenge in subjects with CF. These data will be critical in understanding the basic pathophysiology of CFRD and in developing novel therapeutic options in managing CFRD. Methods: A cross-sectional study of stimulated glucagon responses in a convenience sample of individuals with CF across the spectrum of glucose tolerance (normal, impaired, and consistent with CFRD) was performed. Individuals with CF between the ages of 12 and 45 years underwent an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) and a mixed meal tolerance test (MMTT). Data were compared to historical data of glucagon responses to MMTTs in healthy controls and subjects with T1D. Results: MMTTs have been performed in 6 subjects with CF to date. The mean age was 20.3 years. The mean A1c was 6.7 % with 2 subjects meeting criteria for CFRD. Glucose, C-peptide and glucagon responses to MMTTs are shown ( Figure) . Mean peak rise in C-peptide was 3.78 ng/ mL and the mean peak rise in glucagon level was 20.73 pg/mL. There is a positive correlation between peak rise in C-peptide and peak rise in glucagon levels. Two subjects demonstrated a rise in glucagon in response to incidental hypoglycemia that occurred during the MMTT. Conclusions: Our preliminary findings demonstrate preserved glucagon secretion to mixed meals in individuals with CF. Thus far, we have not identified hypoglucagonemia, as would be expected with indiscriminate destruction of pancreatic cells, although the correlation between peak C-peptide and glucagon suggests loss of glucagon reserve may parallel C-peptide loss. Hyperglucagonemia in response to mixed meals, as seen in subjects with T1D, was not present in these 6 subjects. Additional subjects are needed to further verify our preliminary findings. The onset of cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is associated with accelerated decline in lung function and ultimately an increase in mortality. Despite these effects on health outcomes, relatively little is known about the underlying mechanisms involved in the development of CFRD. However, it is known that the onset of CFRD is not abrupt, but rather is preceded by a period of prediabetes (CFPreD) that can last for several years. We have found that teens and young adults with CFPreD and CFRD have systemic redox imbalance to the oxidizing state and that glucose administration significantly worsens this imbalance. We therefore set out to determine whether young children with CF demonstrated evidence of abnormal glucose homeostasis and had similar derangements in redox imbalance that could be implicated in the development of CFRD. Methods: Clinically stable CF children ages 2 to 8 years old with class I-III CFTR mutations and healthy controls (Ctrl) of the same age were recruited to undergo an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Following an overnight fast, subjects ingested 1.75 g/kg of an oral glucose solution. Plasma levels of glucose (Glu), cysteine (CyS), cystine (CySS), reduced and oxidized glutathione (GSH and GSSG) were measured before and 2 hours after Glu ingestion. Redox measures were done using high-performance liquid chromatography. Redox potentials (EhCyS, EhGSH) were determined utilizing the Nernst equation. Data are expressed as means ± SD. Results: A total of 19 subjects (CF n=17, Ctrl n=2) were recruited. Of CF patients, 13 had normal fasting and 2-hour Glu levels (CFNGT 76.5%) and 4 had prediabetes (CFPreD 23.5%). All 4 CFPreD had normal fasting Glu, but elevated 2-hour Glu levels between 140 and 199 mg/dL. The 2 Ctrl had normal OGTT results. Thus, the CFPreD patients had higher Glu at 2 hours (CFPreD 158±15 mg/dL, CFNGT 99±21 mg/dL, Ctrl 101±17 mg/ dL, p<0.05). There were no differences between CFNGT and CFPreD in terms of sex, age, BMI, pancreatic insufficiency and Pseudomonas colonization. Plasma EhCyS potentials were impressively oxidized at baseline in CFPreD patients (-65 ± 9.6 mV). Two hours following an OGTT, controls and CFNGT also demonstrated a more oxidized plasma EhCyS. All groups demonstrated trends towards reduced total CyS following OGTT. Both CFNGT and CFPreD demonstrated trends towards more oxidized EhGSH at baseline as well. Conclusions: This study shows the commonness of impaired glucose metabolism (23.5%) among clinically stable CF children who are younger than the age recommended for routine screening for CFRD. We also demonstrate that impressive systemic oxidation occurs in CFPreD patients at baseline. Surprisingly, the Ctrls and the CFNGT became oxidized in response to a glucose challenge. Taken together with our data in CF teens and young adults, these preliminary data are leading us to the concept that toddlers and young children can have acute systemic redox imbalance to the oxidized state when ingesting the simple sugar, glucose. Furthermore, because of loss of CFTR function, this acute imbalance may become chronic, pushing the patient along the continuum of CF prediabetes and ultimately CFRD. Support: CFF Grant (STECEN13A0). Background: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is a known comorbidity in some patients with cystic fibrosis. Research has shown that early intervention for CFRD patients with insulin therapy can improve clinical outcomes including lung function and nutritional status. Intermittent insulin therapy can be used to treat patients with a positive screening for CFRD who have intermittently elevated blood glucose levels. However, little is known on whether this practice can produce positive outcomes for patients. In our center we sought to evaluate the clinical differences in nutrition status, lung function and demographic information of patients treated with chronic insulin therapy (pump or intensive insulin management) and compared to those treated with intermittent insulin therapy. Methods: In a cross-sectional retrospective review of our institution, 34 patients were identified with diagnosed CFRD. Patients were excluded if they had undergone lung or liver transplant (n=5), or if they had incomplete data for the past year (n=5). Patients were divided into groups: Group 1 consisted of patients on a chronic insulin regimen or on continuous infusion insulin (insulin pump); group 2 consisted of patients on intermittent insulin. Baseline variables included gender, age at diagnosis and patients with ABPA (as these patients were previously on steroids). Comparisons were made between the two groups with regards to BMI z-scores, mean HbA1c over the past year, and best FEV1 for each patient during the preceding year. Statistical analysis was done using unpaired t-tests. Correlation between BMI-FEV1 and FEV1-HbA1c were evaluated using linear regression analysis. Results: No differences were seen between the two groups with regards to gender, age at diagnosis of CFRD, or ABPA status. Patients on intermittent insulin regimens were more likely to have private insurance (p=0.048), and a lower mean HbA1c score (p=0.043). Patients on chronic insulin regimens or continuous infusion insulin were noted to have a higher BMI (z score -0.667 vs -1.36, p=0.014). (See Table) . As expected, there was a direct correlation between BMI status and FEV1 in our patients. No correlation was seen between HbA1c and BMI. Conclusions: Intermittent insulin is sometimes used in treatment of patients with CFRD with intermittently high glucose. Our data demonstrate a significantly higher BMI in patients on chronic insulin therapy, when compared to intermittent regimens. Although intermittent insulin regimens are considered, this study suggests their use may not be as beneficial as use of chronic insulin in maintaining nutritional status. Sheikh, S.; Kelly, A.; Rubenstein, R.C. The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA Objectives: Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD) is associated with worse cystic fibrosis (CF) outcomes including lower body mass index (BMI). Lean body mass (LBM) deficits arising from hypoinsulinemia are suspected to at least partially mediate worsening pulmonary function, and we recently demonstrated that LBM is even more strongly associated with pulmonary function than BMI. However, changes in body composition in CFRD have received limited attention. Hypothesis: Worsening glucose tolerance as reflected by oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is associated with LBM deficits. Methods: In this pilot study, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scans were performed in children and young adults with pancreatic-insufficient (PI) and pancreatic-sufficient (PS) CF undergoing routine OGTT screening while in their usual state of health. Subjects were enrolled across the spectrum of glucose tolerance; normal glucose tolerance (NGT) defined as 1-hour plasma glucose (PG1) < 150 mg/dL and 2-hour PG (PG2) < 140; indeterminate (INDET), PG1 ≥150 and PG2 < 140; impaired (IGT), PG2 ≥ 140 and < 200; CFRD, PG2 ≥ 200). Sex-and age-adjusted LBM index and fat mass index Z scores (LBMI-Z and FMI-Z, respectively) were generated using contemporary reference data. Results: Data were available for 26 subjects (12M/14F; 2PS/24PI; 8NGT/8INDET/8IGT/2CFRD--CFRD was being managed clinically with diet modification alone) of median (min-max) age: 18y (9-39), BMI-Z: 0.38 (-1.2-1.35), FEV1%-predicted: 96 (61-129), LBMI-Z: -1.1 (-2.5-0.7), and FMI-Z: -0.3 (-1.6-0.7). LBMI-Z was negatively associated with PG2 (β-coefficient -0.004, CI: -0.01--0.0002, p=0.04) but the strength of the association was lessened with adjustment for age (p=0.09). While LBMI-Z was associated negatively with PG1, the association did not reach significance (β-coefficient -0.003, CI: -0.008-0.002, p=0.3). The two "diet-controlled" CFRD participants had lower LBMI-Z (-1.9 and -2.5) compared to other groups (partial β-coefficient -1.3, CI: -2.7-0.7, p=0.05) and appeared to have higher FMI-Z (0.7 and 0.1) although this did not reach significance (partial β-coefficient 0.6, CI: -0.4-1.6, p=0.25). Conclusions: These preliminary data suggest that body composition differences are associated with abnormalities of glucose tolerance and CFRD and that specifically LBMI-Z is jeopardized in individuals with CFRD. The extent to which insulin therapy prevents or reverses these LBM deficits needs further exploration. Historically, individuals living with cystic fibrosis (CF) would gather strength and support by attending summer camps, community events, and support groups. However, medical guidelines recommend stringent separation of individuals with CF to reduce the risk of cross-infection. This study seeks to examine the impact of these recommendations on the social experiences of young adults with CF. A qualitative, exploratory, grounded theory approach was employed to understand the experience of young adults living with CF, with specific emphasis on the impact of social isolation on their lives. Semi-structured individual interviews were conducted with ten young adults aged 18 -25 diagnosed with CF. An interview guide was used to elicit information about how individuals with CF understand, experience, and perceive social isolation from others with CF, ways in which they experience isolation, and the impact isolation has on their medical and psychosocial development. Interviews were digitally recorded, transcribed verbatim, and coded using grounded theory's constant comparative method. Analysis identified the importance of social connection and isolation as a common theme supported by participant's level of connection with others. Participants struggled to define normal in their daily lives. Increased practitioners' awareness of ways to support young adults with chronic illness to engage with the CF community may improve health and mental health outcomes. group existed within a reasonable distance, so it was decided to explore the development of such a group. This abstract describes the development, implementation and evaluation of this group. Method: Input from an interdisciplinary focus group was collected and surveys sent to parent e-mail addresses (paper surveys went to all households with no e-mail on file, about 190 total) to gauge interest and preferences for days/times and topics/format. 29 total responses were collected. 89.66% of respondents indicated they would be interested in a support group. 48% indicated they would prefer the group to be held weekday evenings or weekend days, and 74% indicated the frequency of meetings should be bimonthly or quarterly. The survey also explored topics of interest to respondents. Financial support through the pulmonary div. was secured and invitations were sent to families via postal service and Evite. To date, 5 group meetings have occurred. A meal is shared at each meeting. Virtual attendance using GoToMeeting was also offered and used by participants for the first meeting. Attendance ranged from 6 -14 participants. Topics for each meeting were as follows: Life After Diagnosis/Stages of Grief, School and CF, Childcare and CF, and Stress and Relaxation. Based on group feedback, the location and timing were adjusted to accommodate their preferences. Groups are now on Friday evenings, bimonthly, from 7-8:30pm. Results: Participants were asked to complete evaluations after each group and respond using a Likert scale to these statements: Participating in the group has been beneficial to me; I feel more connected to other parents of children with CF than I did before this group; I feel more emotionally supported than I did before this group; and, I learned something from this group that will help me with my everyday life. Participants were also asked to respond to open-ended questions about what they found to be most helpful about the group, what they might change, and ideas for future meetings. Evaluation results (average of all group evaluations) reveal that 98% of participants strongly agree/agree that participating in the group was beneficial. 97% strongly agree/agree they feel more connected to other parents of children with CF. 90% strongly agree/agree to feeling more emotionally supported than before the group. 82% strongly agree/agree that they learned something from the group that will help in their everyday life. Participant responses to what they found to be most helpful about the group centered on 4 major themes: feeling that they are not alone, gaining hope for the future, the act of connecting to other parents, and practical information. Conclusion: Caregivers who participated in the group found it to be beneficial, and most participants left each group feeling more connected to peers, more emotionally supported, and with information that they could use in their everyday life. Participation in the group has been somewhat low, so the idea of reaching out to families via a closed Facebook group with social workers as administrators is being explored. 662w BRIDGING THE GAP CONNECTING CYSTIC FIBROSIS CAREGIVERS Wortham, L.; Guthrie, C.; Taskar, V.; Rodgers, S. Cystic Fibrosis, UT Health Northeast at Tyler, Tyler, TX, USA Objective: The demanding care that patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) need often impacts emotionally on their caregivers; social isolation among families of CF patients has been described with its resultant negative impact on family dynamics and ultimately adherence in the CF patient; observing some of these behavioral patterns in our patient population, we perceived the need for a caregiver group. The logistics of establishing this group, what we achieved and our challenges are presented here. Methods: The CF center at UTHSCT is a combined pediatric -adult program comprising about 30 pediatric and 75 adult patients with CF. We are a semirural center with patients travelling, on an average, 1 -6 hours. The target population was broadly chosen to include families, friends, parents of newly diagnosed patients, parents of patients that are newly transitioning from pediatrics to adult, and any individual playing an important supportive role in a CF patient's life. The social worker sent out a survey to determine how many caregivers would be interested in participating in the support group. After obtaining the responses, a venue was selected. The content, structure and frequency of the meetings evolved over the last 3 years. Results: A total of 95 surveys were distributed to the CF patients, only 10 caregivers responded positively to become involved in the caregivers group. On average the participation for the caregiver's group ranges from 4 to 10 participants. The group dynamics of the caregivers' support group consisted of mothers/fathers of pediatric and adult patients, spouses of adult patients, friends of cystic fibrosis patients, and coordinator of the local chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation; funding source came from the volunteer services and education day; the venues chosen were on neutral ground away from the CF clinic. A bimonthly correspondence to participants was sent via email, flyers in the clinic, flyers mailed to all the CF families, text messaging and Facebook. Meetings last for 2 hours. We polled members on ideas for the meetings. In the survey 80% of members preferred an unstructured versus structured meeting. 83% of the caregivers groups are unstructured meaning caregivers are able to come and socialize or vent frustrations and worries to other caregivers. 17% of the meetings are structured meaning that there is an invited guest that comes to speak at the caregivers meeting. Coping methods; tried and true techniques; caregivers develop invaluable relationships with other caregivers and feel less isolated. These discussions are confidential and on issues of concerns of care the social worker encourages direct communication with the care team. Conclusion: In conclusion, CF patients are often very dependent on caregivers and caregivers devote their entire lives to their patients. Caregivers have a wealth of knowledge and resources that can be shared with others especially when their own child may have grown or passed away. There is a need to share the everyday trials and tribulations of being the caregiver of a CF patient. Overall in the caregivers support group members laugh, cry and provide invaluable support to one another. This is a less formal forum than a patient/family advisory board that has its own value. Landon, C.; Turner, R. Pediatric Diagnostic Center, Ventura County Medical Center, Ventura, CA, USA Purpose: Real-world adherence to inhaled and oral therapies for cystic fibrosis (CF) patients remains discouragingly low, ranging between 31-53% for inhaled antibiotics. Programs to enhance adherence, including comprehensive behavioral interventions with adolescents, have met with mixed success. Bluetooth-enabled technology will allow for the advancement of patient medication adherence monitoring and intervention. Methods: A proof-of-concept open-label study was initiated to evaluate a systematic approach by linking treatment and feedback components utilizing the eRapid™ Nebulizer System (PARI), a bluetooth-enabled medication delivery device equipped with eBase Controller with monitoring function with the Altera nebulizer handset. The device utilizes the Qual-Comm Life2Net hub, to PARI server, to Amazon cloud, to RedCap data collection. CF clinic patients were screened by the multidisciplinary team and with the Moriskey Adherence Questionnaire (MAQ) for risk of poor adherence. The device was demonstrated and dispensed from clinic following baseline assessment of Pulmonary Exacerbation Score, pulmonary function, and mental health assessment. Results: Pilot study -Fourteen subjects age 8-32 from the populations of 1) deliberate nonadherence, 2) cross-cultural communication, 3) initiation of a complex regimen, and 4) use of a complex medical device. The device enabled our team to utilize this technology: as a clinic and hospital discharge kit to initiate medication, providing rapid feedback on utilization; use as part of a depression intervention with reward for adherence; for adherence bringing compliance in line prior to initiation of Orkambi; use as an " adherence booster" after the patient had regressed; and to test dispensing the medication delivery into another language and culture. Conclusions: The device allows active engagement and discussion by the patient and provider of the treatment regimen. Date-and time-stamped data allowed shared decision making in individualizing therapy for each patients schedule, creating a pathway towards cognitive behavioral therapy intervention. Weekly review of adherence is studied as a process, as opposed to the quarterly team review by patient recall and medication possession by refill data. This additional communication between the patient/ family and CF team addresses the challenges of adhering to CF treatments collaboratively, avoiding miscommunication and misunderstandings about the treatment regimen. Self-report measures of adherence were supplemented by real-time data in conjunction with this additional measurement tool. Clinical Implications: For large-scale studies, the device has potential to replace pharmacy refill histories as the most feasible measure of adherence. The device can potentially replace Daily Phone Diaries or other EMA strategies (PDA assessment). The device provides highly accurate information that can be used in conjunction with other measures. The pilot study demonstrates that Electronic Monitors can become the "gold standard" because they can be integrated into delivery systems currently in place. PATIENT-CENTERED DEVELOPMENT OF CYSTIC FIBROSIS CAREMESSAGE Landon, C.; Papador, J.; Turner, R. Ventura County Medical Center, Ventura, CA, USA Purpose: Cystic fibrosis (CF) requires treatment with complex medical regimens and specialized diets. Adherence to these treatment plans remains discouragingly low, with a rate ranging between 31-53% for inhaled antibiotics. Educational programs are being developed to increase the knowledge, attitudes and practices of patients, providers and caregivers. Patients are the ultimate users of healthcare research findings and the most important stakeholders. We engaged patients in all research steps: preparation of research (agenda formulation, funding procurement), execution of research (study conduct, data analyses) and the translation of results into action. Methods: CareMessage (CM) is a text messaging service that utilizes a database of questions and statements to send messages to a designated population, and to send prewritten feedback based on the responses given. The CFCM database can be uniquely modified to create a program targeting a given group or individual participant that the messages will be sent to. The IRB reviewed assent and consent issues. A focus group, consisting of patients, their parents and their CF team, was used to identify the greatest learning needs of our targeted populations and consulted in clinic during their CF team visits and out of clinic using SurveyMonkey. The CF team was consulted during a post-clinic meeting. The CM programs for COPD and Diabetes were reviewed for messages that crossover into CF health. Results: Based on the data collected from our patient population, the CF-related topics that are most important to the needs of our patients include nutrition, exercise, disease information and adherence. Along with this educational portion of CM, patients requested appointment reminders for visits with the CF team, medication refills, daily medication reminders if adherence issues have emerged and the patient has agreed to this intervention, and notices of educational events. Enrollment into the program was requested during their visits with the CF team. Messages in the CFCM database will be catered to enhance education in these topics. CF team interview revealed a reluctance from providers to participate in smartphone educational programs via text message. Questions from COPD and diabetes programs (58) have been identified and integrated into the CF database. Conclusions: Based on the need to increase adherence to CF treatments and the feedback that was received from the patients, the program will begin with messages relating to adherence. Adherence messages, taken from the Morisky Adherence Questionnaire, have been implemented into the CM system and are being sent to patients, giving another measure of patient adherence. A goal of 150 participants including patients, providers and caregivers has been set for the CFCM program. Clinical Implications: The CFCM program has the potential to increase knowledge, attitudes and practices in CF health. This patient-centered process has allowed a better understanding of patient's education needs. CM can also be used, in clinic, to send appointment reminders and receive confirmations from the patients for each visit. Patient engagement in the process has potential to enhance the quality of the research project (improving enrollment rates in studies, making studies more consistent with patients' values, goals, and preferences). Rationale: At our hospital, inpatient stays for acute pulmonary exacerbations are 10-14 days for 10-17 year olds. Infection control policies designed to protect patients effectively confine patients to their room during their stay, which severely limits physical activity. Hospital stays are associated with depressed and anxious mood in children and adolescents. A systematic review found improved lung function with short-term in-hospital exercise, and exercise participation has been linked with improvements in mood in youth. The primary aim of the current study was to pilot test a self-administered exergaming program during hospitalization (a Microsoft Xbox/Kinect game system, which uses whole-body and limb movements). We hypothesized that the program would be feasible, as indicated by patient compliance with study procedures. A secondary aim was to compare youth who completed the exergaming protocol to an inpatient monitoring group on change in FEV1, physical activity levels, and psychological distress across the hospital stay. Methods: Participants were youth with acute exacerbation ages 10-17 (n=13) and their parents, who were consented upon admission. Exclusion criteria were baseline FEV1 <50%, non-English speaking, or developmental delay. Youth completed the exergaming intervention (n=8) or monitoring procedures (n=5) during their hospital stay. Youth in the exergaming condition were instructed to complete 2 hours of exergaming per day in their room. All youth underwent actigraphic monitoring via wrist-mounted actigraphy device to objectively measure moderate and vigorous levels of physical activity, and completed an activity diary as well as ratings of positive and negative affect. Results: Compliance with the exergaming program was high based on self-report via activity diaries and review of actigraphy data. Compliance with wearing the actigraphic monitor was high, with wear time across groups at a mean of 21.00 hrs/day. Compliance with activity diary completion was moderately high, with youth completing at least one entry on 82% of days. Preliminary results show that the exergaming group reported lower negative affect and higher positive affect at discharge (p=.02), as well as more time spent in moderate to vigorous levels of physical activity, as measured by actigraphy (p=.07). Change in FEV1 was not significantly different in the groups, though the observed effect size was moderate (Cohen's d=.52). Parents and youth also provided positive qualitative feedback about the exergaming protocol. The exergaming protocol appears to be feasible for use in the pediatric inpatient setting, and the exergaming program was viewed positively by participants. While a larger trial is needed, initial results are promising and suggest that a self-guided exergaming intervention might be a useful way to provide inpatient exercise and improve hospital stays. Background: Identifying high-performing CF centres can drive learning and inform quality improvement, but outcomes such as FEV1 or exacerbations are insensitive to change at a centre level. Randomised controlled trials with adequate sample size have shown that maintenance inhaled therapies will result in various important outcomes such as improved FEV1 or decreased exacerbations. This allows adherence rates to inhaled therapy (a process measure) to be used as a quality indicator to identify highly performing centres. Objective monitoring of adherence to inhaled therapy using chipped nebulisers suggests that median adherence in adults is only 36% (Daniels T, et al. Chest. 2011; 140: 425-32) . However, these data are based on nebulisers brought to clinic and it is important to understand adherence rates in the nebulisers that are never brought to clinic. Aim: To explore the effects of missing data on the nebuliser adherence rates of an adult CF centre. Methods: This is a retrospective analysis of adherence data measured with the I-neb nebuliser for both 2013 and 2014 in the Sheffield Adult CF Centre. Adherence is calculated as "normative adherence" (Hoo ZH, et al. Patient Prefer Adherence. 2016;10:887-900) which takes into account a patient's characteristics when defining the minimum required treatment regime. People just on nonchipped devices for inhaled therapy, on ivacaftor or with previous lung transplantation were excluded. Every person had at least 3 months' worth of adherence data. Two potential causes of missing data were considered: (1) I-neb that was difficult to obtain for download (defined as people with data download <3 months for a particular year, whose I-neb was only downloaded in a subsequent year) (2) people not using any forms of inhaled therapy who should have been according to their clinical characteristics (based on the definitions in Hoo ZH, et al.) Results: 89/166 (53.6%) of adults in 2013 and 97/170 (57.1%) of adults in 2014 were using I-nebs. For both 2013 and 2014, only measuring adherence from I-nebs that were easily obtainable overestimated the overall centre adherence. Adherence rates fell further if people not on any inhaled therapy but their clinical characteristics suggested they should be on inhaled therapy were included in the overall estimate of centre adherence. Conclusions: Nebuliser data were not missing at random. Adherence levels fell after including difficult-to-obtain nebulisers in the analysis and accounting for the population that are not on any inhaled therapy. A quality indicator in CF based on nebuliser adherence needs to consider data completeness in comparing the adherence rates of different centres. Background: Interventions to support preventative inhaled therapy adherence are important for effective self-management. Treatment rationalisation can reduce burden and potentially improve adherence but may lead to suboptimal treatment regime. Defining a minimum treatment regime (1) given a person's characteristics (normative regime) provides a helpful metric to understand adherence rate over time and may well differ from measures of unadjusted adherence that provide less precision in estimating quality of care. Aim: To explore the impact of different adherence definitions (unadjusted vs normative) as adherence changed in an adult CF centre from 2013 to 2014. Methods: This is a retrospective analysis of the objective nebuliser adherence data measured with chipped I-neb nebulisers for 2013 and 2014 in the Sheffield Adult CF Centre. People just on nonchipped devices for inhaled therapy, on ivacaftor or with previous lung transplantation were excluded. Unadjusted adherence was calculated as percent of the agreed regimen between clinicians and patients. Normative adherence, which takes into account a person's characteristics when defining the minimum required treatment regime, was calculated with previously described methods.(1) For example, the denominator for a person with chronic Pseudomonas (requires mucolytic and antibiotic) who only agreed to use nebulised dornase alfa once daily is 1 neb/day in the calculation of % agreed adherence; but the denominator is 3 neb/day in the calculation of % normative adherence. (1) Results: 89/166 (50.3%) adults were on I-neb in 2013, which increased to 97/170 (54.8%) in 2014. There was general improvement across all adherence metrics. 79 adults were on I-neb for both years. Among this cohort, 7 had regime rationalisation and 10 had regime augmentation. Those with regime rationalisation have lower normative adherence in 2013 compared to those with regime augmentation (median 20.7%, IQR 15.8-56.1% vs median 42.8%, IQR 4.4-86.5%). Regime rationalisation was associated with improved unadjusted adherence (median change 7.1%, IQR -11.0% to 10.0%), but there was reduction in both normative adherence (median change -0.8%, IQR -10.2% to 2.5%) and total nebuliser used/week (median change -0.2, IQR -3.3 to 1.2). Regime augmentation had the opposite effect (median change in unadjusted adherence -5.0%, IQR -15.2% to 20.5%; median change in normative adherence 5.9%, IQR -3.3% to 27.6%; median change in total nebuliser used/week 1.6, IQR -0.6 to 3.8). Conclusions: There was a genuine improvement in the use of preventative nebuliser among adults with CF in Sheffield from 2013 to 2014. It is however crucial to consider the metric used to measure adherence for the purpose of quality improvement. Regime rationalisation, which is commonly instituted when adherence is low, can appear to improve unadjusted adherence without actually improving the overall nebuliser use. As life expectancy for people with cystic fibrosis (CF) has steadily increased, so has the need for transition of care from pediatrics to adult specialists. If this transfer is not done appropriately, a patient's future health, continuity of care and adherence to medications may be disrupted. Timing of the transition is complicated by developmental and psychosocial challenges common to all adolescents and young adults. Objective: To review the University of Michigan (U of M) transition program progression through quality improvement (QI) initiatives. Methods: U of M CF center transition program was established in 1980. The transition process is usually introduced to patients and families at their first visit to our center. The pediatric team re-introduces the transition program to patients when they reach their early teens, a time when they are gaining independence. When ready, usually between 18 to 21 years of age, the adult pulmonologist meets the patient and family with the pediatric pulmonologist in the pediatric clinic. If the patient and family are not ready after this joint clinic session, the session can be repeated up to 3 times. Additionally, a tour of the adult inpatient and outpatient facilities is offered prior to transfer to adult care. This program was evaluated through 2 QI projects in 1992 and 2010. Following each evaluation, the transition process was modified to meet patients' expectations and improve patient satisfaction. Also, areas of weakness and strength within the program were identified. Results: Timing of transition is complicated by developmental and psychosocial challenges common to all adolescents and young adults. Although structured transitions programs did not appear to decrease patient anxiety during this stressful period, it appeared to improve patient satisfaction, perceived health status, and independence. The transition program optimizes patient health and continuity of care. Discussion: Our evaluations of the program revealed that patients who proceeded through the formal transition program reported a higher level of satisfaction with care both before and after transferring from pediatric to adult care. Patient opinions regarding when to transfer care should be considered. Patients reported significantly higher perceived health status both before and after transition. Patients reported that the most useful experience was meeting an adult physician in the pediatric clinic, followed closely by having a social worker help in the transition process. Formalized transition process is crucial to optimize patient health, continuity of care, and reduce loss to follow-up. Recently, the CF Rise transition readiness program was adopted by the center to help improve CF patients' knowledge and foster their independence as they move to the adult program. Abstract: In Canada all paediatric CF patients are required to transition to the adult CF clinic at the age of 18 regardless of their readiness or desire to transition. We have been told that this can cause anxiety and stress for both the patients and their families. Among the myriad changes encountered include an entirely new team, new clinic location and space, new inpatient setting, and shift to self-care model. Our current transition program starts at age 14 with the initiation of private discussion time with the paediatric health care team and a questionnaire that tracks development of CF knowledge and self-management skills. While this process does provide some level of preparedness in terms of knowledge and skill, patients and family still voiced anxiety about the actual physical experience of transition. Our Transition Night was created to provide an opportunity for transitioning youth and their families to meet and interact with the adult team, be introduced to the new clinic space and routines, meet other parents and be able to present their questions and concerns. Parents were invited to be present but due to infection control guidelines the youth were not able to attend in person. Therefore they were connected via live webinar feed. This gave them an opportunity to view the presentations, meet the adult clinic team and anonymously send in their questions. The evening session was recorded and posted on our CF clinic website and available as a teaching tool. Method: A Transition Evening event was held at a local hotel reception room with easy access to the highway for out-of-town participants. Our target population, identified as those who will be transitioning within the next 5 years, were personally invited with a poster about the event sent by email or regular post. The evening was supported by funds from a pharmaceutical company who provided technological support and equipment. The event was filmed, recorded and aired via confidential live interactive webinar for those at home. All disciplines from both the adult and paediatric teams presented PowerPoint slides with information on various aspects of transitioning to the adult clinic, highlighting the changes patients might expect to encounter. Refreshments and a "meet and greet" session occurred after the presentations. A display table with CF-related information items and equipment was on display. Evaluation forms were available for completion after the session. Results: Eight families from a possible 15 families approaching transition attended with 3 patients logged on remotely. All participants, including those logged in, were actively engaged and asked questions of the staff. Overall, evaluations proved to be extremely positive. Of the 10 evaluations completed, all attendees found the presentations met their learning needs at a very high degree. The same was true for the clarity, organization and understandability of the speakers. All participants found the event to be valuable and helpful. Host event every year Take pictures at event Welcome Objective: This study evaluates the roles of medical and social complexity in health outcomes in cystic fibrosis (CF) after transition into adult care. We hypothesized that individuals with high disease complexity, poor social support systems, or gaps in care experience a more rapid decline in lung function and increased health care utilization after transition. Methods: Using a retrospective cohort design, all CF patients who were transitioned into adult care at Indiana University from our pediatric center between January 1st, 2005 to December 31st, 2014, were included. Along with demographics and comorbidities, the variables included age at transition, gap in care (days) between pediatric and adult CF center visits, treatment complexity score (TCS) (Sawicki GS, et al. J Cyst Fibros. 2013; 12:461-7) , diagnosis of depression and anxiety, and an objective scoring measure of their social complexity (Bob's Level of Social Support, BLSS). Relationships between FEV 1 % predicted and TCS and BLSS were assessed using bivariate linear regression. The relationships between gap in care and FEV1 % predicted as well as gap in care with TCS and BLSS were assessed using analysis of variance (ANOVA). TCS and BLSS tertiles were compared with hospitalization and outpatient visit rates using ANOVA. Lastly bivariate linear regression was used for correlations between TCS, BLSS, and hospitalization rates and pre-and post-transition outpatient visit rates. Results: The average age of the patients (N = 110) at the time of transition was 22.8 ± 6.4 years. The average FEV 1 at transition was 66.2 ± 23.7% predicted. Half of the patients were male and 97% were white. Sixty-three percent had a high school diploma and 29% had Medicaid insurance. There were no correlations between TCS (R = -0.07, p = 0.29) or BLSS (R = -0.01, p = 0.91) and decline of FEV 1 . Between groups of gap in care, there was significant difference in decline of FEV 1 (p = 0.01). Higher TCS and BLSS correlated with increased hospitalization rate (R = 0.72, p < 0.001) prior to transition. A higher TCS predicted more outpatient visits. However, higher BLSS was associated with a lower number of outpatient visits with a significant drop after transition (See Table) . Conclusions: Greater treatment complexity and social complexity are related to increased health care utilization. Patients with higher treatment complexity have more frequent outpatient follow-up visits as well as hospitalizations, while patients with more psychosocial issues tend to have increased hospitalizations and fewer outpatient visits. Screening young adults for social complexity and providing further support may reduce avoidable health care use. Introduction: CFTR is expressed in several brain areas. Patients (pts) show a variety of symptoms, including mood, cognitive, respiratory, and autonomic issues. These abnormal symptoms suggest possible brain injury that can be examined with noninvasive MRI procedures. Methods: 5 CF pts homozygous F508del (3 M; age 29.7±3.7 y; BMI 22.0±0.7 kg/m 2 ) and 5 controls (4 M; age 28.5±5.1 y; BMI 21.3±5.4 kg/m 2 ). Vital signs and demographics were collected. All were in baseline good health. All completed mood, cognitive, and sleep surveys: Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI-II), Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), Montreal Neurocognitive Assessment (MoCA), Trail Making Tests (TMT) and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI). Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) procedures (2 DTI series/subject) were performed using a 3.0-Tesla MRI scanner. Using diffusion and nondiffusion images, mean diffusivity (MD) values, which indicate average motion of water molecules within tissue and show microstructural changes, with decreased values in acute and increased in chronic pathological condition, were calculated at each voxel from each DTI series. Both MD maps, derived from each DTI series, were realigned and averaged, normalized to a common space, smoothed, and compared between groups using ANCOVA (covariates, age and gender; SPM12, p<0.005; extended threshold, 10 voxels). Results: No significant differences in age, gender, or BMI between CF and controls. Initial SpO 2 was 97% (range 97-98%) on room air, but dropped to 91% (range 90-92%) when CF subjects were supine in MRI scanner. Of 5 CF subjects, one on BDI-II, 3 on BAI, 5 on PSQI, and 2 on the MoCA had abnormal scores. Various brain areas showed significantly reduced MD values in CF, indicating predominant acute tissue changes, over controls. Sites with reduced MD values included bilateral prefrontal and frontal, parietal, and occipital cortices, bilateral corona radiate, anterior, mid, posterior cingulate cortices; insula, cerebellar vermis, middle cerebellar peduncles, cerebellar cortices and deep nuclei, and ventral medulla. Only a few areas, including basal-forebrain and right occipital cortex, showed increased MD values in CF, suggesting chronic tissue damage, over controls. Conclusions: Adult CF pts homozygous for F508del had poor sleep, unsuspected low oxygen saturation during rest, but few CF subjects showed mood and cognitive issues. CF subjects show predominant acute tissue changes in areas that control mood, cognition, respiratory, and autonomic functions. However, current mood and cognitive screening tests appear to be less sensitive, and show only limited issues. Speculation: Altered brain structure may be due to CFTR protein dysfunction, malnutrition, or hypoxemia. Further study is needed to determine if these brain structural changes are present in other CFTR mutations and CF age groups. Background: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a heterogeneous disease, even among patients sharing the same genotype. Socioeconomic status (SES) and home environment contribute to some of this variability. We have previously observed that socioeconomic influences such as paternal education and family income manifest in clinically detectable CF disease during infancy. To better understand the link between SES and infant outcome, we interviewed CF caregivers regarding levels of social support. Hypothesis: Impaired caregiver support is a mechanism linking low SES to overt CF disease progression during infancy. Methods: Caregivers of CF infants were provided a modified validated questionnaire to analyze SES, support, and well-being. These factors were compared to a 5-item composite clinical score (nutrition, microbiology, cough, pulmonary exacerbations, and hospitalizations) of CF infants. T-tests analyzed continuous data and Fisher's exact test analyzed categorical data (significance assigned at p<0.05). Results: Lead caregivers of 34 CF infants participated. Of these, 45% had an annual income <$50,000, 26% had less than a high school education, and 21% were single parents. The infants were generally healthy with an average clinical score of 6.9/10 and an average FEV 0.5 of 101±3%. Most caregivers reported being well supported (8.0±3.5 out of 10). However, perceived support was decreased in families with lower annual income (<$50,000: 5.9±1.3; ≥$50,000: 9.4±0.34, p=0.02), lower paternal education (≤High School: 6.2±1.2; College or more: 9.2±0.4, p=0.03), and in single parent homes (SPH) (SPH: 1.7±0.8, two parent homes (TPH): 9.6±0.2, p<0.001). Caregivers in SPH had diminished annual household income, with 83% of SPH earning <$50,000 versus 34% of TPH (p=0.03). Paternal education was similarly lower in these environments (p<0.02). The relationship between support and SES was most evident in SPH. Only 4% of SPH reported excellent support (>8/10). In contrast, 11% of TPH reported low levels of support (Likelihood ratio (LR) 22, Positive Predictive Value (PPV) 0.89, Specificity 96%, p<0.001). Low levels of perceived support (<8/10) associated with diminished clinical scores (<7/10) [LR 4.5, PPV 0.8, Specificity 0.89, p=0.02] . In particular, infants in SPH had overtly lower clinical scores (SP home: 5.1±0.4 vs. TP home: 7.3±0.4, p<0.01). Conclusion: CF caregivers generally report good health and adequate support. However, caregiver perception of support is significantly diminished in association with low income, low paternal education and single parent homes. Infants of caregivers that report low perceived support are at risk for developing increased disease. Single parent homes are most significantly associated with low support and low clinical scores. Assessing caregiver's perceived support and household type may enable targeted interventions to enhance the care environment during infancy and optimize CF outcomes. Supported by UAB Cunningham Memorial Summer Research Program and CFF (CC032-14). Seay, A.D. 1,2 ; Whitaker, B. 1,2 ; Menendez, A. 1,2 1. Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Lowell, AR, USA; 2. Arkansas Children's Hospital, Little Rock, AR, USA Introduction: Assessment of emotional and behavioral functioning can facilitate patient and caregiver communication of behavioral health needs and facilitate appropriate referral and treatment of behavioral health problems. To better identify patients who may benefit from psychological evaluation an abbreviated screening tool that addresses the unique demands of clinical time constraints was developed for routine use at the Arkansas Children's Hospital's two CF center sites. The Pediatric Behavioral Health Questionnaire (PBHQ; an 8-item questionnaire that briefly assesses behavioral health across the following domains: anxiety, depression, behavior, academics, social, treatment, and family adjustment/stressors) was developed to increase the communication of behavioral health information for the purposes of identifying patient and caregiver service needs, standardizing the referral and routing of appropriate psychosocial treatment and services, and increasing access to care. Study aims included: establishing the internal reliability and external validity of the PBHQ and cross-validating the PBHQ with a validated psychological questionnaire. Methods: The project is a cross-sectional survey study designed to inform our approach to referring patients and their families to psychosocial services in the pediatric CF population. Parents of school-aged CF patients were consented in clinic. They completed the Pediatric Symptom Checklist, the PBHQ, and a brief satisfaction survey. Medical information was extracted from the medical record and included in the statistical analyses. Descriptive statistics, chi-square analyses, and correlations were conducted. Results: The sample (N=19) was 52.6% female and 89.5% Caucasian. The mean age at survey was 11.41 years (SD = 4.73 years). There were 26.3% with a known mental health diagnosis, 31.6% with a G-Tube and 15.8% with multiple hospitalizations in a 12-month period. Preliminary results showed good internal consistency of the PBHQ with Cronbach's alpha = 0.81. There was a positive correlation with the PSC (r = .624) and known mental health diagnoses (r = 387). Conclusion: The preliminary data indicate the PBHQ has good internal consistency and external validity. Parents who rated their child as high on the PBHQ also rated their child as high on the PSC and were more likely to have reported that their child has a known mental health diagnosis. There is evidence that utilizing this brief screener will sufficiently identify patients in need of additional assessment. The proposed work is significant as routinely screening for psychosocial difficulties and improving access to services can have an impact on current health-related quality of life, adherence and physical health outcomes. (Quittner AL, et al. Thorax. 2014; 69:1090-7) . These findings led to the development of International Guidelines on Mental Health in CF, which recommended annual screening of depression and anxiety for all individuals with CF, ages 12 and older, and parents of children with CF, birth to 17 (Quittner AL, et al. Thorax. 2016; 71:26-34) . This study aimed to determine the feasibility of implementing these guidelines at 2 CF clinics in South Florida, eliciting patient/ parent ratings of satisfaction with the screening experience. Methods: Trained CF team members used iPads to administer the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) and Generalized Anxiety Disorder scale (GAD-7). Patients (ages 12 and older) and parent caregivers completed these screening measures at stable visits. Those with elevations in the Mild range were given support and psychoeducation about mental health. Those with elevations in the Moderate to Severe range were provided with psychoeducation and referrals to community psychologists. Patients completed 2-3 month follow-up surveys via mail or email. Patient medical data were extracted from electronic records. Institutional Review Board approval was gained for all parts of this study. Results: Adults (N=40), adolescents (N=3), and parents (N=4) completed screening and satisfaction surveys. Sixty percent of adults (age M=34.85, FEV 1 %pred M=52.25, 55% minority) rated the screening process as "very helpful," 30% "somewhat helpful," and 10% "not helpful." A large majority of adults (95%) reported that mental health issues are "very important." Most adults (72.5%) also reported they were very comfortable being asked to complete the screening and 75% were satisfied with the length of the screening. Fifty-five percent of patients were "very satisfied" with the feedback they received after their screening and 22.5% were "satisfied." Fifty percent of patients reported that their concerns were addressed "very effectively," and 27.5% "somewhat effectively." Parents (N=4) and adolescents (N=3) reported similar results. Conclusion: Patients were highly satisfied with the screening process and generally found it helpful. However, results also indicated areas for improvement, including how feedback about results was given and how their concerns were addressed (eg, not getting feedback, getting feedback in front of a companion). Results reflected the limited mental health training of those who initially implemented this clinical study. However, grant funding from CFF has enabled us to place a psychology trainee in both the pediatric and adult clinics, with supervision provided by a licensed psychologist. We will continue annual screening with all patients and parents, utilizing this feedback and the skills of a clinical psychologist, and then re-administer the survey to determine whether our processes have improved. Funding: Vertex CF Circle of Care Grant. Background: Persons with cystic fibrosis (CF) have a median age of death of 29.1 years. They often receive aggressive life-sustaining treatments within 24 hours of death and have a considerable burden of physical and emotional symptoms as well as reduced quality of life as CF progresses. Yet surprisingly, little is known about the palliative care and advance care planning (ACP) needs of people with CF or their families. Objectives: 1) To identify and assess the palliative care and ACP needs of patients at a single CF center; 2) to identify and assess family members' and clinicians' roles in meeting patients' palliative care and ACP needs. Methods: A qualitative study of adult patients (ages 18 or older) with moderate or advanced CF (FEV1 ≤60%) and family members involved in their care. Participants were recruited from the University of Washington Adult CF Clinic. Semi-structured interviews (30-60 minutes) were conducted in-person or by phone. Questionnaires, completed at the time of the interview, included questions about palliative care needs and demographics. Grounded-theory constant-comparison method was used to analyze the transcripts and co-reviewed to ensure trustworthiness. Results: Forty-seven CF patients and 37 family members participated. Patient ages ranged from 24-66 years with a median FEV1 of 40% (Range 19-63). Family member ages ranged from 21-69 years. We identified the following themes regarding patients' unmet palliative care needs: 1) discussions of quality of life including impact of management of current symptoms and complicated treatment routines; 2) provision of information about future course of illness and communication about future functioning; 3) practical assistance with finances, health insurance, and legal issues; 4) support for emotional concerns including referral to counseling; and 5) opportunities to engage in advance care planning. Families identified similar concerns: 1) future quality of life for their loved one given their current level of independence; 2) guidance on how to support their loved one and address his/her practical needs; and 3) connectedness to their loved one's CF care and health status. For both patients and family members, the timing and location for addressing ACP needs was important. Patients varied in their willingness to discuss ACP, but agreed about not having ACP conversations when they were experiencing an exacerbation; however, patients often had difficulty describing what time would actually be best. Family members endorsed the need and desire for ACP but were similarly unsure "at what point" to have these discussions. Both patients and family members thought of their needs as "supportive" rather than "palliative," would choose to discuss their unmet needs with their CF practitioner rather than with another provider, and believed these discussions might be best done during a regularly scheduled CF appointment. Discussion: Patients and family members experience palliative care needs that span a number of domains, but see a role for their CF provider to meet these needs with discussions that are carefully timed, do not occur during an exacerbation, and help them plan for their illness trajectory. Future studies should evaluate interventions to address palliative care needs for patients with CF and their family members. Beachy, S. 1 ; Baker, A.M. 1 ; Quittner, A.L. 2 ; Riekert, K.A. 1 1. Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA; 2. Psychology, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA Background: The treatment regimen for cystic fibrosis (CF) is complex and challenging, and people with CF take about half of their prescribed treatments. Healthcare providers are uniquely positioned to assist patients and families to overcome adherence barriers. To do this, however, providers must first recognize the full spectrum of adherence barriers. Objective: To identify which patient and family adherence barriers are reported by CF providers. Methods: Overall 20 pediatric and 19 adult providers from 34 CF centers in the United States participated in semi-structured interviews, including 2-3 providers from the following disciplines: dietitian, nurse, nurse practitioner, pharmacist, physical therapist, physician, psychologist/psychiatrist, respiratory therapist, and social worker. Interviews were recorded and transcribed, and responses were qualitatively coded for themes. Results: Overall 19 themes were identified: Cost/Access (95% pediatric providers/100% adult providers; eg, copays, pharmacy difficulties), Time/Scheduling (95%/100%; eg, work, school activities), and Attitudes/ Beliefs (95%/95%; eg, buy in, motivation, lack of perceived efficacy) were the most commonly endorsed barriers to patient adherence. Other barriers endorsed by providers included: Mental Health (95%/84%; eg, depression, anxiety), Center Resources (90%/95%; eg, space, staff turnover), Family (90%/58%; eg, family conflict, parental monitoring), Knowledge and Skills (85%/89%; eg, not understanding prevention, understanding device, Daily Habits/Routine (80%/84%; eg, organization, sleep), Social (80%/68%; eg, social stigma, isolation from others), Care Team (80%/79%; eg, trust, care team experience), Energy (75%/79%; eg, burnout, fatigue), Treatment (75%/68%; eg, taste, nausea,), Food (75%/53%; eg, pickiness, can't enjoy food), Intervention (65%/63%; eg, acceptance of counseling, lack of outcome data on adherence), Developmental (65%/58%; eg, transition, maturity), Clinic Visits (60%/84%; eg, visits too long, missed clinic appointments), Disclosing Nonadherence (55%/68%; eg, lack of honesty, don't want to disappoint/anger), Behavior (55%/26%; eg, behavioral issues, rebellion), and Patient Can't Articulate Barriers (10%/11%). In total, 80% of pediatric and 89% of adult providers indicated interest in a checklist to facilitate identification of adherence barriers. Providers identified many ways the checklist could be informative, including supporting collaboration and communication, tailoring interventions and determining if interventions to reduce barriers are effective. Conclusions: CF providers recognize that patients and families experience a wide range of adherence barriers. The majority felt that the development of a Barriers Checklist would help care teams quickly identify barriers and promote collaboration with patients and families to overcome these barriers. Supported by: QUITTN14QI0. Background: With improvements in survival, an increasing number of adults with CF are receiving care in dedicated adult CF programs. For adolescents with CF, assessing transition readiness is an important component of preparation for transfer from pediatric-to adult-focused CF care. Objective: To identify clinical and demographic factors associated with improved transition readiness among adolescents and young adults with CF. Methods: Transition readiness was assessed in a cross-sectional survey study of adolescents and young adults with CF receiving care at a large pediatric CF center using the Transition Readiness Assessment Questionnaire (TRAQ), a validated self-report measure of disease self-management skills (score range [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . Other measures included prescribed CF treatment complexity score (score range 0-30), quality of life (measured by the CFQ-R), and 6 self-report questions on transition counseling received from their health care providers. Differences in TRAQ scores by clinical and demographic factors were evaluated via a multivariate linear regression model including all covariates with significant bivariate associations. Results: Among 74 participants (mean age 17.2 years, 49% female, mean FEV1 85%), mean TRAQ score was 3.52±0.95 and mean CF treatment complexity score was 14.5±5.7. Fifty (67%) respondents reported that their providers had talked with them about their health care needs as they become an adult, and 33 (45%) reported that a plan to address these needs had been developed. Thirty-nine (53%) reported that they had talked about transferring to providers who treat adults. Sixty-five (88%) reported that their provider usually or always encouraged them to take responsibility for health care needs, while only 24 (32%) reported that they had discussed maintaining health insurance as an adult. In bivariate analyses, higher TRAQ score was significantly associated with older age, lower FEV1, higher treatment complexity score, and positive responses to all transition counseling questions. There was no correlation between TRAQ score and any of the CFQ-R quality of life domains. In a multivariable regression model, older age (β=0.14, p=.002) and higher treatment complexity (β=0.04, p=.006) remained significantly associated with higher TRAQ scores. In addition, reporting that a provider had encouraged taking responsibility for health (β=0.61, p=.02) and had discussed health insurance (β=0.47, p=.02) also remained associated with a higher TRAQ score. Conclusion: Among a cohort of adolescents and young adults with CF, transition readiness is associated with older age and higher prescribed treatment complexity. In addition, adjusting for age and disease severity, specific counseling on transition preparation topics such as health insurance is also associated with improved transition readiness skills. Transition programs within pediatric CF programs should encourage such counseling in order to optimize transition-related outcomes. Introduction: Transition from paediatric to adult care involves taking responsibility and becoming independent. Many parents feel that they will become excluded from the management of their child's care following transition. Ten years ago the clinical nurse specialist team (CNST) presented data collected over four months estimating the level of parental involvement in their adult child's disease management following transition. Aim: To re-evaluate the level of parental involvement compared to 2006. Method: We tried to match methods with the 2006 review however, although the audit was carried out at the same time of year contacts have increased despite a stable patient population and email is used in addition to telephone calls. Therefore all contacts (telephone and email) made with the CNST were reviewed over a two-month period (November/ December). This included the number of calls/emails, identity of caller, age and gender of patient, and reason for calling. Results: Comparison of contacts - Table. Reasons for contact included: patient unwell, results, appointments/admissions, letters/welfare issues. Conclusion: There has been a significant increase in the number of contacts over the last ten years. Many more patients have taken responsibility for their CF management with a fall in the number of calls made on their behalf (32% to 7%). Where contact was made on behalf of a patient, 79% were from mothers. It was noted that of the mothers calling, a small group of seven mothers called repeatedly. It appears that over the last ten years preparation for transition and support following the transition process has succeeded in empowering many young patients to take over responsibility for their care, although a small number of mothers continue to be actively involved for many years. Professionals working in adult CF teams need to be aware that following transition from paediatric to adult care, young adults need encouragement and support to become independent however, mothers particularly continue to play an active role for a number of years post-transition. Little is known about the effect of social support on mental and physical health in adults with cystic fibrosis (CF). Adults with CF may face a unique set of clinical and psychosocial barriers affecting the attainment and maintenance of social support, including frequent hospitalizations, transition from pediatric care, change in primary support persons, and social isolation due to infection control policies. This study examined the role of perceived social support on the self-reported mental and physical health of adults with CF. Methods: We examined the responses of adults with CF (N=175) to the Interpersonal Support Evaluation List (ISEL, 0-100 scale) and The Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale (MSAS, 0-4 scale) as part of a single survey wave of the Project on Adult Care in Cystic Fibrosis (PAC-CF), a longitudinal multicenter panel study of CF adults in the United States. The MSAS addresses self-reported mental and physical health, with higher scores representing increased symptom burden. Linear regression analyses were conducted with social support as the predictor of mental health and physical health, controlling for the following covariates: disease severity (number of pulmonary exacerbations and FEV 1 ), age, gender, education, weight percentile, diabetes, pancreatic sufficiency, and colonization with Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and/or Burkholderia cepacia. Results: Participant mean age was 34 years, with 49% female and 61% with a post-high school degree. Reported social support ranged from 20 to 100 with a mean of 80. Physical health symptom scores ranged from 0 to 2.6 with a mean of 0.73. Mental health symptom scores ranged from 0 to 3.3 with a mean of 1.1. Greater levels of social support were associated with fewer negative mental health symptoms (p<.001, R 2 =.270) and fewer physical health symptoms (p<.001, R 2 =.175). Of the covariates included in the analyses, only female gender predicted poorer mental and physical health. Conclusion: Perceived social support significantly predicted self-reported mental and physical health in adults with CF, independent of clinical indicators of disease severity. Previous qualitative research indicates that social support is seen as a valuable resource to children and adolescents with CF; however, few studies have examined the role of social support on health outcomes in a quantitative design. The implementation of social support programs may prove beneficial in the care of individuals living with CF. Introduction: Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) with mental illness have increased morbidity, burden of disease, noncompliance to treatment, and worsened quality of life. Recent guidelines recommend screening for depression and anxiety with the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) and Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item scale (GAD-7) as a standard component of comprehensive CF care. Objectives: The objective was to evaluate how consistently mental health was addressed during CF clinic visits without the use of formal screening questionnaires. Routine care was compared to the use of the PHQ-9 and GAD-7 in terms of detection of symptoms suggestive of anxiety and depression. Methods: We reviewed charts of all patients with CF who were seen in the Saskatoon Adult CF Clinic in 2015. Patients who had previously undergone lung transplantation were excluded. Forty-five patients met inclusion criteria. Physician notes were reviewed for mention of, or plan with regard to mental health. Additionally, data was collected on spirometry, sputum cultures, pulmonary exacerbations, and antibiotic use. In January 2016, the Saskatoon Adult CF Clinic initiated screening with the PHQ-9 and GAD-7. Scores on the questionnaires administered during a six-month period were compared to detection of depression and anxiety without formal tools from the preceding year. Results: Without use of screening tools, mental health was addressed in 9/45 patients. In patients screened with the PHQ-9 and GAD-7 in 2016, 23/45 scored five or more on at least one questionnaire, suggestive of, at minimum, mild depression or anxiety. The screening tools identified 16 subjects with potential mental health concerns that were missed with routine assessment. Overall, the screening tools identified mental health issues more often than the standard patient interview (51% vs. 20%, p = 0.001). Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that mental health was assessed in a minority of patients through routine care. Use of the PHQ-9 and GAD-7 resulted in improved consistency in the assessment of mental health, as well as the identification of more patients with potential mental health disorders. Introduction: Young women with CF face unique sexual and reproductive health (SRH) concerns and prior research has shown that they prefer to receive CF-specific SRH information from CF care providers. The purpose of this study was to investigate the prevalence of CF-specific SRH problems and care provision by the CF team for young women with CF. Methods: Females with CF aged 15-24 years were recruited from five US CF centers to participate in an anonymous electronic survey investigating SRH behaviors and experiences, SRH care utilization, and preferences related to SRH care in the CF setting. Descriptive statistics were used to summarize CF-specific SRH problems and rates of discussion with the CF care team. Results: Respondents thus far included 133 women with CF (mean age 19.4±2.8 years). Thirty-seven percent rated their CF severity as mild, 54% as moderate, and 8% as severe. Self-reported baseline FEV1 was >70% predicted by 68% of respondents. Thirty-two percent had CF-related diabetes. Reported age of adrenarche was 12.1±1.4 years; age of menarche was 13.1±1.4 years. One-third perceived pubertal delay compared to their healthy peers; 75% had discussed puberty with their CF team. Eighteen percent reported a history of urinary incontinence (UI) (mean age of onset 16.0±4.2 years); 15% of all respondents had discussed UI with the CF team. Fifty percent reported a history of vulvovaginal candidiasis (26% had two or more episodes/year) and 31% of all respondents discussed this topic with their CF team. Forty-two percent always disclosed their CF diagnosis to sexual partners; 34% disclosed only when they were in a committed relationship. Of respondents who reported having vaginal sex in the past four weeks (n= 66), 33% reported pain with vaginal penetration half the time or more, 26% coughing during or after sex, and 3% hemoptysis. Of all respondents, 41% reported discussing sexual activity with their CF team, but only 2% reported discussing sexual functioning concerns with CF providers. Twenty-seven percent reported discussing fertility with their CF team; one respondent was told she was infertile due to CF by a healthcare provider. Forty-one percent had discussed contraception with their CF team. Sixty-nine percent were concerned that their future children would have CF and 83% would elect to do genetic testing for CF for a future child. Forty-one percent had discussed contraception with their CF team and 28% had discussed pregnancy planning. Conclusion: Young women with CF face many disease-specific SRH issues. Despite a desire to discuss these topics with CF providers, a minority reported ever discussing most SRH concerns with their CF team. Improvements in patient education, counseling, and care provision around SRH are needed for this population. Supported by the CFF 3rd Year Clinical Fellowship grant. Introduction: As survival in CF improves, more patients need preventive services and care relevant to adolescence and young adulthood, including sexual and reproductive health (SRH). However, SRH experiences of young women with CF have not been studied. This study compared the SRH behaviors of young women with CF to the general US population. Methods: Females with CF ages 15-24 years from five US CF centers participated in an anonymous electronic survey exploring sexual history, contraceptive use, sexually transmitted infections (STIs), and pregnancy. Results were compared to data from the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG), a large nationally representative survey conducted by the CDC to understand male and female SRH behaviors and trends in the US, via chisquared and linear regression tests. Results: To date, 133 women with CF (mean age 19.4±2.8 years) have completed the survey. NSFG comparison data from 2011-2013 were available for 1997 subjects age 15-24 years (mean age 19.6±0.1 years). Eighty-nine percent of women with CF identified as heterosexual, 2% as homosexual, and 9% as bisexual, similar to the general US population (p=0.15). Sixty percent of women with CF reported having had vaginal sex with a male partner compared to 66% of US women (p=0.01). Women with CF were older at age of first vaginal sex (p<0.01) and have fewer lifetime male partners (p<0.01) than the general US population. Fifty-seven percent of all women with CF surveyed reported a history of contraceptive use compared to 74% of US women (p<0.01). Fourteen percent of women with CF were currently using long-acting reversible contraceptive (LARC) methods compared to 5% of the general US population (p<0.01). Oral contraceptives were used by 20% of women with CF and 23% of US women (p=0.04). Women with CF were less likely to have ever used emergency contraception (20% vs. 29%, p<0.01) or have been tested for STIs in the past year; (23% vs. 34%, p<0.01) compared to the general US population. Two percent of women with CF reported ever being pregnant compared to 23.6% of the general US population (p<0.01). Conclusion: Young women with CF are less sexually experienced compared to the general US population and much less likely to have ever been pregnant. However, women with CF report lower rates of contraceptive use and STI testing, suggesting gaps in SRH education. These differences should be considered in the future development of SRH educational materials and care provision for young women with CF. Further investigation of the disparities in rates of pregnancy, contraceptive use, and STI testing are warranted. Introduction: Cystic fibrosis can be a challenging, time-consuming and expensive disease, and many people with CF and their families face issues getting and affording the care they need. A recent study by the CF Foundation showed that 80 percent of adults with CF worry about having the financial support they need to live with the disease. Nearly 75 percent worry about getting or keeping their health insurance. Some patients and families even have to choose between paying for medications and other necessities such as food or rent. CF Foundation Compass launched in 2016 as a tool for people with CF, their families and their health care providers to help through complex insurance, financial, legal and other issues. A team of 10 knowledgeable case managers with many years of experience helping people with CF offers assistance by phone or email. Methods: Each Compass case is recorded in a comprehensive database that collects information about the issues people face as well as proposed solutions. We analyzed data from March to September 2016 to identify the most common topics addressed and trends. Results: On average, Compass receives 59 calls per day. Health insurance issues are common (31% of calls). Of these issues, 18% are for help with choosing insurance options, 13% are for benefit verifications to understand what a particular plan covers and 4% are for help with coordinating benefits. About the same number of calls (29%) require help for financial assistance for care and treatment. For example, these calls often result in referrals to nonprofit foundations that provide funds for people with CF as well as manufacturer patient assistance programs. Fewer calls (11%) are for legal issues related to insurance, employment, education and government benefits as well as the need for assistance with Social Security applications. Many callers (28%) experience other issues that can impact their ability to get care and treatment. The top other issues are assistance paying for medical bills (15%), help with living expenses (14%), finding a CF care center (14%), finding or affording housing or lodging (9%) and paying for or assisting with issues related to medical devices (9%). On average, each month Compass refers 69 people to the CFF-funded CF Legal Information Hotline TM , run by law firm Sufian and Passamano, LLP; funds 41 people to have law firm Sufian and Passamano, LLP, assist with their Social Security Disability Insurance and Social Security Income applications, reviews and appeals; and funds genotyping for 46 people. Conclusions: People with CF face many barriers to accessing care and treatment. Although there are many barriers directly related to access, such as financial needs, there are many other barriers that can impact access and quality of life. CF Foundation Compass can help with many of these barriers and provides a glimpse into priority areas for many of the most vulnerable people with CF and their families. Caring for children with cystic fibrosis (CF) increases rates of parental depression. The International Depression Epidemiological Study (TIDES) in CF found elevated symptoms of depression on the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) in 37% of mothers and 31% of fathers, which were 2-3 times the rates in community samples (Quittner AL, et al. Thorax. 2014; 69:1090-7) . In turn, parental depression increases the risk of depression in youth with CF (Quittner AL, et al.) and negatively affects the child's adherence and health outcomes (Barker DH, Quittner, AL. Pediatrics. 2016; 137e20152296) . As a result, The CF Foundation and European CF Society consensus statements for screening and treating depression recommend annual screening for depression in parent caregivers of patients with CF ages 0-17 with the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) or the shorter PHQ-2 based on staffing and resources (Quittner AL, et al. Thorax. 2016; 71:26-34) . Methods: At the CF Center at Women & Children's Hospital of Buffalo (CFC), screening patients with CF ≥ 12 years for depression began in 2013; annual screening was expanded to parents/caregivers in 2014 using the PHQ-2 for a streamlined process in clinic. Due to low rates of caregiver depression observed in 2014 compared to the TIDES data, in 2015, caregivers of patients 0-17 years of age were randomized to screening with the PHQ-9 for half of the parents (last names A-L) and the PHQ-2 for the other half (M-Z). Our objectives were to examine any differences between the measures and also to compare regional differences, using our data compared to data from the Pediatric CF Center at Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, where screening caregivers with the PHQ-2 has been started. Results: In 2014 at CFC, 85 caregivers completed the PHQ-2 from 74 eligible families; 2 refused and 1 was missed. Only two (2.5%) were positive. In 2015 at CFC, 30 caregivers were randomized for PHQ-2 screening: 3 parents refused and 2 were missed; three (10.0%) were positive. 42 caregivers were randomized to PHQ-9 screening; 1 refused. Eight (19.0%) screened positive on the PHQ-9 and no one answered positive to the suicidality question. In 2014, 7/85 (8.2%) had a score of 2 on the PHQ-2; in 2015, 4/30 (13.3%) scored a 2 on the PHQ-2. Conclusions: We found lower rates of caregiver depression than reported in a large international study, though different screening measures were used. Greater rates of caregiver depression were detected with the PHQ-9 as compared to PHQ-2 screening. Although a small sample, this suggests the PHQ-9 may be more sensitive for caregiver depression screening and preferred to the PHQ-2. Our data will be compared to caregiver screening from the Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago when their data are available, by October 2016. Reasons for lower rates of caregiver depression could include: underreporting/failure to report to team at smaller center, different screening measures or a seasonal variation. Objective: Cystic fibrosis (CF) affects an estimated 30,000 people in the United States. Pancreatic insufficiency is prevalent and can result in malnutrition. Nutritional status is directly correlated with lung function in CF. A gastrostomy tube (GT) can be placed to assist in meeting nutritional goals. Research shows this treatment is beneficial and safe, yet the impact of this decision weighs heavily on caregivers. This study aims to examine the knowledge and attitudes regarding GT placement among caregivers of children with CF and explore the relationship with health-related quality of life. Methods: Caregiver and child pairs were recruited at regular pediatric CF clinic visits. Pairs were excluded if the child had a GT that was removed. A multidisciplinary team designed parallel surveys: one for caregivers of children with a GT, and one for caregivers of children without a GT. To establish internal consistency, Cronbach's alpha was calculated on the whole sample. Study subjects completed the appropriate Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised (CFQ-R) survey. Demographic and clinical data were collected from the electronic medical record. Results: The sample (N=48) was 56.9% female, 30.77% with a GT, and 86.3% Caucasian. Results showed moderate internal consistency with knowledge (Cronbach alpha=.66), attitudes (Cronbach alpha=.66) and decision making (Cronbach alpha =.66). For the with-GT group there was an additional scale measuring current health (Cronbach's alpha = 0.61). The groups differed on the decision-making scale (chi square = 30.01, p = .007). The CFQ-R has two self-report versions for the age group in this sample: 9 completed the Teen version and 16 completed the Child version and caregivers (n = 16) completed the CFQ-R corresponding to Child version (n = 16). Spearman correlations between the Teen/Adult CFQ-R and the Knowledge, Attitudes and Decision-Making Questionnaire revealed strong negative correlations between Teen Role and knowledge (r = -.735, p = .024) and Teen Eating and attitudes toward GTs (r = -.777, p = .014). Correlations between the Child CFQ-R and Knowledge, Attitudes and Decision-Making Questionnaire revealed moderate correlations with CFQR scales of Eating, Body Image and Digestion (r = .664, p = .005; r = .564, p = .023; and r = .575, p = .020 respectively). The Caregiver CFQ-R and the Knowledge, Attitudes and Decision-Making Questionnaire were correlated revealing a moderate negative correlation between Body Image and GT attitudes (r = -.543, p = .030). Conclusion: Comparing the groups revealed differences between the with-GT and without-GT groups for decision making. There were important differences noted in health-related quality of life with patients with GT being identified as having more trouble with eating and body image. Having a better understanding of the relationship between the attitudes toward GT and body image and eating may have an important role in the decision making process of patients and caregivers. Cohen, L.A. 1 ; Walker, S.D. 1 ; Kempker, J. 1 ; Howard, D. 2 1. Pulmonary and Critical Care, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA; 2. Internal Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA Background: The Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Foundation currently recommends that patients with CF attend clinic quarterly for routine nutrition and respiratory care. Studies have speculated that increased clinic attendance leads to improved adherence to medication and therefore improvement in parameters such as FEV 1 . We hypothesized that those patients with a percent predicted FEV 1 (FEV 1 %) baseline ≤ 40% with more frequent clinic visits would demonstrate a slower decline in their pulmonary function (FEV 1 %). Methods: We queried our center's registry database to identify patients with a baseline FEV 1 % ≤ 40%. We reviewed each clinic visit (routine and sick visits) and totaled them together to determine the total number of clinical encounters patients had within the last three years (4/1/2013 -5/1/2016) . Routine visits were defined as visits that occurred within the clinic setting and the patient did not show signs of an acute pulmonary exacerbation (APE). Sick visits were defined as having signs of an APE while in the clinic setting. Change in slope of FEV 1 % was calculated by subtracting the FEV 1 % baseline from 3 years prior from the current baseline FEV 1 %, divided by 3. Data analysis was performed using Spearman's correlation coefficient. Results: A total of 32 out of 319 patients had a baseline FEV 1 % of ≤ 40% (10%). The average age was 33.9 and 59% of the patients were female (19 out of 32). The median number of clinical encounters was 17.5 and the median number of routine visits was 8 in the last three years. The median change in FEV 1 % slope from baseline was -3.5%. There was no significant correlation between more frequent routine clinic visits and FEV 1 % slope (r = -0.28; p =0.12). However, there was an inverse correlation with number of total clinic visits per patient and change in FEV 1 % from baseline (r = -0.45; p = 0.009). Discussion: A few studies have suggested correlation between frequency of routine clinic visits and outcomes in CF patients. This might be expected to be more pronounced in patients with severe lung disease, in whom closer monitoring could lead to more stable disease. However, this was not seen in our population. This may be due to the small number of patients with severe lung disease at baseline, but might be due to the instability often seen in advanced CF lung disease. Additionally, those patients with more unstable disease may be scheduled at shorter intervals. The worsened decline in lung function associated with increasing total clinic visits suggests that those patients with more acute illnesses attend CF clinic more frequently. Conclusion: Increased number of routine clinic visits in CF patients with severe lung disease is not associated with slower decline in FEV 1 . Background: While CF care centers strive to provide the best care to patients and families, they are not always able to adequately address mental health needs. A recent international study found rates of anxiety and depression in patients with CF and their parents to be two to three times that of other individuals in the community (Quittner A, et al. Thorax. 2014; 69:1090-7) . In response, the CF Foundation developed guidelines, encouraging centers to annually (at least) screen patients and caregivers for anxiety and depression. Over the last 6 months, we have designed and implemented a mental health screening program at our large pediatric CF center and systematically evaluated barriers, benefits and outcomes. Methods: Prior to screening, we developed a suicidality algorithm for our larger children's hospital, including a safety plan, and have already used this with two patients with CF who have endorsed suicidal ideation. We also developed a referral network across our state and are partnering with state managed care organizations (MCOs) and area educational centers (AHECs), developing didactic modules to present throughout the state for local mental health and primary care providers about CF and appropriate evidence-based interventions. Patients ages ≥ 12 years and their caregivers have been approached during outpatient clinic visits, and occasionally while hospitalized, by a member of the CF mental health team (social worker or psychologist) and asked to complete the PHQ-9 and GAD-7. Our pediatric CF center serves around 350 patients, with 128 being ≥ 12 years-old. Results: To date, two MCOs and several AHECs have agreed to host continuing education sessions in the summer or fall of 2016. Data collection is ongoing as mental health screening began in April 2016. Thus far, we have screened 20 patients and 7 caregivers. Around 45% of patients have screened positive for anxiety and depression (mild, moderate, or severe) and 15% of caregivers; all have been provided both psychoeducation and referrals. Barriers to implementation have included clinic time and parental refusal for their child to participate. Parents have declined for their child to participate for several reasons, including because the patient was already in treatment and concern about impact of poor medical health on scores. Several benefits, however, have also been identified. Many parents have expressed the sentiment, "it's about time!", reflecting gratefulness that both the CFF and our center have prioritized mental health. Many individuals without previous diagnoses have also been identified. Conclusions: The overall impact of this mental health initiative seems positive at our center, despite some barriers to implementation. Feedback has also been positive within our children's hospital in general and from providers across our state. Future directions include developing telehealth groups for adolescents with CF who score in the mild-to-moderate range for anxiety and depression. Additionally, we are continuing to work on upcoming educational interventions for providers throughout NC. Supported by a grant from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Background: New mental health guidelines from the CF Foundation encourage routine screening of patients and caregivers for depression and anxiety. Many CF centers have begun this process to improve the awareness and treatment of patients' mental health needs. Each of our centers received grants for mental health coordinators (MHCs), partially or fully filled by psychologists at each site, to help with implementation and development of mental health screening and referral procedures. Methods: Adult patients (ages ≥18 years old), pediatric patients (ages ≥ 12 years and ≤17 years), and caregivers of pediatric patients were asked to complete the PHQ-9 and GAD-7 during outpatient clinic visits and inpatient admissions at four diverse CF centers. UNC's pediatric CF center serves >325 pediatric patients from across NC, Boston Children's serves >300 pediatric patients from the Northeast, Children's Hospital of Orange County serves >100 pediatric patients from Southern CA, and Rush Univ. Medical Center serves around 25 pediatric and 45 adult patients in Chicago. Patient populations are highly diverse with regards to race/ethnicity, primary language, income, and residence (eg, urban/rural, domestic/international). Psychologists are participating in various aspects of the screening process at each hospital, providing unique perspectives to key barriers and facilitators. Results: All four centers have been screening pediatric and/or adult patients for at least one month (range 1-10 mo). The total screened of eligible patients thus far ranges from 16-56% and 0-20% of possible caregivers. Thus far, themes of facilitators and barriers are very similar, although a few unique situations have arisen. Across clinics, key facilitators included establishing referral networks and safety plans, role definition of MHCs within teams, collaboration amongst center providers, social workers assisting with the screening process, and buy-in from patients, caregivers and CF teams. One unique facilitator identified was the ability to self-refer due to protected time (Rush and BCH). Across-clinic barriers included clinic time and space, and staff availability. Additionally, more complex barriers emerged regarding screening caregivers, including concerns regarding documentation of results and privacy issues. Unique barriers included underreporting among Spanish-speaking caregivers (CHOC) and occasional patient and caregiver refusal (UNC). Conclusions: There appear to be many factors that aid in the implementation of the CFF's new mental health guidelines. Overall, feedback from families and staff has been positive. The similarity in implementation factors identified across diverse clinics suggests that clinics preparing to implement screening should maximize these facilitators and prepare for the reported barriers. Future directions include continued collaboration between centers as a network for additional support, role identification and delineation within centers, and identification of strategies to improve acceptability to patients and caregivers. Supported by grants from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Background: CF is a chronic disease affecting 30,000 people in the US. Quality improvement efforts have improved outcomes and healthcare utilization in this population, but further efforts will be necessary to increase quality of care, promote adherence, and assist cost containment. The CFF Patient Registry is a source of aggregate data on CF patients, but it lacks healthcare utilization data and is not readily accessible to those outside of clinical care. Other resources within healthcare systems may benefit from an algorithm to identify classic CF patients. This would allow focus on healthcare promotion, adherence monitoring, and enrollment into care coordination, with goals of improving care, patient satisfaction and lowering healthcare costs. Claims data and international classification of disease (ICD) coding are a readily available dataset. However, an algorithm that identifies CF patients based on claims data does not exist. We devolped an algorithm that utilized claims data from a pediatric accountable care organization (ACO) to identify patients with CF. Methods: The ACO database was queried for patients with ≥ 2 claims with ICD-9 277.xx and ≥ 1 prescription claim for a CF medication between 8/1/14-7/31/15. This was validated against a standard patient list generated by the CFF Patient Registry and the electronic health record. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values were calculated with SAS Enterprise Guide 4.3. IRB exemption was granted. Results: The claims method produced 87 patients and the standard CF list included 107 patients. Comparing these lists confirmed the claims method produced no false positives and eight false negatives. The following values for the claims method were calculated: sensitivity (91.6%), specificity (100%), positive predictive value (100%), negative predictive value (60%). The high values for sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value demonstrate excellent reliability and validity for identifying CF patients using claims data. Discussion: Many potential applications exist for data derived from medical claims. However, the first step must be reliably identifying the patient population. Once identified, claims-based data can fill an existing gap in our current knowledge. For example, current data collection includes medications prescribed, but claims-based data is more accurate regarding prescriptions that are dispensed. This may reveal patterns of nonadherence which may be addressed to improve health outcomes. Claims data facilitates tracking healthcare utilization as new therapies and practice guidelines are introduced. With payors asking for justification for costly therapies, this may be essential data to have in coming years. In addition, a validated method to identify patients based on claims paid will allow identification of patients across multiple CF centers. This can allow assessment of healthcare utilization, prescribing patterns and patient adherence both across centers and within CF centers. In addition, it allows, for the first time, the capture of aggregate data from those patients who do not attend CF centers or have chosen not to participate in the Registry. Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA; 3. Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA; 4. Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; 5. Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA Introduction: Evidence-based adherence interventions must be disseminated into clinics for patients to benefit. This requires training providers with a range of experience delivering behavioral interventions. Competence is the degree to which providers deliver intervention components skillfully, and is an important mediator of patient outcomes. We examined predictors of multidisciplinary healthcare providers' competence delivering a problem-solving (PS) intervention in iCARE, a national RCT at 18 CF centers across the US (N=607 adolescents). Methods: Providers (N=48, 48% social workers, 21% nurses, 15% physicians, 16% other) received in-person training, conducted videotaped PS sessions, and received ongoing clinical supervision with tailored feedback. Trained coders rated competence on 171 tapes using the PS-Comp, an observational scale with 8 technical items (eg, defining the problem, explaining brainstorming), 6 relational items (eg, rapport, active listening), and a Teen Active Participation item (enthusiasm, on-task behavior) scored on a 4-point Likert-type scale (1= poor, 4= excellent). ICCs for interrater agreement were .81-.92 for Technical Competence, .50-.77 for Relational Competence, and 0.82 for Teen Active Participation. Multilevel modeling examined longitudinal predictors of Technical and Relational Competence, including practice (# sessions conducted), supervision, Teen Active Participation, and mental health provider (MHP) status. Results: More Practice and Supervision significantly predicted Technical Competence over time (β's .02 and .10 respectively, p's< .01). MHPs performed significantly better at baseline than non-MHPs (β= 0.29, t(45)= 2.86, p<.01). No differences in rates of improvement were found between MHPs and non-MHPs (t(121)= -1.16, n.s.). Neither practice nor supervision predicted improvements in Relational Competence over time (β's 0.01 and 0.05, n.s). There were no differences in baseline performance or rate of improvement between MHP and non-MHPs. Teen Active Participation was significantly associated with both Technical and Relational Competence (β's 0.14 and 0.26, p's< .01), and was the strongest predictor when added to prior models. Accounting for Teen Active Participation amplified the relationship between Supervision and Technical Competence (β= 0.10→0.14, p< .001), and revealed a previously nonsignificant relationship between Supervision and Relational Competence (β= .11, p< .05). Conclusions: Multidisciplinary teams can implement adherence interventions, but one-time trainings are not sufficient for competent implementation. More intensive training and ongoing supervision are indicated-especially for providers lacking formal mental health training-and should include rapport-enhancing strategies. Patients' active participation and providers' competence were likely reciprocally related because interventions are easier to deliver when the patient is engaged, and competent delivery facilitates patients' engagement. Supported by CFF, Genentech, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, University of Miami Summer Dean's Fellowship. Harris, M. CF Care Center, NYULMC, New York, NY, USA Problem: Longitudinal research indicates that adolescents with cystic fibrosis (CF) are at increased risk of depression. Depression in CF patients is linked to lower quality of life, worse respiratory symptoms, and worse medical treatment adherence. The burden of treatment may also contribute to depression. Identifying CF patients affected by depression and anxiety and connecting them with appropriate mental health care is a priority. Project Goal: Aligning with national guidelines for mental health care for CF patients, we aim to increase the rate of depression screening of CF patients aged 12 and over from current level of 0% to 75% by July 2015. Team Members: Dr. Robert Guisti, Christine Mavaro, CF Coordinator and Mary Ann Harris, LCSW Interventions: Collaboratively adapted and refined depression and suicide screening algorithm to fit Fink CF workflow based on CF Foundation national guidelines and Universty of Buffalo screening program. Depression Screening using the Patient Health Questionnaire -9 (PHQ-9) Suicide risk screening using Columbia Suicide Risk Severity Scale (C-SRSS) Case management, psychiatric evaluation, and treatment referrals are offered as appropriate. Progress to Date: Screening was intiated in January 2015. To date, 17 eligible adolecents have been screened. Lessons Learned: Depression screening in adolescent CF patients is feasible at NYULMC CF Care Center A referral network must be available that offers accessible care to patients from different SES and geographic areas, and with different insurance providers. Next Steps: Expand depression screening to include young adults with CF and in caregivers Initiate screening for clinically significant anxiety Garner support and feedback from the CF Parent Advisory Council Extend behavioral health treatment referral network in collaboration with NY Regional CF Care Centers and CF Foundation Background: Access to mental health assessment and treatment is often a barrier for individuals with CF who would benefit from treatment. Annual mental health screening of CF patients ages 12 and up has been indicated in an effort to identify the level of therapy needed and to bridge the continuum of mental and physical health. Limited access to a licensed, qualified professional to provide therapy serves as a barrier, especially in CF clinics that are not able to have a psychologist as part of the primary CF team. Creating an integrated approach between the primary CF team and a therapist who specializes in treating patients with chronic illness may improve patients' access to needed assessments and therapies. Methods: Over a 6-month period, the CF social worker used PHQ-9 (Patient Health Questionnaire) and GAD-7 (Generalized Anxiety Disorder) screening tools to provide scores indicating patients' levels of treatment and psychological services needed. The CF social worker collaborated with the CF Institution's Psychology Department. This collaboration resulted in establishing access to a therapist specializing in chronic illness who was able to provide services on a sliding monetary scale. Patients were offered consult with the specialized therapist regardless of PHQ-9 and GAD-7 screening scores, with the score guiding what level of follow-up and what treatments were indicated. The screening tools were completed before and after 12 weeks of therapy. Therapies included Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (ACT), a proven effective treatment for adult anxiety and depressive symptoms, as well as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), a proven effective intervention for individuals with depression and chronic illness. Results: During the 6-month screening period, the CF social worker screened 18 pediatric and adult CF patients using the PHQ-9 and GAD-7 screening tools. Of the 18 patients screened, four patients (22%) accessed services offered by the specialized therapist. By patient report, anxiety decreased, acceptance of their CF diagnosis improved, and the ability to manage negative emotions improved. Patient-reported feelings did not consistently correlate with posttreatment screening scores. Conclusions: Providing access to a therapist specializing in chronic illness may improve patients' abilities to manage and live with their CF diagnosis and treatments. Utilizing services available in an academic or large-health institution setting may allow for financially-and logistically-accessible services that decrease patients' barriers to seeking treatment. Vecchiet, A. 1 ; Novak, K.J. 1 ; McCoy, K.S. 2 ; Kaczor, C. 1 1. Pharmacy, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA; 2. Pulmonology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA Background: The life-long duration and complexity of CF medication regimens are common deterrents to adherence in the CF patient population. Many of these medications are considered specialty medications. Health systems are increasingly starting their own in-house SPs to improve transitions of care and leverage interdisciplinary teams to improve patient outcomes, such as medication adherence. The most commonly used adherence measure is the medication possession ratio (MPR). A newer measure, the proportion of days covered (PDC), more accurately represents adherence to combination therapy regimens. The purpose of this study was to measure medication adherence in a CF patient population before and after the implementation of a SP associated with an accredited pediatric and adult CF center. Methods: Retrospective analysis of refill histories was completed in two phases. Phase 1: pre-implementation data from January 1 to December 31, 2014 for patients 0-18 years of age. Phase 2: post-implementation of the SP, conducted from July 1, 2015 to February 29, 2016 for patients of all ages who are patients of the in-house SP. To be included, patients had to have filled one of the following specialty medications intended for chronic use (defined as greater than one month): dornase alfa, tobramycin, ivacaftor, colistin, aztreonam, lumacaftor/ivacaftor. Chart reviews were conducted to assess the intended medication regimen and to collect baseline characteristics: BMI, BMI percentile, and FEV 1 . Medication adherence was calculated for patients over the study periods in phase 1 and 2. MPR was calculated as the number of prescriptions filled in the period divided by the number of prescriptions that should have been filled. PDC was calculated for the combination medication regimens as the number of months that a patient had all of their medications available to them divided by the total number of months that the patient should have had those medications. Statistical Analysis: Group comparisons were assessed using Kruskal-Wallis and Wilcoxon rank sum tests for continuous variables and chisquared tests for categorical variables. Unpaired differences (excluding patients in both phases) were assessed using Wilcoxon rank sum tests. Results: In Phase 1, 43 patients were included (median age 10 years). In Phase 2, 86 patients were included (median age 21 years, p<0.0001). There were no significant differences in adherence scores between age groups (0-5, 6-11, 12-18, 18+) in phase 1 or 2 (p=0.86, 0.9545). Patients present in both phases were excluded from adherence calculations leaving 23 patients in phase 1 and 66 patients in phase 2. The median MPR score (IQR) for phase 1 patients on a single medication was 37.5% (29.2-61.1). The phase 2 median MPR score (IQR) significantly increased to 100% (100-100) (p<0.0001). There were 10 patients on combination therapy regimens in phase 1; the median PDC score (IQR) was 25% (10-41.7). The phase 2 median PDC (IQR) significantly increased to 100% (91.75-100) (p<0.0001) in the 28 patients on combination therapy regimens. Conclusion: MPR and PDC adherence scores increased significantly post-implementation of an in-house SP. Adherence scores were not associated with age. Denver, CO, USA; 2. Cornell Univ, Ithaca, NY, USA; 3. Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Introduction: Increasing numbers of patients with CF are achieving developmentally appropriate adult milestones such as higher education and employment. Our objective was to understand whether being employed is associated with higher levels of health-related quality of life (HRQOL) in adults with CF. Methods: Data were obtained from the baseline survey of the Project on Adult Care in Cystic Fibrosis (PAC-CF), a 10-center longitudinal study of adults with CF (N= 307). Participants completed the Cystic Fibrosis Questionnaire-Revised (CFQ-R), a validated HRQOL instrument (0-100 scale), and reported their employment status (0=not employed, 1=employed full-or part-time). Disease severity was assessed by forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ) and number of pulmonary exacerbations (hospitalizations or home IV treatment) over the preceding 4 months. Other demographic and clinical covariates that may be related to HRQOL included age, gender, education, weight percentile, diabetes, pancreatic sufficiency, and colonization with Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and/ or Burkholderia cepacia. Twelve stepwise hierarchical linear regression models were created, one for each CFQ-R domain; clinical and demographic covariates were entered first, disease severity second, and employment status third. Due to multiple tests, a Bonferroni correction was used to evaluate significance at the p<.05 level. Unstandardized regression coefficients (B) show the increase in CFQ-R domain scores for employed individuals. Unique variance accounted for by employment status is indicated by R 2 Δ. Results: Participants had a mean age of 33 years (SD=10.71, range=19-64); 57% were female, 56% had a post-high school degree, and 55.1% reported that they were employed. Being employed was significantly associated with higher HRQOL on several CFQ-R domains (emotional functioning, social functioning, role functioning, physical functioning, vitality, health perceptions, treatment burden) when controlling for covariates and disease severity. Employment was most strongly related to role functioning (B=15.83, R 2 Δ=0.09), health perceptions (B=13.36, R 2 Δ=0.07), social functioning (B=9.70, R 2 Δ=0.06), physical functioning (B=12.84, R 2 Δ=0.05), and emotional functioning (B=9.18, R 2 Δ=0.04). When all predictors were entered in the third model step, employment was more strongly associated with CFQ-R domains than disease severity, except for the physical functioning domain. Employment status was not associated with the remaining, predominantly symptom-based, CFQ-R domains (body image, digestive symptoms, eating disturbances, weight, respiratory symptoms). Conclusions: In this cohort of adults with CF, employment was a stronger predictor of many aspects of HRQOL than measures of disease severity, highlighting the relative importance of employment in adults with CF, particularly in areas such as emotional, social, and role functioning. These findings suggest that encouragement and support of employment among adults with CF have the potential to help patients focus less on physical symptoms and more on other aspects of life, leading to overall improved HRQOL. Graziano, S. 1 ; Lucidi, V. 2 ; Gentile, S. 1 ; Tabarini, P. 1 1. Unit of Clinical Psychology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, ITALY, Italy; 2. Cystic Fibrosis Unit, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a life-threatening, genetic disease that causes persistent lung infections and progressively limits the ability to breathe. Individuals with CF and parent caregivers are at increased risk for depression and anxiety than those in general population (Quittner AL, et al. Thorax. 2014; 69:1090-7) . Psychological symptoms have been associated with worse health outcomes (Goldbeck et al. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;6:CD003148). The CF Foundation and the European CF Society have set up consensus statements for screening and treating depression and anxiety in individuals with CF and parent caregivers. Intervention are designed based on the level of severity of depression and anxiety identified with annual screening (Quittner AL, et al. Thorax. 2015; 71:26-34) . The aim of this study was to investigate anxiety and depression symptoms in Italian patients with CF and parent caregivers using new international guidelines. Methods: Patient recruitment is ongoing. We have selected 120 consecutive patients aged 12-45 years diagnosed with CF (adolescents=F/ M=35/20; mean age [SD]=14.9 [3.5] and adults= F/M=30/35; mean age [SD]=27.9[6.9]) and 130 consecutive parent caregivers (F/M=78/52; mean age [SD]=40.9[7.2]). We included patients with CF, ages 12 years and older, and caregivers of children with CF, birth to 18 years of age. We excluded patients with other chronic diseases, Mental Health severe diseases, and those on the waiting list for organ transplant. Patients and parents completed two self-report measures: PHQ-9 (Patient Health Questionnaire-9) and GAD-7 (Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item) as recommended by the International Committee on Mental Health in CF. Results Preliminary data analysis has shown that a high percentage of patients and parent caregivers reported scores above the cut-off level of 5 both for depression symptoms and anxiety symptoms. Elevated symptoms of depression were found in 52% of adolescents, 41% of adults, 57% of mothers and 44% of fathers; elevated symptoms of anxiety were reported by 53% of adolescents, 42% of adults, 63% of mothers and 49% of fathers. When considering range of severity (mild, moderate, severe) we found that "mild range" was the predominant for depression (adolescents=63%; adults=68%; mothers=47%; fathers=58%) and anxiety (adolescents=56%; adults=75%; mothers=63%; fathers=61%). We found "moderate range" of depression in 32% of adolescents, 21% of adults, 36% of mothers and 26% of fathers, and "moderate range" of anxiety in 33% of adolescents, 20% of adults, 24% of mothers and 28% of fathers. A low percentage of subjects have shown symptoms in the "severe range." Conclusion: Symptoms of depression and anxiety are prevalent in patients with CF and parent caregivers. Adolescents reported more symptoms than adults and mothers reported more symptoms than fathers. Depression and anxiety symptoms in the mild range seem to be predominant in patients with CF and parent caregivers. Preliminary data confirm the importance of annual screening of depression and anxiety using the PHQ-9 and GAD-7. This program was designed to address the issues pertaining to self-care among the inpatient cystic fibrosis (CF) population at Texas Children's Hospital. It was noted that the CF patients have developed a dependency on the nurses and ancillary staff to do things such as waking them up for breathing treatments, take medications, and maintaining good personal hygiene. The goal of the study is to gain a better understanding of the CF patient's feelings towards self-care during admissions. Requirements for participation in the study are admission to the hospital and being over the age of six years. The participants of the study earn points each day by actively participating in three breathing treatments, physical therapy, taking all prescribed nutritional supplements, and having good hygiene and good behavior throughout admission. Once the participants earn 33 points they are rewarded with coupons to either McDonald's or the Texas Children's Hospital Food Court. The participants are asked to complete a presurvey before starting the program and then a postsurvey just prior to discharge, then an additional postsurvey at their clinic follow-up in approximately 2 weeks after discharge. The survey is a rating system designed to obtain information on how important the patients feel that certain aspects of their health care are to them. Our hope with this study is to help find motivating factors for the inpatient CF patients to take charge of their own care and be the key component for their overall outcomes during hospitalizations. The study is currently taking place and thus far has 16 participants with 3 repeat admissions. It is our goal to complete this study by the end of May 2016 with enough information to determine if our inpatient rewards program has had a positive effect on our patients' overall well-being and self-motivation. Smoking, excessive alcohol consumption and illicit drug use are prevalent within the CF population, with these behaviours having adverse health effects upon patients regardless of their treatment adherence. In an attempt to prevent the initiation and aid the cessation of risky behaviours within the CF population, factors associated with these behaviours firstly need to be identified. We therefore investigated beliefs associated with these behaviours within adult CF patients. Method: Twenty-four adult participants were recruited (16 male, age range 19-66 years) from two UK regional CF centres, with a median FEV 1 61.77% predicted. Qualitative semi-structured interviews provided an interpretive perspective when investigating patients' beliefs towards their CF and the impact their CF has upon their life, exploring rationales for why some patients engage in risky behaviours. Results: Thematic analysis identified five themes within the data set: "Identity," "The reality of living with CF and the impact CF can have upon an individual living within a social world," "Patients' attitudes, beliefs and coping mechanisms in response to living with CF," "Support from others" and "Acceptance and Awareness." These findings illustrate that the factors associated with risky behaviours within the CF population are multifactorial. A desire for normalcy was seen to be important to many, with literature acknowledging that this desire for normalcy can be accompanied with the engagement of normalised risky behaviours as a retaliation against the illness identity. Evidence of a life orientated perspective was also prevalent, with participants reporting that they engaged in risky behaviours for fun. Overall there was a reported lack of knowledge concerning consequences of risky behaviours, with many participants stating they had not been informed of these by their clinicians. This was in line with a transition evaluation conducted by the researcher, which indicated that many UK CF units do not integrate a discussion on risky behaviours into a patient's transition to adult care. However, the results of the current research highlight the importance of awareness, with patients who had good awareness of the consequences of risky behaviours often accepting that they cannot engage in such behaviours. Conclusions: This research highlights the need for more effective health promotion measures to reduce and prevent risky behaviours within the CF population. We are now conducting semi-structured interviews with paediatric CF patients to investigate their awareness and beliefs towards risky behaviours, at an age commonly associated with the initiation of such behaviours; the results of which will also be discussed at the NACFC. Overall this research will highlight why some CF patients engage in risky behaviours, to inform interventions to prevent the initiation and aid the cessation of risky behaviours by increasing patient awareness of the consequences of such behaviours, specific to CF. The CF Legal Information Hotline® provides accurate information on legal issues affecting people with CF. Data show that the CF Hotline continues to meet the CF community's need for information on the legal rights of people with CF. Discussion: A. Conclusions: Adults with CF continue to need an accurate resource for information on legal issues as nearly two-thirds of all calls related to adults. Also, the CF Hotline remains an important resource for CF care center staff for information on the rights of their patients as 1 in 3 calls is from a member of a CF Center team. The number of calls related to health insurance coverage has decreased as the Affordable Care Act has made obtaining and maintaining health coverage easier. Information on maintaining Social Security benefits or understanding complex benefit eligibility criteria is critical to many with CF who rely on benefits for monthly income support and access to health insurance coverage. Callers repeatedly reported difficulty accessing correct information about Social Security benefits until they spoke to the CF Hotline. Nearly half of all callers had questions about Social Security benefits or eligibility, and nearly half who called about health benefits inquired about Medicare or Medicaid benefits. Based on reports from callers it is clear that without access to the CF Hotline the most vulnerable members of the CF community would be at risk of becoming homeless or have no access to the crucial healthcare they need to fight CF. Objective: Exciting advancements in the medical care of cystic fibrosis have led to an extension in the lifespan of patients with CF. Therefore optimizing early and ongoing successful engagement in education is critical in order to prepare individuals to learn essential skills that promote self-supporting and fulfilling lives. In spite of the awareness of great need for support to be successful in the academic setting, a school intervention coordination model does not currently exist in our CF center to provide the systematic preventative educational resources to patients, families, and schools that promote engagement, collaboration, and academic success. This abstract describes the rationale for the development of this academic success program and primary outcomes measurement. Method: A planned pilot project informed by a thorough needs assessment is necessary to determine how to develop the key tools and processes, right-size the program, embed the program through innovation into CF care, and spread learning to other CF centers. We are developing this program to assist patients and families to more effectively interface with schools and to create a learning environment where the student with CF can achieve academic outcomes aligned with aptitude and develop optimal social-emotional functioning. This program development is informed by key stakeholders including parents of students with CF, hospital school intervention staff and institution leadership, and CF multidisciplinary team members. Specific goals include: 1) ensuring schools receive education about how CF can impact health, learning, and socialization, 2) systematically helping families and schools develop 504 and IEP plans with the appropriate accommodations and ensuring successful execution of plans, and 3) coordinating timely academic and achievement/cognitive testing as needed. Results: Proposed outcomes include: 1) increased percentage of patients with IEP/504 plans with appropriate accomodations, 2) decreased academic/school stress for parents and students, 3) improved academic performance, 4) increased school attendance, 5) improved child QOL, and 6) improved treatment adherence. Conclusions: Increased attention to the promotion of academic success is greatly needed in comprehensive CF care given the proximal and distal cognitive, socioemotional, and behavioral outcomes associated with academic success. Much of the attention to academic issues within CF care is managed by social work and other members of the team who likely do anxiety and depression. Press-acupuncture needles (size 0.2mm x 1.5mm) were inserted bilaterally at the "shenmen" point, found in the triangular fossa of the ear, for one week. Patients were instructed to stimulate by touch when feeling symptoms of anxiety and depression. Patient returned the following week for removal of press-needle and to repeat questionnaires. Results: The scores from the PHQ-4 questionnaire showed that 100% of patients scores reduced by 1-7 points. With this questionnaire 57% of patients reduced to a lower category of symptom severity. The results of the GAD-7 questionnaire showed that 86% of patient scores reduced by 4-12 points. From this it was found that 71% of patients reduced to a lower category of symptom severity. No adverse effects were experienced and all of the press-needles stayed in for the duration of the week. Conclusion: Despite the small sample size it was evident that all patients who completed the study reduced their anxiety and depression scores in at least one of the questionnaires. More significantly, some patients dropped two categories of severity from moderately severe to mild (GAD-7) and moderate to normal (PHQ-4). Patients scoring higher on their initial questionnaire appear to respond better to this treatment; with this in mind we should consider auricular acupuncture as an adjunct to treatment in CF patients with high anxiety and depression scores. This could be a valuable adjunct to physiotherapy treatment which takes a more holistic approach and could help reduce the amount of medication required by a patient. With this technique the patient is responsible for pressing the acupuncture needle as little or as often as required/wanted, thus giving the patient more control of their own care. This can lead to improved adherence and improved quality of life. Background: Current guidelines recommend that patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) attend specialized clinics 4 times per year based on the finding that more frequent clinic visits were positively associated with higher lung function. However, historically, adherence to these guidelines has been variable and ranged from 35% to 90% in pediatric clinics. Patients attending The Prince Charles Hospital (TPCH) CF clinic are spread over a large geographic area and travel up to 2400km to be seen. This undoubtedly places an additional burden to the patient that is somewhat offset by outreach and telehealth clinics. The objective of this study was to identify the proportion of adult patients attending TPCH CF clinic the recommended 4 times per year, and to determine if adherence to this guideline was associated with any clinical characteristics, higher lung function and/or increased hospitalizations. Methods: All patients registered in the CF clinic at TPCH in 2014 who attended the clinic were included in this retrospective study (n=278). Any patient who was transplanted, transferred between centers, lost to follow-up or died was excluded. The patients were divided into adherent (attended the clinic ≥4 times) and nonadherent (attended clinic <4 times) groups. Continuous variables of the two groups were compared using independent t-tests and categorical variables by chi-square analysis. Results: In 2014, 240 patients were included in this analysis. Of those, 161 (67%) attended clinic on ≥4 occasions. There was no difference in mean (SD) age, BMI, or FEV 1 between the adherent and nonadherent patients (age: 29.4±8.8 vs 31.2±11.6 years (p=0.185), BMI: 23.2±4 vs 24.1±5.2 kg/m 2 (p=0.228), FEV 1: 66.2±22.5 vs 68.3±22.4 %predicted (p=0.506)). In addition, there was no difference in the proportion of male patients (53% vs 63% (p=0.161)), patients who were F508del homozygous (49% vs 37% (p=0.102)), or the prevalence of CF-related diabetes (32% vs 30% (p=0.879)) or pancreatic insufficiency (88% vs 82% (p=0.342)) between the adherent and nonadherent patients. There was, however, a significant difference between the groups in the number of hospitalizations (p<0.001), the number of days in hospital (p<0.001) and the prevalence of chronic P. aeruginosa (Pa) infection (p<0.001). The patients in the adherent group were admitted an average of 2.1±2.5 times in 2014 and 26.3±33.3 days vs the nonadherent group (mean of 1±1.3 admission and 12.6±18.9 days) and 89% of adherent patients were chronically infected with Pa vs 70% of nonadherent patients. There was an association between living remotely (>3h from the clinic by road, n=59) from the clinic and failure to attend (p<0.001). Conclusions: Despite universal guideline recommendations that patients with CF attend clinic 4 occasions per year, only 67% of patients at the TPCH reach this goal. There was an association between the recommended clinic attendance and more frequent hospitalization, more days in hospital, and chronic Pa infection. The only factor associated with nonattendance was distance from the clinic. Melanie Chin is supported by the Ontario Lung Association and Cystic Fibrosis Canada. Cooney, K. Pediatrics, Rhode Island Hospital/Hasbro Children's Hospital, Providence, RI, USA Introduction: In 2002 the Rhode Island Hospital CF Center established a separate adult program with a case-based transition process. In 2011, due to staffing changes, 14 patients, ages 19 to 27 years old, were transitioned abruptly to the adult provider. As a result, the care team set out to identify a process for supportive and timely transfer to adult care. Objective: To design and implement a patient-and family-centered process to improve patient and family experience of transition from pediatric to adult care. Method: In 2012, the CF care team determined the need for a clear transfer protocol with a system for communication and documentation. The team established a target age of 18 years old for transfer to adult care. The process required patient/family involvement and sufficient support given the intensity of the patient/provider relationship in the pediatric years. A Transition Coordinator (TC)was identified from the team to review cases at preclinic meetings, facilitate communication and track progress. Informal feedback was obtained from patients and families. Results: Communication, tracking and documentation were challenging and required an identified TC participating on both teams. Modifications made to the protocol allowed for an introductory visit with the adult provider prior to the final pediatric visit but clarified that these visits did not replace routine care. Patient and parent feedback identified key components that impact successful transfer including continued parent involvement throughout the process and adult consultation to pediatric inpatient admissions. In 2014 the final protocol for transition from pediatric to adult provider was implemented: Routine care for pediatric patients will include age-appropriate assessment of transition readiness. Transition readiness and transfer plans of patients >13 years of age will be discussed at pediatric preclinic meetings. The TC will document and notify adult provider of patients approaching transfer. At the clinic visit following the 16th birthday, transfer to adult care will be discussed with patient/family and a date for an initial visit with adult provider will be established. The patient will have an initial visit with the adult provider, to review the history and plan for care. An initial visit will not follow an inpatient admission. Any concerns about transfer after the initial visit will be discussed with pediatric providers and a written plan established. The TC will inform adult provider of plans. The pediatric provider will remain the primary provider until the final visit with patient. Pediatric provider will document transfer of care in the EMR and inform the TC and adult providers. Pediatric provider will email transition coordinator and adult providers that patient has completed final visit. Patients eligible for transfer will be oriented to adult inpatient care if hospitalized in the preceding year. Inpatient pediatric admissions after age 17 will include consultation by adult CF provider. Initial inpatient admissions to adult service may include consultation by the pediatric provider as needed. Conclusion: A patient-and family-centered transfer protocol with a tracking system is necessary to ensure successful and timely transition to adult care. The process is best facilitated by an identified Transition Coordinator. Background and Objectives: Deficits in cognitive function have been reported in people with diabetes (type 1 and 2). Changes in cognitive performance have been observed posttransplantation. The aim of these studies was to investigate cognition in people with cystic fibrosis (CF) and assess the impact of CF-related diabetes (CFRD) and transplantation on various measures of cognitive function. Method: Cognitive function was assessed using the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB). Pancreatic-insufficient patients were recruited from the Leeds Adult CF Unit and healthy controls were recruited from the general population. Study 1: 49 people with insulin-treated CFRD, 49 nondiabetic people with CF (who had received a normal oral glucose tolerance test in the past 12 months) and 49 healthy controls. Study 2: 18 people with CFRD who are posttransplant, 18 people with CFRD who haven't undergone transplantation and 18 healthy controls. Study 3: To date, 43 people with CFRD (35 who haven't undergone transplantation, 8 posttransplant recipients) have been retested using the same cognitive battery (parallel versions of tests were administered). For each study, groups were matched for age, gender and education level. Results: Study 1 found that people with CF show some degree of cognitive impairment on tests of visual memory and new learning, verbal memory, sustained attention and executive function compared to healthy controls; those who have CFRD generally show greater impairment than nondiabetics. Study 2 found that people with CFRD who are posttransplant show impairment on tests of sustained attention and working memory compared to healthy controls. Performance was similar for those who had and had not undergone transplantation. Preliminary findings from study 3 show that cognitive performance is stable over an 18(±6)-month period, except for improvements in verbal memory. Conclusion: Cognitive function is impaired in people with CF (with and without CFRD) relative to healthy controls. Transplantation does not seem to result in improved performance in those with CFRD. Compared to nondiabetic people with CF, those with CFRD show greater deficits on tests of verbal memory, sustained attention, working memory and processing speed. Palliative care is an interdisciplinary model of care that coordinates an array of interventions with the intent of mitigating the suffering and illness burden experienced by patients with serious or life-threatening illnesses, and their families, from the time of diagnosis forward. The illness burden experienced by patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and their caregivers is characterized by problems in many domains (eg, physical symptoms, psychological distress, and caregiver burden). This burden fluctuates over years and gradually worsens in the context of advanced illness. CF is representative of a type of chronic condition that is best managed by the integration of a palliative plan of care with routine care throughout the disease trajectory-an approach known as concurrent care. In this approach, interventions to address unmet need in defined domains of palliative care are undertaken throughout the course of the illness by CF professionals who have the support of palliative care specialists; referral to the specialist palliative care team is considered when illness is advanced, death is perceived to be soon, and problems are multiple and complex. At the present time, there are no existing models of concurrent palliative and primary CF care in the United States. The proposed study describes the implementation and mid-project evaluation of an innovative model jointly developed by the Cystic Fibrosis Center (CFC) at Beth Israel Medical Center (BIMC) and the MJHS Institute for Innovation in Palliative Care. Recruitment concluded in January 2015. Of the 160 patients and caregivers screened, 152 were eligible and approached for the study with 76 patients and 55 caregivers consenting to the study and 21 declining. Since the implementation of screening for symptom burden, patients have completed 852 monthly screenings in total. Of these screenings, 149 patients were triggered for a triage evaluation by a social worker in one or more of the following domains: global distress (78), severe distress from pain (62), severe distress from dyspnea (50), psychological distress (43), and/or a request for advanced care planning (40). Of these 149 patients triggered, 73 were reachable by phone and completed the triage evaluation, and 76 were missed due to the patient being unreachable by telephone but were seen at a subsequent clinic visit. All missed triages occurred prior to May 2015 at which point the staffing model was changed to improve follow-up. Since that time there have been no missed patients. Of the 72 patients who completed a triage, 23 required a follow-up by the CF Center clinicians and all 23 received this follow-up. We continue to screen patients monthly for symptom burden and unmet palliative care needs, and collect quarterly data on outcomes to determine the effectiveness of the intervention. In May 2016 we will be implementing a music therapy program specially designed for cystic fibrosis patients and assessing patient satisfaction through the web-based survey system. We present the case of a 14-year-old cystic fibrosis patient who perished as a result of complications from her disease coupled with her refusal of treatment. The patient was diagnosed at 11 months of life after her older brother was diagnosed with CF. Throughout the course of her life she had several admissions to the pediatric intensive care unit, some resulting in intubation. She had been diagnosed with Aspergillus pneumonia, MSSA and MRSA pneumonias, and eventually multidrug-resistant Stenotrophomonas pneumonia. At the time of her death her diagnoses included acute-on-chronic respiratory failure, insulin-dependent CF-related diabetes mellitus, pulmonary hypertension, and steroid dependency with secondary immunocompromise. Her last admission was directly from her pulmonologist's office. She developed an increase in secretions and sputum production. She also was describing chest pain as well as an increase in oxygen need, from 5 liters per minute (lpm) of continuous oxygen to 6 lpm of continuous oxygen during the day but no change to her nightly Bi-PAP settings. Patient's respiratory pathogen panel was positive for RSV, rhinovirus, and adenovirus, for which she was placed on supportive care. Her sputum culture was positive for multidrug-resistant Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and she was placed on intravenous colistin, nebulized colistin, and vancomycin. Based on sensitivities, she was changed to polymixin B; however, she reacted with adverse symptoms so she was changed back to IV colistin. Pertinent negatives included her fungal culture and her aspergillosis titers; patient had been positive for aspergillosis in the past. Her respiratory status was stable for the first three weeks of admission, at which point she had a worsening of respiratory distress and noted air hunger. Her Bi-PAP settings were adjusted as her blood gases worsened and she began to have an increase in her CO 2 levels from her baseline, which was in the 60s. As her clinical status Introduction: At the Annual OHSU Pediatric CF Center Retreat, we brainstormed about issues related to clinic flow. Long patient wait times, inefficient time management, staff communication, and a need to value contributions from all care providers were identified as issues to be addressed by the quality improvement (QI) team. Objective: Our global aim was to improve clinic flow in the pediatric CF center at OHSU. The specific aim of the clinic flow QI process was to 1) reduce time between clinic arrival and the patient being roomed, and 2) reduce wait time between 6-7 multidisciplinary care providers. By reducing wait times, we hoped to improve both patient and staff satisfaction with clinic flow. Another objective was to improve staff communication, working relationships, and professional appreciation of other disciplines. Methods: Tools we used included a Definitions Worksheet, Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) worksheet, a Data Collection Plan Worksheet, and Brainstorming. We utilized process mapping and developed a high level flow chart of the clinic process. An action plan was developed for tasks that would be required to revise the clinic flow, based on the flow chart. Tasks included measuring patients per clinic, patients requiring pulmonary function tests (PFTs), and number of late patients per clinic. Time stamping was done to measure patient wait times between providers and average time in rooms for each multidisciplinary provider. Swim lanes were also used to visualize the time stamping data. Additional PDSAs focused on staff communication and developing a late arriving patient algorithm. A survey was used to determine what families wanted to hear from the CF care team at each clinic visit. Results: Clinic flow mapping demonstrated that several team members needed to see each patient without consensus of order. In addition, the EPIC template did not reflect actual time spent in clinic by the patient. Measurement of the current state revealed average lobby wait time was 20 min; average total wait time between providers was 31 min. Time stamping measurements were utilized to develop a level loaded clinic flow and specific provider order. The QI team also worked with EPIC programmers to revise the CF clinic template. After implementing changes, average lobby wait times decreased to 3 min, and average overall clinic wait time was reduced by 15 min. Staff communication handoff scripts were developed and are now being measured. A late patient algorithm was designed and is being used in clinic. Surveys of staff and patient satisfaction in regards to the new clinic flow process are being distributed at this time and will be analyzed prior to presentation. Conclusions: We have successfully measured our clinic flow process and have used several PDSAs to implement changes in our CF Clinic flow. The measurements allowed for building a specific clinic flow process that has reduced clinic wait times for our patients. We anticipate improved patient satisfaction once the survey results are analyzed based on preliminary feedback. Additional adjustments in the clinic flow process are still likely required to enhance team member communication, but appreciation of other disciplines' input has improved. The CFF recommends CF clinic visits on a quarterly basis and designated diagnostic/laboratory tests to monitor for potential complications/disease progression. In Fall 2015, as part of the CF Fundamentals Learning and Leadership Collaborative (CF FUN LLC), the University of Arizona CF QI team developed a comprehensive outpatient project to address shortcomings and achieve the following specific aim by June 2016: improve patient attendance to quarterly clinic visits from 60% and 30% to 80% and 50% in pediatric and adult centers. Methods: To achieve the project aims, we sought to improve the patients'/caregivers' clinic experience through use of team developed and implemented tools to help redesign clinic workflow, including: 1) Pre-project assessments; 2) Patient/caregiver clinic surveys that assessed perceived time spent overall and with each discipline, comfort and understanding of current medications and lab/image testing, reasons for missing clinic, approach to scheduling appointments, and communication with staff; 3) Communication (eg, letter, newsletter) to patients/caregivers about importance and reasoning for quarterly visits and laboratory/diagnostic tests; 4) Increase clinic capacity by adding adult hospital follow-up/acute clinics; 5) A clinic visit "map" to communicate expected discipline care during visits and for patients to communicate specific areas of concern/questions. Outcomes were tracked using designated spreadsheets and run charts. We held weekly, ongoing QI team meetings to review progress, adjust tools, and assess outcomes through ongoing PDSA (plan, do, study, act) cycles. We used intraprofessional, preclinic rounding meetings to help implement tools and changes in workflow. Results: We analyzed survey data and tracked project specific aims through first quarter 2016. Amongst pediatric patient caregivers, most felt an "appropriate clinic duration" was 60-90 min vs 30-60 min amongst adult patients. The primary reason for missing clinic was lack of appointments that fit their schedule in both groups. Over 90% and 53% of pediatric patient caregivers and adult patients felt clinic visits were "somewhat" or "very long." Of pediatric patient caregivers, 68% would like to know which disciplines are expected during a given clinic visit, compared to 80% in adult patients. Time spent with each discipline perceived as "appropriate" was similar between groups, ranging from 72-96%. Percent clinic attendance data are in tabular form, comparing progress to currently available CFF center reports and available local PortCF data. Conclusions: Through use of team developed and implemented tools, we redesigned clinic workflow in order to improve our pediatric and adult CF clinic attendance. We continue to adapt these tools and clinic workflow to provide an optimal patient and caregiver CF clinic experience and encourage ongoing outpatient CF care. Background: Insights from the CF community reveal that finding the right approach to discussing the challenges of daily CF care can be difficult for patients, families and care teams. Patient-provider communication is cited in healthcare literature (Haskard Zolnierek KB, et al. 2009 ) as influential to treatment and therapy adherence. Recognizing this, the CF Foundation (CFF) conducted a pilot to help patients and care teams open a non-judgmental, problem-solving care conversation. This pilot is part of a larger initiative addressing adherence through behavioral research to promote improved health outcomes and help individuals with CF live full, productive lives. Objective: To test language and materials as conversation starters between adults with CF and care team members; and to open communication about sustaining daily care to identify potential barriers and solutions. Methods: Six adult care programs took part in the pilot from Nov 2015 to Jan 2016. Patient and care team representatives from each site formed a working group that designed conversation starter materials -posters, tent cards, magnets, sticky notes and ID badges. The materials included three questions: How are your spirits? What would help you today? [How] are you balancing your life and care plan? Care teams put these materials into practice according to their clinic flow. Feedback was collected from patients and clinicians about the feasibility and utility of the materials through qualitative surveys, in-person or video-conference interviews. Results: Surveys were completed by 127 patients and 19 care team members. Interviews were conducted with 15 patients and 60 care team members. Care teams perceived that the materials engaged patients in new ways and opened up conversations about sustaining daily care and barriers to adherence. Care teams reported that materials were helpful reminders to ask patients these practical, personal questions, but using the verbatim line of questioning in the materials felt "forced." Training on how to implement the materials and verbatim questions on the materials was felt to be inadequate. Care team members found that by using their own words and weaving the themes naturally into their conversation worked best. Patients reported that the wording of the materials was innovative and engaging. They said materials were "inspiring," "compassionate," and "eye-catching" during their clinic visits. For the most impact and effect, patients felt these questions should be asked at the start of every visit. Patients indicated that it would be useful to have continued reminders and encouragement to feel able to open up in personal and practical ways in conversations with their care teams. Conclusion: This pilot project demonstrated that materials to trigger conversations were useful to both care teams and patients. Creating an open and judgment-free conversation may be helpful in building successful partnerships leading to improved adherence, health outcomes, and quality of life. More individual and care team training may help hone communication skills to maximize these conversations. Patient and family education about how to effectively converse with their care team regarding barriers to adherence may also be useful. Gore, W.; Leyva, C.; Morse, K. Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA Background and Significance: Cystic fibrosis is no longer a disease confined to the pediatric population. As the life expectancy of those with CF continues to rise, it is important to prepare pediatric patients to live as independent adults. Transition and transfer are widely discussed within the CF community: "The timing of transfer to adult CF care often coincides with a dynamic period in adolescents and young adulthood when lung function may be declining and treatment burden and complications of a multisystem disease are increasing." (Tuchman E, et al. Pediatrics. 2009; 125:566-73) . Questions of adherence complicate transition and transfer. Adolescents struggle with adherence related to increased care responsibility, treatment burden, perceived treatment benefit, and lack of education. Literature related to transition and transfer agrees on the need for standardized programs within centers. However, much of the literature discussing transition is descriptive, with measured outcomes relating to satisfaction and perceptions. Little has been done measuring quantitative health outcomes of transition programs, and there is no consensus on the best program to improve transition, (Tuchman E, et al. Pediatrics. 2010; 125:566-73) . Methods: The CHLA CF Care Center created a program to help motivate patients and to encourage them to become more involved in their care. Patients aged 8-21 were given a CF Care Notebook to help organize all CF-related health care materials. The sections in the notebook included: MY CF Center, MY Medications and Therapies, MY Nutrition, MY Clinic Visits, MY Transition and School information, and Infection Control. Patients were asked to complete age-appropriate tasks prior to coming to their quarterly appointment. The tasks, based on the transition stages introduced by the University of Wisconsin, included: completing a medication list and maintaining a log of their FEV 1 and BMI. Patients earned a total of 5 points per clinic if they completed their medication list, added their BMI and FEV 1 from the previous visit to the result log and brought their binders to their quarterly appointment. Points could only be earned during a quarterly visit. Patients were able to receive an incentive when they reached 10 points and when they reached 20 points. Results: During the fourth quarter of 2014 CF Care Notebooks were distributed to all CF patients aged 8-20 (72 notebooks). As of the end of first quarter 2016, 74% of patients had participated in the program. Of those that participated, 51% had earned their 10-point milestone incentive and 38% had earned their 20-point milestone incentive. Additionally, quarterly appointment adherence in patients aged 8-20 improved from 65% in 2014 to 71% in 2015. Conclusion: We conclude that a standardized transition and incentive program with quarterly goals, does encourage patient participation and improve quarterly visit adherence. We speculate that the increased level of participation in transition-related goals will lead to increased knowledge and independence in CF care. The life expectancy of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) continues to rise, but CF remains a life-limiting illness. Despite this fact, advance care planning (ACP) is discussed at low rates in health care settings, which could leave patients without end-of-life care plans that uphold their values. The role of coping mechanisms in ACP has not been assessed in CF patients; maladaptive coping, such as avoidance, has been suggested as a potential barrier in communicating about ACP with patients whose end of life may progress at an unexpected rate. This study evaluated whether coping style was related to comfort in discussing, and actual completion of, ACP, independent of illness severity. Methods: Participants (N=218) were individuals from the Project on Adult Care in Cystic Fibrosis, a longitudinal cohort survey study. On a 4-point scale (1=very comfortable; 4=not at all comfortable), participants reported their comfort with: discussing ACP with family and CF providers, and appointing a medical decision maker. For ACP completion (yes/no), participants reported completion of a(n) 1) health care proxy, 2) living will, and 3) authorization for organ donation. Coping style was measured by the CF Coping Scale (0-100), measuring four coping styles: optimistic acceptance, avoidance, distraction, and hopefulness. Pearson correlations assessed the relationship between ACP variables (comfort and completion). A hierarchical regression evaluated the association of comfort with ACP by coping style. Logistic regression evaluated the relationship between ACP completion and coping style. Covariates for all analyses included: illness severity (number of pulmonary exacerbations and FEV 1 ), age, gender, education, weight percentile, diabetes, pancreatic sufficiency, and colonization with Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and/or Burkholderia cepacia. Results: Participants had a mean age of 35 years (range=20-65). Participants reported the following comfort levels for ACP discussion: 59%=very comfortable, 28%=somewhat comfortable, 11%=not very comfortable, and 1%=not at all comfortable; only 19-31% of participants had completed the various types of ACP. Comfort level was significantly correlated with completing a health care proxy and living will (ps≤.001), but not authorization of organ donation (p=.600). Greater optimistic coping was significantly related to more comfort in discussing ACP (p=.002). Greater avoidant coping was significantly related to less comfort in discussing ACP (p=.040). No other coping styles were significantly related to comfort level. Completion of ACP was not significantly related to any coping style (ps≥.286). Conclusions: In adults with CF, optimistic coping may increase comfort, whereas avoidant coping may interfere, with discussion of ACP, independent of age and CF illness severity. Completing ACP was significantly correlated with comfort level and not coping style, suggesting that increasing comfort level may be an indirect path toward ACP completion for CF patients. The current analysis suggests that targeting coping style may increase CF patients' recognition of the advantages and importance of ACP. Background: Even as promising new therapies for CF emerge, people with CF and their families face the challenge of managing a serious chronic illness while coping with the expectation of shortened life expectancy. Palliative care, an approach to care focused on enhancing quality of life, is considered standard of care for people with serious and chronic illnesses, but there is no consensus about how to incorporate palliative care principles and practice into CF care. Objective: We aimed 1) to determine knowledge and perceptions of palliative care among adults with CF, parents of adolescents with CF, and CF care providers; 2) to elicit opinions about incorporating palliative care into CF care; and 3) to elicit recommendations for CF-specific education about palliative care. Methods: We conducted semi-structured interviews with adults with CF, parents of adolescents with CF, and CF care providers. Following initial questions about prior knowledge, experience and perceptions of palliative care, participants were provided a standard definition of palliative care. This was meant to frame further discussion regarding incorporation of palliative care into CF care as well as creation of palliative care education. Interview transcripts were reviewed for recurring themes. Results: Ten adults (6 men, median age 30, median FEV 1 57% predicted), 10 parents of adolescent patients (patient median age 16, median FEV 1 92% predicted), and 8 providers (5 physicians, 3 nurses; 50% pediatric providers) were interviewed. Half of patients and 3 parents had never heard of palliative care. A majority of participants from all groups associated palliative care with hospice, end of life, and relief of suffering. Patients and parents felt that palliative care could be helpful in planning for the future, providing emotional support, and facilitating patient-provider communication. After hearing a definition of palliative care, 50% of patients and 80% of parents felt palliative care could be helpful to people with CF. Half of CF providers could envision referring patients for palliative care consultation but noted the association with end of life may be a barrier. Recommendations for educating patients and families about palliative care included having a CF care team member introduce the concept, including definitions, examples and resources, and initiating conversations before sharing written or online materials. Conclusions: Despite the high burden of symptoms, disease-related care, and limited life expectancy in CF, many patients and parents are unfamiliar with palliative care and how it could be helpful to people with CF and their families. Educating CF providers about palliative care would allow them to initiate conversations with patients and families that would help identify needs and improve knowledge of and access to palliative care. This has the potential to improve patient and family-centered outcomes. We have developed and are currently testing CF-specific standardized education about palliative care. Support: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (DELLON14QI0 Method: We conducted: 3 focus groups (2 patient/1 caregiver), follow-up phone interviews with 12 focus group participants (9 patients/3 caregivers), and 6 inpatient interviews. We sought information from partic-ipants on: a) prior conversations with clinicians about advance care planning; b) existing knowledge about treatments such as lung transplant and mechanical ventilation/intubation; and c) important information needed for decision making. All focus groups and interviews were audio recorded and transcribed for thematic analysis. Result: Early qualitative analysis shows a majority of participants have had conversations with clinicians about lung transplant, but few have discussed intubation. Several people felt they did not want to discuss intubation unless they knew with certainty that they would need it. Most participants knew what lung transplant involved, but only those who had experienced intubation knew anything about the possibility of being intubated. Upon learning about intubation, most CF participants stated they would not want it if it was permanent. Most participants viewed lung transplant favorably and would consider it, but a small number of participants stated they did not want it due to the risks. One CF inpatient mentioned he did not have the support network in place for his recovery: "I'm still thinking about lung transplant; but, mostly, when they describe to me how it is-they told me there must be a family member to be with you, but I have nobody to do that. My ma works." When asked what information people needed in order to feel they were making an informed decision regarding advanced care, some felt prognostic estimates were necessary while others felt it was a bad idea to ask about survival because "by asking the question 'will I live,' you're basically saying to yourself, 'I may die,' and that's the worst thing you could do to yourself." Most patients felt it would be helpful to hear other CF people's experiences with lung transplant and intubation with several participants stating that they follow blogs by lung transplant survivors. Conclusion: Most clinicians discuss lung transplant but not intubation with CF patients. This may be due to prognostic uncertainty on the part of both clinicians and patients regarding which patients may end up needing to be intubated. It may also mean that clinicians avoid conversations about intubation because it is associated with dying. The fact that there is a great deal of variation in people's desires to hear prognostic estimates suggests that care should be taken when assessing whether to convey such information to a patient. Decision aids used to facilitate shared decision making should elicit not only patients' values and preferences for outcomes but also their lived experiences, preconceived notions about treatment, and fears, all of which may impact how people understand medical information conveyed by clinicians, and which may be critical to understanding data for informed decision making. Tallarico, E.; Thaxton, A.; Merlo, C. School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA Introduction: Although novel therapies have increased the average life-span of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) to 39 years, many individuals with CF still develop end-stage lung disease and lung transplantation remains an effective intervention that improves survival. The transition to lung transplantation is a complex process that involves shared decision between providers and patients that should take into account disease severity, social factors, and mental health physiologic criteria as well as social and mental health and requires multidisciplinary coordination. Despite advances in the transition process for CF from pediatric care to adult care, little is known about the transition process to lung transplantation for those patients with CF and end-stage lung disease. The aim of the study, therefore, is to evaluate how CF centers transition patients to transplantation and to understand the interaction between CF and transplant teams at CF centers. Methods: This is a qualitative pilot study to evaluate current practices for transition to transplant at CF centers through using an electronic survey. The survey was delivered via email to CFF network registered nurses using Qualtrics (Qualtrics, Provo, UT, Version June 2016), an online survey software. The survey questions explored CFF network RN's experience with transplant discussion, evaluation, and referrals at each center. This study was approved by the Johns Hopkins Institutional Review Board. Results: Data analysis is ongoing and results will be available by July. We expect to identify common and discordant themes among different CF center practices of transitioning patients to transplant. Conclusions: Understanding current practice of transitioning individuals with CF to transplant will not only help aid in the formation of a decreases inefficiencies in the delivery communication method, and provided an opportunity to educate patients and/or families. Ladores, S.L.; Raju, D.; Bray, L. School of Nursing, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Hoover, AL, USA Background: With advances in research, genetic testing, therapeutics, and comprehensive care, people with CF are living into adulthood and engaging in developmental milestones including parenthood. The CF Foundation Patient Registry indicates that the number of CF women who became pregnant has doubled in the last 20 years. As new CFTR-modulating drugs are approved, the number of pregnancies will likely continue to increase. Specifically, the combination drug ivacaftor/lumacaftor targets the underlying cause of CF for people with homozygous F508del mutation (double ΔF508), and has been shown to improve patient's FEV1 and sweat chloride concentration; however, its impact on fertility has not been studied. This study aims to explore the perceptions of women of childbearing age with double ΔF508 on fertility changes secondary to the drug. Methods: A semi-structured, audiotaped interview was conducted with ten women ages 25-34 with double ΔF508, FEV1 ≥40%, and proficient in English. Interview transcripts were reviewed, coded, and analyzed using Braun and Clarke's approach for thematic analysis. Results: Three main themes emerged that described the participants' perceptions on fertility, reproductive health, and the potential impact of ivacaftor/lumacaftor: (1) "Positive, negative, and unknown effects of ivacaftor/lumacaftor"; (2) "Need for comprehensive reproductive and sexual health education and counseling by the CF care team"; and (3) "Wanting to have a child despite knowing or suspecting impaired fertility." Half of the participants were on ivacaftor/lumacaftor, and described positive effects, i.e., lung clearance, increased energy, and improved quality of life. Several identified negative effects, i.e., loose stools and chest tightness. The majority shared concerns about the drug's unknown fetal effects. All of the participants believe that the drug has the potential to affect fertility, mainly by making cervical mucus less viscous, thus allowing for easier sperm transport. One participant directly linked her pregnancy to the drug after taking it for two weeks. Secondly, participants described how there was no uniformity in how reproductive and sexual health information was disseminated, and reported a desire for more collaboration with their CF care team when discussing pregnancy plans. Lastly, all of the participants wished to have at least one child despite knowing or suspecting that they may have problems conceiving secondary to CF. Two participants shared that being on ivacaftor/lumacaftor made it possible for them to make plans for the future, which include being mothers. Conclusions: This study illustrated that women of childbearing age with double ΔF508 want to become mothers even with potentially impaired fertility. While there is currently no clear evidence that shows ivacaftor/ lumacaftor improves fertility, these women are hopeful that targeted therapeutics will make their dream of motherhood a reality. They are also aware of the drug's effects and concerned about its unknown effects on the fetus. They desire comprehensive clinical care that includes discussions about fertility and reproductive health with their CF care team. Several implications for practice, education, and research are gleaned from this study. Enochs, C.; Kleweno, C.; Filbrun, A.; Nasr, S. Pediatric Pulmonology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA Introduction: Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a life-shortening genetic disease that can require frequent use of intravenous antibiotics (IVABX). Use of aminoglycoside antibiotics increases the risk for acute kidney injury and chronic kidney disease and requires close monitoring of drug levels and renal function. In our CF center, patients often initiate treatment in the hospital then are discharged home for completion of their IVABX course. We identified this transition point as a time where receipt and/or review of laboratory results may be delayed or missed. To determine whether a structured communication plan between the inpatient nurse (RN) case manager and ambulatory care clinic RNs would provide more consistent and timely monitoring of antibiotic levels and renal function in CF patients on home IV therapy. Method: The current communication method was evaluated for consistency of notification to the outpatient team when patient discharges occurred. There was no consistent notification process between the inpatient and outpatient teams. A structured process in the electronic medical record (EMR) was developed through collaboration between the inpatient RN case manager and the ambulatory care clinic RNs. The case manager began sending a notification to the ambulatory care RN inbasket in the EMR when a patient was discharged on home IVABX. The new process was implemented October 1, 2014. The CFF Patient Registry was used to identify patients who had a course of home IVABX one year before and after implementation of the structured process. A retrospective chart review of those patients was used to identify the number of missed or delayed labs received in the CF clinic one year prior to and one year following implementation. Missed laboratory results were defined as those that were not documented as reviewed in the EMR. Delayed laboratory results were defined as documentation of receipt and review >1 business day after draw for all lab tests except amikacin trough. Delay for amikacin trough results was defined as >2 business days after draw. Results: Prior to intervention (October 1, 2013 to September 30, 2014), 75 patients required monitoring of drug levels and/or renal function. Nine instances (12%) of missed initial results were identified in seven patients. Two patients had lab results that were not received for two consecutive weeks. Delayed results were identified in 12 patients (16%). After intervention (October 1, 2014 to September 30, 2015 , 53 patients required monitoring of drug levels and/or renal function. One patient was identified as having missed initial laboratory results (1.9%). Seven patients had a delay in result follow-up (13.2%). Conclusion: Implementation of a structured communication process during transition of care for CF patients receiving home IVABX therapy from inpatient to ambulatory care has decreased missed laboratory results in the year following intervention. The RN-to-RN communication has increased our clinic's awareness of patients in need of laboratory monitoring so further action can be taken if results are not received when anticipated. Delay in laboratory follow-up was identified as an area needing further investigation for cause and possible interventions. Lucia, R.J.; Green, M.; Nelson, S. Children's Hospital of Illinois, Peoria, IL, USA Background: Adults with cystic fibrosis have special healthcare needs and require coordination of complex health care services, particularly as it relates to hospitalization. During inpatient stays, attending and resident physicians rotate on the units. Inpatient staff may become familiar with patients that are frequently readmitted; however, there is often limited in-depth knowledge of the recommended cystic fibrosis care guidelines. The resulting care provided to patients with cystic fibrosis can be fragmented and inefficient resulting in readmissions within 30 days. In the State of Illinois, Medicaid does not reimburse hospitals for readmissions that occur within 30 days of discharge; therefore, appropriate management of patients with complex health needs is not only important for the patient's long-term health, but also for the financial stability of the institution. Assessment: In 2014 there were 511 hospital days (days admitted in the hospital) for patients with cystic fibrosis. Of the 511 days, 99 were related to 30-day readmissions. One patient accounted for 88 of the 99 hospital days. Average cost per day for an adult Cystic Fibrosis admission at our institution is $7176. In the first 8 months of 2015 the rate of readmissions within 30 days had escalated to 125. Without intervention, there was an estimated 187 days of readmission for calendar year 2015. The cost of these admissions would amount to $1,341,912.00 in losses. Methods: Admission statistics and financial data were analyzed and presented to the hospital's administration. A job description was developed with primary responsibilities to include: 1) daily inpatient rounding, including an expanded nursing assessment to ensure needs are being met; 2) daily communication with supervising attending physicians to discuss plan of care, and; 3) education for hospital staff (physicians, residents, bedside nurses, and ancillary staff) regarding cystic fibrosis. A registered nurse was then hired for the Inpatient Clinical Coordinator position. Patients and providers were polled in person regarding their satisfaction with the new inpatient clinical coordinator. Results: Within the first 5 months of the establishment of the Inpatient Clinical Coordinator there has been a decrease in the average readmissions within 30 days from 15.6 days/month to 9 days/month. This has resulted in a cost saving of approximately $47,360 per month for the hospital. With an average salary and benefit package of $67,807, the RN position paid for itself in the first two months of the program. There has also been an increase in collaboration between the outpatient and inpatient physicians and staff. Patient satisfaction has increased due to the coordination of services. Satisfaction has also increased with the attending staff and residents. Conclusion: The establishment of the RN Inpatient Clinical Coordinator position has increased patient and professional staff satisfaction and decreased the financial burden on the hospital resulting from readmissions within 30 days of discharge. Objective: To analyse and compare pulmonary function test results in a cohort of cystic fibrosis mothers before and after pregnancy. Method: A retrospective cohort analysis was conducted to examine data from 1976 through to 2016. All women who successfully completed a pregnancy were evaluated. The lung function parameter used was forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1). The best FEV1 as a percent of predicted normal (FEV1% pred) was determined for each of the 5 years preand post-delivery. Mothers were excluded from comparison if there were less than two data points available. Lung function performed post-transplant was not included. A diagnosis of diabetes, CF mutation status and time to subsequent lung transplantion was also noted. Results: The analysis revealed that 43 mothers delivered 60 children. At least two FEV1% pred results were available on 23 mothers who had a total of 31 children. The mean age of the mothers at the time of each birth was 32 years (18-42). Either gestational diabetes or pre-existing CF-related diabetes (CFRD) was seen in 8/23 women. No women with diabetes had multiple pregnancies. Nine women went on to undergo lung transplantation. The mean time from the last delivery to transplantation was 6.1 years (0.07-21.00). Four of 9 mothers (44%) who went on to lung transplantation had diabetes. These 4 women had a mean time to transplant from delivery of 3.3 years (0.07-5.0 years). Comparison of lung function data in several other sub-groups revealed statistically significant differences in FEV1 % predicted over time. When comparing lung function variations in those women who were homozygous F508del (n=6; mean age 31 years) to nonhomozygotes (n=17; mean age 32 years), the difference in the average rate of decline per year over the 10 years was 2.68% vs 1.42% respectively (p=<0.01). The most significant difference in lung function trends can be seen in the diabetes (n=8) and nondiabetes (n=23) groups. The mean age for both these groups was 32 years. The difference in the average rate of decline per year over the 10 years was 3.08% vs 1.31% respectively (p=<0.01). Conclusion: Analysis of this cohort illustrates that women with diabetes have a lower pre-pregnancy FEV1% predicted. The diabetes group also appear to have an accelerated rate of decline post-delivery. In addition, those who are homozygous F508del have an accelerated rate of decline in FEV1% pred pre-and post-delivery when compared to those who not homozygous F508del. This data set suggests that mothers with CFRD and/or homozygous F508del are at a higher risk of accelerated lung function decline before and after pregnancy. Erdo, J.; Falardeau, S.; Motgi, A.; Feng, L. Public Policy, Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Bethesda, MD, USA Background: The rising cost of health care coupled with a trend toward increased patient cost sharing is of significant concern in the cystic fibrosis (CF) community. A 2014 Commonwealth Fund study found nearly one in four privately insured adults with deductibles under 5% of their annual income skipped needed care; this rose to 40% of individuals with high deductibles. With specialty medications and care forming the core of the CF treatment regimen, higher costs for CF patients could impact access to care. Objective: To determine the impact of health care coverage and out-ofpocket (OOP) costs on access to care and treatments for CF patients. Methods: This study used a mixed methods design. An online survey was completed by 1,082 CF patients and caregivers. Respondents were surveyed on cost sharing responsibilities and their impact on care-seeking behaviors, insurance coverage and the use of supplemental coverage or financial support. A subset of respondents participated in a guided phone interview. Results: Ninety-nine percent of patients reported having health insurance in 2015; 20% of whom had two forms of coverage. A third of patients reported coverage by Medicare, Medicaid, CHIP, or state programs. Due to cost concerns, 22% of patients reported delaying seeking or getting medical care and 24% reported taking smaller or fewer doses of prescribed medications. Patients with higher OOP responsibilities or lower household incomes reported delaying care or reducing medications more often than those with lower OOP expenses or those in the highest income bracket. Patients covered by Medicaid or Medicare reported reducing the dose or frequency of prescribed medications significantly more often than those with other insurance types (29% and 46%, respectively). Findings from the guided interviews followed the themes of the online survey. Many respondents discussed delaying care or skipping medications due to cost concerns, despite having insurance. Some interviewees also noted administrative barriers (e.g. prior authorizations) as a cause of missed doses of prescribed medications. Financial stress was discussed in every interview, with many caregivers and patients elaborating on the burden of indirect expenses; adult patients noted this stress was exacerbated by difficulties maintaining fulltime work. Conclusions: This study informs payors of the financial burdens that influence access to care for patients with CF. Individuals covered by public programs, those with higher OOP expenses, and those with lower household incomes are more sensitive to elevated OOP spending and more likely to reduce doses of prescribed medications or delay care as a result. In addition to costs related directly to health care, patients are further burdened by indirect expenses, including transportation costs to attend clinic visits, food costs, and OOP payments for noncovered products. For patients with CF, such reductions in care or treatment could result in serious adverse health consequences. Further research should address the impact of cost-sharing and social determinants of health on clinical outcomes. Sponsorship: This survey was conducted by Shugoll Research, Inc. in partnership with and funded by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. The rising cost of health care coupled with a trend toward increased patient cost sharing is of significant concern in the cystic fibrosis (CF) community. A 2014 Commonwealth Fund study found nearly one in four privately insured adults with deductibles under 5% of their annual income skipped needed care; this rose to 40% of individuals with deductibles accounting for 5% or more of their income. With specialty medications and care forming the core of the CF treatment regimen, higher costs for CF patients could impact access to timely and lifesaving care. Objective: To determine the impact of out-of-pocket costs on access to care and treatments for patients with cystic fibrosis. The re-survey was completed by 11 of 12 eligible children (92%); 8 of 8 adolescents (100%) and 29 of 31 (94%) parents. The percent correct for each subject area was tallied by age group (Table) and compared to initial survey results. Overall average scores similarly improved post-intervention across the groups. All groups scored well in general CF knowledge. Children demonstrated the greatest improvement in respiratory health. Adolescents continued to score well in respiratory health, similar to their parents. Parents continued to score lowest in nutrition which prompted a second review of survey questions. Twenty-four of 29 parent surveys were matched for pre-and post-survey comparison. Two questions were deemed ambiguous/unclear, answered incorrectly by 67% and 42% of parents on both pre-and post-surveys respectively. When these two questions were removed from the data set, no significant difference in pre-and post-parent survey performance was noted. Conclusion: Quarterly education sessions are an effective method to deliver specific education topics, address knowledge deficits and enhance overall CF knowledge base. No prior exposure to information was a likely factor in children's most significant improvement in scores across topics. Negligible improvement in nutrition content scores for parents may be due to unclear test questions where answer choices were either too similar, lacked personal relevance or education delivery method did not adequately meet adult learner needs. Children may benefit from individual, age appropriate education at an earlier age given score improvement within the child group. Palliative care enhances quality of life for people with serious and chronic illnesses. Opportunities are numerous to introduce palliative care before patients with CF develop advanced disease, but there is no standardized approach to incorporating palliative care into routine CF care. Objective: We aimed 1) to test the feasibility of incorporating standardized palliative care education into routine CF care and 2) to assess knowledge and perceptions of palliative care before and after providing palliative care education. Methods: We designed a 30-minute interactive palliative care education session utilizing existing palliative care resources and data from qualitative interviews with key stakeholders. Patients ages ≥13 years and a designated family caregiver are eligible to participate in this ongoing study. Participants complete surveys to assess knowledge and perceptions of palliative care before and after the education session during a routine clinic visit. The session includes a definition of palliative care, descriptions of 7 components of palliative care, and illustrative case examples. Change in knowledge and perceptions are measured using non-parametric Mann-Whitney U tests. Results: Twenty-seven participants have completed the education session to date, including 9 adult patients, 8 adolescent patients, and 10 caregivers. Median age of adult patients was 28 years, median FEV 1 50% predicted. Median age of pediatric patients was 16.5 years, median FEV 1 89% predicted. Participants reported low baseline knowledge of palliative care, with median composite knowledge score of 18 out of a maximum of 50. Many reported emotional uncertainty and concern related to the subject matter. After the education session, which participants felt was helpful, easy to understand, and contained an appropriate amount of information, knowledge scores increased significantly (post-session median knowledge score 37 of 50; p<0.01): participants understood the definition of palliative care, when it may be appropriate for people with CF, and how it could benefit people with CF. Participants described less fear and uncertainty after learning about palliative care and endorsed feeling relieved and more hopeful. Recruitment is ongoing at 3 CF care centers. Follow-up surveys will be conducted at 3 months to assess knowledge retention and perceptions over time. Medical records of patient participants are being examined for subsequent documentation of discussions about palliative care and/or referrals for palliative care consultation. Conclusions: Participants' willingness to engage in palliative care education suggests openness to discussions with CF providers about palliative care. Preliminary data indicate that standardized, relevant palliative care education can be provided within a reasonable amount of time in the outpatient setting and is well-received by adolescents and adults with CF and their caregivers. Future directions include dissemination of this educational session to other CF care centers. Support: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (DELLON14QI0). Background: Ivacaftor/lumacaftor (Orkambi) was FDA approved for use in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients in July 2015. Due to the number of drug interactions, lab monitoring requirements, and administration directions of ivacaftor/lumacaftor a protocol and education program was developed at a single pediatric CF center. The pharmacist-driven medication education program included a medication history/drug interaction screen performed by the pharmacist, ivacaftor/lumacaftor education with the pharmacist, and then follow-up education at the next clinic appointment. To facilitate this education an ivacaftor/lumacaftor education sheet was developed by the pediatric CF center pharmacist in collaboration with the adult CF center pharmacists. Methods: Patients were included in the results if they were eligible for ivacaftor/lumacaftor treatment and had education completed with the pharmacist. Patients and parents were given a seven-question pre-education knowledge survey by the pharmacist during the medication history session. Patients and parents were then given a follow-up seven-question knowledge survey at the next clinic appointment to assess the effectiveness of the education and provide discussion points for re-education by the pharmacist at that visit. Results: Thirty patients and 23 parents were educated by the pharmacist and completed a follow-up visit during the timeframe. Median age was 15 years (IQR 13-16) and median time between visit 1 and visit 2 was 84 days . Twenty-five drug interactions in 19 different patients were identified by the pharmacist and discussed with the patient, parent, and pulmonologist. Mean baseline scores on the patient pre-education survey was 48.5% (SD 22.3) and 61% (SD 28.7) for parents. At the second visit the survey scores increased to 90.9% (SD 10.3) for patients and 89.5% (SD 16.4) for parents (p<0.001). Conclusion: A pharmacist-driven ivacaftor/lumacaftor education program increased the medication knowledge for patients and parents. The meeting with the pharmacist also identified and addressed drug interactions prior to starting the medication. The use of a knowledge survey helped guide education and target knowledge gaps during the second education session. Long-term knowledge retention with this method of education is a subject of further investigation. Our results demonstrate the role of an educational program for ivacaftor/lumacaftor and the value of having a pharmacist on the CF team. events via mail, email, flyers in clinic, and a reminder on their clinic after visit summaries. With the new guidelines, we used both novel formats and topics to help sustain attendance and interest. CF Education Events are financially supported by pharmaceutical companies that participate in a vendor fair before each event. Results: We continue to organize and host on average 3-4 events per year. Since 2006, we have had 35 events with 10 since the infection control guidelines. We did see an expected decrease in attendance by about 1/3. Efforts used to maintain attendance include offering different formats, such as A) round-table discussions, B) interactive learning activities, C) cooking classes, D) weekend events, and E) lectures. We have added live-streaming capabilities to include people who are unable to attend in person. Additionally, a diverse range of topics to keep interest and engagement are used; including high-profile speakers, panel discussions, and themed events (such as research). Evaluations from attendees show overall ratings of the programs to be good or excellent. Before the new guidelines, attendance ranged from 75-110 people (mean 90). After implementation, attendance has ranged from 39-88 with a mean of 66 people. Conclusion: Education on cystic fibrosis should be continuous and expand beyond the clinic visit. Even with the changes in infection control guidelines, we have continued to include both people with CF and their families in quarterly educational programs. We also work to maintain the culture and excitement around these programs. By utilizing patient and family feedback, adding the option of live-streaming and offering variety of formats, we have continued to be successful. For the future, we want to enhance live-streaming to better capture attendance at home and to make it more user-friendly. Background: Pediatric residents have limited opportunities to gain experience in the longitudinal care of CF patients. Most residents care for CF patients either in the hospital or briefly during pulmonary electives. In recent years, the concept of an individualized curriculum has developed for pediatric residency. This has allowed for transition of the continuity clinic experience of third-year residents out of general pediatrics into their desired subspecialty. Methods: Patients were seen weekly in clinic by the third-year resident physician. The goal was to follow CF patients and utilize those visits to introduce depression screening. The patients were chosen based on age and availability in scheduling. The initial target patient population included adolescents, aged ≥12. At first, the resident utilized the Children's Depression Inventory 2, both self-and parent-reporting. After the 2015 NACFC Plenary session on anxiety and depression, the screening tools were modified to include the recommended PHQ-9 and GAD-7. The resident staffed all patients with the attending in clinic after a full CF follow-up visit was completed. Patients were also seen by child life staff to review any other psychosocial concerns and to increase continuity with inpatient child life. Patients completed evaluations to provide feedback. Those who had ongoing concerns were seen for follow-up visits. Results: Of the 74 total CF patients in the clinic, 19 adolescents were identified. Of those, 6 were seen by the resident, as well as provided with mental health screening, within a 6-month period. Two refused to participate in the screening. Of those screened, two were referred to psychiatry for further evaluation. One patient screened was already followed by psychiatry and on medication. Patient feedback was very positive with the observation that more time was available for discussion of issues one-on-one, even topics that were not directly related to CF. The resident reported that her experience allowed for better understanding of challenges faced by patients with CF as well as additional education in the ongoing care of this patient group. Discussion: The third-year resident had increased exposure to CF care while providing additional valuable services to the CF population of the center. Additionally, patient feedback was overwhelmingly positive with many patients noting improved time for discussion and questions. Also provided were opportunities for resident experience in multi-disciplinary care coordination, including the use of nursing staff, child life services and mental health referrals. Conclusion: Utilizing CF clinic as an avenue for continuity for pediatric residents has the potential to provide a new approach for resident education within this field. Not only can residents participate in vital aspects of patient care, they can use these opportunities to enhance their communication skills and hone their knowledge of CF. This clinical concept could provide a springboard for quality improvement projects as well, coordinating between residents and the pulmonary service. It allows for a relationship that is mutually beneficial, enhancing the education of the resident and the care of patients. The 2014 NACFC meeting had as one of its emphases, introduction and discussion of newly updated CF infection prevention and control (IP&C) guidelines published in 2013. The importance of these new recommendations and the shared experiences of others with patientto-patient transmitted outbreaks in their CF centers in clinics and hospitals profoundly impacted our team. The decision was made to aggressively and quickly work to implement a more system-wide approach that would bring our IP&C practices more in line with the latest recommendations. Our children's hospital is located several miles from our outpatient practice and CF clinic, which also houses a lab and a radiology department. Our health system has also been in the process of acquiring multiple other facilities in our area and thus prior implementation has had its challenges. Design: IP&C sessions at the 2014 NACFC provided strategies and guides to implement the updated recommendations. Our CF team worked very closely in a multidisciplinary fashion with close collaboration of infectious disease colleagues and Infection Control staff to facilitate the necessary changes. Inpatient and outpatient IP&C policies were updated to reflect the new changes and education was started for staff. Inpatient Infection Control is notified of EVERY new CF patient to our center so that their charts may contain an alert which allows prompt initiation of contact or droplet precautions as indicated. Patient and family education was also initiated through our regular newsletters, mailers and in the outpatient department during visits. Packets were given with a Children's Hospital CF "Fastpass" unique to our system, masks, and a letter outlining the new policies. Children's Hospital sent mass emails to ALL the pediatricians and family practice providers in our service area to make them aware of the changes. Instruction occurred personally with laboratory, radiology, ER, surgery, and business office management, and even with information staff at our building entrance. Results: Implementation of new IP&C guidelines has been very successful. Our health system endorsed and fully supported these guidelines within about 6 months of implementation which occurred in November of 2014. Conclusion: Although we face continued barriers, our success was well in advance of what we expected and instituting rigorous new guidelines proved feasible. We continue to educate families, staff and various departments that care for our CF population. Scheduled review of the policy has been instituted by our CF outpatient team, inpatient team and other providers caring for our patients. We have also had requests by other departments who would like to develop Fastpasses for their patient populations, such as those who are immunocompromised. In general our Fastpasses have been well received by our patients, families and our healthcare system as a whole and have proved feasible to greatly reduce or eliminate wait times in common areas. Patients and families have demonstrated acceptance with new policies and given positive feedback for our system as a whole making IP&C a high priority. 
