371baf37eef2efbfb173fe15e0dacda836727a98




This change in our understanding has stimulated new lines of research and led to a new therapeutic approach [340] . Progress has derived from information gained by new investigative methods such as the study of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) cells, using immunohistochemical and molecular biology techniques, and widespread use of more precise fiberoptic bronchoscopy, especially in children [501] . Asthma is a disorder involving all bronchial structures and depends on a complex interaction between the respiratory tract and inflammatory cells, mediators and adhesion molecules. Release of mediators by metachromatic cells primes both activation and migration of inflammatory cells that cause various degrees of airway obstruction over relatively short periods of time, alterations in the mucociliary system and hyperreactivity of the bronchial smooth muscles. It follows that both inflammatory cells and their products play a key role in provoking an airway inflammation, capable of triggering severe symptoms in predisposed children when specific and aspecific stimuli are present. Pediatric asthma differs from adult asthma by its etiopathogenesis, treatment and prognosis. Studies reporting that the future prospects for treating asthmatic babies and children are optimistic [604] have not taken into account the severity of childhood symptoms [264] . The understanding that events during both fetal and postnatal life may be the major determining factors of chronic asthma is also making progress [589] . The classic concept of asthma is that of a chronic inflammatory disease with a multifactorial pathogenesis, characterized by a state of hyperresponsiveness to various stimuli and a level and intensity that for the most part do not cause disturbances in healthy subjects, which consequently leads to a diffuse airway obstruction, either partially or fully reversible, either spontaneously or following treatment. The confusion still existing in terminology (Chap. 5), the reluctance of doctors to use the term "asthma" and of parents to accept it, serve only to delay the diagnosis and treatment. It has long been debated whether two forms of asthma exist: allergic, or extrinsic, and infection-induced, or intrinsic. Some [61] have not confirmed the existence of the latter and others [552] have not found any difference between the IgE values in normal subjects and in subjects with so-called intrinsic asthma. Probably many patients thus classified may be sensitized to unknown Asthma has been recognized as a disease since the earliest times. In the Corpus Hippocraticum, Hippocrates used the term "asqma" to indicate any form of breathing difficulty manifesting itself by panting. Aretaeus of Cappadocia, a well-known Greek physician (second century A.D.), is credited with providing the first detailed description of an asthma attack [13] , and to Celsus it was a disease with wheezing and noisy, violent breathing. In the history of Rome, we find many members of the Julio-Claudian family affected with probable atopic respiratory disorders: Caesar Augustus suffered from bronchoconstriction, seasonal rhinitis as well as a highly pruritic skin disease. Claudius suffered from rhinoconjunctivitis and Britannicus was allergic to horse dander [529] . Maimonides (1136-1204) warned that to neglect treatment of asthma could prove fatal, whereas until the 19th century, European scholars defined it as "nervous asthma," a term that was given to mean a defect of conductivity of the ninth pair of cranial nerves. If, from a clinical point of view, asthma can be defined with a fair degree of precision, much doubt still surrounds its etiopathogenesis, although the important role played by inflammation has been largely clarified. To this day, asthma still retains the characteristics of frequency and unexpected severity that can negatively affect a child, leading to considerable concern in the family. Asthma begins early in life [305] within the 1st year of life (Table 5 .5) with the developing immune system interacting with environmental influence [305] . Moreover, cases of pediatric asthma are increasing, as can be seen from epidemiological figures (Tables 5.10, 5.12), even though cases may be differently labeled, especially when symptoms are mild or moderate, and subsequently often underdiagnosed [446] . A large body of epidemiological evidence shows that allergic disorders in the pediatric population represent a current major therapeutic and preventive challenge for pediatricians. The surprising upsurge of severe asthma is occurring mainly in infants and children (Figs. 5.1, 5.3, 5.8) . Until recently, asthma was defined as a disease fundamentally characterized by a state of bronchial hyperreactivity (BHR). In the last few years, it has been concluded that BHR and bronchoconstriction could be the result of the inflammation primed by Th2 T cells [340] . Asthma is the most prevalent chronic breathing disease that affects subjects of all pediatric ages, but begins in the first few years. In 85% of cases, it begins in children by the age of 1 year, 80%-85% by 5 years of age (when statistics begin) and 94%-97% within 10 years. This is confirmed by 10.8% of new cases in the 2nd decade of life (Table 5 .5); therefore, 90% of cases occur in infancy, considering that sensitization to inhalants is established very early [98] and that cases of sensitization from the 1st year of life onward occur very frequently. During 1991, there were approximately 1.6 million visits for pediatric asthma care. Asthma accounted for 16.9%±9.0% of all pediatric emergency department (ED) visits [121] . During 2000, a nationwide survey among 437,873 Chinese children aged 0-14 found a 1.69% prevalence in children aged ≥3 years and of 0.23% in those aged ≤3 years [100] . Among these children are those with AD (atopic dermatitis) who in 21%-79% of cases, subsequently develop asthma (Table 5 .8). The prevalence is also increasing as in our study in 592 children compared to controls (Chap. 5), documenting an 88.8% increase in severe pediatric asthma. In 411 children (220 males and 191 females) ranging in age from 7 to 13 years, we have found asthma in 31.5% and AR in 25.8% of them. Respiratory allergy affects children even more than food allergy (21.7%). Moreover, pollutants represent an adjuvant factor in the onset of respiratory allergy [521] (Figs. 4.26, 4.27) and we wonder whether similar interactions increase its prevalence. role in the pulmonary first line of defense [250] , and there is greater evidence, on the other hand, of TcR ab, which display a large number of Vb genes [520] . Seen in this light, it is important that in asthmatics the gd are reduced in the circulation parallel to eosinophil increase, even if the two phenomena seem to be unrelated: nevertheless, low gd levels in the airways could be detrimental (see Chap. 1 for further details). The lymphocytes passing from blood flow to the airways reach BALT, devoid of afferent lymphatics adhering to the HEV (high endothelial postcapillary venules), which in BALT function similarly to the mesenteric lymph nodes where B and T cell numbers are similar [40] . BALT follicles contain small and medium lymphocytes but lack capsules and germinal centers characteristic of true lymph nodes [40] ; T and B cell rates are similar to those of GALT: 20% of T and 40%-80% of B cells. This rate is reversed in both lymph nodes and circulation: 70% of T and 15%-20% of B cells [533] . Mast cells and macrophages with APC (antigen-presenting cells) activity are present in BALT; therefore antigens can be directly presented to lymphocytes in this location [520] . Additionally BALT might function as a repository for immunoglobulin (Ig)-bearing cells, but because it is poorly provided with plasma cells, further B-cell differentiation should occur outside the BALT; therefore, B IgA migrate directly to the lamina propria along the respiratory tract to produce antibodies for the mucosal surface [533] , that is in the NALT, which appears to be the principal supplier of B precursors in the upper airways [54] . All Igs are diffused along the airways: plasma The respiratory apparatus's first and qualitatively most notable line of defense against excessive local immune responses is the defensive barriers, both physical and immunological, that range from safeguarding the tight junctions among epithelial cells to IgA secretion in the bronchial lumen. The respiratory epithelium is subjected to a virtually uninterrupted exposure to environmental antigens present in the 8,000-12,000 l of air inhaled daily by an average person [520] . The key factor in the maintenance of airway immunological homeostasis is the immune system's ability to discriminate between intrinsically inoffensive antigens and/or those associated with pathogenic microorganisms, and the exclusion of the latter from the respiratory apparatus by the mucociliary system censoring mechanism, before they reach the underlying immune system. The defenses are not always well equipped and penetration of small quantities of allergens can be viewed as a normal occurrence [533] . Parallel to that which has been described in Chap. 9, a common mucosal immune system (MALT) exists, to which BALT is connected, located in the respiratory mucosa [40] . It has been hypothesized that in newborn babies and healthy children BALT is absent, or at least reduced [54] and that it could be an inducible system that develops in the airways of infants and children, especially in concomitance with exposure to antigens and pathogenic agents [193] . Several studies on humans [40] have, however, confirmed the existence of BALT. Anatomically, it consists of a well-developed lymphatic system originating from the NALT (nasal-associated lymphoid tissue) at the airway entrance, and continues with follicles and submucosal lymphoid aggregations distributed along the whole respiratory tract up to the bronchoalveolar junction [40] (Fig. 11.1 ). The tissue is covered by a layer of flat epithelial cells, with few B lymphocytes, but essentially with T lymphocytes (CD3 + , CD4 + or CD8 + ), grouped in clumps of lymphoid and follicles distributed in a seemingly homogeneous manner over the entire epithelial layer in the main bronchi of the pulmonary lobes, principally at the bifurcation with the bronchioles [193] . The most common lymphocytes are intraepithelial (IEL), situated close to the basement membrane (BM), generally not affected by pathological changes typical of epithelial structures and, as with GALT, CD4 T cells dominate over CD8 T cells [193] . Even in the lymphocytes distributed under the BM of the epithelial layer, T subsets are more numerous than B cells [193] . Specific to IEL is CD103, widely expressed on T cells, of which up to 80% are CD45RO. As in the intestine CD7 expression is frequent; expression of CD25 is lower [520] . The TcR with g/d chains plays a prominent 727 Defense Mechanisms in the Airways cells of the lamina propria pass into the lumen across the BM and epithelium. In the upper airways, IgA antibodies predominate, with the capacity of neutralizing the RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) Rhinovirus and influenza virus and of agglutinating microorganisms, increasing the mucociliary clearance. In the trachea and bronchial tree secretory IgA (sIgA) are 10% of the total proteins; progressing to the alveoli, IgA decrease as low as 5%, while IgG increase up to 10%-15% [533] . Under normal conditions, the respiratory immune system is able to suppress immune responses triggered by allergens circumventing the barrier, in that a successful sIgA defensive system is ready [54] . As seen in Fig. 11 .2 [54] , sIgA are generated from locally produced polymeric IgA (pIgA), armed with J chain, which is transported by the pIgR (polymeric Ig receptor) to the lumen along with the SC (secretory component) [54] . Consequently, immune tolerance is established after the first contact with non-self agents with a two-phase mechanism related to genetic factors, but, mainly because of environmental factors capable of negatively affecting the immune system, a sensitization with the same mechanisms that we have seen play a part in food allergy (FA) can occur [54] . Nonspecific defenses are essentially represented by bronchial secretions that block and neutralize soluble toxic substances and by the activity of the mucociliary system that propels them upward. Bronchial secretion emitted by the submucosal glands and/or by the goblet cells, and enriched by transudation fluids or exudation of blood origin, is made up of glycoproteins originating in the mucosa, arranged in a type of fibrillar network and of a component, more precisely a fluid, containing anti-infective substances (Ig, lysozyme, lactoferrin) and C3 [648] . Additionally, the bronchial secretion performs a major role by hydrating the inhaled air and maintaining the ionic balance. The mucociliary system, already in place in the first days of life, is made up of ciliated cells, each possessing, on average, 200 cilia, 5-7 mm long and 0.25 mm wide. Each cilium is formed structurally of nine pairs of contractile longitudinal microtubules [648] , connected two by two by means of nexin links, and arranged in circles around a central pair. All the tubules converge toward the tip of the cilium, forming a hood connected to the ciliary membrane. Two dynein bridges catalyze hydrolysis of ATPase and transduce the energy into a mechanical force in the form of ciliary bending. The cilia act on the mucus blanket shed from the mucosal glands and especially that from goblet cells. At the moment of the active phase of the beat (15/s), the mucus is driven by the ciliary tip toward the oropharynx at increasing speed from the periphery toward the trachea, accelerating from 2-4 mm/min. At the alveolar level, the alveolocapillary membrane is covered with surfactant, produced by type II epithelial cells and nonciliated Clara cells, situated on the branching border between bronchial ducts and bronchioles, which synthesize the surfactant A-C proteins. This substance, having surface-active properties, changes the surface-charge properties, making foreign particles less viscid and therefore more easily cleared [648] ; in addition, it promotes the intervention of the phagocytes. Ciliary clear- Fig. 11 .2. Schematic representation of immune homeostasis in the airway mucosa. Mucosal sIgA antibodies act as a first-line defense by performing antigen immune exclusion. Antigens circumventing this barrier meet mucosal IgG antibodies. The resulting immune complexes activate complement, and inflammatory mediators most likely formed locally. However, the adverse inflammatory development is usually inhibited by serum IgA and by locally produced polymeric and monomeric IgA. Antigens may be returned in a noninflammatory way to the vasal lumen by pIgRmediated transport mechanisms. The final homeostasis depends on the profile of adhesion molecules expressed by vascular endothelium, normally facilitating preferential extravasation of B and T cells belonging to the MALT (for details see text). pIgR Polymeric Ig receptor, sIgA secretory IgA Asthma can be considered a multifactorial disease in that different genetic and environmental factors contribute to influencing its phenotypic expression [340] . The pathogenesis is consistently related to genetic factors, family history (FH), and the particular role of atopy, intimately interrelated. Four sets of data have emerged recently: a clear-cut genetic component of 125 genes related to the causation and progression of asthma symptoms (Table 4. 2), IL 13 overexpression [321] , IL 12 deficient expression [415] , and Th1 phenotype downregulation due to reduced expression of T-bet (Th1 transcription factor) [188] while GATA-3 is overexpressed [328] , which is implicated in the Th2 development [430] . Several studies on the genetics of asthma confirmed the linkage between asthma and genetic markers on 13 chromosome regions including 5q and 11q. Recently, the ADAM33 gene encoded on chromosome 20p13 (Table 4 .2) was found to be associated with small-airway remodeling in patients with asthma. ADAM-33 polymorphisms may accelerate the proliferation of smoothmuscle cells and fibroblasts, leading to BHR and subepithelial fibrosis [582] . IL 13 is thought to be especially critical in asthma (Table 1.5): normal signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) expression in epithelial cells is both necessary and sufficient to IL 13 to induce BHR, eosinophil inflammation, mucus production, lung emphysema, and other central features of asthma in the absence of inflammation. However, mice lacking STAT6 were protected from all pulmonary effects of IL 13 [321] . Two new ILs are more destructive. The IL 17 family resulted in bronchoalveolar lavage neutrophilia and inflammatory gene expression in the lung. In addition, intranasal administration of IL 25 protein resulted in the production of IL 4 , IL 5 , IL 13 , and eotaxin mRNA in the lung, marked eosinophilia in the BALF and lung tissue, eosinophil chemotaxis and activation mast cell stimulation, epithelial cell hyperplasia, increased mucus secretion, and BHR [269] . In CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone) deficiency, such as in CRH knockout mice, increased levels of IL 4 , IL 5 , IL 13 , IFN-g, RANTES and eotaxin in BALF were observed, thus increasing asthma severity [588] . FP in vitro impairs IL 13 production by PHA (phytohemagglutinin)-stimulated PBMCs (peripheral blood mononuclear cells) from asthmatic and control subjects [150] . Thus the pathogenesis is associated with ILs, namely IL 12 (down) and IL 13 (up) . Children heterozygous (HET) for IL 12 B promoter polymorphism (associated with reduced IL 12 gene transcription) have a greater risk for progression to severe asthma, irrespective of disease cause, but with no difference between nonatopic and atopic children with asthma [415] . As a consequence, ance is substituted in the distal airways by that of macrophages and by cough reflexes [648] . The alveolar macrophages, in the presence of antigens, pollutants, or chronic irritants, pass from a state of quiescence to one of activation and, if the stimulus persists, to one of intense phagocytic activity, with IL (interleukins) production. In particular, inorganic substances are taken up and transported mechanically to the mucociliary system, while organic substances are decayed by cytoplasmic and lysosomal enzymes, and microorganisms are phagocytized and subjected within the phagosomes to the action of free radicals and cationic proteins [330] . Macrophages can also have a deleterious effect on the airways, by releasing enzymes with lytic activity, oxidants and proteases normally neutralized by anti-proteases and by ILs produced by macrophages. Free radicals, ozone (O 3 ) and nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) can, in turn, alter the local protease/antiprotease equilibrium. Lastly, the macrophages have the role of controlling T-mediated activation of the immune system: in subjects with BHR, but without symptoms of inflammation and asthma, macrophage hyperactivity may result in the suppression of local T cells, while a reduced activity could be fundamental in triggering T lymphocyte hyperactivation and up-regulating chronic inflammation, which could further exacerbate BHR up to a pattern of full-blown disease [503] . ∑ Immaturity. At birth not all the mechanisms contributing to the protection of the airways have reached their full functional potential. The mucociliary system develops very early during intrauterine life and proves to be fully suited to the mechanical purification of the particles inhaled from the very first hours of life. The alveolar macrophages, on the other hand, are late in reaching the airways. This is because they are immature cells endowed with phagocytic activity, but without an oxidizing metabolism or cationic proteins able to ensure efficient bactericidal action. In addition, the factors of acquired immunity have not yet been stimulated and therefore, the appropriate protection is temporarily taken care of by the maternal antibodies. ∑ Constitutional disease. Diverse genetically transmitted diseases share the same characteristic of appearing in the first years of life with recurrent respiratory infections (RRI), for example, cystic fibrosis (CF), primary ciliary dyskinesia, etc. ∑ Immunodeficiencies (IDs), which reduce the airway resistance (Raw) to infections, including primary IgA deficiency, chronic granulomatosis, etc. (Chap. 22) . ∑ Deficiency of a1-antitrypsin. The primary deficiency lies in an insufficiency of the anti-protease defense, corresponding to phenotype ZZ, which favors the development of emphysematous lesions. everything is ready to up-regulate aberrant Th2 responses in atopic children, probably leading to a class switch to IgE antibody formation. Outcomes in adult asthma may be determined primarily in early childhood. In an unselected birth cohor, >25% children had wheezing that persisted from childhood to adulthood or that relapsed after remission. At age 21, 26.9% had continuing symptoms of asthma; 14.5% had persistent wheezing from onset with no remission, and 12.4% had relapsed after remission. The factors predicting persistence or relapse were sensitization to Der p, BHR, female sex, smoking, and early age at onset [554] . It was previously found that at 25 years 88% of symptomatic subjects had BHR, a proportion statistically higher in the asthmatics than in the group of controls (12.8%) [218] . The reason is that a very early presence of eosinophilic inflammation and even remodeling of airway wall occur early in the natural history of pediatric asthma and are present well before asthma would be diagnosed based on clinical symptoms [501] . That the pattern of asthma during childhood predicts outcome is confirmed by the Melbourne study in the original children followed-up at age 42. Most children with persistent asthma (70%), frequent asthma (69%), and infrequent asthma (69%) had severe asthma into adult life and reduced PFTs [264] . Stimulating findings have opened up an unexpected facet of asthma pathogenesis. Studies suggest that TNF-a, a proinflammatory IL that participates in the inflammatory reaction in asthmatic patients, or nearby genes, including those in the HLA region, may contribute to the development of asthma in the Japanese population [449] . Platelet-activating factor (PAF), also implicated in the pathophysiology of inflammation in asthma, is degraded and inactivated by PAF acetylhydrolase: its deficiency is found more frequently in children with atopic asthma [275] . Polymorphism in the activation-induced cytidine deaminase gene might be associated with the pathogenesis of atopic asthma and the regulation of total serum IgE levels in children aged <3. The related deficiency leads to a complete defect in class-switching, resulting in a hyper-IgM phenotype and lack of IgG, IgA, and IgE. An area requiring further study is on the role of CC16 (Clara cells), which is secreted in the airway epithelium and plays a key role in inhibiting airway inflammation, but CC16 levels are reduced in patients with current asthma due to increased levels of its A38G allele [325] . This allele was associated with increased BHR at age 1 month and increased risk of asthma at age 6 [324] . It might be an intriguing candidate gene determining asthma severity in children with the CC16*38A phenotype by increasing Th2 IL production in their airways [242] . Even if the existence of a genetic predisposition to asthma has been proved (Table 4. 2), the precise mode of hereditary transmission is not yet clear; according to several investigators it could appear to be of the autosomal dominant type. The same model has been attrib-uted to BHR, because of the significant difference between parents of asthmatic children (50%) and those of healthy children (10%) and, based on hyperreactivity to histamine, between nonasthmatic atopics, nonasthmatics (33%), and the general population (6%) [179] . In twins, the concordance rate of asthma (about 50%) is 14.7%-19% in monozygotes (MZ) and 4.8%-8.7% in dizygotic (DZ) twins [174] ; 44.5% of asthmatic children have positive skin prick tests (SPT + ) vs 20.7% of healthy children [209] ; also, total IgE and sIgE (specific) to inhalants are significantly high in asthmatic children, but normal in controls [433] , indicating that genetic predisposition is an essential prerequisite, that increased BHR risk is associated with atopy and that severity is correlated to that of atopic manifestations. Although total serum IgE tracks with age, children who are predisposed to persistent wheezing and early sensitization to local aeroallergens already have high levels of IgE at age 6 [305] and 9 months [572] . Martinez et al [383] clearly indicate that a FH of asthma imposes an increased risk for childhood asthma and that elevated serum IgE levels measured during the first year of life are associated with subsequent asthma [383] . Total serum IgE levels were high at age 6 months in a cohort of 150 children at risk for developing asthma as offspring of mothers with asthma; IgE levels were still significantly higher for the asthmatic children at age 6-8 years with a GM (geometric mean) = 38.32 as compared with nonasthmatic ones (GM = 12.28). IgE levels were higher when the infants were 6 months of age [305] .Within the same family group, some members can have BHR and elevated IgE, others only high levels of IgE [229] . As mentioned in Chap. 5, the risk factor is significant in relation to positive FH (FH+): the prevalence of asthma has increased from four-to tenfold compared to subjects with negative FH [174] ; if it is specifically related to asthma, children have an increased risk of becoming asthmatic within the 2nd year of life [746] , with a BHR-atopy association correlated to age and to FH [122] . In our everyday work, we see that almost all asthmatic children have a positive FH, and in those with severe asthma, such as the above-cited 592 children, the rate surpasses 95%. A prospective cohort study has shown that even in the absence of respiratory symptoms FH+ children and those with personal atopy could have impaired PFT (pulmonary function tests) early in life [360] . Asthma in adults is usually associated with an elevated PRIST (paper radio immunosorbent test) and with SPT+ to allergens, and therefore with an IgE-mediated mechanism. The concept that IgE was central in allergic asthma [305] was stressed by data from a population-based study, which showed a close and highly significant relationship between asthma and serum IgE levels [63] . Conversely, the existence of the two forms of asthma has not been confirmed because, once IgE levels have been standardized according to sex and age, the intrinsic forms were brought back to an IgE-mediated mechanism [63] . Even in children [65, 572] asthma and The pathogenic role of allergens as propitiatory of asthmatic attacks is expressed not so much in immediate reactions as in being the cause of long-term inflammation. Instead, symptom worsening over a short period is more easily released by irritants such as O 3 , physical exertion, variations in T (temperature), etc. [333] . However, none of these factors has been formally identified as the cause of airway inflammation [499] . Often, intercurrent respiratory infections are able to amplify not only the clinical features, but also the chronic inflammation, because of the increase in the airways of eosinophils and cationic proteins, including MBP (major basic protein) [158, 341, 477] . This is significant, given the positive interaction between Rhinovirus infection and childs response to allergen exposure [341] . Other details regarding the child: 1. BHR can be present in children with AD, with greater probability in those displaying an early onset of AD. 2. BHR associated with an increase of total IgE levels can be present in children who have never suffered from asthma. 3. Altered PFT can constitute a factor of asthma risk in the first 3 years of life. 4 . The onset of atopic asthma in infancy is liable to continue into adulthood if not diagnosed in time and treated appropriately. BHR are associated with elevated concentrations of IgE and atopic sensitization. Additionally, BHR is already present in newborns and in 2-to 10-week-old infants, before acquired factors can come into play [745] , in 6-month-old at-risk babies [553] , but also in 8% of apparently normal babies [746] . In early life, children of atopic parents and those with personal atopy have impaired PFTs even in the absence of respiratory symptoms, but with a significant interaction between history of maternal asthma and the child's atopic status [360] . These findings have up to now been observed only in adults and children with significant respiratory disease. The importance of serum IgE in determining BHR is decisive in the pediatric field [64] . If the association of BHR with the FEV 1 /VC (vital capacity) rate is operative only in asthmatic young people with at least moderate levels of IgE, then IgE influences the given relationship by interacting with BHR. Asthma associated with BHR increase is independent of all other factors considered. Introducing IgE levels and PFT results into this calculation, all other diagnostic and/or clinical parameters play a substantially secondary role [64] . Therefore, in infancy, BHR appears to be associated with atopy, with FH+ of atopy (FHA) and asthma (indicating that it is hereditary) and with wheezing beginning very early or after 2 years of age. In additional studies on pediatric cohorts, a significant correlation between BRH, asthma and atopy was found in 90%-100% of cases [574] and the degree of atopic sensitization was assessed by SPT+ to several allergens and BHR in asthmatic children [65] . Agreement on a positive correspondence between BHR and atopy is not unanimous [574] : this was confirmed in two longitudinal studies [4, 107] . Moreover, BHR is significantly more often found in atopic children with wheezing than in nonatopic children [108] . The correlation is absent in other children [108] and in adults followed up from age 7 [289] ; infants at risk aged 6.5 months have reacted to the histamine test with BHR independently of wheezing [106] . Atopy can nonetheless be considered the main independent determining factor that contributes to BHR and even acquires a predictive character when accompanied by altered PFTs [574] , in that subjects atopic from birth are those affected with more severe BHR in childhood [666] . Certainly, in childhood an airway inflammatory reaction manifests itself early, strictly related to atopy, which underlies on the one hand BHR and on the other -whether directly or not -PFT reduction [574] . The even greater relationship between atopy, elevated IgE levels, infant asthma and BHR seems to us especially significant [16] . Another possible pathogenic factor is the finding of IgG subclass deficiency, with or without associated IgA deficiency, in children with chronic and/or severe asthma, especially if accompanied by RRI. Table 11 .1 summarizes the intimate links between infant asthma and atopy. Airway inflammation is a characteristic feature of asthma and contributes significantly to many features of this disease. No doubts remain regarding the pathogenic role of airway inflammation (Fig. 11 .3) [194] , either in severe, prolonged attacks of asthma or in children with chronic disease. Since 1906 [173] , anatomopathological studies of patients who died after an asthmatic attack have highlighted the presence of numerous changes in the bronchial mucosa [255, 516, 600] (Figs. 11.4, 11.5): ∑ Clear inflammatory response with subepithelial infiltration of inflammatory cells, eosinophils and activated lymphocytes, with class II antigens, mast cells and macrophages more numerous than in controls. ∑ Desquamation of the bronchial epithelium with shedding of epithelial cells from basal cells and swollen ciliated cells. ∑ Hypertrophy and hyperplasia of smooth muscle. ∑ Edema of the mucosa and the submucosa as a consequence of increased permeability of the microvasculature and plasma leakage. 732 CHAPTER 11 Asthma ceased subjects suffering from asthma during life are found to have relatively normal bronchi [287] , the damage found in specimens from lung biopsies in children with asthma in remission were similar to pathological specimens of others of the same age who died from status asthmaticus and even of patients who died of causes unrelated to asthma [255] . Figures 11.6 and 11.7 [50] show the differences between the bronchial state of a healthy subject and that of an asthmatic one during the pollen season. It should be emphasized that consistent damage of a chronic airway inflammatory process caused by more than one cell type is observed in subjects with newly diagnosed asthma, having asthma for <1 year (Fig. 11 .8) [327] , even after 2-3 months of asthma duration, showing a greatly decreased number of ciliated cells in the airway epithelium as compared with those in the control subjects [328] . If anatomopathologists underline the inflammatory aspects, clinicians favor that of spontaneously reversible bronchoconstriction, or reversible following specific treatment, whereas physiologists consider the increased BHR as the dominant factor. Even if the concepts of reversibility and of hyperactivity have long attracted a great deal of attention, the idea that asthma should be regarded as a pulmonary inflammation has only recently been given its due attention. Based on recent research, BHR is related to the degree of airway inflammation: as such, both tissue damage and BHR can find a unifying pathogenetic mechanism in the interaction of the different mediators discharged by different cells [255] . It does not, however, seem to be caused by the basic inflammation, since it does not regress with corticosteroid (CS) therapy [94] . Figure 11 .9 [499] illustrates the etiology of asthma, BHR and bronchoconstriction. Figure 11 .10 [287] shows the relationships between T and B lymphocytes and eosinophils in acute and chronic asthma [274] . Figure 11.11 [513] illustrates the physiopathological correlation and Table 11 .2 [162, 538] the main differences between immediate asthmatic reactions (IAR) and ∑ Mucus hypersecretion with mucus plugging in the airways (also containing desquamated epithelia, lymphocytes, Charcot-Leyden crystals (CLC) and Curschmann's spirals) up to the segmental bronchi and bronchioles. ∑ Numerical increase of epithelial goblet cells. ∑ Mucosal gland hyperplasia. ∑ Fibrotic pseudo-thickening of the BM by deposits of interstitial collagen under the epithelium. The end result is a further compromise of the airway lumen [340] . In these studies, however, a greater number of neutrophils and a lesser number of eosinophils may be present, while fibroscopy has made it possible to demonstrate that asthma is prevalently a chronic airway inflammation in which eosinophils and metachromatic cells play a primary role in provoking tissue damage: the bronchial surface is left naked by epithelial desquamation, from which the remodeling processes originate, regenerative of the epithelium with squamous and calyciform metaplasia [53] . If adults with mild forms of asthma show a severe pathological picture, and delate asthmatic reactions (LAR), whose characteristics are summarized in Fig. 1.9 . The immediate phase is summed up in IgE production in response to allergenic stimulus ( Fig. 1.40 ). On the next encounter, in the atopic child, the interaction between allergens and sIgE linked to receptors on effector cell surface initiates a complex chain of biochemical events leading to cellular activation, culminating in mediator release within a few minutes of the allergenic stimulation, and, at the same time, to the appearance of clinical manifestations [207] ( Fig. 11.11 ). Parallel with this, in the airways, 3-12 h after allergenic exposure, recruitment of eosinophils, neutrophils, basophils and PBMCs, which constitute the primary histopathological infiltrate in status asthmaticus, starts the delayed reaction ultimately resolving in chronicization. A close relationship between basophil number and histamine serum level, and between eosinophil number and MBP concentration [283] is evident. Eosinophil number, 30 min at most after antigen challenge, reaches its peak after 4-6 h and, in individuals without LAR, after 24 h [538] , so it is assumed that their transition occurs from the mucosa to the secretions. The pathogenesis of this second phase no longer focuses on mast cells, which, nevertheless, participate in releasing ILs and chemotactic factors, but rather on ef- 734 CHAPTER 11 Asthma Fig. 11 .8. Electron micrograph of a bronchial biopsy specimen of an asthmatic subject with asthma for less than 1 year. The airway epithelium (E) is damaged, and the subepithelial basement membrane is thickened (BM). A strong inflammatory reaction is seen in lamina propria with eosinophils (black arrows) and lymphocytes (open arrows). ¥2,000 Modified from [162, 538] . BHR bronchial hyperreactivity. gens [240] up to 24 h later [442] . This role is a prerogative of specific Th2 lymphocytes, ILs, and factors they secrete, that is LTB 4 , PAF, IL 3 -IL 6 and the chemotactic factor of CD8 T cells [258] . On the other hand, a relative absence of IL 10 characterizes the airways of asthmatic fector cells such as basophils, neutrophils, and, above all, eosinophils, as is demonstrated by cationic protein concentrations [442] , ECA (eosinophil chemotactic activity) and NCA (neutrophil chemotactic activity) [240] during a BPT (bronchial provocation test) with aller-Pathogenesis sufferers, potentially increasing the severity of allergic inflammation [384] . The role of platelets still remains to be elucidated. On the basis of the latest information available, this reaction appears to be suited for further studies of the physiopathology of asthma and to assess the therapeutic potential of new drugs [162] . Both in asthmatic adults [435] and in children [255] , inflammation is usually present. Moreover, a pediatric study has revealed an intimate correlation between activation of both eosinophils and mast cells and BHR [187] . A single pathogenic mechanism does not exist at the basis of the inflammation and consequential BHR; rather, it is likely that the orchestrated action of mediators, their products and cells attracted in this process can play a salient role in provoking BHR [340] . From a histopathological point of view, interesting progress has been made possible by the study of BALF cells via fiberoptic bronchoscopy, which can be performed even in nurslings, using models as small as 1.8-2.3 mm in diameter [737] , and which can also be achieved, in severe cases, using a noninvasive method such as a neonatal catheter [182] . Using these techniques, immune cytochemical research has demonstrated that, in asthmatic children, neither the discriminatory presence of cell types nor their quantitative increase as compared to nonasthmatic atopic controls (Tables 1.40, 1.41) have been found. Studies of BALF cells and lung biopsies have revealed that a great number of CD4 + [15, 236] are activated by the expression of CD25 and of class II HLA molecules [691] . In atopic asthma sufferers, these T cells have a Th2 phenotype, which is notably relevant in the pathogenesis of allergic disease, especially of the airways, so a great deal of asthma is associated with the activation in the bronchi of IL 3 -IL 6 and GM-CSF (granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor), a pattern compatible with Th2 activation [524] [525] [526] . IL 13 hyperproduction [321] could also bias the differentiation of T cells toward a Th2 phenotype through its ability to modulate IL 12 production from APCs. Whether as a result of exaggerated Th2 cytokine production or as a primary defect, lack of IL 12 can clearly influence immune responses toward a skewed Th2 response [676] . Furthermore, alveolar macrophages, bronchial epithelium, eosinophils and mast cells express these and other ILs, whose secretions lead to the pathological findings observed in asthma [15, 236, 691] . Some CXCL and CCL chemokines (Tables 1.54-1.57) act on both basophils and eosinophils; the former could represent the key mediators of immune inflammation. In immune inflammation, it is not easy to draw a balance of the importance of the different cell types or of the mediators involved. It seems more evident that they act together, each armed either with its own weapons or those shared with others, releasing a complex cascade of harmful events [73] . Of no minor importance are the notable alterations experienced by the postcapillary microvasculature: it is known that, in addition to the explicit damaging action carried out by powerful mediators, even vagal nerve stimulation, through neuropeptide release, secreted by neuroendocrine tissues of the airways, including substance the mucociliary clearance must cross the mucosal layer and penetrate via the junctions to encounter immunocompetent cells [533] . DCs send the start signal to T cells during the sensitization phase and can also act as synergistic agents of their activation process in the airway walls during IAR. They are equipped with FceRI-a that can facilitate allergen uptake and internalization, enhancing their potential role in the induction and amplification of chronic airway inflammation [660] . Having elevated levels of class II HLA, in vivo they efficiently trap aeroallergens and in vitro are skillful APC for P (SP), can contribute to the vasodilation in the microvasculature. In turn, edema contributes to different worsening changes, including the inhibition of mucociliary clearance. In addition, proteins become available that form the substrate for anaphylotoxins of complement derivation and kinins [287] . Different cells are involved in immune inflammation. Characteristics [537] : ∑ The tissues of atopic sufferers show an accumulation of Th2 capable of orchestrating immune inflammation; consequently, Th2 predominate in the BALF of atopic asthmatics. ∑ Activated Th2 cells are found in blood and airways of asthmatics and their expansion is preferentially allergen-induced. ∑ Th2 produce proinflammatory ILs and, in particular, IL 3 and IL 4 , with a major role in the synthesis of IgE, IL 5 and GM-CSF, whereas IL 2 and IFN-g are absent. ∑ Th2 are involved in the enrollment of eosinophils, the primary effector cells of inflammation [537] . ∑ During asthmatic attacks, there occurs in children an expansion of allergen-specific Th2 clones, accompanied by very high production of IL 4 , as demonstrated by an increase in CD23 on B cells and on CD4 + HLA-DR + [200] ( Fig. 11 .12) [513] . ∑ In BALF of nonasthmatic children, CD8 T cells are more numerous than CD4 T cells (Tables 1.40, 1.41) , while in atopic pollen-allergic subjects the proportions are more than reversed: CD4 85% (Th2 48%, Th0 39.5% and Th1 12.5%), CD8 15%, allergen-specific T clones 27% [141] . Thus an imbalance between Th1 and Th2 lymphocytes primes the Th2 or allergic phenotype, whereas the Th1 phenotype may be underexpressed. A reduced expression of T-bet, in T cells from airways of asthmatic patients compared with that in T cells from airways of nonasthmatic patients, suggests that loss of T-bet might be associated with asthma pathogenesis [188] . In a normal lung, T cells, on the order of 1.5¥10 8 , are in direct contact with aeroallergens [263] . However, in moderate asthma, their number may not be increased ( Fig. 11.13 ). In the mucosa of lower and upper airways, dendritic cells (DCs) have been found, whose percentage in BALF cells is 1% [693] and whose number is greatly increased in atopic sufferers [412] and in asthmatic smokers [533] . DCs form a continuous intraepithelial reticulum interdigiting with epithelial cells, similar to the skin process [619] . They do not protrude through the epithelium, being confined by the tight junctions; consequently the allergens that are not removed from Epithelial and subepithelial T-cell subpopulations (left) and CD4 and CD8 (right) in a bronchial biopsy specimen of an mild asthmatic subject: in mild to moderate asthma T cells are activated, but their total number is unchanged IELs [263] , where they are CD1a-positive only for 30% [693] . They also are able to transport antigens, by migrating from the respiratory epithelium to the regional lymph nodes, where they undergo a maturing process, acquiring a greater immunostimulating activity [263] . In this way, they provide for antigen processing and presenting to T lymphocytes, thereby involving HLA-DR molecules, up-regulated in asthmatic subjects ( Fig. 11 .14), which, by linking to allergenic peptides, form bimolecular complexes easily recognized by TcR-CD3 [258] . Even in the bronchial mucosa in correspondence with lymphatic structures, M cells similar to those found in the intestinal epithelium situated over Peyer's patches have been described. In the airways, they could perform a similar function, transferring antigens from the bronchial lumen to lymphatic structures, even if they do not play a primary role in mucosal immunoregulation [537] . CD8 T cells induced by antigen encounter are in turn activated in the regional lymph nodes that drain the upper respiratory tract [262] . Lymphocytes accumulate in the respiratory tissues during the 1st hour of allergic reaction: in LAR they are attracted by specific receptors located on T cells, as well as on mucosal capillaries and epithelial venules, and activated in sites of immune inflammation, they induce phenotypic alterations in endothelial cells [524] . The predominant clones of allergen-specific T lymphocytes of atopic asthmatics, which are Th2-like, are able to produce elevated levels of IL 4 [535] . Recently, GATA-3 overexpression was found to be implicated in Th2 development in human T cells and IL 5 promoter activity in CD4 + T cells of asthmatic patients was enhanced by GATA-3 [286] . In asthmatic patients, more cells from BALF contain mRNA for IL 3 -IL 5 and GM-CSF (whose genes are associated in a gene cluster of chromosome 5), and reduced IFN-g levels compared to controls [530] . More precisely, using in situ hybridization, and the immunofluorescence technique on BALF cells from asthmatic subjects, there is an evident imbalance between the reciprocal proportions of IL 4 and IFN-g in tissue infiltrates of allergic inflammation [530] , with a significantly larger number (p<0.01-p<0.001), in comparison with controls, of cells showing elevated mRNA concentrations for IL 4 and IL 3 , CD3-positive (that is T lymphocytes, predominantly CD45RO), and no difference for IFN-g [530] . IL 3 -IL 5 and GM-CSF are associated with Th2, eosinophil accumulation [531] , bronchoconstriction and Aas score [532] . This picture is compatible with the predominant activation of the Th2-like subset, the promotion of an IgE response and generation of pro-inflammatory mediators [524] . In asthmatics, a predominance of Th2 and Th2-like T-cell ILs are reported. T lymphocytes are therefore capable, even supported by the four classes of chemokines, of directly coordinating the accumulation and activation of specific effector cells at the mucosal surface. In particular IL 3 , GM-CSF and IL 5 (with the aid of CD54, = ICAM-1) appear to be very active in attracting and activating eosinophils; GM-CSF and other T-like ILs are active in the differentiation of monocyte-macrophages, IL 3 and GM-CSF and metachromatic cells [524] . In this context, the presence of mast cells and basophils assumes great relevance, given that their precursors are able to produce IL 4 for Fce receptor cross-linking. IL 4 synthesis modulates that of IgE antibodies, by acting directly on B lymphocytes, or by activating Th2-like CD4 + cells. The latter produce on the one hand IL 4 (and therefore IgE) and on the other IL 5 , finally closing the inflammatory cycle [535] . Since 24 h after BPT with allergens the majority of ILs originate from T cells [531] , we may conclude that expanding allergen-specific Th2 lymphocytes directly orchestrates both the development of bronchial inflammation by producing specific IL and the continuous synthesis of IgE, able to elicit decisive influxes on inflammatory cells [525] . Titers of B cells, CD19 and CD23 markers are found to be increased compared to controls [552] . Examination of lymphocyte subsets in asthmatic individuals shows that CD3 + , CD4 + , CD8 + and CD45 + are present in notably greater numbers than in nonasthmatic atopic subjects and in nonatopic controls [15] . The marker CD25 (receptor of IL 2 , IL 2 R) [15, 119] and of HLA-DR and CD49a/CD29 (VLA-1) in greater numbers than in normal controls denotes that such activated cells are able to contribute to the pathogenesis [119] . Soluble IL 2 R (sIL 2 R) is a marker of their activation, with particularly elevated levels in asthmatic children compared to healthy controls and adults [408] . Even in the pediatric age group, high percentages of both CD4 and CD8 peripheral blood T cells express activation markers: thus T-cell activation as compared to controls is found [153, 207, 252, 590] , with significantly higher differences regarding the increase in absolute numbers of CD4/ CD25 + , CD4/HLA-DR + and CD8/CD25 + [207] , of T-cell specific markers CD23 and CD25 [252] , HLA-DR antigen [590] and PEF-correlated CD25 [153] . Associations between eosinophil activation, CD4 + cell numbers, and a high correlation between CD4-Th2 and eosinophils and severity of asthma [691] , are totally confirmed by the evidence in children of CD4-Th2 and CD8 displaying Fig. 11 .14. HLA-DR (immunoperoxidase demonstration) in the bronchial epithelium of normal (left) and asthmatic subjects (right) the bundles of smooth muscle, and in patients with asthma this number was correlated with the hallmark of asthma, BHR [55] . In asthmatics there is no instability of mast cell membrane, which could facilitate degranulation, an event that can be mediated not only by encountering sIgE, but also by sIgG (specific) and anaphylotoxins. Similarly, there is no functional heterogeneity, since mast cells of the human airways belong mainly to the T type, even if both phenotypes can coexist in the same site with different levels (Table 1. 27) . Mast cells participate in the immediate phase of allergic reactions: they are found in the BALF of atopic asthmatics taken 15 min after allergen challenge in the degranulation stage [258] , often in proximity to the small vessels and nerve endings and intimately correlated with smooth muscles, with spontaneous release of histamine and eicosanoids [73] . Once the degranulation has started, it is possible that allergen encounter with superficial mast cells provokes an initial mediator release that increases tissue permeability, with consequent enlargement of the intraepithelial tight junction network, thus allowing a greater number of allergens to reach the layers below, where a strong group of mast cells are to be found [283] . The array of primary and secondary mediators further increase the permeability of the epithelial barrier, permitting the entrance of plasma proteins and blood platelets [283] . This is how the true asthma allergy explosion is set off. Consequently histamine, PG, thromboxanes (type A 2 ), LTs (leukotrienes), PAF, bradykinins (BKs), granule derivatives and chemotactic factors are crucial for developing an inflammatory stage of immediate reaction [287] . As well as inducing adhesion, diapedesis, directional migration and activation of eosinophils and neutrophils, they also recruit other cells that are fundamental for the establishment and self-maintenance of inflammation, such as monocyte-macrophages, blood platelets, more eosinophils, and neutrophils to the injured site [283] . Mediators participating in the triggering of asthma affect the infiltration of leukocytes, probably aided by afferent vagal stimulations, affecting the bronchospasm as well as mucosal gland secretions, which are unrelated to symptom severity [283] . ILs, whose secretion is associated with histamine release and mast cell proliferation (probably associated with IL 3 and IL 4 generation), are in turn able to amplify the vasoactive phase of immune inflammation [73] . Mast cells, as well as sharing with basophils the CD154 production with a direct effect on IgE synthesis, express mRNA for IL 4 and for IL 5 , whose release, together with IL 3 and IL 6 , is triggered by an IgE-mediated mechanism [287] . Mast cells, however, appear to be the only cells producing IL 4 in the airways of asthmatics: this could indicate their possible intervention in LARs, which, however, has not been fully confirmed. On the other hand, the mediators seem to be correlated to IARs, as demonstrated by the increase in histamine levels in circulation and the increase in histamine and tryptase in BALF of atopic subjects a few minutes after allergen CD25 and HLA-DR positively correlated with disease severity (p=0.03) and with a significant increase in total eosinophilia (p=0.01) as compared with the controls [207] . Remarkably, the proportion of CD4 T cells expressing the memory cell marker CD45RO was significantly elevated in both atopic and nonatopic asthmatics compared with controls, whereas the naive marker CD45RA was expressed by a high proportion of CD8 T cells only in the nonatopic asthmatics compared with controls. Moreover, high rates of these CD4 and CD8 T cells express mRNA encoding IL 5 , but only CD4 expressed mRNA encoding IL 4 in asthmatic children compared with the controls [208] . The relationship between cells displaying IL 5 and activated eosinophils in bronchial biopsies in asthmatics [236, 340] (Fig. 11 .10) indicates that high levels of IL 5 distinguish between severe asthma [119] and moderate asthma, where they cannot be measured [153] , considering that CSs reduce their transcription, together with several others, being capable of inhibiting in atopic asthmatics T-cell activation markers in BALF and in peripheral sites [723] and DC as well [412] . For these reasons, T lymphocytes, with all the cells and factors they stimulate, above all eosinophils, can be considered as the key cells that bring into effect, sustain and perpetuate the immune inflammation, the catalyst element that induces BHR in relation with endogenous and exogenous factors, and triggers the series of events that lead almost inexorably to asthma [287] . This is especially evident when the impossibility of establishing a state of tolerance through Th1 T cells results in the sensitization to environmental allergens [262] , guided by the Th2 in the critical phase of developing the immune system in infants. Tables 1.40 and 1.41 summarize normal data on lymphocytes and other cells in BALF in nonasthmatic children. Characteristics [537] : ∑ Are present in airways of asthmatics in increased numbers and in various stages of degranulation, but are absent in normal subjects ∑ Respond to allergens in an IgE-dependent manner with high-affinity IgE receptors (FceRI) ∑ Have a key role in driving the IgE-mediated reaction ∑ Directly express CD154 as basophils do, with the immediate implication that synthesis of IgE occurs even in peripheral tissues, other than in germinal centers of lymph nodes ∑ Produce short-lived mediators and inflammatory ILs Mast cells derive from bone marrow precursors as regulated by the same ILs that are important contributors to the allergen-specific airway inflammation [537] . Their greater concentration is in more peripheral airways, where they localize prevalently in the sub-and intraepithelial layers, and in the bronchial lumen [258] . A striking increase in the number of mast cells was in stimulation, and by increased urinary methylhistamine in the ensuing hour [283] . Tryptase in BALF is correlated to PC 20 (concentration of methacholine inducing a 20% fall in FEV 1 ), but not in serum after TPB with allergens [240] , which could suggest that mast cells, along with their mediators, represent the key cells in a child's BHR, given the possibility of a tryptase-induced up-regulation of bronchial smooth muscle tone [187] . Mast cells could also have the function of controlling the immune inflammation by releasing repair mediators such as heparin [467] and LTB 4 , which is highly chemotactic for both eosinophils and neutrophils [54] . The characteristics of basophils are as follows [376] : ∑ They produce MBP. ∑ They express CD154 as do mast cells. ∑ Anti-IgE modulate their allergen-induced activation [581] . ∑ PAF selectively induces them to release histamine. ∑ They have an important relationship with the CCL, lesser with CXCL chemokines. ∑ IL 3 induction produces IL 4 and activates MCP-1 (monocyte chemotactic protein-1), stimulating their degranulation. Basophils share with mast cells the IgE-mediated degranulation process, with histamine and LTC 4 release that makes them powerful inflammatory cells; however, they do not release PGD 2 and are unique since they contain MBP along with eosinophils (Table 1. 25) . Together with mast cells they are high histamine producers, which release after stimulation by PAF, C5a and anti-IgE IgG [581] . Basophils release a greater quantity of histamine in asthmatics than in allergic rhinitis (AR) sufferers [376] , even if anti-IgE IgG could down-regulate histamine release [581] . IgE-mediated basophil releasability has a clinical relevance in the pathogenesis of airway reactivity, since they are increased in atopic asthmatics: symptom severity is correlated with basophil responsiveness in vitro [376] . Lymphocytes and other cells promote their maturation and differentiation as well as mediator secretion, favored by various ILs such as IL 1 -IL 3 and GM-CSF. In particular, IL 3 and GM-CSF induce their migration in vitro in picomolar doses and increase their chemokinetic activity and adhesion [742] . Basophils express, together with eosinophils but not with neutrophils, the integrin CD49d/CD29, equal to VLA-4, counter-receptor of VCAM-1, equal to CD106, which allows adhesion to the endothelia [561] . The parallel with eosinophils is strengthened by the community of receptors for IL 5 that become active in picomolar doses also on basophils [249] . Recently, it has been established that the basophil role seems to be decisive in LAR, coinciding with that carried out in the pathogenesis of AD: 19 h after the challenge, an increase in mediators released by these cells has been noted [73] . Of equal importance is the link with CCL chemokines and with MCP-1, MCP-2 and RANTES (now CCL2, CCL8, and CCL5, respectively), which stimulate basophil migration (Tables 1.54-1.57), while the CXCL with a function identical to IL 8 and CCL5, promote their adhesion, to which  several integrins contribute (Tables 1.45-1.49) . Eosinophils (Figs. 11.3, 11.4, 11.8, 11.10, 11.11) The characteristics of eosinophils are as follows (see Table 1 .24): ∑ They are markedly increased in number in blood and airways, with statistically significant differences in asthmatic children compared to healthy controls [254, 639] . ∑ They are equipped with numerous integrins, CD45, CD59 and HLA-DR among the inducible molecules. ∑ Dependent on IL 3 , IL 5 and GM-CSF, as well as on TNF, PAF and IL 1 , for development, activation and survival [460] (Table 11. 3) [22, 284, 466] . ∑ An increase in the bronchial mucosa of mRNA for IL 5 (eosinophilopoietic) [236] associated with GM-CSF (IL para-eosinophilia) [59] indicates its presence and activity [59, 236] , and also the significant connection with a number of activated T cells [236] . ∑ They are laden with cationic proteins, which once released may be highly toxic to airway tissues. ∑ Better than any other cell, they represent the common factor able to correlate IgE hyperproduction and involvement of metachromatic cells, macrophages and of themselves in the immune inflammation [526] . ∑ Some studies, but not all, show the hypodense phenotype and the correlation of ECP (eosinophil cationic protein) levels with clinical manifestations. Eosinophils also are heterogeneous, as far as density and activity are concerned. Their growth from eosinophil precursors is highly dependent on a set of ILs. IL 5 and PAF not only activate eosinophils but transform the normally dense cells into a hypodense phenotype ( Fig. 1.35c ) that responds equally to chemotactic signals [354, 460] . Numerous studies have evaluated the possible role played by such cells, more cytotoxic [73] , with more receptors for IgE and IgG, that produce more LTC 4 and more active, from a metabolic point of view, in patients with delayed responses to inhalants [538] . Such data is suggestive, but it is not yet possible to transfer them automatically to the pediatric field since it could more simply be related to immature forms [408] , scarcely increased in number [254, 408] , an effect inhibited by nedocromil sodium [578] . Moreover, the increase in hypodense cells can depend on artifacts resulting from techniques that use dextran or gelatin, or on the significant increase in eosinophilia in asthmatic children, therefore an epiphenomenon [254] . Thus, notwithstanding recurring indications, density appears to be an overly imprecise sign to be useful to recognize a pathogenic role in the pediatric field as an index of cellular activation. made it possible to ascertain that in asthmatic subjects, eosinophils appeared in the degranulation stage under the BM and among the basal cells, with a significant parallel between the presence of eosinophils in a degranulation phase and epithelial damage, whereas they were not activated in controls [51] . The asserted verifications of such alterations even in normal subjects can be explained by the potential damage provoked by the biopsy per se and in the preparation of the microscopic specimens [15] . As at the peak of cutaneous reaction, eosinophils are markedly reduced during exacerbations in asthmatic children [605] . Numerous lines of research have given further evidence that activated cells and granule products are implicated in the tissue destruction that accompanies and Eosinophils have, equal to mast cells, a great number of FceRI and FceRIIb (CD23), which demonstrates their crucial role in atopic IgE-mediated disease. In fact atopy contributes to infantile asthma by the mobilization and activation of such cells [408] . As can be seen from the data in Table 1 .24, eosinophils can be primed to express HLA-DR in vivo, implying the presence of HLA class II molecules: therefore they are APCs able to present antigens to CD4 T cells. The modulating and regulating role carried out at the level of the immediate hypersensitivity reactions is also demonstrated by the increased presence in the IAR sites and by the ability of some of their cellular proteins to inhibit or degrade the mediators of the immune reaction [679] . Especially EPO (eosinophil peroxidase) can degrade LT, and PGE 1 combined with PGE 2 have been credited with being able to inhibit histamine release [679] . Additionally, eosinophils contain great quantities of VIP (vasoactive intestinal peptide) and produce SP. The mature cells synthesize PAF, which causes an increase in cytotoxicity and superoxide generation [758] . Immunohistochemical studies on BALF cells have shown that eosinophils are in motion 30 min after the antigen encounter [15, 217] and that their relative percentage, along with that of ECP in BALF, in the majority of patients, is correlated with the severity of asthma ( Fig. 11.15 ) [51] . In fact they predominate over other cells in BALF, together with MBP, ECP and neurotoxins produced by them [531] , data significantly documented in histological specimens of patients who died from asthma [255] . Other studies done to evaluate the differences between asthmatics and healthy controls have [22, 284, 466] . ADCC antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, EAEC eosinophil adhesion to endothelial cells. amplifies immune inflammatory changes ( Fig. 11 .16) [52] . Moreover, as a result of the change in volume and composition of the secretions of the airways that follows, the mucociliary clearance is compromised (by the parallel effects of LTC 4 ). In particular, MBP has a cytotoxic effect on airway epithelium, up to the point of dys-epithelialization [217] . The protein in concentrations of 100 mg/ml provokes in vitro ciliostasis and cell exfoliation within 12-48 h, and, if the dose is increased fivefold, the denudation of the superficial epithelium and of the nerve endings appears, whereas with a level of 700 mg/ml, within 30 min, the ciliary beat frequency is inhibited by 20% and the zone of activity reduced by 40% (Fig. 11 .17) [217] . Experimental research has proven that EPO, in the presence of H 2 O 2 and halide, tangibly damages the tracheal epithelium [51] , while MBP stimulates the tracheal smooth muscles into producing PGE 2 and in secreting chlorides [217] ; additionally it increases its reactivity to acetylcholine and to histamine, if the epithelium above is normal. If this is not the case, its action is negated [57] . MBP can neutralize the heparin anticoagulant activity [217] . Other highly toxic products derived from the granules play a significant role in determining the epithelial lesions during inflammation, such as ECP, ten times more cytotoxic than MBP, EDN (eosinophil-derived neurotoxin), free O 2 radicals, eosinophil-activating factor (EAF) and eosinophil cytotoxicity enhancing factor (ECEF), two factors empowering the eosinophils and their cytotoxicity [679] . An aggravating role is played by complement components, first C5a, which, like PAF, stimulates ECP and EPO release and the production de novo of toxic O 2 radicals. Given that components and deposits of the complement components are present in the bronchial secretions and in airway mucosa, it is likely that C5a not only stimulates eosinophils, but also contributes to their activation in tissues close to the inflammatory foci [749] . inflammatory sites in vivo [561] . Let us remember that on a cutaneous level the CD62E selectin facilitates eosinophil and/or neutrophil adhesion, allowing them to migrate through epithelial layers, suggesting that endothelial activation, in the late stage, and due to ILs, covers a primary role in the directional migration of inflammatory cells [258] (Fig. 11 .20). The glycoprotein The role exercised by eosinophils in causing inflammation therefore appears dominant, as demonstrated by a significant increase in asthmatic adults in both number and ECP levels ( Fig. 11 .18) and in the correlation between the two concentrations, with statistically significant differences compared to controls [442, 678] . In this regard, data is controversial in atopic children [240, 442, 627, 639, 756] , making asthma monitoring problematic given that the rates decrease with treatment [756] , but not when asthma is stable [756] , or in asymptomatic children [240] . More convincing seems to be the significant increase in FEV 1 after treatment, correlated with an ECP decrease, whose levels could be predictive of the results of treatment and of eventual relapses [755] . Such discrepancies are only apparent when one recalls that ECP levels depend on those of active eosinophils when inflammation is present and not on total eosinophilia. BHR is therefore secondary to the epithelial damage caused by eosinophils and their cationic proteins. In fact, at BHR resolution, eosinophils remain unvaried numerically, but with a reduced activation, as proved by the normalization of EPO levels, which is accompanied by the transitory increase in neutrophils and in the levels of MPO (myeloperoxidase) [229] . There exist ample interactions with ILs (Table 11 .3) and adhesion molecules (Tables 1.44-1.49 and Fig. 1.59 ). There are three highly selective phases: expression of CD62E, CD62P and CD62L ligands (Table 1 .50); activation of CD11a/CD18, CD11b/CD18, and CD49d/ CD29 (VLA-4=a 4 b 1 ); and transendothelial transmigration through adhesion molecules of the Ig superfamily (CD106=VCAM-1, CD54 and CD102= ICAM-1 and -2) (Table 1 .4), with a putative mast cell role in binding them to eosinophils through CD62 P and IL 4 ( Fig. 11.19 ) [54] . Like eotaxin-1 and -2, RANTES and MIP-1a induce eosinophil chemotaxis during transendothelial transmigration [563] . The adhesion of only eosinophils and basophils to small-vessel endothelium is mediated by the interaction of CD106/CD49d/29, which therefore plays a primary role by recruiting cells to be sent toward membrane of the eosinophils interacts with CD62E; thereafter eosinophils are linked via b1 and b2 integrins to endothelial cell membrane and activated under the influence of IL 3 , IL 5 and GM-CSF produced by lymphocytes and mast cells [561] . Eosinophils adhere to endothelium in vitro, IL 5 induces them to express on membrane CD11a/CD18 CD54, they express their ligand on HEVs, and eosinophils are also bound to CD102, CD62E and CD106, which can contribute to their migration to the inflamed tissue in vivo [233] . They adhere to epithelium activated by IL 1 or IL 4 ; IL 4 can synergize with IL 1 or TNF in promoting the eosinophil link and successive transmigration [563] . Linking to CD102, CD62E and CD106 is crucial in encouraging their accumulation in the airways of asthmatics, and is so characteristic as to be able to consider the levels of CD54 and CD106 as activation indexes that are more sensitive than those based on ECP [233] . Activated eosinophils migrate to mucosal sites and through the action of IL 5 and PAF progress to the bronchial epithelium [460] . Elegant data indicate that only IL 5 is correlated with eosinophil enrollment and degranulation. IL 5 promotes the differentiation of mature eosinophils from precursor cells and a current hypothesis suggests that along with GM-CSF and IL 1, it can stimulate their degranulation, even in pollen-allergic subjects during the pollen season [87] . IL 5 is also able to prolong their survival for 24-48 h, with a lesser role compared to other ILs, and to activate them in successive phases, along with elaboration of lipid mediators and PAF activation [460] . In particular [563] , it carries out a chemotactic action on eosinophils. Moreover, since it is a growth factor inducing pro-inflammatory modifications in these cells and acting on B lymphocytes, it increases IL 4 -induced IgE synthesis, making it possible to conclude that IL 4 , after its release from IgEactivated mast cells, can foster eosinophil recruitment and differentiation, both in blood and in the airways. As pointed out previously, the comment that IL 5 regulates eosinophil adhesion, an event underlying a fundamental role in their persistence in airway tissue, is relevant [460] . Studies on animals have widened the field of experimental knowledge, indicating that CD54 expression is induced on endothelial and epithelial cells of the airways in the hours following an inflammatory stimulus [81] ( Fig. 11 .21), that repeated antigen inhalations concretely increase CD54 manifestation on tracheal vascular epithelium and endothelium with a consequent rise in BHR and eosinophils in the airways, and also that anti-CD54 monoclonal antibodies reduce neutrophil adhesion and migration and inhibits (partial) in vitro eosinophil adhesion to endothelial cells [230] . Anti-CD54 delivered in vivo lessens or eliminates eosinophil infiltration and aspecific BHR induced by methacholine [230] . These experimental data clearly indicate that CD54 can play a substantial role in BHR pathogenesis [705] , while blocking it by a monoclonal antibody can provide a therapeutic approach for the treatment. Pluripotent monocyte-macrophage cells are implicated in the pathogenesis of asthma, performing important functions in chronic inflammation, due also to their long life-span (about 180 days). Similarly to mast cells, they are divided into two subpopulations: low-density cells that appear in a state of activation, and high-density cells that are in a state of quiescence. Immunohistochemical studies on cells taken from BALF have shown evidence that: ∑ Their numbers are higher in atopic asthmatics than in healthy controls. ∑ Many cells carry monocyte markers, suggesting that they are of recent derivation from blood monocytes. ∑ They are provided with receptors for IgE (FceRIIb) and therefore are activated [330, 693] . The characteristics of monocytes are the following [330] : ∑ They produce ILs stimulated by endothelin-1 (ET-1) and endothelin-4 (ET-4) [129] . ∑ They liberate thermostable factors. with consequent release of other mediators ( Fig. 11.22 ) and, if Ca is present, HRF, and they also participate in LARs [564] . In contrast to their ability to release factors impairing ciliary function, macrophages also express a potent capacity to synthesize ILs that may up-regulate ciliary beats [648] . In 75% of cases, macrophages react with GM-CSF [330] , which activates them, stimulating their response to IgE via CD23, so IgE occupying the CD23 molecule on macrophages leads to a potential loop for allergens to activate macrophages [537] . As effector cells they are charged with clearance of cellular debris ingestion and killing of microorganisms. They have the ability to migrate to sites of inflammatory reactions where they produce growth factors, bioactive lipids, free O 2 radicals, NO and nitrites [537] . In particular, the marked production of NO [443] may have important effects on vascular and bronchial smooth muscle tone and on bronchial epithelial cells: therefore, the role played by macrophages in airway inflammation [212] is significant. Alveolar cells synthesize elastase and metalloproteins, capable of breaking down macromolecules of the extracellular matrix (ECM), among which elastin is an element in connection with the elastolysis found in asthmatics [53] . As regards the relationship with other cellular types, they contribute to the recruitment and immunological activation of granulocytes, attracted by LTB 4 and IL 8 /NAP-1 (neutrophil activating peptide-1), of eosinophils by PAF, GM-CSF and IL 5 , of neutrophils by IL 8 /NAP-1 and of mast cells [287] . ∑ They express HLA class II antigens and activation molecules CD11a and CD11b. Such expression is suppressed by hydrocortisone in sensitive subjects, but not in those who are resistant [330] . They migrate in the alveolar cavities as a consequence of a series of factors related to endothelial microvasculature and chemotaxis phenomena [537] . In the airways, they actively participate in inflammation, secreting numerous ILs with pro-inflammatory activity such as IL 1 , TNF, M-CSF, chemokines as well as thermostable factors that stimulate eosinophils and neutrophils to release LT and ECEF. Monocytes in asthmatics are activated, as demonstrated by IL 5 production in atopics with peripheral eosinophilia; they produce GM-CSF in vivo that, on its own or in concert with other ILs, can induce bone marrow progenitors to generate new colonies [330] . Monocytes show a striking ability to produce O 2 •and, when they are linked by FceRIIb to the receptors, can activate NADPH oxidase, thereby playing a significant role in chronic inflammation by their ability to release toxic products, in part through their linking to CD23-IgE [144] . Co-expression of CD14 + /CD23 + is significantly increased, while the specific CD14 marker shows no change [552] . ET-1 and ET-4 are potent stimuli for monocyte production of TNF-a, IL 1b , IL 6 , IL 8 and CM-CSF [129] . The characteristics of macrophages are [537] : ∑ They are increased in number in asthmatic airways and BALF. ∑ They can produce proinflammatory ILs such as IL 1 , IL 6 , IL 8 , TNF, and also PGs, LTs, PAF, NO (N oxide) and O 2 free radicals. ∑ They express FceRIIb. It is hypothesized that the majority of active macrophages derive from circulating monocytes [97] (Fig. 11.22 ). The lung alveolar macrophage is the primary phagocytic cell in the alveolar space [533] . Although their numbers are significantly increased in asthmatics [503] , their proliferation in the airways is generally negligible, leading to underestimating their contribution to asthmatic inflammation [330] . On the contrary, they are equipped with HLA class II molecules, becoming, in this association, the predominant cell type in the airways [537] , and they are able to process and present antigens to histocompatible CD4 T cells, even though alveolar macrophages are APCs of little effect [287] . After interacting with CD4 T cells, active macrophages pass to a quiescent stage, which precludes the perpetuation of the inflammation [97] . They synthesize a wide range of mediators: eicosanoids of both metabolic cycles, including LTC 4 , LTD 4 and LTE 4 , PAF, and b-glucuronidase. Moreover, they produce O 2 free radicals, pro-inflammatory ILs of toxic effect on the bronchi, various proteins and peptides, C5a, PDGF (platelet-derived growth factor) Pathogenesis EGF epidermal growth factor, GM-CSF granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor, IL interleukins, LTC leukotriene, PAF platelet-activating factor, PDGF platelet-derived growth factor, TxB thromboxane B modulating their functions, in concert with various ILs [88] . As underlined in Chap. 1, PAF and SP favor neutrophil adhesion to the walls of vascular endothelium and their successive migration in the interstice of respiratory airways of asthmatics, where they can produce several negative effects on both structure and function [88] . In a mouse model, the link between allergen-induced T cell activation and neutrophil influx induced early IL 17 mRNA expression in inflamed lung tissue, concomitant with a prominent bronchial neutrophil influx [243] . In asthmatic children, the manifestation of CD11b, localized in specific granules, is also increased in the neutrophils, thus carrying out an important role in their migration together with eosinophils: the induction of complement receptors, in particular of CD35, could constitute the first step in the inflammation [37] . The negative effect of neutrophils on ciliated cells caused by proteases such as elastase, by oxidants that impair their motility, as well as by bioactive lipids such as PAF that up-regulate mucociliary clearance [413, 648] , has now been confirmed. The role of epithelial cells is to provide passive support to sensorial receptors, which are opportunely protected by tight junctions and regulate the hydroelectrolytic perireceptor environment, also ensuring, by means of mucus and cilia, the clearance of abnormal substances and performing antimicrobial, antioxidant and antiprotease activities [648] . According to recent information, they also play an immune role as APCs, as they are equipped with FceRII and class II antigens that they can present to CD4 T cells (Fig. 11 .13), and express enzyme pathways for cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase. Oxygenated metabolites have robust effects on smooth muscles, nerves and glands, as well as on inflammatory cells and epithelial cells [52] (Fig. 11 .25). Due to specific phospholipases, these cells release eicosanoids, NCF and endopeptidase, able to degrade neuropeptides and fibronectin that mediate cell adhesion together with integrins, and participate in epithelium regeneration [525] . Epithelial cells contribute, therefore, by means of these mechanisms, to the pathogenesis of asthma, promoting both infiltration and local activation of granulocytes and T lymphocytes [374] . The epithelial cells also produce: ∑ IL 1 , an IL 6 synergistic component of T lymphocyte, IL 8 growth and activation [374] , IL 10 , IL 11 , and IL 16 [189] ∑ NAP-1/IL 8 , chemotactic for T cells, neutrophils and above all eosinophils, in contrast with normal subjects [33] ∑ Growth factors: TNFR-1 (CD120a), endothelins, lipids, NO, PDGF [189] ∑ Adhesion molecules such as CD54, CD102, CD62E and CD62P, ligands of the counterparts on T lymphocytes (CD11a, b/CD18, CD49d/CD29) and CD62L To summarize, macrophages participate in regulating the inflammation by releasing ILs and growth factors, and in the growth and activation of mast cells and eosinophils. All these effects stimulate the release of vasoactive mediators capable of provoking bronchoconstriction and mucus secretion. Recently, it has been reported that macrophages produce CCL chemokines such as MIP-1 and -2, MCP-1-3, and that alveolar cells are activated by MCP-1, with increased levels in asthmatics [330] . It follows that even macrophages could play the role of key cells in immune inflammation [52] , as depicted in Fig. 11 .23. Moreover, the virtual involvement in the fibrosis process in the reparative stage [53] demonstrates their wide powers. Finally, they constitute the only cell line that does not undergo the positive effects of therapy [212] . The characteristics of neutrophils are: ∑ They can have cytotoxic enzymes and toxic radicals of O 2. ∑ They appear to be more active in LARs. ∑ They enter into close contact with selectins and integrins. ∑ They secrete numerous ciliostatic substances. Neutrophils are active in acute asthma in both IARs and LARs, as shown by the presence in both phases of neutrophil chemotactic factor (NCF). Neutrophils accumulate in the sites of IgE-mediated acute allergic reactions within a time that varies from 30 min to a few hours. Therefore, these effects are carried out after the initial action, when NAP-1 and NCF come into play, promoting an accumulation of inflammatory cells that prolongs the inflammatory effects of allergen challenge. Their primary role seems to be that undertaken in LAR, depending on the time needed to produce NCF. Neutrophils are found at the center of inflammatory lesions because of two specific cell sites: the cytoplasmic membrane and the intracellular granules, which contain a vast array of digestive enzymes (Table 1.23). Elastase, collagenase and gelatinase, which attack the vasal endothelium of the respiratory apparatus, are particularly cytotoxic. Not all authors are in agreement regarding the attribution of a specific role to neutrophils [53, 600] , even if IL 17 secreted by T cells could involve them in the airways (Table 1.5) . Recently, however, a better understanding has been gained of the role they play in immune inflammation, which is summed up in the stages described above and which require the recruitment of CD11a/CD18, CD11b/CD18, b2 integrins of neutrophils, which link to their counterparts on endothelial cells, CD54 and CD102 [420] (Fig. 11 .24). Furthermore, in vitro studies have shown that the duo NAP-1/IL 8 [266] , stimulated by CD62E, directs neutrophils to transmigrate through the endothelium [420] , and that SP directs them toward inflammatory sites, joining with VIP and somatostatin in ∑ Chemokines: MCP-1 and GM-CSF specific for monocytes, MCP-4, GRO-a and GRO-g [189] The report that IL 1b produced by monocytes induces an increased synthesis of IL brought about by epithelial cells denotes the possible existence of an amplifying network among epithelial cells and monocytes/macrophages. Recently the effects in the airways of ET-1, provided with a powerful bronchoconstriction action -less so in endothelin-2 and -3, whose synthesis is codified by an equivalent number of genes identified in the human genome -have been defined [431] . Bronchial epithelium of symptomatic patients produces larger quantities of it compared to asymptomatic patients. ET-1 binding sites are present in bronchial and bronchiolar muscles [4] . Additionally, such peptide stimulates the lipoxygenase activity with an increase of LTs, with both chemotactic and constriction effect on smooth muscle [4] : in a pediatric cohort it reflected the degree of effort required by asthma [12] . In confirmation of its autochthonous production, ET-1 levels in BALF are high; the output is regulated by TNF-a, IL 1 , lipopolysaccharides (LPs) (endotoxin) [431] and histamine [4] . Consequently, the airway epithelium, like vascular endothelium, plays an important, double role in regulating the muscular tone of the area of interest, releasing both constriction factors, such as ET-1, as well as the epithelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF) [431] , identified with NO [10] . The potentially harmful activity of epithelial cells also comes about through 15-HETE, a biological mediator that stimulates the infiltration of inflammatory cells by inducing the release of mucosal glycoproteins, influencing in leukocytes 5-lipoxygenase activity and stimulating in asthmatics a premature bronchoconstriction in response to inhaled allergens. They are therefore activated cells, which, with their products, can play a deleterious role in the genesis and persistence of bronchial inflammation and BHR ( Fig. 11 .25), while their changes are the heart of remodeling [491] . The vascular endothelium, in addition to contributing to the passive barrier and also taking part in airway remodeling [490] , seems to be involved in asthma pathogenesis and in inflammatory processes associated with its severe forms. It is considered a true endocrine gland, with a surface made up of about 10 3 cells corresponding, in an adult, to about 1.5 kg of tissue [112] . Its cells locally regulate the inflammatory cells that, to reach inflammation sites, must cross endothelial walls. This process is articulated in two phases: first adherence and then passage through endothelial cells. The regulatory activity consists of impeding the adhesion and aggregation of blood platelets and other blood cells, maintaining bloodstream regularity by endothelium-released NO, with an action that is both vasodilatory, especially at the arteriolar level, and antiaggregating along with PGI 2 [10] . Once activated, endothelial cells induce: ∑ An increased expression of adhesion molecules ∑ Production of GM-CSF, IL 8 and RANTES, potentially reduced by inhalation of beclomethasone dipropionate (BDP) ∑ Production of chemotactic factors for neutrophils and T lymphocytes, and of PAF and IL 5 [654] Basophils adhere to endothelia by means of CD49d/ CD29 [561] , and TNF-a and IL 1 induce CD54 on endothelium (a prerogative also shared by macrophages) and CD62E for leukocyte adhesion. Activated endothelium could be capable of self-protection against TNF-a negative effects, which exposes the barrier to O 2 toxicity, thus increasing its permeability [654] . Nor should one forget the complex interactions between subsets of lymphocytes and endothelial tissues in the control of lymphocyte recirculation ( Fig. 1.5) . Hence, it is not out of the question to also attribute to these cells a participation in the inflammatory process.  As already noted, the production of IgE is slight in the respiratory mucosa which, instead, is populated by mast cells armed with IgE in the epithelium and connective tissue, which, along with basophils, produce CD154, whereas eosinophils have the CD40-CD154 duo (Chap. 1). In making a comparison with Fig. 11 .2, in the mucosa a contrast with the alteration of immune homeostasis can be noted (Fig. 11 .26) [54] , provoked by an excessive local accumulation of B lymphocytes following a combination of an aberrant extravasation of lymphocytes, an increase in vascular permeability and an excessive exposure to antigens by the local immune system. All this is transformed into a worsening and perpetuation of the inflammation, laying the foundations for a chronic disease of the mucosa [54] . The increased production of IgE and mast cell positive regulation play a role in the outcome of the late reaction which cannot take place without T cell cooperation (see "Role of the Inflammatory Cells") ( Fig. 11 .27) [54] . Parallel to the suggestion of interpreting to interpret AD as a failed attempt by Th2 T cells to inhibit Th1 T cells to restore local homeostasis, asthma could be the Blood platelets provided with FceRII migrate by diapedesis to inflamed tissues, acting as effector cells in the immune inflammation. An inappropriate activation leads to eosinophil recruitment by the expression, either singularly or in combination, of PF4, PAF, PGE 2 , and thereby to BHR and asthma. In asthmatics, thrombocytopenia, an increase in associated circulating blood platelets in the microvasculature, of blood platelets in BALF, of PF4 levels and thromboxane B 2 (TXB 2 ), as well as the prolonged bleeding time and a reduction in the time needed for blood platelet regeneration and survival have been identified. These cells liberate TGF-b and PDGF, the former being able to stimulate fibroblast proliferation, the latter smooth muscle hypertrophy. bTG (bthromboglobulin) generates NAP-2 and PF4, chemotactic for neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages, respectively (Table 1 .57), suggesting platelet involvement in infiltrating and perpetuating structural alterations which, in the long run, lead to subepithelial fibrosis and smooth muscle proliferation at the basis of BHR [743] . The hypothesis that bTG and PF4 perform the role of plateletactivation markers has not been confirmed [743] . The altered mucosal homeostasis is reflected by distorted B lymphocyte accumulation because of aberrant lymphocyte extravasation, and emigration of mast cells (MC) armed with IgE and partly primed eosinophils (Eos) is facilitated by cytokines modulating the profile of endothelial adhesion molecules. A second line of defense is set up in the mucosa to perform immune elimination, including local IgG production to limit dissemination of foreign antigens. Due to the proinflammatory IgG properties, a vicious circle may develop with further increase in epithelial antigen penetration, complement hyperactivation, massive phagocyte recruitment and inflammatory mediator release (for details see text) Central role played by IgE and mast cells in development of late-phase allergic reaction. Processed peptide is exposed by APC to T lymphocytes in the context of HLA class II molecules, while intact allergen cross-bridges IgE antibodies on the surface of mast cells. Cytokines generated by CD4 and mast cells enhance preferential IgE production triggering mast cells, thus polarizing T-cell cytokines to a Th2 pattern (for details see text) result of a failure of the normal defense of the organism to control IgE-mediated immune responses [263] . A host of mediators, some preformed such as histamine ( Fig. 1.56 ) and others generated ex novo, participate, directly and indirectly, in inflammation and bronchoconstriction [162, 538] . Many of those initially released are widespread, far from the discharge site to go toward metabolization or inactivation. Histamine, BK and PAF are at the basis of IAR (Table 11 .2); others such as PGs, thromboxanes (TXs) and LTs provoke both IAR and LAR. Other inflammatory factors are PGD 2 and TXA 2 , which produce vasodilation, LTs, which induce mucus secretion and increase vascular permeability, and factors released by neutrophils, basophils and eosinophils, discarded by mast cells after allergen/IgE-FceRI interaction and drawn back to the site of immune inflammation by chemoattractant factors (BCF, NCF, ECF, LTB 4 ). The peptide LTs such as LTB 4 , discarded by stimulated neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages, LTC 4 by mast cells and eosinophils, are powerful mediators of asthma attacks. PAF is a vasoactive mediator released by a range of cells that carries out a bronchoconstriction activity after exposure to a specific allergen. It has chemotactic and activating action on neutrophils and, above all, on eosinophils. Additionally, it increases eosinophil cytotoxicity, provoking the release of granule content; it stimulates O 2 •generation (less in neutrophils), promoting the release of MBP and ECP cationic proteins and, in blood platelets, the flow of Ca ions and aggregation [758] . PAF linked to specific receptors can stimulate complex mechanisms of intercellular transduction, by which it induces G proteins and C protein kinase activation, and inositol phosphate and intracellular Ca turnover increase, the result being the secondary activation of phospholipase A 2 with subsequent discharge of arachidonate by membrane phospholipids, with subsequent production of a mediator cascade, including TXA [607] . For eosinophils, it is the most potent chemotactic factor which causes, in vivo, their accumulation in the airways, amplifying their activity both in IAR and LAR. Additionally, TXA promotes their adhesion to human vascular endothelium, stimulating eosinophils to synthesize LTC 4 , an effect amplified by the fact that, when eosinophils come into contact with PAF, they release further quantities [607] . Eosinophils can attract other cells through PAF, with an increase in vascular permeability and bronchoconstriction, to the point of destroying the bronchial epithelium of asthmatic children [558] . Exudation of serum proteins in tissues -also due to a com-bined action with LTC 4 -is at the forefront in contributing to the amplification and maintenance of long-term immune inflammation [607] . The selective attractionactivation eosinophil ratio as also documented by the orchestration of cationic proteins, and powerful mediators, makes PAF the leading player in eosinophil inflammation, able to reproduce the entire sequence of typical asthma events. PAF plays a notable regulatory role in pediatric asthma re-exacerbations, as demonstrated by its marked increase during acute asthmatic attacks and by the parallel decrease after SIT [265] , and by higher levels in asthmatic children, as compared to asymptomatic children and controls [558] . Eicosanoids are secreted in the airways by mast cells, alveolar macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils and epithelial cells [362] . Among those derived from mast cell membrane, via the arachidonic acid metabolism, the second class of cysteine derivatives in particular possess a spasmogenic action, while LTB 4 carries out a chemotactic action. Lipoxygenase leads to the formation of various PGs, which, together with TXA 2 , cause bronchoconstriction, milder if induced by PGE 2 . LTs are assuming an ever more important role in the pathogenesis of asthma as based on new experimental data ( Fig. 1.57 ). Inhalation of cysteine derivatives provokes an acute bronchoconstriction that is prolonged and stronger than that caused by histamine in asthmatic sufferers, whose upper air tract is particularly sensitive to LT bronchospastic actions [387] . Higher levels in BALF and urine of asthmatics during a severe, acute crisis can always be noted. LTs also exert a sensitizing action on the airways, making them vulnerable and susceptible to BHR to triggering agents such as allergens, intense physical activity or cold air [387] . Additionally, LTs increase vascular permeability, mucus hypersecretion and the production of IL 1 by monocytes [362] . LTE 4 , in particular, recruits eosinophils and neutrophils in the ratio of 10:1, able to increase their numbers in only 4 h [329] , while LTC 4 reduces the activity of respiratory cilia in vitro [709] , a negative effect confirmed by the report that pretreatment with cromones inhibits LTs [578] . LTB 4 , on the other hand, possesses striking chemotactic activities for neutrophils, eosinophils and monocytes, also regulating the expression of membrane receptors and of IgE-FceRII. Recent data show that concentrations of exhaled LT and 8-isoprostane (a marker of oxidative stress) are increased in atopic asthmatic but not in atopic nonasthmatic children. Exhaled LTE 4 concentrations are reduced by 18% by inhaled CS treatment whereas LTB 4 and 8-isoprostane are not reduced [588] . Prostaglandins PGF 2a and PGD 2 are powerful bronchoconstrictors. PGE produces bronchodilation in healthy subjects and bronchoconstriction in asthmatics. PGI 2 has little effect on smooth muscle but, since it immune inflammation acting on both growth and differentiation of the progenitors of hematopoietic cells, which are released at the sites of immune inflammation. ILs (Table 1 .5), many of which can be found in BALF, are released [58, 334] : ∑ many that can be found in BALF are released by [58, 334] : IL 3 -IL 5 ,IL 9 ,IL 11 ,IL 13 ,IL 17 ,IL 25 , and GM-CSF by Th2 lymphocytes and mast cells ∑ IL 2 , IL 9 and IFN-g by Th1 lymphocytes ∑ IL 1 , IL 6 and TNF-a by macrophages ∑ GM-CSF, IL 3 , BaDF, NGF by epithelial cells ∑ GM-CSF, IL 6 by fibroblasts and endothelial cells (see the complete list in Table 1 .5, also including IL 16 and IL 17 ) Allergic airway disease is associated with skewed Th2 cytokine production, although the underlying cause of this aberrant immune response is not well understood. GM-CSF, IL 3 and IL 5 prolong eosinophil survival and stimulate their degranulation. GM-CSF stimulates granulocytes to generate LT and PAF, basophils to release histamine and neutrophils and macrophages to secrete more cytokines, among which are found IL 1 , TNF, G-CSF and M-CSF [58] .All ILs act according to what is summarized in Table 1 .5, in concert with the newly released and activated factors ( Fig. 1.56 ), perpetuating the allergic inflammation and forming the molecular basis of its becoming chronic. IL 4 plays a highly important role in promoting the isotypic switching of B IgG cells into B IgE cells and, as a consequence, increases the concentrations of total IgE and sIgE recorded in allergic asthma. IL 6 en-has a striking vasodilatory activity, can cause, in concert with other mediators, edema and therefore BHR [362] . Tables 11.4 and 11.5 [22, 283] summarize the mediator activities and the pathological events for which they are responsible. These immunotransmitters, able to induce their own release besides that of other mediators and of regulating the expression of the receptors, have specific effects on Modified from from [22] . TXA thromboxane A, PAF platelet activating factor, NKA neurokinin A. hances in B lymphocytes IL 4 -induced production of IgE antibodies. All these data reinforce the opinion that ILs perform a leading role in propitiating in the airways the conditions that trigger asthmatic manifestations. Wild et al [721] found that the administration of IL 18 increased the production of ragweed-specific IgE and IgG 1 in serum in a mouse model of allergic asthma, effects consistent with the support of a Th2 phenotype. Furthermore, intranasal application of IL 18 together with ragweed increased the production of BALF eosinophilia, suggesting the stimulation of an allergic sensitization when coadministered with an allergen [721] . On the contrary, IL 11 has a profound inhibitory effect on antigen-induced inflammatory responses in the lung. This inhibitory response is associated with marked diminution in eosinophil recruitment, Th2 cell accumulation, Th2-like T cell IL production, and antigen-induced endothelial cell CD106 expression. [692] . Thus, IL 11 is an important mediator of the remodeling response in the asthmatic airway and its elaboration reflects, at least in part, an attempt at healing and repair in this setting [752] . In all inflammatory diseases the processes of recovery begin early in the course of asthma (premodeling). They start in the first stages of cell denudation and lead either to restitution to a former state (restitutio ad integrum), which does not leave a residue, or leaves changes in connective tissue deposition and to permanently altered airway structure which, in its permanent state, constitutes cicatrization [681] . Epithelial BM collagen deposition and thickening is already apparent in asthmatic children before the age of 3 years, compared to symptom-free children [501] . Normally, healthy epithelium is in contact with cylindrical cells, contact which is characterized by tight junctions in such a way that the adjacent cells oppose an impermeable barrier to the intercellular passage of macromolecules, inhaled pollutants, infectious agents, and other particulate matter. The mucosa generally absorbs small molecules as well as proteins by paracellular means, but when exposed to foreign agents it responds with plasma protein leakage. However, persistent allergic airway inflammation in asthma is accompanied by airway remodeling changes, including hyperplasia of airway mucus glands, myofibroblasts, smooth muscle and vasculature, and the thickening of the airway wall with subepithelial fibrosis [261] . The prospect of developing irreversible airway obstruction should prompt early treatment decisions [189] . IL 11 induces an airway remodeling response in the asthmatic airways characterized by tissue fibrosis, deposition of types I and III collagen, and myocyte and myofibroblast hyperplasia [752] . It follows therefore that the remodeling process can also involve other cells such as leukocytes and ECM [491] . devoid of cilia [51] . This tissue often exfoliates, with separation of mucosal cells, leaving the basal layer exposed but intact, though weakening the connection system between columnar and basal cells. It is clear, therefore, that to induce the effects described, destructive activities must take place, concentrated in both space and time (Figs. 11.30, 11.31) [52, 53] . Epithelial damage could depend not only on the cytotoxic effects of eosinophil-derived basic proteins and oxidants, but also on neutrophil intervention which, in vitro [413] and in vivo [677] , have the ability of producing similar effects, as well as the exfoliation and detachment of the epithelium from the BM [413, 677] . In addition, epithelial injury is mediated by exogenous factors such as air pollutants, viruses and allergens as well as by endogenous factors including the release of proteolytic enzymes from mast cells [260] . It has been suggested that such changes could also originate from an abnormal response of epithelial cells, stimulated by leukocytes [413] . Moreover, IL 13 hyperproduction promotes subepithelial fibrosis and thickening of smooth muscle layer [321] . The epithelial response to these stimuli in asthma may be impaired despite up-regulation of CD44 capable of enhancing presentation of EGF (epidermal growth factor) ligands to EGF receptors (EGFR) [260] . Their biological activity is regulated by a range of cytokines and growth factors: ∑ IL 1 , PDGF and TGF-b stimulate their proliferation and collagen synthesis. Furthermore, IL 1 can activate T lymphocytes that respond with TNF. ∑ GM-CSF induces the formation of CD106, CD54 or CD62E and is able to stimulate the eosinophils either directly or through the induction of IL 5 R (CD125]. ∑ IL 1 , TNF, TGF-a, histamine and heparin regulate mast cell number and function, modulating their content of proteoglycans and enhancing the filling of mast cell granules in the bronchial mucosa. ∑ IL 8 has an important role in directing inflammatory cells in the bronchial mucosa [534] . The fibroblastic activation may be responsible for the deposit of interstitial connective tissue under the epithelial BM [534] . During the initial processes of recovery, fibroblasts proliferate actively, secreting proteoglycans and collagen. These cells, which perform a vital role in the secretion of ECM components, can change phenotype in response to environmental signals and differentiate in myofibroblasts [534] . Macrophages, lymphocytes, mast cells and eosinophils, cells which probably participate in various ways in ECM fibrosis and/or remodeling [53] , are always almost present in the granulation tissue. As the recovery process progresses, tenascin, a glycoprotein, qualitatively increases, while fibroblasts and the newly formed vessels diminish [189] . Myofibroblasts, deposits of fibronectin and laminin, and collagen hyperplasia are also found. Even in case of restitution to a former state, the regeneration of the submucosa is always, in part, abnormal [53] . Epithelial cells release a wide spectrum of molecules participating in airway repair including: ∑ Fibronectin, growth factors ∑ Cytokines including IL 9 , IL 11 , IL 16 and IL 18 ∑ Chemokines such as GM-CSF and eotaxin ∑ Adhesion molecules such as CD40 and CD54 [681] The bronchial epithelium is actively engaged in defense of the airways by secreting mucus and many specific and nonspecific cytoprotective molecules that trap and inactivate inhaled components. If the asthmatic immune inflammation is protracted over time, the adhesion mechanisms are compromised, which should ensure the maintenance of epithelial integrity, represented by desmosomes, hemidesmosomes and tight junctions (zonula occludens) and zonula adherens, which is located immediately below the intercellular joints ( Fig. 11 .28) [327] , as well as adhesion molecules such as b 1 -integrins and CD62E [413] . In some cases, a pseudostratified epithelium can be observed with increased goblet cells and vacuolized ciliated cells, often However, regenerative activities begin with the reepithelialization of the denuded surface, as demonstrated by various stages of ciliogenesis related to nonciliated superficial epithelium, and by a quantitative increase in goblet cells in the ciliated epithelium. The speed and rapidity with which restitution to a former state begins and continues is surprising. Vascular endothelial cells proliferate, forming granulation tissue, the newly formed vessels have open junctions that permit the release of proteins and erythrocytes, the microvasculature also responds by recruiting neutrophils [490] . It is likely that bronchial epithelial cells originally involved with the lesion are able to initiate these reparatory activities, producing chemotactic factors for intact epithelial cells and for PMNs [600] . Facilitated by an adequate hydraulic pressure, the plasma proteins enter the lumen of the tight junctions of the intact cylindrical cells that circumscribe the denuded area [491] . These cells respond immediately, leading to a supposed intervention of specific factors in vivo: substitute secretory cells, both ciliated and basal cells, undifferentiate, become flattened and migrate beyond the membrane -a process which takes place rapidly in the 1st min following denudation (about 3 mm/min) [490] . A fibrin and fibronectin gel, also rich in neutrophils, contributes in covering up the stripped areas where it is continually enriched with plasma until the epithelium has been regenerated with the tight junctions [491] (Fig. 11 .32). The fibronectin, present in the ECM with a great number of binding sites for the cells and other molecules, appears to participate in epithelium regeneration since it is responsible for cell adhesion, a mediator role that is shared, via different receptors, with collagen and laminin [600] . However, the simple restitution of epithelial cells has the potential of being involved in many aspects of structural alterations, present in human airways, that are at the base of symptoms similar to asthma (Table 11 .6) [491] . ECM is a complex and dynamic meshwork influencing many cell biological functions such as development, migration, and proliferation. ECM plays an essential supporting structural role, which differs somewhat in the three physiological zones of the lung: the proximal conducting airways and vasculature, the distal gas-exchanging respiratory zone (alveoli), and the intervening transitional zone (respiratory bronchioles). In the conducting airways, the ECM of the rigid cartilage (composed largely of proteoglycans and collagen) and the more flexible interstitial tissue support the adjacent epithelial and smooth muscle cells. ECM allows some mobility to 754 CHAPTER 11 Asthma  The BM of surface epithelium is composed of two layers: the basal lamina (referred to as the true BM) and the lamina reticularis. The basal lamina is of normal thickness in asthma. However, thickening of the lamina reticularis is a characteristic feature of the asthmatic bronchus, occurring early in the disease process [681] . Studies of postmortem reports initially led to the conclusion that in asthmatics the BM becomes thicker as a result of edematous collagen deposits, with fibrils of a plexiform appearance. Electron microscopy (EM) and immunohistochemical investigations subsequently made it clear that BM is normal. Airway thickening be-regulate airway and vascular diameter and acts as an essential stabilizer for preventing airway collapse during expiration. In the respiratory and transitional zones, the ECM is more dynamic to accommodate the constant fluctuations in alveolar volume that accompany inspiration and expiration. Macromolecules constituting ECM are secreted locally and consist of fibrous proteins (fibronectin and laminin) embedded in a hydrated polysaccharide gel containing several glycosaminoglycans including hyaluronic acid. ECM is a dynamic structure, and an equilibrium between ECM synthesis and degradation components is required to maintain its homeostasis [681] . Fig. 11 .32. Plasma exuded through barriers in the airway microvasculature and mucosa. Plasma leakage from subepithelial microcirculation multiplies its solutes and expands in volume. It surrounds the basolateral aspects of the epithelial cells; by increasing the hydrostatic pressure the exudate may compress the sides of these cells. At a certain pressure, the tight junctions at the apical pole of epithelial cells would separate due to the increased pressure load. Plasma leakage through the ensuing holes in the venular wall. Tight junctions are reestablished as soon as the interstitial pressure returns to normal levels neath the BM occurs with collagen deposition and other ECM proteins, including fibronectin and tenascin in the connective tissue layer surrounding the blood vessels, and alveolar interstitium [261] . The degree of collagen deposition into the BM lamina reticularis in children who underwent fiberoptic bronchoscopy is such that airway fibrosis evolves in parallel with eosinophilic inflammation before a clear clinical diagnosis of bronchial asthma could be made [501] . Instead, reticular BM thickness or inflammatory cell number determined in ultrathin sections of endobronchial biopsies were not present in 53 infants aged 3.4-26 months with severe wheeze and/or cough, with reversible airflow obstruction [548] . In healthy subjects, BM, independent of asthma etiology, gravity and duration, shows a pseudothickening [51] caused by a deposit of collagen III, V and I (to a lesser extent) and of fibronectin in the lamina reticularis situated below the BM [534] , confirming that at the basis of this process, is the activation of contractile myofibroblasts in the subepithelial site, rather than an epithelial dysfunction [53] . Since BM appears to be the main structure appointed to the regeneration organized by connective tissue, forming a sort of framework for parenchymal cell replication, its structural alterations, in the airways of asthmatics, can result in an ECM deficiency of the submucosa that could be at the basis of airway remodeling. Most patients with asthma have an abnormal superficial elastic fiber network with fibers appearing fragmented. The deeper layer of elastic fibers is also abnormal in most patients with asthma: fibers are often patchy, tangled, and thickened. EM studies show that a severe elastolytic process occurs in patients with asthma, and in some patients, disruption of fibers has been observed. The pathogenesis of asthma ( Fig. 11 .11) is in large part identified with BHR which, together with epithelial alterations, secondary to immune inflammation, constitutes the causative element in triggering the chain of events that result in an asthmatic attack. On the whole, BHR measurement could represent a useful means of identifying in advance subjects at risk of PFT worsening, well correlated with severe manifestations and treatment implications. Nevertheless, in children a noticeable variation in clinical symptoms is found, which is why, in practice, the usefulness of measuring BHR is somewhat reduced. Furthermore, the uncertainty of a certain correlation of this parameter with the clinical state and its diversity over time renders BHR not very reliable as a diagnostic test for selecting an adequate treatment and for determining a prognosis [108] . Other authors have demonstrated that reduction of activated T cells and CD25 is correlated with that of BHR [119] but with an improvement of FEV 1 , the number of eosinophils and probably of IL 5 [665] decreases. With the aim of prospecting the nosological picture, it should be clear that [110, 603, 722] : ∑ BHR is not synonymous with asthma, neither is it systematically predictive of an asthmatic state. Rather it is one of the factors that suggest asthma presence, without possessing the characteristics of a diagnostic symptom in se and per se. ∑ BHR is not, therefore, the only component of the physiopathological mosaic of asthma. The etiopathogenic mechanisms of mucus hypersecretion and of bronchial edema are equally noteworthy factors not to be ignored in the overall picture [238] . ∑ BHR does not lessen with age [344] as previously suggested [414] because a small child is more susceptible to BHR also because of airway caliber reduction [584] . BHR is present even in chronic airway disease such as CF [186] . Virtually all asthmatic children have BHR, but not all children with BHR suffer from asthma [108, 476] : more precisely it can be present in apparently healthy children and absent in others who are asthmatic, while nonasthmatic subjects can manifest signs of BHR -for example if faced with a cold air challenge [238] . It is also possible that BHR is present without any ongoing symptoms, which can be ascribed to patients unable to describe correctly the symptoms during initial history [496] . On the other hand, transitory BHR can be present in children with viral infections; therefore exogenous events increase BHR in both healthy and asthmatic subjects [753] . Even exposure to small allergen doses can trigger BHR, without, however, altering airway caliber [722] , whereas in asthmatic children the opposite occurs: continuous or repeated exposure to aeroallergens induces a BHR increase, causing an almost unnoticeable progressive increase, persisting for weeks or even months. This gives rise to the premises of a vicious cycle, consequently subsequent exposures, even to nonallergic or banal stimuli easily provoke BHR. Even if inflammatory injuries caused in loco are numerous and severe, when administering histamine parenterally bronchoconstriction is likely to occur [167] ; therefore what results is the product of a series of joint causes. At present, the contribution of environmental factors is considered important in eliciting BHR, as demonstrated by a greater asthma prevalence in southern countries, where SPT+ to aeroallergens is less [287] . The pathogenic links between damage provoked by pollutants, mediators, inflammation and BHR are harder to characterize [238] . Strongly suggestive in this regard is that BHR may be possibly generated by O 3 with a potent inflammatory action on airways. Injected in test animals, it induces NCA and of LTB 4 formation in epithelial tissues, provoking in the respiratory mucosa a PMN in-of the lower airway nervous control mechanism, entrusted either to the sympathetic (adrenergic system) or parasympathetic system (cholinergic system). These systems are usually in balance: the cholinergic system promotes bronchoconstriction; the adrenergic system, in contrast, modulates bronchial smooth muscle relaxation. At the present time, the ANS airway innervation is considered to be far more complex. Given that sympathetic fibers do not directly innervate smooth muscles, in addition to the usual adrenergic and cholinergic fibers, fibers belonging to a third system called NANC (nonadrenergic and noncholinergic) have been reported, which include both e-NANC (excitatory noncholinergic/nonparasympathomimetic structures) and i-NANC (nonadrenergic/nonsympathomimetic inhibitory structures) [21] . The fibers of cholinergic nerves travel along the tenth pair with synapse in the airway parasympathetic ganglia, spreading to smooth muscles and submucosal glands. Stimulation of vagal receptors present in the airways provokes one of the most powerful bronchoconstriction reflexes, besides mucus secretion. In particular, mechanical or pharmacological stimulation of vagal terminals occasion, by reflex action, characteristic asthma symptoms and signs such as coughing and rapid, shallow breathing. Cholinergic innervation of upper airways is most dense, thinning out in the periphery. Animal studies have shown that stimulation produces little effect in the lower airways [21] . Given that in humans the muscarinic (M) receptors are equal to parasympathomimetic, which are diffused even in the lower airways, investigations to ascertain whether in asthma there was an increase in their activity [719] were made. This view point is supported by a study showing that many stimuli having a bronchospastic action, such as S dioxide (SO 2 ), histamine, PG and BK, also affect afferent receptors, therefore inducing reflex bronchoconstriction inhibited by anticholinergics. There could also be an increase in neurotransmitter activity in cholinergic ganglia, either as a result of other neurotransmitter or mediator release, or because postganglion nerve terminals carry out an action favoring acetylcholine release [18] . Given that adrenergic nerves are able to inhibit this production via receptors b or a 2 , it is likely that a deficiency in adrenergic responses is reflected in cholinergic tone increase by an increase in muscarinic receptors or others related to them. Asthmatics have an exaggerated bronchospastic response to cholinergic action, but an analogous effect can also be brought about by other spasmogens; therefore an isolated deficit of muscarinic receptors with inhibitor action is unlikely. [21] . The presence in vivo in humans of five muscarinic receptors (only the first three are found in the human lung), each encoded by different genes, has been filtration from the microvasculature which, once activated, release TXA 2 able to sensitize the smooth muscles or the nerve terminals, thereby causing BHR [287, 317] ( Fig. 4.22) . O 3 induces BHR, be it through oxidizing damage [317] , in concentrations of 0.12-0.15 ppm [606] , or through indirectly stimulating the tachykinins to induce BHR [315] . As a result of BHR, the threshold of bronchial response to various stimuli that unleash factors with bronchoconstriction effects, is noticeably lowered. Among these, the role of mediators should be considered. As seen in Tables 11.4 and 11.5, those capable of inducing BHR are many: PAF and PG, and, to a lesser extent, TXA and LT, even if it is clear that there is not only one but a combined interaction at work [283] . These factors are therefore capable of causing a clinical response, increasing and/or maintaining BHR, as a result of which vicious cycles are born between clinical response, immune inflammation, triggering factors and symptoms. BHR degree is often correlated with disease severity with important clinical implications, when these are clearly the important correlation in children between BHR to histamine and the increase in mast cell tryptase and of the number of eosinophils/mm of BALF [187] . As opposed to other children, serum tryptase levels did not increase after BPT with allergens [240] . Recent studies suggest that depletion of IL 12 [415] and overexpression of IL 13 [321] increase susceptibility to development of BHR, even in the absence of inflammation [308] . To better explain the pathogenesis, various theories have been put forward based on the intervention of endogenous and exogenous factors. Among the endogenous factors, the following may be enumerated [154] : 1. Autonomic nervous system (ANS) alterations ∑ Deficit of adrenergic receptors ∑ Vagal hyperactivity ∑ Altered neuropeptide release at the sensory terminals 2. Anomalies of smooth bronchial muscles 3. Anomalies in airway epithelium ∑ Desquamation of the epithelium ∑ Loss of EDRF 4. Changes in the biochemical homeostasis 5. Effects of NO Several inflammatory mediators effecting neurotransmitter release by airway nerve endings, or able to act upon ANS receptors, have been identified. Conversely, neuromechanisms could contribute to the inflammatory reaction at the bronchial level. It is therefore possible that some BHR mechanisms are linked to an imbalance reported. Stimulation of such receptors results in bronchial secretions and in smooth muscle contractions, and correlated G proteins have also been identified and cloned [318] . Specific studies have clarified the functionally active types [77, 719] : ∑ M 1 , located in the parasympathetic ganglia, submucosal glands and in alveolar walls, regulating both vagal tone and mucus secretion. They are inhibited by pirenzepine. ∑ M 2 , located on the postganglion nerves in the presynaptic position, with autoreceptor functions, inhibit acetylcholine release and, consequently, the reflex vagal bronchoconstriction actions. They are blocked by gallamine. ∑ M 3 , located in the bronchial and bronchiolar smooth muscles in the postsynaptic position and in submucosal glands promote muscular contraction and mucus secretion. They are inhibited by hexahydroxyl-diphenidol. ∑ M 4 , located in the postganglionic cholinergic nerves, airway smooth muscle and alveolar walls, inhibits acetylcholine release. ∑ Human skin fibroblasts also express M 2 , M 4 , and M 5 . In particular, M 1 , like a 1 adrenoreceptors, are linked to Gq, and activate phospholipase C (PLC), from which results the turnover of phosphatidylinositol-bisphosphate (PIP2) and Ca ++ release, whereas M 2 are connected to Gi containing Gi 2 to bind to GTP; the stimulation of the receptor inhibits adenylcyclase and modulates the ionic channels for K + and Ca ++ [21] . The inhibiting activity is not operative in asthmatics, probably due to a functional deficiency of the M 2 receptors, which could be expressed by an exaggerated cholinergic activity because of the loss of a normal acetylcholine release retroinhibition, thereby explaining the sometimes dramatic bronchoconstriction action of b-blockers in asthmatics. In fact, a block of b-receptors could abrogate the antagonistic actions of cholinergic nerve activation, thus achieving an excessive acetylcholine release, which is not autoregulatory in asthmatics [21] . Therefore, nonselective antagonists of muscarinic receptors, for example, atropine or ipratropium bromide (IB), are able to mediate both bronchodilation (M 1 and M 3 receptors) and bronchoconstriction (M 2 receptor) [525] . The potential deficits of the parasympathetic cholinergic system affecting BHR are the following: ∑ Increased cholinergic reflex activity ∑ Stimulation of the efferent nerve terminals, exposed as a result of inflammation ∑ Vagal hyperreactivity ∑ Increased acetylcholine release via ganglionic or postganglionic effects ∑ Smooth muscle hyperresponsiveness or hypersensitivity to acetylcholine-mediated cholinergic activity ∑ Possible decrease or dysfunction of protective M 2 , which turns into exaggerated cholinergic activity The M 2 deficit is confirmed by the simple observation that pilocarpine, their antagonist, blocks SO 2 -induced bronchoconstriction by limiting the acetylcholine, whereas in asthmatics such a block does not occur. It is significant that influenza virus selectively damages M 2 receptors rather than M 1 , probably by an effect of neuraminidase action on M 2 sialic acid residues, providing a valid mechanism to explain increased BHR in subjects after viral infection [77] . The bronchodilator effect of adrenergic stimulation seems to depend on the basal vagal tone. The adrenergic receptors are of the a type, divided into three a1, subdivided in A, B and C, four a2 further divided into A, B, C and D, and type b, with b1, b2 (present in the lungs with a relationship of about 1:3) and b3 with a more limited diffusion. Also G proteins have been cloned for these receptors, a 1 to Gaq, a 2 to Gai and b to Gas (which, together with G i2 form the four subfamilies of the a subunit) [318] . Under normal conditions, the sympathetic tone (specifically the b receptors), represents the main balance unit by antagonizing the vagal tone and diminishing vagus-induced bronchoconstriction. The b-receptor antagonists have no effect on the cholinergic tone of a healthy subject; on the contrary, they cause bronchospasm in asthmatics with a greater efficacy the more the vagal tone is raised, a stimulation produces mucus secretion and, above all, mast cell mediators are discharged. b2 receptors are widely distributed over the bronchial area: they can be found on smooth muscule fibers and in epithelial and glandular cells. In asthmatics, due to a poor reactivity of the adrenergic system, it is likely that the main role in regulating the bronchomotor tone is played by circulating catecholamines. Epinephrine inhibits the bronchoconstriction action of histamine, acting as a true circulating hormone, and could play a protective role with regard to bronchoconstriction agents. In asthmatics and other atopic subjects, a deficit of b-adrenergic receptors and a parallel a-receptor hyperresponsiveness, which could be expressed into blocking the balance of vagal action, has been demonstrated. A supposed genetic deficit of b-receptors in asthma has remained an enigma since the beginning [636] , even if this anomaly can be hypothesized in a few patients [502] . The postulated interconversion between b and a receptors has been negated by studies with monoclonal antibodies on receptor structures [90] . Generally, potential deficits of the adrenergic system can be summarized as follows: ∑ An increase in a receptors in the airways ∑ A decrease in a-receptor antagonists ∑ A quantitative and/or qualitative decrease in b receptors ∑ Anomalies in receptor splitting, with a, M 1 and M 3 increase causing a reduction in the number of b and M 2 receptors in all organs and can be produced by cells other than CNS cells [21] . It has been suggested that anomalies of the NANC system, in its two components (e-NANC and i-NANC), represent another important component in asthma pathogenesis. Numerous stimuli release neuropeptides [18, 90] or tachykinins in the respiratory tract, neurotransmitters that send signals not only to nerve cells, but also to other cells or systems. So-called neurogenic inflammation is based on the contribution of numerous neuropeptides to the pathogenesis of a major part of the anatomopathological lesions thus far reported, thereby determining a series of biological responses during the recurrences of acute asthmatic attacks such as vasodilation, plasma extravasation into postcapillary venules, an increase in vascular permeability, exudation of capillaries in the bronchial lumen and edema development, contraction of bronchial smooth muscle cells, mucus hypersecretion, coughing, activation of inflammatory cells and their adhesion to endothelial cells [426] (Fig. 11 .33). As seen in Table 11 .8 [18] , several tachykinins released by sensitive nerve endings belong to e-NANC: SP, NKA, NKB (neurokinin A and B), CPS (capsaicin), NPY (neuropeptide Y) and CGRP (calcitonin gene-related peptide) [21] . SP is released by afferent nerves to sensitive amyelinated terminations known as C-fibers. SP binding sites are diffused throughout the smooth muscles of the whole tracheobronchial tree. Injected intravenously, in humans SP provokes an evident vasodilation, probably Thus it appears that the postulated b-receptor deficiency is secondary to asthma, probably as a result of the inflammation. Additionally, if the increased a receptors were of any significance, the a blockers could have a therapeutic effect, which, however, does not happen; consequently these possible anomalies have few clinical implications. Finally, given that treatment with b-blocking drugs can yield bronchoconstriction in asthmatics (but not in normal subjects), a deficit of this system is excluded [77] . Given the existence of a certain amount of polymorphism related to some b 1 loci, for example at codon 16 (Gly 16), which is more evident in subjects with nocturnal asthma [661] , it has been hypothesized that this phenotype predisposes to the nocturnal reduction of the b 2 -adrenergic function and therefore to the scant effect of b2-adrenergics on the clinical symptoms. It has also been suggested that substituting glutamic acid with Glu 27 (glutamine at codon 27), which has a receptor with reduced suppression, is associated with a bronchoconstriction reduction [234] . In conclusion, G protein studies are justified by a possibly better understanding of the action mechanism of related drugs. The functions of NANC, composed of naked nerve fibers that are found free in the submucosa, are summed up in Table 11 .7 [18] . NANC was originally described in the gastrointestinal tract. Given that the respiratory system also derives from the cephalic portion of the archenteron, it is logical that NANC and related peptides can be found in both systems; they are, however, present 759 Airway Remodeling because of the antidromic activation of local axon reflexes that affect the sensitive C-fibers and also other tachykinins, while PFT alterations result from smooth muscle constriction. SP could, therefore, be the e-NANC neurotransmitter [18] . The presumed mechanism of axon reflexes is that, in response to harmful stimuli in the airway lumen, nerve fibers in the epithelium layer release SP, while other fibers of the same axon, by supplying different targets, release SP by antidromic activation. In this manner, stimulation of epithelial nerve fibers can provoke bronchoconstriction and extravasation of plasma proteins with an axon reflex by SP release near airway smooth muscles and postcapillary bronchial veins [333] . In particular, SP bronchoconstriction activity, at least in vitro, is fulfilled antidromically when reflex cholinergic bronchoconstriction is present, as a result of exposed afferent nerve endings situated under desquamated epithelium, especially those of C-fibers [426] . As well as affecting the muscle, SP also affects bronchial mucus production, stimulating both the submucosal glands to an increased secretion, as well as the myofibrils surrounding glandular ducts to increase their secretion. Furthermore, SP increases mucociliary clearance in the airways [362] . Other evidence suggests that SP induces aspecific degranulation of cutaneous and peritoneal mast cells, but not those of the airways, and causes T-lymphocyte proliferation, neutrophil and alveolar macrophage phagocytosis [90] , and enhances neutrophil [88] and eosinophil chemotaxis [90] . Thus, we understand how BHR to SP in asthmatic children is correlated with asthma severity [429] . NKA-induced bronchoconstriction, which in the airways travels in the same fibers containing SP, is dosedependent [126] and stronger than that provoked by SP, which, in turn, is more powerful as a vasodilator and vasopermeabilizer. Therefore, in the present state of our knowledge, NKA and SP exercise a bronchoconstriction 4 and NKA, an effect not inhibited by adrenergic or cholinergic receptor activation nor by cyclooxygenase blocking activity [90] . Also characteristic of VIP is an abundant distribution in both upper airways and nasal mucosa, but not in bronchioles, which is why its bronchodilator action is greater in regulating the caliber of large airways, and is practically wholly ineffective in small airways. In consequence, the therapeutic effect in the asthmatic patient is deceptive, either because specific VIP receptors are scarce in this location, as has been said, or because of the effect of peptidases (for example tryptase) capable of degrading VIP which are released by inflammatory cells present in asthmatic airways [333] . It is characteristic that tryptase degrades VIP with bronchodilator effect, but not so SP, thus promoting bronchial reactivity, causing in prospective BHR and bronchospasm [96] . The prevalent conclusion is therefore that i-NANC exercises a modulator activity of cholinergic effect rather than a direct bronchodilator action [96] . Potential alterations of the i-NANC system foresee the following mechanisms: ∑ Shortage of nonadrenergic neurons with inhibitor activity ∑ Increased degradation of VIP/PHM ∑ Reversible blockage of nerve ganglia or nerve endings with nonadrenergic inhibitor activity ∑ Numerical reduction of VIP/PHM receptors [96] What, then, is the role of neuropeptides? In a healthy individual at rest, the adrenergic, cholinergic and NANC effects are balanced for a perfect bronchopulmonary homeostasis and there is a balance between the bronchodilator mechanisms (b-adrenergic system + VIP/ PHM) and bronchoconstrictors (a-adrenergic/cholinergic + SP/NK/CGRP) [90] . As shown in Table 11 .7, NANC displays opposing functions: broncho-and vasoconstriction, and broncho-and vasodilation. Confronting the neuropeptide multiform actions, the host generates numerous defense mechanisms. If, on the one hand, VIP reduction/inactivation could contribute to asthma pathogenesis, on the other, the neutral endopeptidase 24.11 (NEP, CD10) is capable of inactivating neuropeptides in bronchial epithelial cells. The contrasting effects of NKA and SP on the one hand and PHM and VIP on the other have already been mentioned. There could be present anomalies of the intrinsic microganglia, the efferent parasympathetic fibers containing VIP, and the VIP receptor system [18] . On the other hand, the effects of bronchoconstriction NANC hyperactivity could, in some patients, play a negative role, such as a hypersensitivity of sensitive nerves and of axon reflexes, amplifying inflammatory responses by releasing factors stimulating such sensitive endings, or an increased smooth muscle sensitivity to bronchoconstriction tachykinins [426] . Its sensitivity to O 3 or to action (e-NANC) that can clash with i-NANC, which has a bronchodilator effect, as well as with EDRF, with an effect on bronchial smooth muscle equal to NO [10] . Epithelial denudation can involve the loss of these factors, thereby increasing reflex bronchoconstriction -an effect also mediated by tachykinins contained in microganglia [90] . CPS stimulates SP release from sensory terminals and, to the same degree as SP, provokes bronchoconstriction and an increase in vascular permeability. Furthermore, it suppresses not only the inflammatory effects of airway vagal stimulation but also the effects provoked by tobacco smoke and chemical irritants [90] . CGRP is a peptide codified by the same gene as the thyroid C-cells which, in turn, codifies calcitonin. It is located in the sensory nerves where SP is also present. It performs a notable vasodilator action on smooth muscle, strong and persistent, associated with eosinophil infiltration, potently contracting in vitro human airway smooth muscle [96] , acting in synergy with immune inflammation mediators, including PAF, BKs and LTB 4 .It has been credited with a role in blood flow regulation in tracheobronchial small vessels [18] and in APC inhibition [525] . NPY has no direct effect on tracheobronchial smooth muscle contraction, while it stimulates bronchial gland secretion and is a long-acting constrictor of vascular smooth muscles. The effects of tachykinins are mediated by specific receptors in such a way that each of them activates, by preference, a distinctly separate receptor: NK-1 are activated by SP, and NK-2 by NKA [90] . Possible deficits of the e-NANC system comprise the following mechanisms: ∑ Enhanced noncholinergic excitatory activity ∑ Diminished degradation of tachykinins ∑ Stimulation of the afferent nerve endings in which travel neuropeptides, exposed as a result of inflammation ∑ Smooth muscle hyperresponsiveness or hypersensitivity to neuropeptide bronchoconstriction activity [96]  Human PHM (peptide histidine-methionine), its homologous PHI (peptide histidine-isoleucine), the equivalent in many mammals and VIP, have the same localizations and analogous functions (they are codified by the VIP gene in the same pro-hormone and they have in common >50% amino acid structure) [90] . They have a bronchodilator activity, more pronounced with VIP, with an effect 50 times greater than isoproterenol [21] . i-NANC works via parasympathetic nerves containing VIP and/or PHM, these being the only neuropeptides with a bronchodilator action. VIP, most probably an i-NANC neurotransmitter, is found in parasympathetic ganglia (efferent ways), localized in the cholinergic motor nerve endings in smooth cigarette smoke [315, 337] has recently been defined. Furthermore, the afferent sensitive fibers, even terminating normally in the brain, can branch out and, by antidromic stimulation, be induced to release tachykinins and other mediators in peripheral areas via an axon reflex [426] . The final result therefore is that in the asthmatic, unlike in a healthy individual, the balance tends toward bronchoconstriction effects [90] . Neuropeptide action can be linked to that of ILs, with a point of unification represented by the joint action of autacoids, substances physiologically active such as histamine, serotonin, PG, etc. Thus, on the one hand ILs contribute to asymptomatic epithelial damage, while, on the other, neurotransmitters contribute to bronchoconstriction ( Fig. 11 .34) [418] . Another factor can be represented by dysfunctions in the stimuli-response relationship. As is known, Szentivanyi [636] advanced the theory that a b-receptor anomaly was at the basis of BHR and other related disturbances. However, there is an interesting paradox worth mentioning: b-adrenergic receptors are quantitatively normal, but cell response to b-adrenergic stimulation is reduced, as can be noted in atopic patients who have not received treatment. Further, administering b-adrenergic drugs causes a rapid receptor desensitization [318] : what conclusion can finally be deduced from this? b-adrenergic receptors are made up of peptides from the cellular membrane which bind either to epinephrine or to norepinephrine. The link to one of these hormones activates Gs -a G-protein -which in turn stimulates adenylyl cyclase to produce cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), while the Gi inhibit this process. A chain of Gs is deactivated by pertussis toxin. This activity was studied in the murine model in which it reproduces both the immunological anomalies of atopy and hyperreactivity in diverse organs [516] . An experimental model of this type has made possible the definitive demonstration that G-protein deficit is at the basis of signal transduction anomalies [318] , or of stimulus-response relationship common to both AD and asthma. Hyperplasia and hypertrophy of bronchial smooth muscles have been observed, though insufficiently to provide an explanation of BHR pathogenesis, since it is improbable that they are already present in asthmatic children. The reduction of bronchial caliber, especially of bronchioles, which are unique in being surrounded by smooth muscle [255] , caused by the joint action of  The effect on the mucosal epithelium by toxic products of eosinophil origin has been analyzed, together with changes that range from loss of ciliated cells to complete epithelial denudation: ∑ As previously said, the epithelial barrier permeability is increased by histamine, LTs, BKs, CPS, SP, TNF-a, reactive oxygen metabolites, viruses, etc. Consequently, access to the mucosa and submucosa by inhaled molecules such as allergens, microorganisms, dusts, environmental pollutants and inflammatory mediators is made easier. Among those last named, superoxide anion has a particularly harmful effect on the airways with its highly destructive radicals [726] . The epithelial damage exposes intraepithelial mast cells, afferent nerve endings and, in particular, irritating vagal receptors to the combined action of various stimuli. These lie in the upper and lower tract mucosa immediately below the epithelial tight junctions [722] , which, though physiologically impermeable, allow a greater absorption of allergenic and irritating substances to take place if altered. In addition, the mucociliary clearance reduces its filtering action of inflammatory substances and airway secretions. ∑ Experimental studies have highlighted the role played by epithelial denudation, which could lead to NEP loss, usually found not only on smooth muscle, but also on target cell membranes such as epithelial, endothelial and alveolar type II cells, submucosal glands, postcapillary venules and nerves, all of which are sites of tachykinin activity [126] . NEP selectivity makes it possible to degrade SP and NKA, blocking their bronchoconstriction activity while the inhibition, especially if associated with O 3 -induced BHR [406] , potentiates NKA [126] and SP effects [421] . Exfoliation of epithelial cells and other serious cytopathic effects -caused by viruses harmful to cells [20, 72, 130] , chemical substances, pollutants, etc. -points first to a NEP deficiency, thereby preventing both the destruction of bronchoconstriction neuropeptides as well as the synthesis of those with bronchodilator action, also amplifying the inflammatory action of tachykinins and reflex bronchoconstriction [18] . If, as a result of epithelial damage, the sensitive nerve endings of bronchial mucosa remain exposed to the bronchial lumen, having a much lower threshold of stimulation, they are stimulated continually by inflammatory metabolic products [21] . In this way, as a result of antidromic stimulation of these nerve endings, an exaggerated neuropeptide release with a highly rapid and diffuse action on bronchial airway occurs [21] . BK could play a part in allergic asthma since, administered either inhaled or IV, it provokes bronchospasm in asthmatics, but not in healthy subjects. It works indirectly, probably via the stimulation of sensitive nerve terminals, with consequent retrograde release of SP no longer degraded by NEP, NKs and CGRP by an axon reflex [421, 429] . BK antagonist therapy is based on these premises [18] . Following these phenomena of mucosal edema, smooth muscle constriction and intraluminal secretion increase, cannot, in itself, constitute the primum movens of the pathology under examination [722] . Mast cells and eosinophils are both able to contribute in a more significant manner -by means of tryptase action on smooth muscle tone [154] . In the asthmatic, smooth muscles could evolve under the effect of certain stimuli from a multiple-unit to a single-unit system. These changes in the contractile properties of smooth muscle in human lungs may be associated with changes in myosin H chain isoforms, thus contributing to BHR [138] . It has also been suggested that in asthmatics there is a reduction of an epithelium-derived inhibitory factor (EDIF) of the muscle contractility, or of NEP, a factor with a relaxing effect on smooth muscle [675] , where it is located. In any event, the result is the loss of the barrier mechanism and therefore of bronchoconstrictor control. A noteworthy impulse has also been given to cAMP study, which that is entrusted with muscle relaxant effects and inhibits mast cell degranulation and consequently histamine discharge, unlike cGMP (cyclic guanosine monophosphate). Normally there is a balance between cAMP and cGMP, which can be broken in either one direction or the other. Maintaining the cAMP level within normal limits is useful to bring adrenergic receptors back to a functional stage in which they can again be activated. Recent research shows that cAMP production induced by adrenergic b receptors is not deficient in the PBMCs of asthmatics compared to healthy subjects [155] , as was suggested previously. However, PBMCs of patients even with stable asthma do not have the ability to make adenylyl cyclase more powerful [155] , so the lack in increase of cAMP concentrations is correlated with a transduction defect. There are two possible pathogenic mechanisms: the existence of a generalized deficit involving bronchial smooth muscles, no longer relaxed under the effect of cAMP metabolism, and therefore the impossibility of potentiating cAMP when facing a bronchoconstriction stimulus, which could result in an equilibrium upset between cAMP and cGMP; or, alternatively, the adenylyl cyclase deficit could reflect negatively on IL production by PBMCs, the tissue inflammation being at the basis of an increased BHR [155] . In vitro, in biopsy specimens of airway smooth muscle of asthmat sufferers, there is a correlation between muscle functions and BHR level, indicating that BHR, which is observed in the presence of a great variety of stimuli, is a demonstration of the noteworthy contribution given to bronchoconstriction by the bronchial smooth muscle spasm. The differences between asthmatics and nonasthmatics have not yet been fully elucidated, nor have the variations induced by different types of stimuli. It is believed that there are other exogenous factors at the basis of this anomaly. Probably, the airway infiltration of inflammatory cells contributes to smooth muscle tone by the action, on a local level, of various mediators such as histamine, PAF and eicosanoids [138] . neurogenic inflammation affecting target cells, cholinergic reflex bronchoconstriction, hyperemia, edema and mucus hypersecretion, with an increase in vasal permeability will follow. This axon reflex, amplifying the immune inflammation, could therefore represent an important pathogenic element in provoking asthma and BHR [21] . ∑ Moreover, there is a receptor loss: if they belong to the b type, there are no disturbances of note; if they are H 2 , production of PGE 2 , which acts by inhibiting, at least in part, the smooth muscle responses to histamine and NKA ceases. The receptor loss by numerous epithelial ILs involves mainly IL 1 , with a possible amplification of the inflammatory response and consequential jeopardizing of lesion repair [22] . ∑ Other studies have shown the loss of NO production, catalyzed by iNOS (inducible NO synthase) and induced into the epithelium by TNF-a, IL 1b and IFN-g, also compromising both vascular muscle regulation and harmful chemical substance clearance [10] . ∑ Another pathogenic hypothesis cites the inhalation of endotoxins present in Gram-negative germs, identified with the somatic antigen, which are located in the cell walls as LPS as a possible culprit. Such toxins, brought into homes by environmental germs, could provoke bronchoconstriction in asthmatics in doses of 20-40 mg, and in healthy subjects as well in doses of 200 mg [433] . ∑ BHR persistence, also produced by MBP-induced discharge of factors of epithelial origin stimulating muscarinic reactivity [57] , could be explained by the thickening of the lamina reticularis below the BM [600] . A crucial point is played by myofibroblasts, capable of producing subepithelial fibrosis, whereas in asthmatics an excess in their numbers below the bronchial epithelium, with a close correlation between the number of myofibroblasts and the collagen layer thickness, has been reported. It is therefore evident that fibrosis jeopardizes the respiratory function and that a network of contractile myofibroblasts underneath the BM markedly contributes to BHR persistence. Moreover, activated eosinophils present in these locations, as well as deposits of ECP, stimulate the synthesis of hyaluronate and proteoglycans in human fibroblasts [600] . The main cause of asthma inflammation, which, apart from smooth muscls spasms, also depends on mucosal edema and on secretion changes, with formation of mucus plugs in the smaller bronchi. Bronchial edema is attributable to the increase in capillary permeability with exocytosis of serum proteins in interstitial areas with an array of mediators among which are histamine, BKs, PAF, PGE and LTs, potentiating each other in turn. For example, PAF-produced edema resulting from the harmful action exercised on microvasculature is increased by the coincident action of LTC 4 [283] . There are several other edema factors such as cigarette smoke, viral infection, pollutants, neuropeptides and proteases, all capable of altering epithelial integrity and mucosal permeability: thus allergens may penetrate across the junctions that are no longer tight, for their encounter with APCs [619] . Even if the pathophysiological contribution of this process is little known, it has been seen that following an airway effect of local BPT, an extensive edema is formed and that both edema and inflammation increase the thickness of airway walls, thus contributing to bronchospasm in children [619] . Therefore, pharmacological prevention of the increase in vascular permeability requires the inhibition of histamine receptors and of arachidonic acid metabolism through cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase, with the aim of simultaneously blocking PGs and LTs, respectively. The role of bronchial edema has been the object of few studies and merits a closer examination [283] . The formation of tenacious mucus plugs in the airways is one of the characteristics of asthma [255] . Mucus hypersecretion, a possible consequence of hyperplasia and metaplasia of submucosal glands and goblet cells that cover the respiratory tree, contributes to an exaggerated insufflation and focal atelectasis. The pathogenesis is complex: various mediators and cells of inflammation are able to contribute -along with C-fiber activation also stimulated by BK and inhalants -leading to mucusproducing cell quantitative increase and exocytosis, as well as to myoepithelial cell contraction [362] . The mediators (Tables 11.4, 11.5) that are principally responsible are, in order: LTD 4 >LTC 4 (active in picomolar concentrations) >HETE (nanomolar) >PGF 2a = PGD 2 = PGI 2 = PGE 1 = PGA 2 >histamine H 2 (mmolar) [283] . Mucus hypersecretion may be produced by IL 13 even in the absence of inflammation [321] . We summarize the numerous mechanisms that lead to vasodilation and hyperpermeability evidenced so far, with consequent bronchoconstriction amplification. Plasma proteins release from tracheobronchial microvasculature and the forcible fluid passage deriving from it are important inflammation components and, consequently, a basic characteristic of pathogenesis [177] . They occur gradually within 10-20 min after an allergenic BPT in the airways: the stronger the stimulus, the greater the exudation [490] (Fig. 11 .32). The continuous lial cells, stimulating the proliferation of Th1 at the expense of Th2 cells [443] . Further improvements in techniques will permit monitoring inflammatory events, by measuring exhaled NO (eNO) levels and providing a noninvasive marker for the early diagnosis (Chap. 6) and a more precisely aimed treatment of pediatric asthma [759] . [333] ∑ Pharmacological stimuli, histamine, methacholine, acetylcholine, hypotonic aerosols [154] , all medications may provoke adverse responses (see "Treatment"). In a cross-sectional study on 1,881 children aged 6-7 years, the use of antibiotics during the 1st year of life was significantly associated with wheezing. This increased risk was a prerogative of children genetically predisposed to atopic immune responses [156] . ∑ Physical stimuli: fresh and dry air [206] , ultrasonic mist, smog, inert dust, atmospheric pollutants, physical exercise [606] . ∑ Chemical and pollutant stimuli: oxidant, harmful and irritating gases, tobacco smoke [167, 195, 621] ( Table 2. 26) ∑ Allergens, especially aeroallergens ∑ Viral infections [167] Predisposing Factors Anatomical and physiological factors, specific to the pediatric age, can predispose to the airway obstruction, as can extrinsic factors more readily predisposing, some of which are even etiological factors. Anatomical dynamic factors are represented by an evident reduction, more or less to scale, according to age, of anatomical parameters. The following [174, 204, 274, 589, 648] show that the child's airways are not to be viewed as a miniature replica of the adult's airways: ∑ At birth, the lungs weigh ª48 g; at 1 year 130 g; at 12 years 390 g; in the adult ª1,200 g. ∑ The estimated gas-exchange area at birth is almost 27-fold lower than that of an adult: 2.8 m 2 , 32 m 2 at 8 years and 75 m 2 in the adult. ∑ The total pulmonary capacity of a newborn child is 180 ml; at the age of 16 it is 5,100 ml. ∑ Bronchi and bronchioles have reduced caliber and length. The diameter increases by 200%-300% from birth to adulthood. vascular extravasation can give rise to the production of mediators of inflammation facilitating the intraluminal transmigration of inflammatory proteins. Since the absorption of solutes is directed above all by mediators, the mechanisms that reduce or abolish their activity cause the regression of protein accumulation in the lumen, an effect which can be achieved following treatment with CSs in moderate doses (400 mg/day) [669] . Nonetheless, measurements in controlled asthma have shown little or no increase in airway permeability and no correlation with BHR degree [722] . The loss of pulmonary tissue elastic properties can cause bronchoconstriction. Testing immunized animals to BPT with ovalbumin, the resulting protein transudation in the airways inhibits the surfactant, with a consequent Raw increase [356] . Until 10 years ago, NO was known only as one of the components of the harmful gases discharged by vehicles and cigarette smoke, also held to be jointly responsible for acid rain and the O 3 hole. Recently NO equal to EDRF has been localized at the airway epithelium, where it could act as a mediator of bronchodilation under the nervous control to counterbalance the bronchoconstriction caused by mast cell degranulation (or by ET). Moreover, NO, produced in large quantities, provokes an increase in vascular permeability and cytotoxic effects, contributing to epithelial denudation [10] . In this cytotoxic activity, it also mediates O 3 effects -a significant fact given the increased incidence/prevalence of asthma [759] . From a pathogenetic point of view, NO deriving from airway epithelium (as well as from macrophages, mast cells and Th1 cells) could play an important role in amplifying and perpetuating the Th2-mediated inflammation (Chap. 4). iNOS can be induced in the epithelium by pro-inflammatory ILs such as TNF-a and IL 1b , secreted by macrophages, and IFN-g derived from Th1 cells [759] . It is also feasible that even viral infections induce iNOS production by the epithelium, thus increasing NO secretion during asthmatic attacks [443] . Elevated concentrations of NO thus generated in the airways carry out a suppressive action on Th1 cells and a reductive action on IFN-g, resulting in a net proliferation of Th2 cells. CSs inhibit iNOS both directly and by blocking pertinent IL synthesis by macrophages [443] : in fact, in asthmatics treated with oral or inhaled CS (ICS), NO levels are reduced, in contrast to untreated patients [293] . Exhaled NO levels are increased in atopic nonasthmatic children and, all the more, in atopic asthmatic children, but were reduced by 53% by ICS treatment [587] . Therefore, ICSs inhibit NO production by epithe-∑ The alveoli are reduced in number. The number of alveolar structures increases exponentially from 30-32 weeks of intrauterine life until birth, the newborn has only 8%-11% of the alveoli of an adult and with a less differentiated structure, and by the age of 8 the alveoli increase tenfold, and proceeding to adulthood, the airways triple in diameter. ∑ The cartilaginous tissue, the submucosal glands and the smooth muscle of lower airways complete their development at 8 months; the smooth muscle of proximal airways in adulthood. ∑ Formed cilia and mucus are found in the airways at 13 weeks of life. ∑ The thorax is extraordinarily flexible in infancy and it stiffens with age. Within this anatomical framework, the neonatal epithelium develops structurally and provides important functions in the normal airway development. [584] The younger a child, the more evident the anatomical details facilitating the onset of bronchospasm, therefore provoked by trivial causes such as a mucosal edema and/or a catarrhal secretion. The relevant infantile characteristic of the respiratory mechanism in this context is the resistance to air flow. A reduction in bronchioles and/or bronchi caliber translates into a hindrance of air flow so that, in young babies and children, an obstruction, even a limited one, requires great exhaling pressure during exhalation, from which derives a dynamic compression of the peripheral tracts which worsens the obstruction itself. Among the principle causes of this, some of which have been better defined by new methods of investigation (Chap. 6), are the following. The relationship between the caliber and upper and lower airways is physiologically reduced as compared to that observed in adults. This condition exposes an infant, often male, to severe bronchoconstriction because the edema, the secretions and the cellular debris cause stenosis more easily in bronchioles of a smaller diameter.We must also consider that Raw varies inversely with the fourth power of the radius of bronchioles. Therefore, it is sufficient that the radius is halved, for example caused by a viral infection, for the Raw to be increased 16- fold. An increase in caliber occurs only towards 5-6 years of age. The infant chest wall is less rigid, so that the thoracic wall and airways have a greater propensity to deformability. The decreased static elastic recoil properties predispose to an early airway closure even during tidal breathing. On the other hand, greater elasticity means that the airways of babies are more easily susceptible to vibratory movements, which are at the basis of wheezing. The cartilaginous substances of the trachea and segmental bronchi also are less rigid, so that airway collapse is facilitated during expiration. The early airway closure at elevated pulmonary volumes determines an alteration of the ventilation/perfusion rate, potentially complicated by hypoxemia. Decreased smooth muscle in peripheral airways facilitates obstruction especially following an edema, mucous hypersecretion and infiltrations by inflammatory cells. Infants and children are therefore more vulnerable to small airway pathologies. Smooth muscle reduction compared to that of an adult also contributes in many cases to a poorer response to bronchodilators (the younger the baby, the more this is the case). Compared to an adult, an increased percentage of mucosal glands in walls of the larger bronchi contributes to intraluminal mucous secretions and in turn to airway obstruction. Another anatomical disadvantage from a mechanical point of view is the position of the diaphragm since the angle of insertion on the ribs is horizontal, in contrast to an oblique insertion in adults, which, combined with the compliance of the bronchial wall devoid of cartilaginous support and that of the thorax with low skeletal or muscular support, cause retraction of the rib cage during inhalation, therefore requiring greater effort, whereas in adults the diaphragm tends to elevate the rib cage, thus increasing its diameter. Functional insufficiency of the diaphragm occurs because the increased effort cannot be sustained efficiently, caused by relative reduction of muscle fibers. The diaphragm must ensure >70% of respiratory excursions, given that a child up to the age of 6-7 years con-lower airways, bronchial edema, dense mucous secretions and respiratory dynamic alterations as well [307] . Sensitization to inhalants is rare in very early infancy, but clearly prevalent from 3 years onward ( Fig. 9 .39), with high successive sensitization to pollens and to Der p 1 (  Of children affected with AD, 44%-53% are at risk of developing other atopic disease, namely RA or asthma (Table 5 .8), and 47% of these children have asthma with or without BHR (Table 7 .10). Additionally, some foods can be responsible for asthma in allergic children, more frequently than in adults (Tables 9. 18, 9.19) . M cells transport allergens to subepithelium where they facilitate allergen access to lymphoid tissues, then interacting with allergen-specific T cells or with B IgE lymphocytes, finally reaching the airways via blood vessels and causing BHR and asthma [537] even in children <2 years of age ( Fig. 11 .35) [450] . In our division, it is not infrequent that children react positively to food provocation testing manifesting wheezing. tributes only in part to thoracic cage expansion, either because of increased compliance (see "Decreased Lung Elastic Recoil"), or because the movements of lifting and lowering the rib cage are conditioned by their almost horizontal position, and by the almost cylindrical form of the thorax, so that diaphragmatic contraction during inhalation can cause subcostal retraction rather than rib elevation. The alveolar openings that permit ventilation between alveoli (pores of Khon) and the bronchoalveolar communications (canals of Lambert) are decreased in number and size in the infant lung, thus impeding a normal collateral ventilation. For this reason, young babies and young children are more easily susceptible to atelectasis distal to obstructed airways. The reduced caliber of peripheral airways can be a risk factor for relapsing wheezing. The functional residual capacity (FRC), airway conductance (Gaw) and V max were found to be significantly lower in young babies suffering from bronchiolitis before the age of 1 year and related relapses [375] . In conclusion, the fact that the airways of the very young face obstructions more easily and more rapidly than older children is not surprising. Therefore the lung is more vulnerable to inflammation in this early age and this may result in persistent airflow limitation [274] . We have so far outlined some of the principal causes for which the particular predisposition needed to develop not only reversible wheezing in the very first period of life, but also bronchoconstriction and respiratory insufficiency, which is at the basis of the high number of hospital admissions and assisted breathing that is recorded in this age group. Several factors can modulate the onset and severity of asthmatic clinical symptoms in a child [174] . With advancements in research, knowledge regarding the way in which these factors provoke alterations at the airway has been perfected, even if still far from achieving a univocal pathogenetic mechanism. It is certain, however, that asthmatic children display BHR, an abnormal marked sensitivity to most varied stimuli, which in healthy subjects usually do not induce responses of any particular clinical relevance. In asthmatic children, these and other stimuli can provoke smooth muscle spasms of the  Aretaeus reported cases of exercise-induced asthma (EIA) at the first Olympic games recorded in history [13] . Twenty-four centuries later, approximately 3%-10% of athletes taking part in international competitions are affected by asthma. Physical activity regularly leads to a decline in PFT in children and adolescents with asthma. This decline is a consequence of what is known as EIA, a theme of much research in recent years [542] . EIA is found in up to 63% of asthmatic children (Table 5 .11), in 30%-40% with RA [307, 584] , in nearly 3%-8% of schoolchildren and in 13% of child athletes [542] . The main cause is BHR that typically appears after 3-8 h of vigorous exercise, so that in diagnosing EIA, the subject is required to run on an equipped treadmill under controlled environmental conditions [39] . After 5-15 min, bronchoconstriction, ranging from moderate to severe and lasting 15-30 min can occur, followed by a refractory period of 2 h during which no exertion can provoke EIA. Delayed reactions can occur even 8-12 h later, and this two-phase reaction is not uncommon [39] . Free-running tests and treadmill tests ( Fig. 6 .24) induce EIA [542] more easily. Objectively, arduous exercise -for example: running, bicycle riding or crosscountry skiing, but not long-distance skiing [335] -provokes bronchoconstriction in at least 70%-80% of asthmatics, which is neither intense nor prolonged [394] . Running provokes EIA more easily than jogging and this, in turn, more frequently than walking. In evaluating the triggering factors, a variety of issues come into play including cold, dry air, environmental pollutants, a recent allergic exposure or inflammatory mediators. The pathophysiology and cause of EIA remain controversial, but two theories have been offered: 1) the hyperosmolar theory and 2) the airway rewarming theory. Warm air and humidity can accelerate bronchospasm, exacerbated by cold air inhaled during exercise, especially if open-mouth breathing results from increased need for O 2 [606] . Hyperpnea induced by physical exertion causes water release via evaporation of mucosal periciliary fluid with consequent local hyperosmolarity [606] , which could provoke bronchospasm via direct vagal action, or by induction of mast and other cells to produce mediators, thus activating the successive cascade of immunological events [464] . Other authors, however, place emphasis on heat loss caused by hyperpnea, which could have consequences on subsequent rebreathing, with vasodilation of peribronchial vascular plexus, hyperemia, edema and, finally, bronchoconstriction [66] . Therefore, thermal shock could occur [394] . Since asthmatics have a hyperplastic vascular bed possessing greater permeability, the initial cooling down and subsequent warming up could cause bronchospasm via a true vascular blockage, with the onset of reactive hyperemia and edema involving the bronchial walls [394] . At the moment, however, there is insufficient data to clarify which of the two theories (warming up and hyperosmolarity) is pre-eminent. In studying BALF before and after exercise, no significant differences were found in histamine and tryptase levels. This could make doubtful a possible intervention by the airway mast cells accompanied by liberation of histamine and other mediators [278] . However, Kikawa et al have shown that in children with severe asthma, following physical exercise, LTE 4 urinary levels were clearly higher than those of controls, thus concluding that airway reactivity seems to be a salient factor in EIA development [294, 295] . The analyses of histaminemia have revealed elevated levels of histamine 10 min after BPT, returning to normal after 20 min and significant subsequent reduction of T lymphocytes 2 and 4 h after the test [66] . Certain drugs such as ASA and food additives can induce bronchospasm in asthmatic and nonasthmatic subjects, by means of a nonallergic mechanism probably linked to the interference on mediator regulation (Chap. 10). Irritant factors [584] like smoke, gases, dusts, vapors and immunotoxic substances, in addition to being harmful to the cells, have a more negative clinical impact on asthmatics compared to the general population, being able to provoke or aggravate asthma in subjects with BHR. Irritants, formaldehyde, fine wood dusts, etc. must be avoided in the home of asthmatic children (Chap. 24). Other factors involve meteorological, hygrometric and/ or barometric variations. Fog, in addition to its specific effect (larger drops deposit in smaller bronchi and trigger bronchoconstriction, smaller drops stratify on bronchial walls increasing mucous fluidity), can also transport harmful dusts and fungi. Tables 4.15-4.17 and Fig. 4 .22 illustrate the agents that compromise the immune system in test animals and, prospectively, in human beings. The immunotoxic substances include: exhaust gas, atmospheric dust, industrial smog -notably SO 2 , O 3 , NO, NO 2 -as well as anion superoxide, from which H 2 O 2 , OH -, O 2 "singlet" ( 1 O 2 ) and other O 2 radicals are derived, with directly damaging effects on human cells [262] . Small doses induce BHR and high and/or persistent doses induce lasting toxic effects [262] . TNF-a and IL 1b are able to elicit a rapid and temporary increase in ciliary beat frequency following release of NO and, consequently, of iNOS [648] . Experimental data show how in children the in-tion of inhaled viral allergens and their absorption [20] . Clinical studies confirm that VRIs markedly aggravate or even directly trigger asthmatic symptoms in a high rate of cases, most especially in very young children [20, 167, 611] (Table 6 .1). A re-examination of studies done in pediatric cohorts (0->17 years old), with respiratory infections of both upper and lower airways and asthmatic symptoms, found a link with viruses in 25.2% of general cases and in 35.6% of asthmatics [69] . In the follow-up of 11-to 17-year-old students with asymptomatic BHR, 45% developed a symptomatic form and 80% had suffered from past respiratory infections [753] . More recently, early respiratory infections indicated an increased, rather than a decreased, risk of developing bronchial obstruction during the first 2 years of life and of having asthma at 4 years of age [427] . Two cohort studies indicate that RSV lower respiratory tract infections (LRTIs) during infancy are associated with increased risk of asthma in the following years [585, 597] . Respiratory inflammation (RSV) during the 1st year of life seems to predispose, possibly via IL 13 -mediated mechanisms, to augmented allergic airway responses [361] . Moreover, both pneumonia and RSV LRTI during the first 3 years of life are associated with an increased risk of asthma or asthma-like symptoms up to 11 years of age [88, 616] , or up to 5 years in Gambian children [670] . In infants and toddlers, RSV plays an especially important role and can induce respiratory disturbances with variable degrees of severity, culminating in hypoxia [714] and even death [271] . In particular, the course of bronchiolitis in a baby can prove very severe, sufficient to warrant RSV classification as the greatest agent of morbidity and morbility in the 1st year of life [477] . As with other respiratory viruses, RSV causes an increase in IgE [428] , altering their immune regulation, and of eosinophils, which show a greater ability to participate in the immune inflammation [130] . It is highly probable that during infections, virus-specific IgE linked to mast cells react with an RSV antigen, by releasing vasoactive and inflammatory mediators, and start the whole cascade of events leading to BHR already described [72] . The increased airway permeability opens the door to allergens triggering allergic asthma, with an increase in cholinergic responsiveness and a decrease in the b-adrenergic responsiveness, thereby increasing BHR and airway inflammation. RSV has an additional specific influence on PMNs producing O 2 •and TXB 2 , with a significant chemiluminescence when incubated with RSV, and cytotoxicity for target cells [298] . They are the dominant inflammatory cells in the nasal secretions of babies with RSVinduced bronchiolitis, and in BALF of infants who have undergone ventilation for severe VRI [182] . It appears that PMN-deficient motility ( Table 2 .10) protects very young babies from RSV. RSV pathogenicity is shown by its ability to activate eosinophils notably producing cationic proteins in greater quantities, and obviously causing persistent BHR and damaging the respiratory crease of respiratory symptoms and asthma are proportional to that of pollutants [694] , even acting in newborn babies (Table 2.26) .As yet, no studies have quantified the relationship between atmospheric pollution and BHR [694] . In communities with high O 3 concentrations, the RR (relative risk) of developing asthma in children playing three or more sports was 3.3 (95% CI, 1.9-5.8), compared with children playing no sports; thus, air pollution and outdoor exercise could contribute to pediatric asthma development [390] . Patients exposed to particulate air pollution and gaseous pollutants such as NO 2 concentrations can present with an increased prevalence of asthma symptoms and medication use [687] . Children are more at risk both because of the smaller caliber of their airways, and because of the increased RR with a resulting increase in inhaled pollutants per kilogram of body weight [521] ; therefore an irritation provoked in an adult may turn into a significant bronchoconstriction in a very young child. Passive smoke could constitute the most important environmental factor in the etiology of early infantile asthma (Tables 4.21-4.23), being involved in 38%-65% of cases (Fig. 4.23 and Table 5 .11). Viral respiratory infections (VRIs) have been related to the onset of recurrent wheezing illness and asthma in infants and are probably the most frequent cause of exacerbations of established disease in children. Studies discussed in Chap. 4 have shown that children with siblings have a lower prevalence of allergies and asthma than do children without siblings, an association attributed to a preventive effect of early infections, according to which early-life infections up-regulate Th1 lymphocytes that may inhibit the expansion of allergen-specific Th2 lymphocytes, thus limiting the development of allergic diseases. The action of respiratory viruses on the airways is modulated by several factors, including atopy, male sex, age, type of virus, possible BHR and development of correlated symptoms [545] . Infection by respiratory viruses can induce in children (even nonatopic children) [72] airway obstruction even though limited to the upper tract, BHR, functional changes in the airways, and PFT changes, which can persist for weeks after recovery (Table 11 .9) [20, 72, 130] . Infections, especially if contracted in the early stages of life, can damage the mechanisms underlying the mucosal barrier, thereby allowing a massive allergen penetration. As seen in Table 11 .9, the necrotizing action that various influenza and parainfluenza viruses can have on the bronchial mucosa has been demonstrated: denuding it of its epithelial covering, they allow a greater penetra- Infection by Rhinovirus is by far the most common cause of wheezing disease in older children [280, 547] (Table 11 .10) [81] , in that it significantly stimulates mast cell mediator release, contributing to BHR development and possible late reactions [341] . In ten patients with AR and BHR, their responses to BPT to both histamine and allergen (ragweed) were evaluated during an experimental infection from Rhinovirus. Four weeks later, BHR had increased in both tests; specifically, only one patient reacted prior to infection with a late response to the allergen, while 8/10 manifested it during observation, 5/7 persistently (Fisher, 0.0027) [341] . Rhinoviruses are able to increase BHR and promote the appearance of late reactions to the specific allergen. Even if the virus does not usually have a direct effect on the airways, the infection heightens the eosinophil response to challenge [341] . The major risk of causing asthma in children aged >2 years was that of the association of Rhinovirus infection with the sensitization to domestic allergens and exposure to passive smoke [161] . In asthmatic children the triggering element of the exacerbations was represented in 66% of cases by Rhinovirus, compared to 13% in controls. Furthermore, the relapses and PEF reductions were numerically equal to hospital admission [281] . It is hypothesized that even a subliminal inflammation induces in endothelial cells CD54 expression, CD11a/ CD18 receptor, which plays the role of the linking site for the virus. Linking to CD54, the virus can interfere with CD11a/CD18 and the host's natural defenses, thus inflammatory reactions to viral infection can stimulate Rhinovirus receptors to induce new ones, thereby spreading viral infection [280] . To summarize these reports, a unifying mechanism has been proposed [72] , suggesting that virus action has a major implication in triggering asthma. From Table  11 .10, it can be deduced that the epithelial damage and persistent inflammation that follows have an effect on sensitive nerve endings, provoking the onset of bronchoconstriction reflexes. Above all, respiratory viruses, in addition to provoking airway inflammation and prolonging its effects -either directly or through cellular products infected by them (such as IFN-g) -promote the formation of virus-specific IgE and the release of mediators. epithelium with subsequent airway exposure of vagal receptors [298] . Studies [201, 298] indicate that RSV triggers eosinophil degranulation by directly activating them [299] , a plausible and stimulating link between VRI and asthma exacerbations. Attention has been drawn to the role of alveolar macrophages in RSV infections: once infected, they acquire the ability to replicate RSV, also expressing HLA-DR and immunoregulatory ILs such as IL 1b and TNF-a, capable of stimulating phagocyte cytotoxic responses. Consequently macrophages, by regulating local immune responses, perform an antiviral activity conditioning both viral replication and disease severity [401] . Lymphocyte studies have shown that the CD4/CD8 ratio in the lower tract is 22.5:1, and in the upper tract 15:1: thus diminishing the CTL importance, residing, however, in intraparenchymal locations, not intraluminal or bronchiolar [182] . Even influenza and parainfluenza viruses, Rhinovirus, Mycoplasma and Adenovirus often trigger respiratory infections, which can be found in very young babies as copathogenic factors [514] , becoming recurrent in older children (Chap. 22). In 70% of nasal lavages in children <2 years with respiratory wheezing, RSV has been identified in 35% and Rhinovirus in 15% of cases [161] , whereas in the >2-year-age group, only 31% of the cultures proved positive, with Rhinovirus predominant and an almost total lack of RSV [161] . Therefore, in older children, Rhinovirus influenza virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, etc. are the most frequent cause of wheezing. In a group of children aged 1-6 years, the viral origin of 45% out of 115 infection episodes of the airways has been ascertained, underlining, in the following order, the causative role of: Coronavirus, Rhinovirus, influenza virus A, and parainfluenza 1-3 viruses, Adenovirus, and Mycoplasma. The study revealed an RSV absence [400] and a total agreement with the identification process carried out in three other pediatric cohorts [477] . As well as Chlamydia trachomatis active in bronchiolitis, Chlamydia pneumoniae can induce in asthmatic children, especially <4 years [428] , asthmatic crises whose onset is linked to sIgE production with consequent triggering of symptoms, which can wholly overlap what is known properly asthma. Indeed, the more protracted and pronounced sIgE production, the longer the disease duration [175] .  The influence of emotions on asthmatic attacks has been widely documented; therefore any emotional conflict being experienced by the child must always be taken into consideration (Table 5 .11), even if for parents such occurrences are rare (Table 6 .1). It is known that in 12%-13% of wheezing increase can be triggered by worries regarding school [307] , a forthcoming trip, the birth of a sibling, etc. -all events that carry great emotional weight. Often the child uses the disease as a means of attracting parental attention, or to obtain privileges which might not otherwise be granted, or to divert existing tensions within the family nucleus, thereby avoiding subsequent conflicts. Studies carried out using BPT have confirmed the asthmogenic role of physiological factors: it has been noted that blind placebo (BP) inhalation prior to the test significantly reduced the onset of asthma, while open BPT with placebo, which the children believed to be the specific allergen, provoked an obvious bronchospasm [363] . Sometimes, a child has bronchospasm following laughter or crying, in the latter case with a frequency of 40% [339] : this can be explained by the mechanical airway irritations caused by intense and rapid exhalations, as well as by hyperpnea, which, as previously mentioned, plays its part in EIA and can trigger bronchospasm even in healthy subjects.We have observed numerous cases of parents of asthmatic children who literally forbade them to laugh, for fear of setting off an asthmatic attack, and, conversely, other children tried blackmail by threatening to cry [68] . Pediatricians should clarify all these issues both to parents and children, especially explaining that these forms of attack recede spontaneously within a few minutes and should not be viewed as a cause for alarm; but should not be underestimated [68] : a child belonging to a small group of asthmatics under observation over a period of 10 years died following a fit of laughter [339] . AR, frequently complicated by sinusitis, can aggravate asthma (Table 11 .1). The presence of such conditions should therefore be ascertained in all asthmatic children and, especially, in those affected with chronic asthma who also presented Rx evidence of sinusitis [179] . GER (gastroesophageal reflux) may be a severe disease and is often neglected in the etiopathogenesis of asthma [702] . GER is a pathology more commonly found in younger infants who have not yet learned to sit up and is determined by functional immaturity of the lower esophageal sphincter. GER is caused by the retro-grade movement of gastric contents across this sphincter into the esophagus [702] . The estimated incidence of GER in asthmatic children reaches 50%-60% and can be an aggravating factor of the disease, higher than in the general population [702] . The reflux of acid material provokes bronchospasm, very probably through a vagal reflex. Exposed receptors could be activated with stimulation of the X afferent fibers situated in the esophageal mucosa. This could provoke a vagus-mediated increase of BHR with amplification of the bronchoconstriction effects of other exogenous stimuli [221] . The activation of this reflex between the esophagus and the airways is also related to the fact that embryologically both derive from the anterior archenteron and that they have a common autonomous innervation (Chap. 9). Based on this pathogenetic mechanism, the cough-producing clinical symptoms that have no other etiologies [170] such as in the child with asthma who is difficult to control, or who shows symptoms 1-2 h after having gone to bed, etc. [584] , can be assessed. In 40 children aged a median of 14 months with persistent respiratory symptoms, a significant decrease was noticed in the number of further GER-related episodes of recurrent bronchopneumonia, reactive airway disease, nocturnal symptoms and in their nutritional status after starting antireflux therapy [277] . An esophageal scintiscanning was used to detect GER in 126 asthmatic children with a mean age of 2.31 years who were refractory to routine antiasthmatic medication [647] . The treatment of the asthmatic child, summarized in Table 11 .11 [26, 360, 476, 508] , is determined according to age and according to the severity of the symptoms. There are four routes of administration: The parenteral route is recommended for more severe cases, to achieve elevated concentrations of a drug in a short period and to obtain a good bronchodilatory effect. This method does not produce selective effects in that the drug spreads more or less at the same rate to all areas; it is most often used in EDs or in intensive care units (ICU) and, in any event, under medical supervision for asthmatics in severe conditions (in a state of unconsciousness, requiring intubation). The oral route, having a latency time of 1-2 h linked to the rate of gastric absorption, has neither rapid nor selective effects, but certainly finds higher compliance. Higher dosages are needed than for the inhalation route to reach effective levels in the bronchial area, possibly with a higher rate of incidence of undesirable effects as a result of b 2 and b 1 receptor stimulation in extrapul-To obtain the desired therapeutic effects using inhalatory routes of administration, the following must be considered: ∑ The size of the inhaled particles ∑ The appropriateness of the apparatus used ∑ The child's compliance ∑ The child's age, strictly linked to the above (Table  11 .11), because MDIs (metered-dose inhales) developed for use in adults may be difficult for young children to monary sites. In any event, it is recommended for the very young who are not able to tolerate aerosols and in cases of nonsevere asthma [79] . Inhalation is the preferred route, in that it reaches the tracheobronchial tree immediately and requires lower doses, with a parallel decrease in adverse effects compared to other routes of administration. The subcutaneous (SC) route is reserved for epinephrine and terbutaline. use, because they may have difficulty coordinating actuation with inhalation [28] . Regarding the first point, only particles with a diameter of 1-5 mm efficiently reach the lower airways. If they are larger, they will stop in the upper airways and, if smaller, they will reach the alveoli, or be exhaled. In asthma, there are 4 routes to administer drugs by inhalators: 1. Predosed MDI or pressurized MDI spray can (with spacer) 2. Dry-powder inhaler (DPI) 3. Pneumatic nebulizer with compressor 4. Traditional aerosols These are predosed spray cans or MDIs that manually release fixed predosed drug doses (puffs). These MDIs, if not used properly, deposit up to 90% of the drug in the oropharynx with the same effect of a drug administered per os; moreover, steroids may cause dysphonia and predispose the child to oropharyngeal candidiasis [517] . Therefore, the instructions for use should be carefully followed [78] : ∑ Shake the inhaler. ∑ Hold it upright and exhale deeply. ∑ Close the lips around the mouthpiece. ∑ Press the inhaler while inhaling slowly and as deeply as possible. ∑ Hold the breath for at least 10 s (in such way that the drops are deposited on the airways as a result of gravity and not of impact). ∑ Exhale slowly and wait 1-2 min, if the dose is to be repeated. MDIs are suitable for children at 10 years (Table  11 .11) and 7-8 years of age if properly instructed [273] . The main difficulty arises as a result of poor coordination at the moment of discharge, mostly due to: ∑ Rapid inhalation ∑ Blocking the inhalation at the moment when the aerosol discharges its content ∑ Breathing though the nose ∑ Premature or delayed breathing (lack of hand-lung coordination) [78] The major problems can be obviated by keeping the mouthpiece 3-5 cm away from the lips, an expedient that overcomes the instinctive defense of small children using their tongue to impede any further drug entry to the lower airways: the effect becomes noticeably increased, also allowing for confirmation of its proper use, but it is not always a recommended method for this age group [78] . It should be noted that MDIs contain chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 11, 12 and 114, which provoke cough and reduce ventilatory function in one-third of patients [128] . New hydrofluorocarbon inhalers (HFIs) deliver albuterol, BDP, and various other medications. To overcome the difficulty caused by the lack of synchronization between discharge and act of inhaling, spacer devices are available. These are adapters consisting of an expansion chamber placed between the MDI and the patient's mouth, facilitating use in preschool children [273] . It consists of a container in which drug particles are held in suspension, that is held inside the apparatus until the moment of inhalation, discharging the required amount even in situations of noncompliance. Consequently, a minimum deposit in the oropharynx is assured and a higher percentage of inhaled drug, as well as a decreased incidence of side effects resulting from systemic absorption [25, 220, 359] . After the puff, the majority of finer small drops remain suspended inside the spacer for at least 30 s, thereby allowing even the youngest children to undergo treatment. The larger aerosolized particles, on the other hand, are withheld, thus obtaining a more rapid administration of the drug and a more efficient supply and an unquestionably adequate cost-effectiveness ratio [436] . In addition to being helpful to children unable to use MDIs correctly, such adapters become indispensable for those undergoing an ICS treatment, to reduce the pharyngeal drug impact and prevent the side effects listed above [80] ( Fig. 11.36 ). Another innovation has been the introduction of a valved holding chamber (VHC) at the mouthpiece of large-volume spacers to aid the inhalation by very young babies. The principal MDI models with valve spacers are as follows: with the Aerochamber (150 ml volume), also available with a mask for infants and young children, the rate of swallowed medication is barely 2%-3% compared to 60% and 80%, respectively, with the spray or MDI; inhalation is also correct [357] , while the rate reaching the airways is 17% compared to 14% of an adequate MDI inhalation [357] .Also available are Babyhaler (Fig. 11 .37) and Volumatic, more suited for older children, with volumes of 350 ml and 750 ml, respectively, Fisonair, Nebuhaler and Turbohaler for DPI budesonide (BUD) (Oxis) Turbuhaler for formoterol and Diskus for salmeterol. In addition, there is the pocket-size spacer-discharger of predosed aerosol (Jet) for BDP ( Fig. 11.38) , which avoids the synchronization problem mentioned and has an inhalation quota of 30% and a swallowed one of 10% [359] ; and the breathactuated Autohaler, a dispenser of albuterol. Therefore these last two are useful in acute attacks and for children who have difficulty in using MDIs [128, 485] -not for everyone. Patients aged 5 years have difficulty with the Autohaler since it requires quick inhalation, as with MDIs [128] . For nurslings and very young children, a well-designed mask must be placed on the dispenser (Fig. 11.37 ), or alternatively, an Aerochamber can be used for nurslings with a closely fitting anatomically designed mask [180] , to avoid an empty space between the mask and the face, eventually changing the type of mask if necessary. The choice between large or small chambers has been resolved in favor of the latter, which are easier to manage if the child rejects the treatment, and are also less frightening. They release at least the same amount of medication as the larger ones, if not more, at a low tidal volume (TV) rate [180] . If the spacers are not equipped with valves suitable for nurslings, during inhalation the air can be contained within a nonanatomical mask, thus reducing the dosage inhaled [44] . For children unable to tolerate a face mask, a MDI with a polystyrene cup can be used, especially in case of emergency [508] . In conclusion, face mask devices should be applied firmly to the face, especially if a valved spacer is used. With nebulizers the mask should be held as close to the face as practicable without undue disturbance.Any gap reduces the dose dramatically; therefore in very young children high doses of ICS are not effective because a lot of the spray is lost and does not reach the lesser airways, because of the small TV in these babies. Another characteristic of critical importance is the volume. The right size is a matter of balance. Using a small, low-resistance, two-way chamber with nurslings and children, 38% of the dose is received, whereas with larger chambers, only 20% is received [44] , obviously depending on details: it is larger, more cumbersome and inconvenient to use. An alternative to the MDI is the small-volume nebulizer (SVN). Advantages to SVNs include use at any age, or administration while asleep [102] . A recent metaanalysis has found the efficacy of MDI-VHC superior to that of SVNs, particularly in regard to onset of action and reduction of hospitalization [86] . In 123 children <2 years of age with moderate-severe exacerbations of wheezing seen in the ED, the response to salbutamol delivered by MDI-VHC and facial mask was faster than to salbutamol delivered by SVN [540] . DPIs are ecological since they do not contain CFCs: the micronized powder is contained in capsules, is inhaled by special dosers such as Spinhaler for DSCG (cromolyn); Diskhaler, Rotahaler, and Easyhaler for albuterol, and Turbohaler for BUD and formoterol. They do not require coordination of inhalation techniques since the patient inhales directly from the mouthpiece, the inhalator being breath-actuated. Multi-dose apparatuses, in addition to their convenience, ensure greater compliance, especially from preschool children [232] . Even with this system, difficulties arise. The very young should be taught to rapidly inhale without holding his (her) breath and told not to lean their head backwards [508] . In fact, the micronized particles of the medicine tend to agglutinate in clumps of excessive size. For effective use, children should inhale rapidly with high peaks of inspiratory flow (PIF) of at least 30-60 l/min, to create sufficient turbulence to break them up: at a lower rate the functionality, for example of the Rotohaler, drops to 10% [128] . Since large amounts of medication may remain in the mouth, it is advisable to have the child rinse it thoroughly after inhalation [508] . These models are not suited for children suffering from acute asthmatic attacks [44] ; they are advisable for use with children aged 5-6 who can use them [44] . Jet nebulizers can be used with a mask or directly from the mouthpiece, to avoid the frequent problem of small infants and young children unable to use MDIs, or suffering from acute attacks or persistent bronchoconstriction ( Fig. 11.39 ). The advantages are obvious: even superficial breathing over several minutes can effectively deliver the medication deep into the airways. Compared to traditional MDIs, they produce a larger number of particles in a given time and particles that are also smaller in size (0.5-5 mm instead of >5 mm), thereby distributing the drug more quickly. However, if children are not cooperating during the brief time of discharge, this technique will be inadequate. During nebulization, if the mask is distanced even 1 or 2 cm from the face, the delivered medication is reduced by 85%. Given that even the most tranquil child cannot stay still for more than 5 min, a means of reducing this time frame could be studied [181] . Ultrasonic nebulizers (for example, Fisoneb) ensure rapid nebulization, but are commonly less efficient for drug delivery, especially with suspensions, have a poor cost-benefit ratio and are difficult to handle [26] . Some nebulizers (for example, Nebula and Soffio) can also be used at home (Fig. 11.40 ). With nebulizers equipped with electric compressors, the need for good coordination from the moment of discharge and the act of inhalation is eliminated, thereby facilitating a sustained administration [476] . Newer types of hand-held nebulizers are small enough to be safely carried in a briefcase, a purse, or a backpack. Even with nebulizers some rules should be followed: ∑ Regular checks of the proper functioning of the machine. ∑ The drug must be diluted in saline, 4 ml. ∑ Time of nebulization about 10 min. ∑ Careful rinsing of the oral cavity, especially after using CSs. ∑ Washing under running water of the flask, mouthpiece and mask after use. The traditional models are suitable for all children who will accept them. Usually, they produce too large particles (>5 mm) to reach the airways effectively but, unlike cromolyn and BDP, they are suited to b 2 -adrenergics, which are characteristically effective even in low doses, since they are easily absorbed by the oral/nasal mucosa. Even in this case, wheezy infants or toddlers should inhale with an open mouth, otherwise 75% of the aerosol is blocked, with the nose acting as a filter [549] ; nor should the mask be distanced from their mouth [192] . been created that allow the child to breathe while receiving the medication, and placebo spray cans produce excellent preventive training. Breath-actuated MDIs are not recommended for this age group [57] . ∑ Children 6-8 years of age At this age children spend a great deal of time outdoors, and they need a portable model that is easy to use and efficient. The aerochamber fulfills all these requirements well. The DPI is useful for subjects who have not yet become accustomed to MDIs. Both systems avoid the problems associated with CFCs. ∑ Children aged >10 and adolescents Young people of this age are able to use MDIs, which are economical and fulfill the requirements needed [476] . The instructions provided with the device are unsuitable for younger children (Table 11 .13) [476, 486] , and even adults have found difficulty in using the equipment [103, 350] , to the point that manufacturers were invited to change the mouthpiece [350] . Additionally, there are problems related to the dosage absorbed and to be delivered [112] . In the first instance, a pharmacokinetic analysis revealed that nurslings and toddlers absorb only 0.13%-0.33% of the dose being delivered by MDI or nebulizers, respectively [549] , and on average only 14% of nebulized medication is deposited in the airways, increasing from 9% to 19% in older children [357] . Reports have shown nebulizer reactions including tachyphylaxis or increased BHR due to b-agonist overuse To summarize [476, 508, 699] (Tables 11.10, 11.12) [56, 604] : ∑ Children 1-2 years of age Nebulizers are useful for acute attacks not requiring the child's total cooperation [272] . The more economical MDIs with valve expanders are also recommended. Both are provided with face masks suitable for use even with nurslings and toddlers if the problem of keeping the appliance in position on the face can be overcome, adapting the expansion chamber volume to the specific needs listed in the previous section [180, 181] . Only 0.3%-1.5% of the nominal dose inhaled by children, even 9-16 months old, reaches the lungs, significantly more if nebulized [549] . A recent trial has established that MDIs with spacers may be as efficacious as nebulizers for the ED treatment of wheezing in children aged ≤2 years [143] . For decades we have used in children aged 6 months and older with wheezing a BDP or flunisolide suspension for nebulization dosed in drops (1 drop/kg) plus albuterol solution for inhalations (half dose), 3-4 doses/day as needed. The symptoms are improved in 90%-95% of cases. ∑ Children 3-5 years of age MDIs with VHC spacer plus face mask [44, 56] are preferred; however, many children probably use nebulizers because that is the route they began [78] . New cases should first try MDIs with spacers [56] . Devices have 777 Drugs to Be Used and Routes of Administration a Doses of inhaled corticosteroids are recommended for children in such severe condition that they are no longer controlled by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. However, higher doses and concentrations may be required for younger children because of the relative inefficiency of delivery devices (see Table 11 .13). b IB should not be administered at intervals less than 6 h to avoid atropine-like toxicity. c Cromolyn is more effective if administered at age 9 months by nebulizer [479] . When prescribing steroids, pediatricians should always prescribe the lowest dose required for symptom control; when symptoms remit, steroids may be stepped down and started up again when symptoms return. Data from [56, 604] . BDP beclomethasone dipropionate, BUD budesonide, cromolyn, FP fluticasone propionate. or allergic reactions to the medication or the excipient. Recently two asthmatic children experienced a lifethreatening exacerbation of their symptoms after nebulizer use. Cockroaches were detected in the reservoir of the nebulizers used [48] . The point of departure is the anatomical differences found in the very young. Nurslings inhale with a relatively rapid TV and in so doing retain the therapeutically useful particles for a shorter time [436] . Nonetheless it should be noted that TV and PIF are reduced, compared to older babies and preschool children, so that infants <6 months inhale the aerosol directly, thereby receiving a greater dosage of the undiluted medication, whereas an older infant or preschool child inhaling with normal TV, but at ambient air, receives a comparatively smaller dose, underscoring the dosage/kg problem [112] . Taking into consideration that the reduction in caliber of the lower airway tracts reduces the penetration drug in the peripheral areas [584] , and that newborn infants tend to breathe through their nose, in the best hypothe-sis the amount of the drug that is deposited in the airways is only 33%-50% of that inhaled per os [344] . Also, the correlation between the drug concentration in the aerosolized or nebulized solution (Cs) and that per inhaled volume unit of gas (Ci) appears to be inconstant, since for a given Cs the Ci can be five times greater in a young infant compared to an older child, in whom the inhaled dosage is independent of weight [112] . Therefore, doses for children aged 6 months to 5 years have to be regulated according to weight in kg, to balance the discrepancies that arise from a dosage based on a single measure for all [112] . If no correction is made, children aged 1-5 might receive a larger dosage than those aged 5-10 [344, 488] . However, based on studies conducted related to the plasmatic concentrations of albuterol, it has been noted that doses calculated on the basis of weight can prove to be less in children aged 6 months to 5 years. Therefore in cases of severe asthma, the dose can be increased -even up to 25%-50% [488] or more -with no risks, whether it be the result of greater drug clearance in the airways or of an insufficient inhalation coordination between the method of discharge and the technique [488] ; and finally -we should add -whether it also be because of the great differences among individuals. One could settle for a fixed dose for all patients, given that the results produced are similar [459] . Further research will ascertain which dosage is the most suitable in early infancy, based also on pharmacokinetic studies of each drug. The drugs to be used are the following: ∑ Adrenergics ∑ Anticholinergics ∑ Theophylline ∑ Corticosteroids Table 11 .14 [124, 617, 634, 635] sets forth the action mechanisms whereby drugs that can be used to treat acute asthma work; Table 11 .15 [174] those of b 2 -adrenergics; Table 11 .16 [35, 56, 406, 437, 552, 582] specifies the dosage for each method of administration. Adrenergic or sympathomimetic agonists can be classified, according to their respective actions on the receptors, as follows: Drugs acting on receptors a, b 1 and b 2 : epinephrine Drugs acting on receptors b 1 and b 2 : isoprenaline, orciprenaline Drugs with selective action on receptors b 2 (b 2 -adrenergics, b 2 -agonists), further divided into: ∑ Catecholics: isoprenaline ∑ Resorcinolic: fenoterol, orciprenaline, reproterol, terbutaline 778 CHAPTER 11 Asthma with SC epinephrine compared to those given terbutaline inhalation (11%). In Chap. 20, b/w based doses of inhaled epinephrine are detailed. In case of a severe attack, epinephrine remains the preferred drug [352] . b 2 -Adrenergics for predosed MDIs or nebulizers ( Fig. 11 .40) offer the best results because of rapidity of action, good efficacy and limited adverse effects on the cardiovascular apparatus. Given the recognized benefits of short-acting b 2 -adrenergics, attention was directed to extending the duration of effect of b 2 -adrenergic agonists. As a result, long-acting b 2 -adrenergics with a 12-h duration of action were introduced: salmeterol and formoterol. For an immediate effect, lasting 4-6 h, albuterol is recommended: to limit the adverse effects of short-acting b-agonists, the stereoisomer of albuterol, levalbuterol, compared to racemic albuterol significantly reduced the number of hospitalizations in the ED management of acute asthma in children aged 1-18, but the hospitalization length of stay was not significantly shorter between the two groups [84] . For an effect with 5 min of latency, but with long-term effect (12 h), salmeterol 25 mg is recommended. A dose of 50 mg has induced a significant HR increase in the first 5 min [19] in children of 13.4±2.5 years. Formoterol has the same latency and lasts 12 h [441] , while systemic administration of formoterol (via the oral route) displays a short duration of action (4 h). Salmeterol is a long-acting b 2 -agonist with a long side chain, diffuses quickly from 3. According to Spitzer et al [608] , these drugs aggravate asthma, rendering the airways more susceptible to stimuli. In effect, though reducing the acute episode, they promote delayed bronchial inflammation, which is at the basis of chronic asthma. 4. Burrows and Lebowitz [62] agree with these findings and advise against regular, high dosages of b 2 -adrenergics. 5. Prospective studies in children have shown that prolonged usage of b 2 -adrenergics does not reduce BHR [571] . 6 . In patients treated with terbutaline, a rebound type of BHR can occur when treatment is stopped: conversely, in children 1.5-11 years admitted to an ICU, the same drug was shown to be safe and effective [288] . 7. It should be noted that for b 2 -adrenergics, dosages that double the usual ones, even if only for 7 days, amplify airway reactivity even in the late reaction [110] . Chronic use of high doses results in hypokalemia, because ATP stimulation causes K + passage within the skeletal muscles, an effect that is strengthened by hypercapnia, hypoxia and hypokalemia, characteristics of acute asthma-status asthmaticus [310, 697] ; even theophylline can provoke hypokalemia, and together with CSs, hyperkaluria [310] . 8. Few and contradictory results have been obtained with these drugs in bronchiolitis: epinephrine was more efficacious than salbutamol [401] . Probably, the negative results depend on having measured the Raw index of seriously ill infants with widespread edema and mucous secretions, thereby reducing the dose of the aerosolized drug [112] . Moreover, the total resistance of upper airways can be reduced by 50% at this age, making measurements unreliable [206] . This can also be related to a reduced response to b-adrenergic stimuli effected by respiratory viruses and therefore to that of b-adrenergic drugs [73] . 9. In conclusion, there is no clear benefit of using b 2adrenergics in the management of recurrent wheeze in the first 2 years of life, although there is conflicting evidence [140] . These drugs stimulate the muscarinic receptors with reduction in intracellular cGMP by competitively inhibiting a-adenylcyclase [77] . The bronchodilator effect works on medium-or large-caliber bronchi; it is less rapid (15 min after administration, maximum effect after 30 min to 2 h), but longer-lasting than short-acting b 2 -adrenergics (exhausted after 3-5 h). They should be used in the intercritical periods, or in association with inhaled b2-adrenergics, which allows the dose of the latter to be reduced. This also reduces the risk of side effects as a consequence of the therapeutic margin of these drugs [79] . the aqueous phase into cell membranes of the lung with maximal bronchodilation ª1 h after administration. Formoterol has a medium-sized side chain and diffuses both into the aqueous phase and cell membranes of the lung with an onset of action within minutes. Two recent articles have reported that formoterol provided superior bronchodilator efficacy over 12 h compared with salmeterol [501] , or at least as effective as salmeterol [183] . So once daily oral bambuterol may be an interesting and less expensive alternative to twice-daily inhaled formoterol and salmeterol [158] . The increased efficacy of the first (single) dose compared to regular follow-up treatment should be kept in mind, being equal to a PD 20 improvement of 1.7 or 0.7 [680] . Therefore, with the new, long-acting b 2 -adrenergics the late reaction is inhibited and adverse effects are reduced. Nevertheless, some undesirable side effects can result, especially with continued and/or high-dose use: ∑ Muscular effects: muscle tremors (as a result of action on b 2 muscle receptors) ∑ Metabolic effects: hyperglycemia (for glycogenolysis) with hyperinsulinism, hyperkalemia and therefore hypokalemia as a result of K + deposits at the cellular level ∑ CNS effects: agitation, insomnia ∑ Cardiovascular effects (in cases of overdose): tachycardia, extrasystole, hypertension Possible effects resulting from prolonged usage include: ∑ Tachyphylaxis (reduction in therapeutic responsiveness) ∑ Difficult management of the disease: asthma worsening, BHR increase [571] due to tolerance increase [456]  We draw attention to the results of certain studies focusing on b 2 -adrenergic use, especially when used over a prolonged period and/or in high dosages [697] . 1. Sears et al [571] obtained better results when b 2adrenergic drugs were used only as needed. Control of the disease is reduced in patients who treat asthma with bronchodilators continually, for a long time and regularly, patients becoming dependent, and thus inhaling ever higher doses: in this way desensitization of b-adrenergic receptors occurs, that is repeated administration reduces the bronchodilator effect. 2. According to Page [467] , this is probably caused by a disrupted equilibrium between inflammatory and antiinflammatory factors, as a result of reduced anti-inflammatory release, caused by the powerful antidegranulation accomplished by b 2 -adrenergics on mast cells. In time, this leads to the deactivation of natural defense mechanisms, allowing the inhaled allergens to penetrate in the bronchial tree more deeply [467] , with loss of the action inhibiting BM thickening and smooth muscle hypertrophy, deleterious aspects for asthmatics [516] likely leading to an irreversible chronicity [467] . IB has an anticholinergic activity that is similar to that of atropine, but also a reduced systemic absorption. IB is most often used with other drugs, providing good bronchodilator action and few side effects (mucosa dryness) [371, 663] when utilizing a DPI -preferred by young children rather than an MDI [663] -or a spray with spacer [371] . Theophylline drugs are enjoying a renaoissance mainly because of their rediscovered anti-inflammatory properties [274] . Theophylline is a methylxanthine similar to theobromine and caffeine. The mechanisms of its action [124, 635, 740] and the anti-inflammatory effects [101, 114, 461, 658] are summarized in Tables 11.17 and 11.18 [101, 114, 124, 461, 635, 658, 736] , from which the induction of apoptosis in eosinophils clearly emerges ( Fig. 11.41 ). Bronchodilation is caused by PDE inhibition, which causes an increase in cAMP levels. It also displays considerable anti-inflammatory properties (Table  11 .14) and promotes the production of anti-inflammatory IL, IL 10 , deficient in asthmatic airways, depressing instead that of IFN-g [513] . Significantly, in young asthmatics, abatement of IgE levels occurs with slow-release theophylline, but not with cromolyn or BPD [658] . In examining the pharmacological aspects, it is useful to review a few basic facts [404, 706] : ∑ The therapeutic range of theophylline is between 10 and 20 mg/ml (56-111 mmol/l), even though it is known that bronchodilation can take place with therapeutic levels of 5-15 mg/ml. Below the minimum level the effects are few and side effects -even severecan occur when the theophylline level exceeds 15-20 mg/ml. Thus the therapeutic range is extremely close to the toxic range. ∑ Theophylline metabolism results in 85% of theophylline being metabolized by the enzymatic system of hepatic cytochrome P450, so all factors or drugs that interfere with this system can alter its metabolism (Table 11 .19) [244] , increasing or reducing theophylline clearance, with reduction or, respectively, increase of its concentrations [706] . ∑ Theophylline clearance (distribution volume ¥ unchanging level of elimination) varies according to age [404] : -From birth to 7-9 months, it is reduced. -Between 7-9 months and 9 years of age it increases (1.44 ml/min/kg); therefore, proportionately higher doses are required. -From 9 to 16 years the clearance is reduced again (9-12 years=1.26; 12-16 years=0.9 ml/min/kg). Such levels are appropriate for good theophylline distribution and function. Other factors that must be borne in mind are [244] : ∑ Individual variations in the rate of absorption. ∑ Differences of half-life in children are half that of adults (ª3.5 h instead of 7 h). ∑ If the patient is obese, the correct dosage must be prescribed according to ideal standard weight, and not to the actual weight. Theophylline absorption also depends on circadian rhythms. The indispensable interval of time to reach peak concentration of the medication is significantly shorter (and absorption increased) when oral doses are taken in the morning, compared to evening effects. Analogously, clearance is influenced: the elimination rate is greater with morning doses compared to evening doses in children treated with slow-release or IV medications, so a standard dosage with equal doses at regular intervals will provoke an increase in nocturnal serum levels compared to daytime levels, to the advantage of nocturnal asthma sufferers [32] . All this is of great importance in establishing dosages which must be personalized whenever constant monitoring for an entire 24 h period become necessary. Similarly, for the study of theophylline pharmacokinetics, the hours at which both doses and blood samples were taken must be recorded [244] . ∑ Children with acute asthma who can benefit from theophylline, but reducing the respective doses when associated with b 2 -adrenergic. ∑ Mild or moderate forms of acute attacks, if there has been no response to the b 2 -adrenergics. Eventually it can be associated with them, again reducing the respective doses. ∑ Moderate to severe forms of chronic asthma resistant to other medications [707] . The scientific rationale behind theophylline lies in its anti-inflammatory quality, not shared by other medica-783 Drugs to Be Used tions, which we have always taken into consideration. Logically it holds an undisputed and, to this day, unique place ensuring the compliance of young and very young children who are not used to taking inhalation drugs. According to Szefler [634] , the clinical effect of chronic therapy with theophylline, cromones, and anti-LT on symptom scores, PEFR, and acute exacerbations (morning, or evening) is comparable. In view of the rapid metabolism that the drug undergoes in the child, an early and periodic monitoring of theophylline to verify that the levels are not subtherapeutic (5.6 mg/ml) is indispensable. We suggest measuring theophylline levels after at least 3 days to coincide with the administration of the maximum dose tolerated, 4 or 8 h after the morning dose, depending on the medication being used. Once theophylline levels have been monitored, the dosage should be adjusted based on serum concentrations in mg/ml [244] 2. Dosages for infants <1 year of age [244] : ∑ Initial dosage in mg/kg/day: (0.2) (age in weeks) +5.0; this equation results in levels of theophylline between 5 and 10 mg/l [244] . Serum theophylline concentrations should be monitored within 6-12 h after start of treatment [256] . ∑ Subsequent dosages should be based on serum theophylline levels measured at least 3 days after start of treatment. The average dosage of long-acting theophylline is 7-10 mg/kg every 12 h [83] . This formula, having a greater half-life, is recommended for treating nocturnal asthma, among other reasons because of its protracted bronchodilator effect. Additionally, capsules that can be emptied and mixed with foods minimize the child's opposition [83] . For cases using long-acting theophylline, a noninvasive, reliable, and convenient method for measuring theophylline levels in saliva has been proposed [640] . Three different controls are recommended, to characterize around-the-clock theophylline profiles: ∑ Good symptom control, no side effects: measurement 4 h after morning dose, every 3-6 months ∑ Nonoptimal control: as above with the addition of a further measurement just before evening doses ∑ Poor or no clinical response: 24 h profile, even at home [640] In conclusion, the use of theophylline has but one disadvantage: for safe treatment we recommend measuring theophylline levels to reach and maintain levels encompassed within the therapeutic range [706] . This is also valid to avoid undesired side effects [244] . Notwithstanding what has been said, theophylline is completely safe. A study of 35,000 patients who filled 222,000 prescriptions for 9 years registered only one case of seizures in a child (without specifying the cause), equal to 0.003% of cases and to 0.00045% of the prescriptions [404] . From time to time, North American and North European authors have underlined the negative effects of theophylline with the result that experts tend to relegate this drug to a secondary role among the forms of treatment [272, 435, 504] , thereby contributing to an unjustified decline in its use [536, 635] . In particular, three recent studies [89, 148, 622] excluded its use in hospital treatments of children aged 2-18 years with moderate to severe asthma and, specifically, in association with MDIdelivered albuterol and IV-administered methylprednisolone, even though no undesired side effects were found to justify the exclusion [622] . Nevertheless, the studies did not include patients in severe conditions, a limitation that prevents the evaluation of theophylline ability to preclude the necessity of ICU admission and/or assisted ventilation. Furthermore, in our opinion, the above-mentioned associations have not been placebo) to attribute the improvement in memory and attention [34] . Other researchers, not finding any side effect, suggest that the potential vulnerability only concerns children already suffering from similar problems [562] . In a systematic review of 12 pediatric studies, no behavioral or cognitive adverse effects of theophylline were identified [597a]. The CS action mechanism (Tables 11.20 [23, 249, 284] , 11.21 [120] , 11.22 [23, 203, 284, 633] and 11.23 [56, 117, 437, 581] , Fig. 11 .42 [105] ) is performed on adenylyl cyclase by increasing cAMP levels, and on the inflammation, reducing the edema and inhibiting histamine release [703] . In particular, cAMP level maintenance within a normal range is useful for bringing the adrenergic receptors back to a functional state in which they can again become activated [703] . CSs inhibit the metachromatic cell mediators and basophil releasability, and reduce circulating eosinophil number and presumably also those in the tissues, but not of macrophages [212] . These effects are due to IL inhibition that activates these cells and stimulates them into reaching inflammatory sites [570] . In asthmatic children (80% atopic), serum concentrations of IL 5 , CD25, and ECP remained significantly higher than controls, even after treatment with oral CSs. Thus, T cell-mediated inflammation may persist in childhood asthma despite apparent clinical remission associated with conventional treatment [172] . The most powerful action of endogenous CSs is directed against inflammation, markedly exacerbated if the adrenal gland is removed [570] . In this process, the main activity is aimed at suppressing the transcription of genes involved in inflammation, and, to this end, their re-properly evaluated since children had already reached maximum bronchodilation with "liberal and elevated" doses of nebulized albuterol [89] . Even in children or teenagers with nonsevere asthma treated with albuterol and IV-administered methylprednisolone, DiGiulio et al [148] did not find clinical differences between theophylline and placebo, although at the cost of possible type II errors. Although concern was expressed about the dangers of improper use of theophylline [89] , no related adverse effects were reported in either study: nausea was the most toxic symptom encountered [622] . On the other hand, several studies have shown theophylline effectiveness (ref in 615) . In patients admitted to ED and treated with theophylline, discharges were more frequent than admittance to hospital (6%), which differs from patients treated with metaproterenol and cortisone (21%), and with an overall cost fivefold lower [740] . Mechanical reasons, especially in life-threatening forms of infantile asthma, can impede b 2 -adrenergic passage. This is theophylline's strong point: administered IV in these forms it produces an almost immediate clinically detectable, objective bronchodilation [664] . In 94 children aged 1-17 in severe status asthmaticus admitted to the PICU theophylline safely hastened the recovery of these children who were also receiving albuterol, IB, and CS therapies [49, 515] . On a therapeutic level, other side effects were noted [706] such as learning and behavioral problems. Re-examined by various researchers in ten studies, they were unable to definitively verify this correlation, partly due to methodological errors [123] , or because the former were completely absent, whereas the rest normalized, or improved, within 2 weeks [613] . No school-related differences were found between asthmatics (whether theophylline-treated or not) and controls [353] . Parents were unable to decide to which treatment (theophylline or ceptors interact with AP-1 (activator protein-1) and NF-kB (nuclear factor of chain k of Bs) (Fig. 11 .43) [568] or, diversely, render more potent the inhibitor of the chain k of B, type a (kB-a), inhibitor of NF-kB ( Fig. 11.44 ) [568] . However, the bronchial smooth cells lack the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBPa) required to form a complex with the CS receptor, therefore CSs cannot contrast the ADAM33 accelerated proliferation of bronchial smooth-muscle cells and the resulting BHR [539] . From a clinical point of view, the latency time is lengthened (6-12 h) compared to other drugs [683] , and a maximum bronchoprotecting effect can be attained after many months of continuous treatment [570] . Consequently, although CSs are an effective treatment on ameliorating asthma symptoms and represent the most effective anti-inflammatory therapy of asthma, this therapy is symptomatic since the disease flares when treatment is stopped [517, 645, 671, 680] . If ICSs are discontinued, the asthmatic children return to The IL-13 inhibition by steroids may, at least in part, account for their therapeutic effects [150] . See Tables 7.17 and 7.18 for side effects of CSs employed topically in atopic dermatitis. Data from [23, 249, 284] . a See text. severe asthma receiving high-dose inhaled CS therapy (1675±94 mg/d), 50% of whom required chronic oral CS therapy [120] (Tables 11.20-11.22) [21, 120, 203, 249, 284, 633] . Pharmacokinetics studies suggest that the fraction deposited in the airways is absorbed in an active form in variable concentrations, and passes, in turn, into the circulation. In fact 80% of the amount deposited in the oropharynx is absorbed by the intestine, passing through the liver where most of it is metabolized. Part of it reaches the systemic circulation where it joins with the amount originated in the airways. These two rates are aggregated, but are continually reduced as a result of recirculation and hepatic deactivation, as is evident from Fig. 11 .45 [703] . Nonetheless, there is a different bioavailability (the drug rate bypassing the hepatic filter) and a rapid CS metabolic clearance CS reaching the circulation [22, 359] . Substandial differences can their baseline PFT and indices of airway inflammation after 2 weeks [593] . CSs do not relieve symptoms promptly and children may not improve within a few days [517] . So CS efficacy is significant in late asthmatic responses, chronic asthma and, more generally, in suppression of chronic inflammation [570] . This effective anti-inflammatory action on mast cells and eosinophils occurs in the epithelium (each 2.5-fold) and in submucosa (from 2-to 10-fold, respectively) and, on clinical grounds, in BHR improvement [258] (Table 11 .14). Basically, there are no definitive effects, since the underlying inflammation is still active in childhood asthma despite apparent clinical remission even after years on ICSs [476] . Thus, any beneficial CS effect on BHR is not due to the prevention or resolution of remodeling of the airway wall [645] . The reason is that CSs have marked effects in inhibiting T-cell activation, but these effects are not reflected in changes of overall cell numbers in the circulation. So there is neither a discernible effect on the underlying mechanisms of inflammation [208] , nor on methacholine responsiveness [645] . In addition, during the period of alveolar development, CS administration may result in decreased lung-cell mass and in the presence of too few abnormally large alveoli [727] . Also, for this reason it may be prudent to avoid CS use in the very young, because they appear not to be very effective, as is also demonstrated by their lack of impact on PFT [620] . FP, mometasone furoate (MF) and, to a lesser extent, BDP are thought to be second-generation ICSs in that they display both increased anti-inflammatory potency and systemic bioavailability [434] . In addition to dysphonia and oral candidiasis, several undesirable effects of inhaled CS (including osteoporosis) occurred in 163 children aged 14.4±2.1 years with 787 Drugs to Be Used Osteopenia was strongly associated with growth suppression (odds ratio, 5.6). Note: 50 % of children required chronically administered oral CS therapy. Data from [120] . Fig. 11.45 . The fate of inhaled CS.The amount of an inhaled CS that reaches the systemic circulation is the sum of pulmonary and orally bioavailable fractions. The fraction deposited in the oral cavity will be swallowed and systemic availability will be determined by absorption from the gastrointestinal tract and the degree of liver inactivation. The systemic concentration will be reduced by continuous recirculation and liver inactivation Growth"). Similarly, 22 children aged 3.3-10 years (with an incidence of 3.1% of total cases) treated with inhaled FP (91%), with doses ranging from 500 to 2,000 mg/day presented with acute adrenal crisis, acute hypoglycemia, and with decreased levels of consciousness, coma, or coma and convulsions. The remaining six children presented mainly with lassitude, weakness, nausea, and dizziness [652] . Severe growth retardation and adrenal suppression were described in children taking FP doses >1,000 mg/day [715] , and acute adrenal crisis associated with inhaled FP in three children presenting with hypoglycemic coma and convulsions [651] .A probable explanation for these findings is that FP taken twice a day accumulates in the blood, which has a half-life of 7-8 h and a distribution 4 to 5-fold greater than other drugs, leading to an increased risk of systemic side effects such as growth retardation and adrenal insufficiency [61] . HPA was also reported in 4 children aged 4.2-4.8 years receiving FP 500 mg/day, in 1 child aged 7.2 treated with FP 1,000 mg/day, in 3 children aged 4.8-6.1 treated with BUD 400 mg/day and a 9-year-old treated with BDP 600 mg/daily [475] . Adrenal suppression was found in 9-18 children aged 7-17 receiving FP 477 mg/m 2 /day for 5-16 weeks [368] . Given to asthmatic children in high dosages, flunisolide has provoked no negative effects on the axis, nor on glycolipid metabolism [215, 494] . These results have been confirmed with BUD, administered for 3-5 years in doses of 200 mg/day [685] , with measurement of 24-h plasma and urine cortisol [684, 685] , 24-h urinary cortisol alone [157, 487] . Yet, other studies found no HPA deficiency, nor growth deficiency in children [541] or in schoolchildren undergoing treatment with BUD [646] . In asthmatic children under treatment for 3 months with inhaled BDP in doses of 400 mg/day, a 63% decrease of plasma cortisol after evening doses and a 29% decrease after morning doses [637] was observed. Such data were subsequently confirmed by reductions of serum cortisol [493] , urinary cortisol [505] , or both [439] , after treatment with BDP and BUD in doses of 400 mg [445] , or with FP in doses of 250 mg [757] , and with an MDI without a spacer [220] . Among the possible causes could be the use of MDI spray cans without spacers, given that they increase oropharyngeal deposits [220] . Another question being debated is whether inhaled medications, properly used, have a negative effect on bone density, an effect which, however, is independent of HPA-axis suppression, possibly related to the inhibition of insulin-like growth factors [517] . Using the equivalent of 8 mg/kg of BDP [649] , a child should be considered at risk of HPA-axis suppression or of delayed growth [198] . The effects on the skeletal system have been evaluated by dosing two markers correlated with osteosynthesis and growth rate, osteocalcin and the carboxy terminal propeptide of type I procollagen (PCIP), showing a growth decrease after 1 and 5 months of deactivated by the liver, and only a limited amount, equal to 1% and 10% [23] , reaches the circulation. Side effects are few with preparations active by inhalation and with reduced systemic absorption, which, undoubtedly, have resulted in therapeutic progress -among these preparations are BDP, BUD, deflazacort, flunisolide [26] , even if giving rise to controversy [668] . FP, because of its more favorable risk-benefit ratio, is preferable to BDP for the long-term treatment of children with asthma, especially if moderate doses are required [135] . It should, however, be clarified that with inhaled doses of 400 mg/day and using a valve spacer, the systemic absorption is reduced to zero, given that all of the drug ingested remains in the spacer, thereby eliminating any difference in the bioavailability of different medications [359] . Both BPD used with the Volumatic or the Jet as well as BUD taken with Nebuhaler have a lesser systemic activity compared to the same dose inhaled with an MDI or a DPI, even if rinsing the mouth after use reduces or abates ingestion, as previously mentioned [26] . Additionally, drop formulations (deflazacort is prescribed in doses of 1-2 mg = 1-2 drops/kg) favor personalized prescriptions and ensure compliance in younger children. Other adverse phenomena, such as HPA axis suppression, growth retardation [120, 285] , and are, in our opinion, provoked by prolonged treatment and by administering high dosages, chiefley orally [120] , which can lead to a potential axis inhibition, with reduced ACTH secretion due to negative feedback mechanisms and the adrenal gland inability to respond to adrenocorticotropic stimulation, giving way to severe risks in patients prone to respiratory arrest during severe acute attacks [517] . A complete functional restoration may require up to 1 year, whereas treatment limited to 1 week is usually devoid of negative consequences: 8-10 days after stopping treatment, HPA function returns to normal [560] . In adults, a possible axis deficiency can be revealed only through metapyrone or insulin tolerance tests, or through a CRH test [560] . Recent data suggest that CRH and its CS regulation may be essential for the control of airway inflammation and the maintenance of lung homeostasis in asthma [588] . Several studies have not found such anomalies [487, 684] , or a small but significant degree of growth impairment in children receiving only 400 mg/day of BDP [157] . Regarding the dosage factor, important undesired systemic effects of chronically and systemically administered medications (Tables 11.20-11.22) are found in children 7-10 years old with severe asthma, treated with doses of FP increased from 800-1500 mg up to 2,250 mg/day, leading to an increased risk of systemic side effects such as undetectable cortisol levels [650] . Acute adrenal crises have been reported by several studies, all in children treated with inhaled FP [630, 650-652, 736, 757] (see "Linear treatment with BUD, both in full doses of 800 mg/m 2 /day and half doses, with no variations in growth measured by conventional parameters [603] . The combined examination of PCIP and amino terminal propeptide of type III procollagen (PCIIINP) has shown the suppression of both bone turnover and collagen after twice-weekly treatment with DPI BUD and BDP(800 mg/day), more evident in the latter case [42] . The effects on PCIIINP [734] and on osteocalcin were subsequently confirmed by other studies [655, 733] . Bone density was also measured using a densitometer and an absorptiometer, without noting any significant differences between asthmatic children and controls. Vice-versa, osteocalcin was shown to be reduced in the densitometer compared to the absorptiometer, a result that can be ascribed to the disease and not to BDP, according to the authors [312] . Some maintain that osteocalcin is not a marker sensitive to bone turnover, in that asthma per se can decrease it tangibly, making it of little use in evaluating the effects [312] . Others have measured bone density without finding any significant difference [17, 300] . Concern has been raised that the use of ICSs in children may be associated with growth suppression. Recent evidence presents conflicting results regarding reduced [157, 593, 649, 690] and normal growth [444, 684, 718] , including a wide and well-documented study [8] that meta-analyzed 21 pediatric studies, based on statistical analysis and excluding the studies employing different methods of evaluation [729] . A recent meta-analysis [583] has concluded that moderate doses of the inhaled steroid BDP in children with mild to moderate asthma has been shown to significantly affect linear growth. Also, for the effect of moderate doses of inhaled fluticasone, a statistically significant difference was revealed. However, two recent long-term studies have been reassuring [6, 645] . The growth of a cohort of 142 children with mild to moderate asthma was followed until they reached adult height; the subjects received a mean dose of BUD of 412 mg/day for a mean of 9.2 years. The adult height of this cohort on long-term inhaled BUD therapy was 0.3 cm greater than expected. Its sole weakness was a high rate (72%) of drop-outs in the control group [6] , as in other conventionally treated children [568] . In the Childhood Asthma Management Program (CAMP) study, a randomized trial for more than 5 years in >1,000 children with mild to moderate asthma, neither inhaled BUD nor nedocromil was better than placebo in terms of PFT, but BUD provided substantial clinical improvement as compared with nedocromil or placebo [645] . Significantly, both studies reported a transient reduction in growth velocity only in the 1st year of treatment [6, 645] . In longer clinical trials, despite a strict selection process, compliance problems can be noted. Problems increase with duration of participation, increasing child age, and the presence of less family cohesion or attention problems in children [625] . Height may diminish with an increase in dose and return to normal when treatment is reduced or stopped [646] . The attitude of inhaled CS overdosing in children was recently clearly documented. In 8,913 children, the CS inhaled at daily dose ranges equivalent to BDP were 350-2400 mg, 265-3400 mg, and 300-4800 mg for the 0-4, 5-11, and 12to 16-year-olds [171] . We believe that many results not associated with HPA-axis suppression may depend on the use of safe doses of 100-200 mg/day, which should proportionally be reduced as compared to adult doses, better in mg/kg, as has previously been pointed out. Although inhaled FP was found to reduce morning serum cortisol concentrations by 17%-43%, even at low doses of 176 mg/day [169] or of 200 mg/day; prepubescent children treated with FP 100 mg and 200 mg daily for 1 year showed no statistically significant differences in growth rates, similarly to placebo-treated control subjects [7] . FP DPI 100-200 mg administered daily to 437 children (4-11 years old) with persistent asthma for 12 weeks in a randomized, DB, parallel-group, multicenter trial did not affect 24-h urinary free-cortisol excretion, and improved PFT in children even as young as 4 and 5 years old [484] . Often, good results are obtained in children with low doses [205, 438, 487, 684, 729] , and even in adults, doses can be reduced with the same results [231, 285] . A 12-month 100-mg daily treatment of FP in 625 children aged 1-3 years with mild to moderate recurrent wheeze resulted in improved symptom control with no effect on growth rate, and a serum and urinary cortisol concentration suppression of 10% and 14%, respectively [45] . A recent study has set up a milestone in the treatment of pediatric asthma, having demonstrated that repeated bursts of oral CS at 1-2 mg/kg/day (maximum=50 mg) for a 5-day period are not only effective, but above all are safe in children, since they are not associated with any lasting perturbation in bone metabolism, bone mineralization or adrenal function [160] . In addition, low cortisol levels normalized after discontinuing inhaled FP [757] . Others have noted that growth decline is reduced after the first 6 weeks or at most within 18 weeks [159] . A 6-month treatment with inhaled BUD and FP did not induce body fat accumulation in 21 of 26 asthmatic children; however, in five children aged from 4.3 to 5.3 years, the treatment was associated with growth velocity below the third percentile [550] . The magnitude of these changes in linear growth has varied between other studies using different ICS preparations, indicating on the one hand that either study design or specific steroid preparation/dose may be important considerations [434] , and on the other the lack of reliable data on compliance may seriously confound the study of long-term growth effects of ICSs [732] . DB, randomized placebo-controlled tests have also been carried out [729] [730] [731] 733] , employing knemometry (from knhmh, leg), which ensures reproducible findings (Figs. 11.46-11.48) [365] , to evaluate ICS effects on lower limb linear growth, which always proved to be re-duced, though not with FP [731] . The results on PCIIINP of the same group [734] , completed by measuring cortisol and insulin-like growth factor levels [735] , and additional data have confirmed these studies [365] . In children aged 0-3 years, within a 3-week period the increases in the lower-leg length during placebo, BUD 400, and FP 400 treatments (200 mg inhaled twice daily) were 85, 45, and 34 mm/d, respectively [11] . Nevertheless, some aspects of the assessment of safety are unique to younger children, including the rapid growth velocity and their different metabolism. The rapid growth in the first 2-3 years of life may make the child more vulnerable to the adverse effects of drugs and/or disease. More seriously, the safety findings in adults and schoolchildren cannot be extrapolated uncritically to younger children [11] .We deem that the concern about potential dysfunc-791 Drugs to Be Used Fig. 11.46 . A knemometer.The child is positioned so that the knee is positioned at a right angle and the feet are comfortably placed. At the first visit a template is made by drawing around the child's feet, so that at the subsequent visit positioning is identical. Fig. 11 .47. Diagram showing knemometer and manipulation of the lower leg. The lower leg is moved around in order to gain maximum reading of the digital ruler. Alternatively, knemometry may be measured by a hand-held knemometer, provided with an electronic caliber, which measures the length of the lower leg from above the knee to below the heel. Measurements are taken with the child in a supine position with a 90°flexion in hip, knee, and ankle joints. A fixed cap is held against the knee and the other, adjustable cap is placed under the heel. Both caps are parallel, and the distance is ongoing measured electronically with a resolution of 10 mm. An investigator stabilizes the knee cap with one hand,while slowly compressing the heel cap up to a predefined pressure of 80 g with the other hand, as determined by an interposed spring. At this pressure, a microswitch is activated and the reading is recorded on a computer tions is valid in cases of oral and/or high doses as an intercurrent necessity [347] . A meta-analysis suggests that moderate doses of inhaled BDP in four studies and 450 children and FP in one study and 183 children with mild to moderate asthma cause a decrease in linear growth velocity of 1.51 cm/year and 0.43 cm/year, respectively [583] . However, the increase in height of 277 children aged 4-11 years with chronic asthma was greater with FP than with BDP, 5.01 vs 4.10 cm/year, respectively [151] . These findings should not limit ICS administration in children with moderate/severe asthma [28, 282] . A possible choice is flunisolide, which is freer of adverse effects [215, 228, 494] , provides better penetration and a more homogeneous distribution in the distal airways, also parenterally administered if asthma is more severe [706] . In moderate to severe asthma, the benefits may outweigh the risks associated with continuous use [703] .Various immune parameters are normal in long-term ICS-treated children [347] , but eosinophils are reduced only in patients taking monodoses [497] . In conclusion, short-term and/or alternate-day treatments are safer [438] , with a return to normal basal parameters in a short time, as already detailed [285, 757] . To further reduce potential damage, preparations should be chosen with a longer duration of action and to begin treatment between 3:00 and 5:00 PM (monodose), as there are no differences with qid therapy, nor does it influence 24-h plasma or urinary cortisol levels [497] . It will be sufficient to monitor the effects of treatment in individual patients, while in other cases the risk-benefit analysis is strongly in favor of preventive drugs and of theophylline [285] . However, refer to the comparison of SIT/steroids in Chap. 13.We deem, however, that periodically measuring the growth of asthmatic children on long-term treatment with ICS is a useful practice [728] . An FDA mandate (November 9, 1998) requires labels on inhaled and intranasal CS warning of a potential reduction in linear growth in children demonstrates this concern (accessed from: http://www.fda.gov/cder/news/ cs-label.htm). Table 11 .21 enumerates CS side effects and the consequent measures required, and indicates a few possible causes of treatment failure with these drugs. No posterior subcapsular cataracts have been observed in children treated with ICS [592] , which were seen, however, in 11.3% of 274 children [718] , and in 15%-21% of 163 children [120] , most probably related to chronic oral treatment. Synthetic CS prime IgE synthesis in vitro [304, 452] and the increase in serum IgE levels after 7 days of steroid treatment -viewed as being caused by steroid immunomodulator effects on T lymphocyteswhich is also associated with an FEV 1 reduction [754] . Such effects were not seen ex vivo even after 1 week of steroid treatment [304] . It is not excluded, however, that with larger doses and/or long-term treatments, significant increases in IgE can be seen [318] ; such reports require further evaluations; however, in this respect ICS may not be suitable in children. An in vitro study has demonstrated that hydrocortisone enhances total and allergen-specific IgE production by PBMCs from atopic subjects in vitro. The induction of Der p-specific IgE synthesis in subjects with high serum allergen-specific IgE levels was even greater than that of IL 4 . This is the first report to show that hydrocortisone enhances Der p-specific IgE production from circulating B cells in atopic asthma [101] . The immediate in vivo interpretation of these findings would be that CSs promote allergy, which in theory would mean that the most efficacious treatment for allergic diseases is detrimental regarding disease progress. However, the underlying mechanism by which CSs enhance IgE production in vivo is unknown [101] . High dosage can cause an increase in anxiety, depression, memory reduction, and psychological vulnerability, with a potentially negative impact on asthma severity and on the child's own ability to cope with the disease and its treatment. If, on the other hand, CSs are used in brief cycles, school performance, memory and behavior remain unchanged [432] . In conclusion, CS-induced adverse effects in 163 children with severe asthma are inadmissibly high. Given the frequency with which they occur, evaluation and close monitoring of potential adverse effects is clearly warranted, even in those patients who are not CS-dependent but require high-dose ICS and frequent rescue oral CS therapy [120] . Some data will be useful in making a more prudent choice regarding medications to be used, especially in cases of severe asthma (Table 11 .14) (in parentheses the variable effects) [284] : ∑ Muscle relaxant: b 2 -adrenergics, theophylline ∑ Antiedematous: b 2 -adrenergics, theophylline ∑ Anti-mucus secretion: CS, (b 2 -adrenergics, theophylline) ∑ Prevention of late reaction: CS ∑ Inhibition of mast cell degranulation (b 2 -adrenergics, theophylline) ∑ Attenuation or resolution of hyperreactivity: CS b 2 -Adrenergics, compared to other drugs, are characterized by: ∑ Greater selectivity ∑ Quick relief (greater effect on early asthmatic response) ∑ Very brief latency time by inhalation (a few minutes) ∑ Lower incidence of side effects Duration of effectiveness: catecholics 2-4 h; resorcinol and salagen 4-6 h; clenbuterol and procaterol >6 h; fenoterol and salmeterol 12 h, and oral bambuterol 24 h [158] . Anticholinergics, compared to b 2 -adrenergics, induce a lesser degree of bronchodilation, are more delayed but more prolonged in duration (compared to most b 2adrenergics. IB is to be preferred because of the lesser These guidelines are likely adopted by 5.7%-7.9% of readers of NIH guidelines [121] . Even within private practice, patients' race and ethnicity are associated with clinician nonadherence to national guidelines [463] . In a recent study of children who presented to an ED, 71% of children (mean age >8 years) did not have a written plan. Only 7% of those with a plan consulted it at the onset of wheezing and 4% consulted it before going to the ED. Also, 48% did not use a holding chamber with their MDIs and 66% did not use their PEF meters. Regarding exacerbation response, 71% did not have a written action plan, and 89% did not maintain a symptom diary [557] . In 1114 children aged 6 (mean) evidencebased guidelines for pediatric asthma demonstrated an improvement of asthma management plans, but failed to influence patient outcome [385] . Moreover, US guidelines are structured "for children 5 years of age and older" [435] [436] [437] , while European consensus guidelines [698] [699] [700] consider children aged 0-5 years as well. Guidelines do not master factors associated with lower adherence to the medical regimen in young children, such as medication taste, and the congestion of too many medications with multiple dosing intervals [27] . Children with many risk factors experienced 0.80 more days of wheezing and 1 more day of activity restriction as a result of asthma compared with children with few risks for nonadherence [27] . For children younger than 5 years, expert recommendations are based on extrapolations of studies in older children [434] . The issues related to minorities in the populations are pertinent: black and Latino children had worse asthma status and less use of preventive asthma medications than white children within the same managed Medicaid populations [351] . The parents may not always be aware of the severity of the disease: in one trial, 36% of parents stated that they would administer a b 2 -agonist, but 57% would go to the ED without giving a b 2 -agonist first. Also, fewer than 5% would call the physician and use a PFM [696] . In a separate sample, the figures were 13% and 1%, respectively [338] . One-third or fewer parents followed other NHLBI recommended steps, including using a PFM, calling or going to see the doctor, or going to the ED [557] . Bronchiolitis is an acute respiratory disease that affects infants, generally between 2 and 10 months of age [499] and involves chiefly the small arteries, is characterized by an acute onset of wheezing, expiratory dyspnea, tachypnea, fever, with or without diffuse fine crepitations of rhonchi and rales on auscultation, and with radiological appearance of emphysema [69] . This definition prevails in Europe and Australia, and by American authors all first-time wheezing associated with a respi-impact of side effects and protracted duration of its action: 4-5 h. Nevertheless, other controlled studies are needed before they can be used effectively and safely in maintenance therapy. Theophylline drugs, compared to b 2 -adrenergics, have a more gradual action with more frequent and more significant side effects. Long-acting theophylline [83] has proved useful in young children who do not readily accept inhaled procedures, in children with asthma or wheezing in the morning as the only symptom, in cases of chronic asthma to avoid waking the child during the night, and in adolescents with severe symptoms before adding CS to their maintenance treatment [706] , or to reduce doses when possible [566] . CSs compared to b 2 -adrenergics and theophylline drugs have a greater latency time and are the preferred choice for use in severe crises for short periods. In prolonged treatments, the wide spectrum of side effects makes it preferable to use hydroxylase compounds in acute phases because of their short plasma half-life and the faster bioavailability of their active principle [633] . Preparations that interfere less with the metabolic processes are preferred for chronic forms [633] . b 2 -Adrenergics can be combined -depending on the case -with anticholinergics, theophylline and CS: ∑ In the first case a functional synergy is obtained without causing an amalgamation of the side effects of the two drugs considered individually. ∑ With the combination of b 2 -adrenergics and theophylline, an increased bronchodilation in cases of severe acute asthma and a better control of the symptoms in the several forms with a chronic trend could be achieved, but there are few recent studies that could confirm the usefulness of this association, when carried out on a regular basis, whereas if doses and the frequency of administration of inhaled b 2 -adrenergics are reduced, the association with theophylline is effective on bronchodilation. ∑ CSs together with b 2 -adrenergics enhance their therapeutic efficiency by acting on cAMP; cAMP levels are maintained within normal limits, with the above-mentioned effects, also improving oxygenation [545] . Furthermore, b 2 -adrenergics with long-term half-life provide better control of asthma when symptoms persist, notwithstanding treatment with CS, and considering that this association can be useful in covering the CS latency period [359] . One major problem is the treatment guidelines, an issue frequently quoted: written guidelines are often difficult to read. In the US, the mean grade levels obtained for the leading guidelines ranged from 4.9 to 9.2 [191] . Only 2.1±1.0% of the directors from 376 sampled EDs reported the use of written protocols or guidelines [121] . ratory tract infection in infants is included [674] as wheezing-associated respiratory infection (WARI). It probably represents the first episode of asthma disease. Episodes of lower airway illness labeled bronchiolitis in the 2nd year of life is more likely to be asthma [747] . Bronchiolitis is highest in infants (50%-60% of cases), but can also be seen in the 2nd year of life, even if with a much lower prevalence. It is more frequent in winter months and usually affects males, as does asthma. Since 1980, the rate of hospitalization for children with bronchiolitis has increased from 5.4% to 16.4%, whereas mortality rates for the disease have remained constant [372] . In the Netherlands, the national number of bronchiolitis hospitalizations significantly increased from 1991 to 1999 in children aged 0-4 years [674] . The host's characteristics stand out in the clinical manifestation of the disease [226, 271, 391, 417, 512, 611, 711] : ∑ Age (<1 year) holds first place, given the reduced caliber of nursling bronchioles. Our studies indicate that the onset age <6 months is even more significant (Tables 11.24, 11.25) [69] . ∑ Genetic predisposition. ∑ Patient's immune state. ∑ Prematurity. ∑ Lungs more or less immature (additional effects from smoking). ∑ Male sex. ∑ Bottle feeding. ∑ Presence of cardiopathies, pneumopathies, polymalformative syndromes. ∑ Poor socioeconomic status and/or living conditions. ∑ Exposure to allergens and/or pollutants. ∑ Passive smoke, particularly maternal. Breast feeding plays a key role, since maternal milk contains anti-RSV sIgA. Breast feeding for at least 1 month and, negatively, parental smoke equal to >20 cigarettes are highly significant compared to controls [391] . Assay of cotinine levels emphasizes a significant relationship between admissions to hospital and mother's and parents's secondhand smoke (p<0.0005), compared to a similar group not affected by bronchiolitis (p=0.0181) [519] . In the cohort of 240 infants, 29% had a smoking mother [747] . The impact of daycare attendance on the incidence of infantile LRTI amounts to a doubled increase in the risk of such infections. In a cohort of children prospectively studied in the first 3-6 months of life by a polyfactorial analysis, the factors increasing the risk of a care setting different from the child home have been defined. They include repeated transfers from one place to the other, twice-daily changes of the environment (both heralding potential infections), worries, probably lesser care by persons replacing the mother, and higher prevalence of infections (8.6%) [257] . Compared to the age of 4 months to 3 years, the presence of >3 children of the same age, and/or that of smoking persons in daycare settings (personal experience) exposes the child to the risk of acquiring respiratory infections, but not at home, even with > three siblings, and persons caring for the child or sharing the bedroom, etc. [257] . In 87% of cases, bronchiolitis is caused by respiratory viruses such as RSV (see Chap. 4) and the remaining rate to parainfluenza 3 and 1 viruses, adenovirus, etc. About 25%-50% of young babies show seroconversion for RSV or parainfluenza virus in the 1st year of life, though only a certain number of babies manifest signs of disease. RSV provokes, in most subjects, nonsevere or imperceptible clinical features, while in infants it can cause bronchiolitis with all ensuing symptoms, showing its greater impact on young infants. With passing time, the number and severity of the episodes decrease [323] . Regarding the frequency of reinfections, it has been reported that a second infection recurs in 75% of cases and a third in 65% of cases, thus being the major cause of lower airway disease in infancy. As with all infections sustained by respiratory viruses, bronchiolitis can occur in epidemic forms, more severe in some years and less so in others, and more than once in the same child during the 1st year of life [546] . Genetic factors such as FHA [271] (71%, [499] ) or allergic sensitization [586] and family predisposition to asthma (43%, [499] ) are crucial elements that condition the onset of bronchiolitis, as well as the persistence of bronchoconstriction. It is important to emphasize that one atopic or asthmatic parent is a highly predictive factor relating to the insurgence of asthma in the child [271] (Tables 11.24, 11.25). In a prospective study of 47 infants, it is interesting that among children with RSV, 6/11 (54.5%) children with FHA developed asthma compared with 5/36 (13.8%) matched controls without FHA. In these children at age 7 1 /2 asthma was found in process of macrophage-induced lymphocyte activation [503] , as previously seen (Table 11 .9). It can be assumed that in a selected number of children, either affected previously, or at the time of primary RSV infection, there is an alteration of T-cell regulatory mechanisms [523] . Therefore, bronchiolitis can be regarded as an immune system disorganization related to host immaturity, in which T-cell hyperactivity is unraveled, in parallel with persistent and elevated IgE-mediated responses, which, via increased histamine and other mediator release, can, in future, predispose to asthma and BHR [611] . Infants affected by bronchiolitis have a markedly lower number of CD8 + lymphocytes (inversely proportional to IgE maximum titers) than infants suffering from other types of RSV infection [715] during convalescence. Similarly, CD8 T cells are reduced during bronchiolitis [523] and in infants manifesting >3 episodes of wheezing during their 1st year of life [546] . From the fundamental studies of Welliver et al [714] [715] [716] , the presence of anti-RSV sIgE in the nasopharyngeal secretions of children after an episode of bronchiolitis or of pneumonia with wheezing provoked by RSV has been noted, but not in controls also affected by RSV-induced respiratory infections and without bronchoconstriction.Also known is the longer persistence of anti-RSV sIgE in the study babies compared to controls (Table 11 .26) [714] . At the same time, an elevated histaminemia and a clear correlation of anti-RSV sIgE titers with hypoxia as the objective measure of disease severity has been displayed, results that are totally overlapping those following infection by parainfluenza viruses [716] . Furthermore, the higher the levels of anti-RSV IgE in children suffering from bronchiolitis, the more easily the wheezing relapses (70% compared to 20% of those whose levels are not measurable) [715] . IgE produced by RSV therefore has immediate implications on atopic asthma, resulting in the IgE-mast cells linking and mediator and IL release. A subsequent direct mast cell intervention could be inferred from tryptase levels present in BALF of 91.8% of infants, but not so elevated as compared to the levels found in controls, to imply a confirmation [184] . [587] . In a cohort of 240 2-to 10-week-old infants, 61% had a FHA and 40% a history of asthma [747] . If we consider the infant's still immature immune system, already Th2-controlled at birth, it is evident how, with the decrease of passively acquired antibodies and with the addition of the aggravating factor of low IFN-g generation and progressive decrease in anti-RSV sIgA in maternal milk, the infection can progress. The functional characteristics of young infants are dominated by an insufficient development of bronchial cartilages, smooth muscles and the number of alveoli, and by reduced elastic recoil [512] . RSV has a certain tropism for small airway epithelial cells, whereas, for example, the parainfluenza virus prefers the subglottic epithelial cells [125] . The viruses have immunosuppressive and cytopathic effects on monocytes, macrophages and T lymphocytes, subsequently interfering on the normal 795 Bronchiolitis Statistically significant differences between groups III and IV and groups I and II (combined) and between groups III and IV (combined) and groups I and II (combined). Data from [715] . By an aspecific phagocytosis of RSV by the cells or an interaction with a receptor on eosinophils, RSV prime the eosinophils to start the chain of O 2 •generation and activation and to release mediators in greater quantities, confirming the hypothesis that some inflammatory signs seen in the airways of these children are eosinophil-induced [298] . Such RSV-induced effects on inflammatory cells in bronchiolitis may be much more pathogenic than was formerly believed, as demonstrated by their relationship, which has come to light in recent years, with eosinophils, whose activation appears pathogenically to be more important than that of neutrophils/ macrophages and is characteristic of bronchiolitis but not of other respiratory disease [298] . Significantly higher ECP levels have been reported in infants with RSV-induced bronchiolitis than in controls suffering from URTIs and LRTIs that were also RSV-induced. High ECP levels in the nasopharyngeal secretions are predictive of the development of bronchiolitis at the time of RSV infection, and in parallel of clinical severity [201] . Especially in males, ECP levels are associated with the disease and its severity more than with peripheral eosinophilia, presenting as markers of disease progression [202] . The same difference was observed in infants with other RSV infections, but in females rather than males [751] . ECP was not predictive of asthma development in 6/34 children 2 years old after hospital admission at the age of 3 months [585] . There is, however, a correlation between LTC 4 and RSV-specific IgE levels in the nasopharyngeal mucosa [686, 714] of 67% of children with RSV bronchiolitis, vs 33% of controls with URTIs, also caused by RSV (p<0.001), who, moreover, showed LTC 4 concentrations fivefold lower than the study children (p<0.02) [686] . PaO 2 titers were lower in children with detectable LTB 4 than in those with undetectable LTB 4 , and LTB 4 titers were inversely correlated with initial PaO 2 ,values which suggests a connection with disease severity [203] . Therefore, the damage produced by RSV at the bronchial epithelium, associated with toxic effects of basic proteins, and edema and bronchospasm triggered by LTs, could induce an airway obstruction, followed by a postinfection persistent BHR [323] . Other than BHR, bronchiolitis is dominated by activation of cellular immunity with production of Th2-like T cell ILs, clearly indicating an immune response to RSV and predictive of the development of asthma. An increased rate of CD4 + , CD25 + , and CD23 + lymphocytes was found in infants at 5 months compared with the time of bronchiolitis and with healthy subjects of the same age. Moreover, the CD4 + increase is not associated with CD8 increase, which remains low, whereas IL 4 increased in both groups. Eosinophils also increase significantly and are related to the number of days of wheezing -therefore, a classic Th2 response [523] manifested by RSV-induced IL 13 production [670] . It is unclear whether genetic factors condition the phenotypic expression of RSV-in-duced bronchiolitis and the development of asthma, or RSV predisposes infants to asthma. Even more pathogenetic is soluble CD14 (sCD14), a predictor of subsequent wheezing in children aged 2-14 months with RSV-induced brochiolitis, although not influenced by FHA+, sex, or breast-feeding [601] . Anatomopathological study shows that RSV replication in the airways has cytolytic effects on the epithelium. Significant changes in airway morphology are seen in animals with acute viral respiratory infection: the airways become edematous and infiltrated with inflammatory cells. The lower airways show marked bronchial narrowing and collateral ventilation and elastic recoil reduction. The reduction in caliber of distal airways makes the small bronchi and bronchioles obstructed by cellular debris from virus-specific epithelial necrosis, increased mucus secretion, intraluminal secretions of relatively dense and viscid exudate, bronchiolar inflammatory infiltrates and edema of both submucosa and adventitia. The lesions are aggravated by replacement of necrotic cells by cuboid nonciliated cells, thus impairing mucus clearance, which condenses in obstructive and potentially occlusive plugs [611] . From a functional viewpoint bronchospasm can be absent. Vice versa, alterations of the respiratory mechanism are present, denoted by a 50% increase in FRC compared to normal, reduced pulmonary compliance, increased resistance to air passage, especially during exhalation, since during exhalation -especially if forcedthe airway caliber is reduced as a result of bronchiolar obstruction. The work of breathing is aggravated by air trapping with pulmonary hyperdistention or atelectasis, which are at the basis of hypoxemia -warning signs of ventilation-perfusion imbalance [271] . Bronchiolitis is an acute disease with a sudden onset and a steady worsening in the first 24 h. It presents a severe clinical situation in young infants caused by respiratory changes, with prolonged exhalation, cough, sustained resting polypnea (RR ≥70-80/min), and obstructive type dyspnea, sometimes cyanosis and/or lethargy [474] . Moreover, symptoms can include coughing (100%), nasal congestion (94%), wheezing (89%), difficulty breathing (87%), poor feeding (70%), poor sleeping (69%), irritability (67%), fever (59%), vomiting (51%), and choking (41%) [499] . If the disease worsens further, RR decreases (Appendix 11.1) [302, 544] and signs of hypoxia and difficult breathing occur 22% to 46% of children so affected are admitted to hospital, especially if RR is >70 [499] or are admitted to the PICU at a median age of 1.7-2.27 months [506] and requiring mechanical ventilation in 31.4%-34.1% of cases. Tachypnea makes breast-feeding difficult, not leaving a sufficient interval of time for sucking and swallowing. etiological agent identification. Confirmation is obtained by using the indirect immunofluorescence technique and by ELISA. In any event, these are roundabout methods and can take more than 10 days to carry out [125] . Even if in 3%-10% of cases Chlamydia trachomatis and Mycoplasma pneumoniae [514] are isolated, both illness severity and prognosis are parallel to cases in which only RSV has been found. Differential diagnosis is summarized in Tables 11.27 and 11.28 [594] . It is made difficult in babies by the frequent analogies between the clinical picture, the objectivity and the X-ray results. Bronchiolitis has characteristics other than those of asthma [125] : ∑ It manifests itself in the cold seasons. ∑ It occurs in epidemic waves. ∑ Episodes are frequently preceded by rhinorrhea and fever. ∑ It is particularly common in daycare settings. ∑ In the same family other members suffer from influenza. ∑ It is primarily a disease affecting babies in the 1st year of life, which is why diagnosis can be limited [747] , whereas asthma normally occurs after this age (Figs. 4.14 and 5.3). However, pediatricians generally do not need to differentiate virus and nonvirus-induced severe wheezing, since treatment of airway obstruction is unaffected, apart from an epidemiological interest in etiology [594] . Treatment is symptomatic. If breathing difficulties are severe, there is need to humidify the air and to hydrate the baby adequately (not >1,500 ml/m 2 , correcting the acidosis), also to choose the diet and to control hydrosaline balance: in young infants rehydration is cardinal even though cases of severe dehydration are rare [26, 222] . Electrolyte concentrations should be carefully monitored in all infants with acute bronchiolitis [512] . If cyanosis is present and SaO 2 is ≥95% in room air, warm and humidified O 2 can be delivered into a tent or headbox, adjusting O 2 saturation. If necessary, give a dose of epinephrine 1:1,000 (Table 11 .16), with a vasoconstriction action and, therefore, an antiedematous action, which can, if required, be repeated after 15-20 min, since it is rapidly metabolized. Inhaled epinephrine is discussed in Chap. 20. Racemic epinephrine [551] (not registered everywhere) has proved most effective, as shown by concrete improvement and few or no side effects. The effect of the racemic form derives from its action on a-adrenergic receptors, capable of reducing microvascular leakage by causing constriction of precapillary bronchial arterioles and hence bronchial mucosal edema [551] . The drug is administered through a nebulizer in doses of 0.1 ml/kg [551] . In severe cases, assisted breathing is needed [271] . Racemic epinephrine proves The child can become dehydrated as a result of an increased perspiratio insensibilis and of shock. Fever if present, in most cases does not rise beyond 39°C [270] . Objectively, nasal flaring, use of accessory respiratory muscles due to intercostal retractions can be noted. During auscultation, a prolonged expiratory phase can be heard, together with expiratory wheezing and fine diffused rales or rhonchi. The rales indicate an obstruction of the main bronchi, and the rhonchi an alveolar hypoventilation. High-pitched expiratory wheezes in all lung fields may be audible. Hypoxemia and hypercapnia deriving from the alteration of the ventilation-perfusion balance and of pH and PaCO 2 are present. Aspecific symptoms can also be noted in young infants such as lethargy and irritability or other neurological symptoms of hypoxemia. Apnea and/or cyanosis can be the only symptom [512, 594] . Diagnosis is above all clinical. SaO 2 monitoring is determinant to ascertain the degree of airway obstruction, and in cases of severe respiratory distress it should be integrated with the acid-base balance test; arterial samples may verify PaCO 2 levels. Pulsus paradoxus is a clinical correlate of cardiopulmonary interaction during asthma and correlates with the severity of the asthma attack. The degree of pulsus paradoxus can be measured directly with a hand-operated BP cuff or estimated from pulse oximetry [372, 717] , a noninvasive method for detecting severe cases and for measuring O 2 saturation (SaO 2 ), but not always reliable [512] because it can be affected by the child's movement and by peripheral vasoconstriction, which occurs in the more severe cases [509] . This pulse may be related to RR in young children [372] , but it cannot always be utilized because of HR increase; nor is there a clear correlation between peripheral pulse increase and asthma aggravation [738] . If it is >20 Torr, a moderate to severe obstruction is present [174] . In a survey of 519 physicians, the decision to transfer children to an appropriate emergency setting was significantly influenced by the 2% difference between SaO 2 values of 94% and 92%. This finding may help to explain the increased numbers of admissions for bronchiolitis since the popularization of pulse oximetry [372] . However, in 67% of cases oximetry is done in pediatric ED as part of the initial procedure and to document improvements after treatment [121] . Full blood counts are normal [125] in 80% of children [512] . Chest X-rays show typical airway emphysema resulting from air trapping, chest hyperinflation, diaphragmatic flattening and accentuation of the bronchial network; multiple areas of atelectasis can mimic areas of thickening. No correlation between these findings and severity of bronchiolitis is found [512] . Cytological examinations of nasopharyngeal aspirates and titers of specific antibodies may facilitate the to be better, as has been confirmed in the US [551] where a shorter length of hospitalization of children compared to a group treated with albuterol has been documented [399] . If the mean percent SaO 2 at 60 min was significantly higher in the epinephrine group [399] , either the acidity of the solution (pH 3.2), or the content of 798 CHAPTER 11 Asthma Table 11 .28. Pediatric differential diagnosis of bronchiolitis and asthma Positive family history Frequent May be frequent ( [594] . GER gastroesophageal reflux, RRI recurrent respiratory infections, RSV respiratory syncytial virus. bronchiolitis. This could account for the controversies summarized elsewhere [323] . As an alternative, consideration should also be given to forced nasal respiration of the infant and to the greater aerosol residual in the oropharynx compared to an adult [549] . In the survey from 519 physicians, most respondents recommended use of bronchodilators (96%), and few recommended steroids (8%), or antibiotics (2%). Inhaled albuterol was the most common drug specified (84%). Inhaled epinephrine (57%) followed by inhaled albuterol (35%) were the most commonly second recommended treatment [372] . Epinephrine was given to 58% of 237 infants in pediatric EDs in Canada [499] . In 149 infants hospitalized with bronchiolitis, there were no group differences in the effectiveness of therapy of either nebulized epinephrine or albuterol every 1-6 h. This is probably because by the time infants present to medical care, the amount of virus-induced necrosis may already be substantial [474] . Much debated is CS use in 5% of cases [499] . The rationale for their use is in direct relation to the anti-inflammatory power carried out on the bronchiolar walls and the restoration of b 2 -receptors; but the small airways of these infants are, for the most part, unresponsive [711] . Furthermore, since they retain fluids in the tissues, CSs should be used with caution [594] in view of the inappropriate secretion of ADH (antidiuretic hormone), potentially present in these babies along with hyperreninemia [222] . Five percent of infants received CSs while in the hospital and 4% on discharge [499] . Antibiotics have no therapeutic value in a viral disease; unless a bacterial association is suspected (in 2% of cases), or confirmed by clinical or laboratory evidence, and severe, clinical signs, such as persistent febrile condition and/or an increase in the indexes of inflammation [512] . However, there are concerns about risks of adverse reactions, and the effect of antibiotics on bacterial resistance (Chap. 19) . Good results have been achieved with ribavirin, a synthetic nucleotide with virostatic properties on many viruses including RSV, interfering with the expression of mRNA of RSV itself, the effects of which on clinical parameters are noticeable 24-48 h after therapy [599] . The drug is administered by a small-particle aerosol generator and is delivered to a head box, face mask or O 2 tent in a solution containing 20 mg/ml of water, for 12-18 h consecutively per day for 3-7 days, depending on the disease progression [599] . Given the potential for environmental contamination during treatment, it is preferable to administer it in high doses by means of an O 2 hood at 6 g/dl water for 2 h instead of 18 h, achieving the same effects [176] . After the initial positive results, reservations were expressed, due also to the unfavorable cost-benefit ratio [712] , its limited strength and the drug's possible toxicity and environmental contamination [176] , which is why it is recommended as an optional choice [235] . metabisulfites, present in levo-epinephrine preparations as a preservative [543] , or in epinephrine acid tartrate as a vehicle [689] or both, might have been responsible [543] . These causes may explain why no improvement was shown in infants with acute bronchiolitis when compared with placebo [2, 226, 689] . Four recent randomized, DB studies have evaluated nebulized epinephrine in the treatment of infants with bronchiolitis. The delivered types of epinephrine were L-epinephrine [2] , racemic epinephrine [237] , epinephrine diluted in normal saline solution [373] , or epinephrine acid tartrate, 1% [689] . Nebulizations were administered using a nebulizer and face mask, and O 2 was given as needed as above. No significant overall differences were found between the groups [689] or between treated and placebo groups [2, 237] . A decrease in symptoms and length of hospitalization was reported in 54 infants [373] . When epinephrine diluted in normal saline was nebulized to these infants with viral bronchiolitis, the in-hospital stay was reduced by 25%, from 4 days in the 0.9% saline solution group (group 1) to 3 days in the 3% saline solution group (group 2) [373] . This outcome could bear an important economic and clinical impact worldwide; in the US, >10 5 children are hospitalized annually at a cost of US $300 million. Decreasing this burden by almost 25% could theoretically save nearly US $75 million annually in the US alone [373] . A Cochrane review concludes that there is insufficient evidence to support the use of epinephrine for the treatment of bronchiolitis among inpatients aged ≤2 years except a significant change in clinical score at 60 min post-treatment [239] . Usually, severely ill, hospitalized infants are aged a few days [2, 470] or 3-6 months [69, 237, 372, 373, 470, 474, 499] .We analyze the differences in epinephrine preparations in Chapter 20. As has been discussed, the use of bronchodilators is controversial, since usually they increase the state of agitation of infants in whom bronchiolar smooth muscles are barely developed before the 18th month, even if muscular tissue appears at the 23rd week of intrauterine life and by the 25th week is uniformly distributed at all levels of the bronchial tree [632] . As stated, bronchospasm is not a main component of bronchiolitis, and in acutely ill infants the production of mucosal edema and increased mucus secretion may impair medication effects [206] . In some cases, b 2 -receptors in healthy infants of 5.6 months [206] have been found, even in reduced numbers, and the efficacy of nebulized albuterol has been reported in infants 1-24 months old [565] . A causative factor, as noted, is the b-adrenergic receptors' desensitization caused by RSV. The safety of b 2 -adrenergics for use in infants of 7.5 months [36, 370, 371] has been ascertained, whereas in infants <1-6 months [199, 250] b 2 -adrenergics induced a significant HR increase and a SaO 2 reduction. Even if tachycardia can be viewed as an index of effectiveness [199] , we believe that b 2 -adrenergic may be useful in older children who can no longer be diagnosed as having Immunoglobulins with high titers of anti-RSV antibodies [227] , IV administered (RSV-IVIg), in a prospective blinded randomized, multicenter study over 3 years, with high (750) or low (150 mg/kg) monthly infusions can be used for prevention. Compared to controls, highdose RSV-IVIg reduced the incidence of LRTI, RSV-associated hospitalizations, ICU days, and ribavirin doses (p=0.01-0.05) with 3.3% adverse reactions. The protection was extended to the follow-up with a clear reduction in severe consequences, even among subjects who were at greater risk [227] . In premature babies, the efficacy is the same, compared to controls, with a reduction in the number of days spent in hospital or ICU associated with RSV infection [226] . Even though offering a valid defense, it is not preventive in 100% of cases; nor has it lowered the mortality rate [9] . It is administered IV (750 mg/kg/2 h, once a month, during the RSV season: November to March-April): it causes overhydration, requires the same monthly controls and has an elevated cost, as does ribavirin [235] . In 1996, the FDA approved the use of RSV-IVIg as a prevention against RSV infections, excluding, however, children with congenital cardiopathy. Other DB, randomized studies are further testing the advantages and limitations of RSV-IVIg [9] . Another molecule, palivizumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against RSV, is now marketed for preventing respiratory tract infection by RSV in infants. The results of six trials suggest that the optimal dose is 15 mg/kg palivizumab by monthly injection throughout the seasonal epidemic period. The AAP has restricted its use to infants with CLD and congenital heart disease (CHD) [9] . Two recent studies [225, 515] have shown that the hospitalization rate for RSV bronchiolitis decreased significantly (46.2% vs 11.8 and 3.8%; p < 0.01) in premature infants with a gestational age ≤32 weeks and with CLD [225] . The emerging problem is that 83% of the children needing PICU admission for mechanical ventilation for the RSV bronchiolitis treatment from 2000 to 2002 born at term did not have CLD and were not candidates for RSV prophylaxis according to the current recommendations [9, 515] . Certainly RSV prophylaxis would increase the net cost of care if palivizumab were administered to the population of infants with bronchiolitis. Generally speaking the prognosis is favorable. The mortality rate in hospitalized infants is 1%, which rises to 3.5% in premature infants and babies born with heart diseases, chronic respiratory disease, primary and secondary IDs, etc. [323] . Long-term prognosis can be complicated by asthma. Many studies have examined why children with genetic predisposition to atopy develop bronchiolitis more fre-quently or, afterwards, an asthmatic condition, especially if with IgE elevated levels. The influence of predisposing and confounding factors is well known: passive smoke -especially maternal -environmental pollutants, etc. Nevertheless, RSV infection remains the main factor that facilitates the insurgence of asthma. In this context, the report that more than one-third of children who have asthma during childhood have suffered from RSV-induced bronchiolitis (Tables 11.24, 11.25) seems particularly relevant. Consequently, PRIST is useful for identifying children with persistent wheezing who will continue to suffer from asthma [69] , in many of whom the IgE increase is followed by sIgE development [70] . Several studies have indicated the predictive nature of total IgE [300] and/or of CBIgE [368] ; others underline SPT effectiveness as a screening method (Chap. 6) . What is the role of atopy? Several authors have expressed controversial opinions [69, 70, 184, 383, 391, 453] . Often the studies have proved inconclusive, some linking the unfavorable prognosis to atopy and maternal passive smoke [391] . Others do not confirm FHA+ with atopy, emphasizing instead the association with parental smoke and sibling presence [400] . The results of Rylander et al [545] appear to be very eloquent: reexamining 79 children 4 years after their admission to hospital, they observed in only 22 of those with recurring wheezing a statistically relevant association with FH and an equally significant PEF and MEF 25 reduction. In 83 children followed-up to the age of 8 [313, 314, 320] , the risk of atopic children developing asthma or BHR during their school age was significantly related to recurring wheezing that appeared in the 1st year of life and to a premature IgE increase [314] compared to controls.At age 19 wheezing in early childhood was a significant predictor of asthma, and also seemed to predict PFT abnormalities in early adulthood. Thus, although the outcome of children with early wheezing is good at school age they may become symptomatic again as adults [495] . In other entrants, at the age of 4 years, asthma was present in 62.5% of ex-bronchiolitis sufferers vs 6.3% of controls and in 88.5% of children with high IgE titers compared to 32% of those with normal IgE levels [555] . In children of atopics, at the age of 11 atopy and wheezing were closely related [609] . Many different lines of research agree that RSV-induced bronchiolitis is responsible for a subsequent asthmatic syndrome, persistent for many years after the primary infection. In particular, it is hypothesized that anti-RSV IgE production can constitute a marker for the predisposition to develop specific response to VRI of early and late infancy, able to trigger recurrent asthmatic episodes [453] (Table 11 .29) [4, 117, 161, 178, 214, 241, 246, 302, 381, 375, 423, 447, 454, 470, 495, 587, 616, 637, 644, 713, 726, 745] . Studies fail to clarify the pathogenesis of this higher prevalence of asthma in these subjects [585, 587] . It can be speculated either that the atopic risk preceded and/or provoked RSV-induced bronchiolitis and wheezing episodes, or that, at the origin, a reduced [453] did not find a causative connection between the initial type of infection and subsequent respiratory changes [611] ; therefore bronchiolitis during infancy might not cause a greater morbility for respiratory disease in older children [747] , or the long-term prognosis PFT is already present in the first weeks of life [747] . In fact, these alterations, years after an episode of bronchiolitis, can reflect pre-existing damage in the pulmonary system and/or in airway's mechanical properties, already present at birth [381, 638, 747] . A meta-analysis Table 11 .29. Bronchiolitis, IgE antibodies, atopy and asthma development: a meta-analysis Viral infections do not provoke an IgE antibody expansion and a higher atopic risk in children aged <2 years, frequent at 2-4 years and more frequent after 4 years [161] Development of specific IgE in 44 % of asthmatic children and in 17 % of nonasthmatic children up to 2 years [587] Significant association between FHA/asthma and RSV infection at 3 years, with similar differences in specific IgE titers between study children and controls [587] Atopy in 67 % of ex-bronchiolitics (aged 19) and in 50 % of controls [495] Children who were current wheezers at ages 7-8 had detectable RSV-specific IgE during their initial episodes but no relation to alteration of spirometry tests at age 7-8 years [712] . Recurrent viral infections unrelated to BHR at 1 year [644] , 3-6 [4, 725] , 7-8 [724] , or at 13 years [616] Aspecific BHR at methacholine inhalation challenge (MIC) in 80 % of children of 12 years hospitalized in the 1st year of life due to severe bronchiolitis, vs 15 % of controls [178] BHR to MIC was present in 48 % of ex-bronchiolitics and in 32 % of controls [495] Recurrent bronchiolitis not followed by asthma in 85 % of cases within the 10th year of life (despite numerous episodes experienced during the 1st year of life), or significantly predictive of spirometry value reduction, also in RAST-negative children, moreover in 45.2 % of cases methacholine challenge was correlated with dust mite-positive RAST [246] Among 6-year-old children who were hospitalized with RSV bronchiolitis as infants, there was a ª 3-fold increase in wheezing [423] ; at 9-10 years of age, 33 % of these children with RSV bronchiolitis in infancy required bronchodilator therapy, compared with 3 % of the control group [447] Infants with reduced conductance have a fourfold greater (in males tenfold) virus-induced risk of wheezing within the 1st year of life; in females the risk is 16-fold greater in case of reduced FRC before the illness [382] Elevated Raw and reduced FRC are predisposing factors for long-term wheezing respiratory illness in infants [381] Children with wheezing in the 1st year of life and at least one episode in 3 years of follow-up, experience at birth, compared to controls, a 22 %-25 % PFT reduction [382] In children with chronic cough and previous LRTI, the intercellular spaces are 17-fold increased with notable edema and the inflammatory cells increased sevenfold (91 % of lymphocytes, 9 % of mast cells and eosinophils), whereas ciliated cells are reduced threefold [241] In prematurely born babies with gestational age of 29 weeks, a high Raw is significantly associated with respiratory manifestations at 2 and 3 years of life [214] Prematurely born babies with birth weight of 0.5-1.5 kg who suffered from >1 wheezing illness in the first 2 years of life develop asthma at 5 years in 18.1 % and at 8 years in 21.3 % of cases vs 10 % of controls [302] BHR is observed at birth in healthy neonates [744] or at 8 months, 3.6 months after having suffered from bronchiolitis [644] In conclusion: A high proportion of infants hospitalized with bronchiolitis go on to develop asthma-like symptoms [712] ; such infants are more likely to have reduced PFT at 1 month of age [637] , thus raising the chance that bronchiolitis may identify the infants with poorly developed airways and therefore at an increased risk of developing asthma-like symptoms in response to respiratory infections Viral bronchiolitis in infancy enhances the risk of asthma and recurrent wheezing in later wheezing by increasing the likelihood of Th2 sensitization to subsequent respiratory infections and to aeroallergens [470] 25 %-56 % of bronchiolitic subjects are eventually diagnosed with asthma, more commonly with a personal or family history of asthma [117] PFT abnormalities may persist in asthmatic children up to 17 years of age and recur in the adult age [454] Decreased indices of small airway obstruction (PEFR, FEV 1 , FEF 25-75 , FEV 1 /FVC) and increased Raw have been found in children following bronchiolitis [117] BHR bronchial hyperreactivity, FRC functional residual capacity, PFT pulmonary function testing. is open to all types of complications. It is likely that a percentage of children will suffer from asthma (15%-63%) [130, 320, 417, 453, 555] , especially with FH+ and/or high titers of total and/or specific IgE and PC 20 -histamine >2 mg/dl, FEF 25-75 over 70%, and FEV 1 /FVC over 70%) of predicted status asthmaticus [453] , or independent of FH [523, 616] , but with Th2 producers of IL 4 , virtual absence of CD8 T cells and almost undetectable IFN-g [523] . In 7-to 8-year-old exsufferers of severe bronchiolitis, RSV infection primes memory T cells that make strong IFN-g responses. However, IL 4 -producing T cells responding to RSV and cat antigens are significantly more frequent in ex-bronchiolitics, thus increasing the risk of allergic sensitization by providing a local IL 4 -rich environment in which aeroallergens are first encountered [470] . The other important question remaining to be clarified is that together with children in whom wheezing associated with atopy and BHR (development that is a prelude to asthma) began after the age of 2 [423] , there are others with early onset of wheezing (<2 years), which ceases, more or less without consequences, at about 10-11 years of age [726] , in relation with reduced airway development in this period, and with the particular vulnerability to VRIs [725] . Similarly, the age which should be taken as a reference has proved to be a relative factor [723] . To this end, let us stress that 49% of children labeled as asthmatic at the age of 5 years were asymptomatic at 10 years [471] .A more valid criterion is allergen sensitization, which is not only linked to the diagnosis of asthma, but is also predictive of asthma in children with wheezing [142] . The differential diagnosis between the two forms is summarized in Table 11 .30 [383, 723] , and that of asthma and bronchiolitis in Tables 11.27 and 11.28. For the prevalence of wheezing, see Tables 5.10 and 5.12.Wjst et al show that it is on the increase from 10.9% to 17.6% in the 1-to 3-year age group, then decreasing from 16.4% to 9.7% from 4 to 9 years [726] , while others report figures of 60% [638] or 50% [383] . In this study, the children examined at birth and re-examined at the age of 3 or 6 based on the time of onset and pattern of wheezing symptoms were divided into three wheezing phenotypes: ∑ 19.9% with transient wheezing only in the first 3 years of life ∑ 15% with late-onset wheezing, not present in the first 3 years, (but with symptoms beginning between 3 and 6 years) ∑ 13.7% with persistent wheezing in the first 6 years of life. Children with transient wheezing showed significantly altered PFTs, to a greater degree than the other groups, and also with a smoking mother (only the 2nd and 3rd group had asthmatic mothers), IgE titers significantly high (higher in the 3rd group), SPT+ and normal PFTs at 1 year of age and altered PFTs at age 6: this is the minority with a predisposition to asthma [383] . Persis-tent wheezing is more commonly seen in children with asthmatic parents who have significant LRTIs with RSV [616] . The three groups can be further reduced to two: one with a viral infection and one with an atopic disease, probably aggravated by the infection [547] . Measuring specific Raw (sRaw), 200 children who wheezed at least once during first 3 years of life had significantly higher sRaw than the 303 who had never wheezed in the first 3 years of life, who had significantly higher sRaw if they were atopic or were at high genetic risk of atopy. These high-risk children, even if they had never wheezed, had a higher sRaw than children at medium and low risk. Atopic children had significantly higher sRaw than those who were not atopic, but nonatopic children at high risk had higher sRaw than those at medium risk [351] . Therefore, higher sRaw predominates in atopic or high-risk children independently of the number of wheezing episodes. Persistent symptoms after 3 years of age are associated with the concrete risk of developing asthma [152] . At the age of 11, 17 of 21 children still had wheezing and 12 of 21 had BHR [609] . When asthmatic children encounter the allergen, an acute asthmatic episode is triggered that can evolve in three stages. The first begins 20-30 min after allergen exposure and essentially consists of a bronchospasm, a clinical consequence of metachromatic cell degranulation; the airway caliber generally returns to normal within 2 h. The second stage reaches its maximum intensity about 6 h after the provoking event, coincident with the eosinophil inflammatory response in the airways. The third stage, which can last up to 3 weeks, is sustained by the intense inflammatory response induced by mediator release and progressive recruiting of [383, 723] . and often the diagnosis is not clear. The early recognition of premonitory signs (Table 11 .31) [25] before wheezing is perceptible can be finalized by an often resolutive immediate therapy. The hallmark is wheezing during expiration provoked by air rushing through larger but narrowed airways in sufficient force to generate air vibration, heard as a whistling sound associated with breathing. Additional symptoms are a feeling of a tight chest and a hacking, recurrent cough, especially at night, which can also be the only symptom. After the age of 1 year, the bronchospastic component predominates in acute attacks, which are rapidly reversible. The hypersecretion component dominates in chronic asthma and in more prolonged, severe attacks that are less responsive to therapy with bronchodilators (status asthmaticus). In addition to respiratory dyspnea, children often complain of abdominal pain, or headache, or a general sense of feeling unwell as the first subjective signs. Abdominal pain, particularly in younger children, is secondary to the use of abdominal muscles and of diaphragm. The dry, irritable, nonproductive cough of the first stages is often accompanied by a feeling of anxiety and is found together with tachypnea and tachycardia. The child is almost recumbent in bed, has difficulty in walking and talking, generally adopts particular postures to facilitate breathing, for example, sitting in a rigid position or leaning forward, to better use the auxiliary respiratory muscles. Wheezing may be a late symptom. It results from air being exchanged through partially obstructed airways and occurs in the larger airways where airflow is turbulent. The small airways do not produce wheezing since the airflow is laminar rather than turbulent. Consequently, marked small airway obstruction may be unrecognized on auscultation [481] . This fact, objectively important, does not always reveal the obstruction and precisely defines its evolutive stages. These limitations can be overcome by spirometry. Infantile asthma is classified as acute and chronic; however, rigidly following structured frameworks can lead to imprecise evaluations. Table 11 .32 [481] illustrates the assessment of varying factors that trigger the clinical features and the differential prevalence according to age. Classifications of asthma based on clinical presentation (Tables 11.33-11.35) [1, 435-437, 494, 592] are also useful in defining the several phases of treatment [437]. Aas staging [1] is often requested for the purpose of publication in international journals. Table 11 .36 [186, 279] presents a summary of the causes of persistent cough. Figure 11 .50 [694, 695] presents an indicative diagram on the diagnosis of asthma, which, in most cases, can be made on the basis of history, objective examination and instrumental proofs [102] . inflammatory cells: in this stage the airways react acutely to contact irritating substances. All these events lead to the noted effects of inflammation and bronchoconstriction, which, as shown in Fig. 11 .49 [454] , are expressed by clinical features. What is defined as asthma is therefore structured on two levels: the asthmatic attack and the intercritical period. The first is the final link in a chain of events and reactions whose immediate causes do not represent the core of the issue. It could be better to analyze the predisposing factors carefully, the latent anomalies, the causes predominating at the beginning of the process and the pathogenic mechanisms at the basis of the re-exacerbations. Clinical features do not present clearly defined aspects and are extremely variable from an almost normal state to one of extreme severity. The onset can be gradual 803 Asthma  ing is the tip of the iceberg as most of the iceberg is not noticeable, airway obstruction begins well before the tip is evident, and wheezing is heard, therefore its presence can be measured by spirometry before clinical objectivity reveals wheezy breathing [481] . When symptoms occur gradually, it is surprising how children are able to get used to the reduced respiratory function, considering it a normal condition and even expressing a mild sense of well-being so that a <50% fall in PEF, and the related reduction of dynamic parameters can be underestimated for a long time. The symptoms that should arouse suspicion in these children are asthenia, a lessened ability to concentrate and persistent sinusitis. ∑ Eosinophilia is often higher than 250-400 cells/mm 3 . The count can be repeated in the expectoration. In children this could be unrelated to ECP levels; however, 27% of 92 children aged <2 years had serum ECP ≥8 mg/l, 76% of this group developed physician-diagnosed wheezing, and 48% had hospital admissions for wheezing. ∑ PRIST is often elevated. SPTs and RAST can be carried out to spot allergic asthma. ∑ Spirometry can provide useful information with collaborating children [429] . ∑ If necessary, PFTs and/or BPTs (Chap. 6) can exclude other causes of wheezing (Tables 6.2, 6.3, 6.11). Even if BPT has proved useful in excluding the diagnosis of asthma, especially in adolescents, BPT with histamine is not a substitute for traditional medical diagnostic ability; children aged 2 years may be able to perform BPT (Fig. 6.25b) . ∑ Other research has proved futile or misleading. For example, leukocytosis >15,000/mm 3 may be related to child age, the effect of stress and of adrenergic drugs [41] . Recognition of the different patterns is useful to evaluate the symptoms based on age (Table 11 .32), frequency and severity of the symptoms (Tables 11.33-11.35), and risk factors (Table 11 .37) [310, 336, 481, 485, 623] . The procedure will distinguish between noncomplicated/ nonsevere cases or a severe asthmatic attack reflecting status asthmaticus. The guidelines indicated in Chap. 6 are followed, examining the content of Table 11 .38 [164, 584] . If it is ascertained that the child has already manifested recurring episodes of cough and wheezing, likely linked to EIA, diagnosis is almost achieved. Also, it is possible that the child under observation belongs to a group of young patients with chronic and nonproductive nocturnal cough, or with laborious breathing after running, etc., but never wheezes (Table 11 .36). The physical examination includes thoracic examination as well as verifying: ∑ The general condition of the subject ∑ The state of nutrition, including weight and height ∑ The possible presence of effort-induced dyspnea Diffuse hyperphonesis, unequal reduction of breathing sounds according to the conditions, wheezing, expiratory whistling, prolonged expiration, and rales of varying loudness (sometimes only rales can be heard) reflecting airflow limitation are ascertained; liver and spleen are often palpable as a result of diaphragm depression, following marked lung hyperinflation. Wheez-805 Clinical Presentation The subgroups are formed according to those in Table 11 .32 (episodic, frequent, chronic) or Table 11 .33 (mild intermittent, mild persistent, moderate persistent, severe persistent) and to FEV 1 values between exacerbations. Modified from [1] . PFT Pulmonary function testing. a If children have symptoms and signs of more prolonged bronchial obstruction (including subclinical obstruction) the next higher grade is given; simple exercise-induced asthma is not taken into account provided that recovery is complete with rest and/or a single dose of bronchodilator. ∑ Chest X-ray and ECG are not necessary in cases of uncomplicated asthma. Chest X-ray shows hyperinflated lungs, depressed and not very mobile diaphragm, increased thoracic anterior-posterior diameter, peribronchial interstitial infiltrates, and sometimes parenchymal opacities often leading to atelectasis are found. In all cases of recurring bronchoconstriction especially with increased susceptibility to infections (Chap. 22), it could be necessary to evaluate immunological parameters such as quantitative serum (Table 1 .15) and secretory Igs, and lymphocytes and subpopulations levels (Tables 1.34-1.41, with BALF data). Determination of IgG subclasses is superfluous in the asthmatic child, as there are no differences compared to healthy subjects, with the exception of a few specific cases [468] . If a differential diagnosis with other conditions that should be differentiated from asthma is indicated, specific tests can be asked for such as PFT, BPT, as above, bronchoscopy, diagnostic imagining, bronchography, CT (computerized tomography), scintigraphy, etc., functional and cytological analysis of ciliary structures, and the sweat test. Differential diagnosis includes the most common clinical conditions that mimic asthma at various age levels: Table 11 .39 [481] shows the relative prevalences. Table 11 .40 [186, 481, 584] shows the most common precipitants of asthmatic symptoms and Table 11 .36 those of persistent cough. A brief description of the condi- tions that most frequently present difficulties [186, 469] follows, also based on Appendix 11.2 [186, 469] : ∑ Aspiration of a foreign body: 40% of cases occur in children ª2 years old; if not recognized and treated promptly, it can cause disease and even death. Usually it begins abruptly in otherwise normal subjects. Limited wheezing reduced to a single hemithorax is characteristic; it can be confused with asthma. Nevertheless, it does not respond equally promptly to bronchodilators, potentially implying that inappropriate treatments were instituted. Smaller bodies may induce progressive symptoms. Chest X-rays are not always discriminatory, since many foreign bodies are radiopaque. ∑ Vocal cord dysfunction is a functional disturbance that mimics asthma with paroxysmal attacks and severe dyspnea and is unresponsive to any treatment. Sounds can be heard on auscultation during inspiration and expiration that is otherwise normal. Instrumental analysis gives consistently negative results. ∑ Hyperventilation syndrome and panic attacks can coexist with the basic disease. The patient complains of being breathless. There are asthmatic symptoms that contrast with negative objective findings, as do most other tests. ∑ Bronchiolitis: see Tables 11.27, 11.28, 11.30 and 11.32. ∑ Pertussis can lead to a mistaken diagnosis that should be avoided through a lymphocyte count and nasopharyngeal cultures. ∑ Cystic fibrosis: there can be initial asthma-like symptoms and BHR. The sweat test is a decisive means of providing a definitive answer, also necessary, especially considering the marked frequency in Caucasians [469] . ∑ Bronchiectasis: wheezing and BHR are found. CT enables differentiation from asthma. ∑ Ciliary dyskinesia is suspected when a chronic obstructive respiratory disease is seen, accompanied by rhinosinusitis, otitis and X-rays showing emphysema [469] . Status asthmaticus is an attack that lasts more than 1 or 2 days, in whom conventional forms of therapy have failed, and may require admittance to hospital, with the child often in progressive respiratory failure. It is a medical emergency in which the child with acute asthma fails to improve following appropriate aggressive treatment in an ED or outpatient setting [717] . However, children 3-5 years old are significantly more likely to have an ED visit (OR -odds ratio 1.6; 95% CI, 1.3-2.0; p < 0.0001) or a hospitalization (OR 2.9; 95% CI, 2.0, 4.3; p < 0.0001) than older children [5] . Risk factors of status asthmaticus are summarized in Table 11 .36. The risk of hospitalization is very high with on household smoking (Table 4 .25). The risk is greater in children aged <2-4 years as a result of the above-mentioned physiological particularities. Bronchial smooth muscles are particularly reduced in children 808 CHAPTER 11 Asthma geneous distribution of areas of premature airway closure and obstruction causes ventilation/perfusion mismatching and hypoxemia results. Increased work of breathing under hypoxic conditions and some degree of dehydration combine to cause accumulation of inorganic acids. This acidosis is initially offset by respiratory alkalosis, but once respiratory failure ensues, a rapid and often profound decrease in pH will occur [717] . The combination of these factors explains the increased severity of asthma, the higher incidence of hospitalization, and the relatively scant response to bronchodilators in the pediatric population aged <5 years, and particularly <3 years. aged <3 years, in whom the obstruction is more a result of edema than of bronchospasm. On the other hand, mucosal glands are numerous, with a consequent increase in the Reid index (mucosal glands/thoracic wall). Furthermore, the relative scarcity of diaphragmatic fibers, which contributes to a reduced muscle resistance to the work required of them, the increased pulmonary peripheral resistance and reduced alveolar surface should not be forgotten. Pulmonary mechanics and volumes are markedly altered in status asthmaticus. Caused by severe lower airway airflow limitation, premature airway closure leads to increases in closing capacity and FRC. Inspiratory muscle activity persists throughout expiration, attempting to counteract expiratory airway closure by increasing the forces holding the airway open. Hyperinflation results [717] . Nonhomo-  Objective examination (Table 11 .41) [273, 435-437, 485, 623] requires that on inspection, the general conditions and the presence or lack of be observed: ∑ Possible signs of risk affecting the psyche (anxiety, agitation, apathy, drowsiness) ∑ Inhalatory retractions and use of the accessory muscle ∑ Dehydration ∑ Polypnea ∑ Forced posture ∑ Cyanosis ∑ Sweating ∑ Tremors ∑ Breathlessness After the evaluation of the general conditions, hydration, decubitus, etc., and of thoracic objectivity, several other parameters can be considered to make a diagnosis as quickly as possible and initiate treatment. Table 11 .41 provides a general assessment; therefore it is not necessary for all parameters under consideration to be present. However, the greatest risk in respiratory failure dur-ing episodes of severe asthma regards young children (Table 11 .36), in whom PEFR measurement is not always easy; therefore an evaluation of these parameters can permit a strict control of the child's condition [436] . Vigilance is the participation in the environment and can help in evaluating the child's fatigue. Dyspnea is the parameter most noted by parents and doctors and can be helpful in evaluating the level of airway obstruction. It can be evaluated semiquantitatively by asking the child to repeat a phrase or count to ten within a single breath. The condition improves if the length of the phrase or the numbers counted increase. The use of auxiliary muscles is an indication of bronchoconstriction. Sternocleidomastoid use is linked to PEFR or FEV 1 <50% of predicted value. Flaring of nasal wings (Fig. 11.51) is a visible sign of dyspnea and shows the involvement of auxiliary muscles in respiration. Diaphragmatic depressions can be noted and inspiratory retractions, especially intercostal [481] (Figs. 11.51, 11.52). Status asthmaticus is an ingravescent asthma, resistant to therapy, that progresses to a state of emergency [310] . The symptoms given in Table 11 .41 can assist in its diagnosis. It eventually becomes hypercapnic, caused by CO 2 accumulation with ensuing development of respiratory acidosis. On auscultation, prolonged expiration, wheezing, due to obstruction worsening, is audible during both inspiration and expiration, while respiratory sounds are re-  Blood gas analysis: measurement of PaCO 2 is the parameter most indicative of severity [485] . Appendices 6.6-6.12 indicate PEF values according to sex and age. No response to a b 2 -adrenergic, whether evaluated clinically or instrumentally, is a sign of severe obstruction related to the degree of asthma severity. duced. In children with signs of respiratory distress, wheezing is absent because of airway obstruction. The severity can also be measured by means of a respiratory score (Table 11 .42) [174, 476] , especially for children aged <6 who have little experience with PFM, or children in significant respiratory distress, in whom it is difficult to obtain an accurate PFM measurement [102] . The respiratory score (Table 11 .43) evaluates the need for hospitalization and monitoring the outcome of clinical symptoms in a hospital setting. ∑ Inspiratory retractions at rest and nasal flaring (in infants rhythmic head flexion during inhalation and extension during expiration). ∑ HR and RR: RR can vary from 20%-30%, depending on whether the infant is awake or asleep. It is advisable to measure it also during sleep. ∑ SaO 2 : toddlers tend to develop hypoxemia earlier than adults [435] . An acute attack or asthma exacerbation always requires the greatest medical care [559] . The aims of treatment are summarized in Table 11 .44 [79, 604] . On the basis of the flow chart in Fig. 11 .53 [174, 435, 436] and the scores in Tables 11.42, 11.43, it is possible to establish the most 812 CHAPTER 11 Asthma To each parameter is assigned a score from 0 to 3. Summing up the single scores, the severity of asthma exacerbations can be estimated according to the following scale: 0-4, no immediate danger; 5-6, impending respiratory insufficiency; 7 or more =, ongoing respiratory insufficiency. Data from [174] . SaO 2 O 2 saturation, PaO 2 partial pressure of O 2 in arterial blood, PaCO 2 partial pressure of CO 2 in arterial blood. Table 11 .41. Immediate management in the hospital receiving room can reduce hospital admissions for acute asthma, allowing more children to be safely managed in the community [115] . As a consequence, >70% of asthma hospitalizations could be cared for in alternative settings with supplemental O 2 , nebulized medication treatments, and close nursing observation [392] . Depending on symptom relevance (mild, moderate or severe), various drugs or combinations of drugs in sequence can be used. Diagnostic tests, if convenient, with the aid of a respiratory score, can evaluate the necessity for recovery: a score of 0-4 is reassuring, in that an immediate danger of respiratory failure can be excluded; it must, however, be monitored at regular intervals. With scores >5, admittance to hospital could be unavoidable [174] . Because of RR variability, it is recommended that it be measured as described below, as well as pulsus paradoxus: if the score is >20%, a serious airway obstruction is present. If the child is old enough or can collaborate, the reduction in pulmonary volumes and flows can be measured (spirometry, PEFR) [437] . These findings, if possible, should be obtained at once, then at 30-to 60-min intervals, which must be reduced to 15-30 min if the child does not respond to treatment [268] . If spirometry cannot be carried out, even because of the severity of the child's conditions, ascertain PaO 2 (Table 6 .25) and PaCO 2 by measuring arterial blood gas level. Figure 11 .54 [140, 174, 435-437, 559, 699] indicates various treatment plans, either at home or in an ED. Therapeutic interventions should be integrated, according to the case, with good hydration, correction of acidosis, and O 2 therapy when necessary (see below). appropriate therapeutic approach, but there are others that are equally valid. Given the variability of the clinical picture, however, they cannot constitute a rigid guide, but should be interpreted on the basis of clinical evidence [268] in which history and progression of clinical symptoms are important [485] . To evaluate the severity of an acute asthma attack in the child, follow 813 Treatment We repeat that in early infancy rehydration is cardinal, since dehydration can easily occur as a result of RR increase and the reduced supply of nutrients and water: a 5% dehydration should be corrected when necessary. Children experiencing an asthmatic attack, even if not severe, become hypoxemic more easily than older children [605] as a result of perfusion-ventilation [554] . The degree is related to respiratory obstruction and, above all, to PaO 2 and FEV 1 [267, 605] . PaCO 2 increase is an index of severity. The respiratory silence associated with hypoxemia (PaO 2 <50 torr) and/or hypercapnia (PaCO 2 >45-50 torr), or SaO 2 <91%, is also an index of severe respiratory insufficiency, which makes recovery in an ICU urgent [406] . The AAP recommends, as the first treatment in a child whose condition may be defined as severe, the use of SC epinephrine in standard dosages [509] . Moreover, the a-stimulating action makes epinephrine the drug of choice [485] . If a moderate attack occurs, which can be treated at home, the first treatment to be done at once should be with epinephrine, which has specific indications in cases of severe asthma, particularly suitable for use with children who, by definition, do not suffer from cardiovascular disturbances, apart from effects due to overdose. For the inhaled racemic form see above and Table 11 .16; otherwise it can be substituted with inhaled b 2 -adrenergics, for example albuterol: unit dose 100-200 mg with dosed MDI, or else 150 mg/kg diluted in 3 ml of saline to be nebulized in 10 min by facemask or spacer + VHC, measuring periodically the above parameters. All b 2 -adrenergics are equivalent, but because of its wide international use, albuterol remains the drug used as a reference point [406] . If, after the use of epinephrine/b 2 -adrenergics, an efficacious clinical response is obtained, a home maintenance treatment can be suggested, without disregarding subsequent treatment plans (Fig. 11.54 ). If no obvious improvement is observed, IB can be added to nebulized solution (150-250 mg according to the age, to be repeated every 6 h). ICS can be added to the treatment [406] . Interestingly, in children with acute asthma a single inhaled dose of BUD decreases ENO and is correlated to a PEFR increase [659] , and two doses of dexamethasone may provide similar efficacy with improved compliance and fewer side effects than five doses of prednisone [510] . In two studies in ED children aged <5 [149, 556] , the treatments compared with prednisone were nebulized dexamethasone 1.5 mg/kg and nebulized BUS 800 mg three doses at 30-min intervals, there were no significant differences in admission rates, with a nonsignificant trend favoring ICS (OR 0.49; 95% CI, 0.22-1.07); thus oral CS appear to be at least as effective as ICS in children with exacerbations of asthma. Another ED trial specifically including 100 children aged >5 with the most severe asthma on presentation (FEV 1 <60% predicted) found prednisone better than 2 mg FP by MDI and spacer at 4 h (FEV 1 45% predicted at trial entry, admission rate 31% on FP vs 10% on prednisone) [567] . Using much higher doses, the bulk of evidence suggests that ICS may be as effective as oral CS in all but the most severe episodes. One trial compared nebulized BUD (2 mg/8 h) with two doses of prednisolone 2 mg/kg on admission and at 24 h in 46 children admitted to hospital with severe asthma. Life-threatening episodes were excluded. Outcomes were comparable at 24 h and at 3-and 24-day follow-up [386] . Predictors of hospitalization in children with acute asthma are five variables: previous ICU admission, baseline SaO 2 ≤92%, 4-h SaO 2 92% or less, 4-h clinical asthma score 6/9 or higher, and hourly albuterol dosing intervals, associated with long vs short therapy, all with high odds ratio (OR). Probability of long therapy was 91.5%-99% for ≤3 predictors, but only 40.6%-61.8% for individual variables [291] . Otherwise, follow what is indicated in the treatment of status asthmaticus, or take the child immediately to a pediatric ED, especially if there is no response to the b 2 -adrenergic administered by MDI of parenterally [41] . Persisting with treatment at home in a child with little response to the bronchodilators leads only to a worsening of the episode, which becomes even more refractory to drugs [267] . Ingravescent asthma unresponsive to treatment is a lifethreatening condition usually requiring admittance to ICU. Table 11 .45 [434, 435, 485] indicates the dosages of the drugs to be used in an acute severe attack of status asthmaticus. The clinical characteristics, to be evaluated together with the clinical asthma score in Tables 11.42 and 11.43, are summarized in Table 11 .46 [56, 336, 476, 485] . Monitoring of clinical parameters is integrated with laboratory parameters only under a regimen of hospitalization and observation. In emergencies, it is better to treat the child rather than waste time in consulting textbooks or prescribing tests [485] . It should be underlined that because of potential hypoxemia, SaO 2 (which must always be >93%) should be measured regularly. Nevertheless SaO 2 decrease is often an early sign of moderate or severe obstruction. If it is found to be <91%, it is an indication that hospitalization is required [663] . Therapy is summed up in the following points [267, 268, 435, 485, 564, 683, 699, 717] (Fig. 11 .54, Table 11 . 45 ). An urgent strategy in a child with status asthmaticus is a controlled ventilation. Over 11 years, 11.3% of 290 PICU admissions for status asthmaticus required ventilation: 13 children (aged 2-18) presented with rapid respiratory failure en route, or within 30 min of arriving to the ED [366] . Pressure-controlled ventilation (PCV) in 40 children with severe respiratory failure was an effective strategy. Four hours after starting PCV, median pH increased to 7.31 (6.98-7.45, p<.005), and Pco 2 decreased to 41 torr (21-121 torr, p<.005) , which were ments in ventilation (significantly shorter) and oxygenation than those with progressive respiratory failure [366] . Status asthmaticus must be treated with IV therapy. Many children are dehydrated due to excessive insensible loss from respiratory effort, hyperdiuresis, and vomiting. Initial therapy must include intravascular volume repletion with normal saline, correction of electrolyte imbalance, and fluid and electrolyte maintenance. below 7.21 (range, 6.65-7.39) and 65 torr (29-264 torr), respectively. For children with respiratory acidosis (Pco 2 ) (>45 torr) within 1 h of starting PCV, the median length of time until Pco 2 decreased to <45 torr was 5 h (1-51 h). SaO 2 was maintained >95% in all patients. Median duration of PCV was 29 h (4-107 h), PICU stay was 56 h (17-183 h), and hospitalization was 5 days (2-20 days). Therefore, PCV represents a therapeutic option in the management of such children [554] . Children with rapid respiratory failure had greater improve-815 Treatment Fig. 11.54 . Flow chart for the treatment of pediatric acute asthma exacerbations. A Home treatment. Measure PEFR value, respiratory rate (RR), heart rate (HR), note use of accessory muscles, alertness, color AE if the child is unable to perform PEFR or has unconsciousness more or less evident AE epinephrine 1:1000 0.01 ml/kg subcutaneously immediately ( 1) Inadequate response to treatment within 1-2 hours from start of treatment 2) PEFR < 40 % of predicted or personal best 3) Past history of acute asthma exacerbations, especially if hospitalization was required 4) Presence of high-risk factors (Table 11 .40) 5) Prolonged increase in asthma symptoms before the emergency department visit 6) Inadequate access at home to medications and medical care 7) Difficult home conditions, without sufficient monitoring facilities and nursing care 8) Discontinuity of medical care and failure to attend a general practitioner between attacks Treatment Home with medication, patient education, and follow-up plans Warning: In any moment the child presents: • excessive fatigue /weakening • confusion or drowsiness • PEFR is <50% and/or hypercapnia and hypoxia persist or worsen admit the child to ICU Note: in most cases holding chambers could be substituted for nebulizers to deliver b 2 -agonists in acute asthma in the ED [140] . Data from [174, 435- ∑ Rehydration: in general not >1-1.5-fold the normal daily needs, monitoring fluid and electrolyte balance because of potential hypersecretion of ADH and osmolality [336] . Do not exceed the dosage because the high negative pleural pressures during inhalation encourage fluid accumulation in interstitial spaces and therefore the insurgence of pulmonary edema [174] . Provide adequate K + chloride (25-40 mEq/l) also because b 2 -adrenergics may produce hypokalemia, and fluid supplementation, 300-400 ml/m 2 body surface in the first hour, with 24 h continuation of 200-300 ml/m 2 . ∑ O 2 treatment is O 2 humidified to 30%-40% via a face mask or nasal cannula or via a partial or nonrebreather mask at a flow rate of 4-6 l/min not longer than 30-60 min, to keep PaO 2 >85 torr. It must not be excessive to avoid increased ventilation. ∑ Inhaled b 2 -agonist with albuterol at 0.15 mg/kg (maximum, 5 mg) per dose should be started every 15-20 min for at least 1 h, even if some improvement occurs after the first inhalation; inhaled albuterol should be continued at the above doses at 30 min intervals over an additional 1-2 h, then at hourly intervals for another 2-3 h, and at decreasing intervals, by nebulization with mask in the very young and with MDI-spacer in older children. ∑ If children fail to respond within 2 h to b 2 -adrenergics, start IB via MDI in the doses indicated; it could be added to IV b 2 -adrenergics. ∑ Continuous infusions of aminophylline in children who do not respond satisfactorily to b 2 -adrenergics only. A reasonable starting point is a bolus of 3-6 mg/kg over 10-20 min, followed by 1 mg/kg/h depending on whether the theophylline level is known or not or the child is following an oral therapy (Table 11 .45). Measure the theophylline level as soon as possible; it must be within 10 and 20 mg/ml, considering that 1 mg/kg of aminophylline increases by 2 mg/l the serum concentration [707] . ∑ IV CSc. It has been shown the best results by administering a single IV dose: hydrocortisone 4-6 mg/kg/ dose or methylprednisolone 1-2 mg/kg/dose, both every 6 h. Continue with inhaled doses. If ICSs are not available the oral type can be taken, but it requires 6 h to reach peak levels. It is recommended that the first dose be administered as soon as bronchoconstriction worsens [683] . ∑ Measure pH and base excess (BE) to correct acidosis with NaHCO 3 = mEq required to be calculated with the formula: BE ¥ 0.3 ¥ kg in weight. ∑ The use of sedatives to reduce the state of agitation should be employed with great caution because they depress the respiratory centers [272] (see "Death by Asthma"). If monitoring of the above parameters shows a continuous and significant clinical improvement for at least 4 consecutive h, drug doses can be gradually reduced, but monitoring the drugs necessary in case intensive use be made of b 2 -adrenergics. Some children can worsen 819 Treatment The presence of any of these life-threatening features should alert the doctor. Data from [56, 336, 476, 485] . Use of clinical scoring system 20 19 Use of pulmonary function testing 56 73 Chest Rx during the first episode of wheezing 59 50 Oxygen given to all wheezing children 33 40 First medication given Number exceeds 100 since some hospitals utilized more than one agent. Data from [332, 536] . creases the aerosol penetrance, and the quantity of drug reaching the airways decreases as the child pattern of respiration is altered [607] , provided that b 2 -adrenergics are nebulized with an appropriate face mask, thus ensuring a more rapid improvement, which either makes it unnecessary to send children to an ICU, or shortens the period of hospitalization [683] . A note to explain the rational behind the use of theophylline in severe, life-threatening cases, above all in children [615] who, for anatomical reasons, experience bronchoconstriction more than bronchial obstruction. Inhaled b 2 -adrenergics may not reach the inflamed bronchus because of severe bronchospasm, not because of bronchus failure to dilate. On the contrary, the theophylline reaches it systemically, performing anti-inflammatory effects (Tables 11.17, 11.18) and producing a diffuse bronchodilation that reaches the bronchi obstructed by edema and mucus [393] . At this point, b 2 -adrenergics, inhaled or nebulized, can take advantage of the opening and reach the terminal airways to the point of inducing a therapeutic effect. Table 11 .48 [332, 536] compares the use made in 1988 of various drugs in 118 pediatric EDs in the US, compared to data 6 years later [332] , to evaluate the effect of 1991 guidelines [435] . It should be noted that the great use made in the US of epinephrine and the marked increase in albuterol (first choice in 95% of cases) and CS use, whose route of administration is not specified. In a survey of 376 directors of ED settings, 80% reported the use of inhaled b-agonists as the initial treatment. Only 44.7% ±2.9% reported the use of steroids if there was a poor response to the initial treatment [121] . Also, in 125 children nebulized b 2 -adrenergics in ICU and at home were used in 100% of the cases (Table 11 .49) [615] . A subsequent survey of 348 ED directors confirmed the high preference for inhaled b 2 -adrenergics (96.5%), significantly more public (24.6%) and community hospitals (17.1%) than pediatric EDs (3.5%) reported the use of SC epinephrine as the first medication, compared to steroids (18.1%) as a routine part of the treatment [121] . However, North American authors have shown that epinephrine is comparable to inhaled b 2 -adrenergics for its rapidity of action, effectiveness and duration of effect [537] . Also notable is how much easier and more practical it is to use epinephrine in the doctor's office, at the child's home or in a busy ED [536, 750] , especially if auto-injectable (Chap. 20). It has been noted that if a visit to the ED is followed by treatment with albuterol every 30 min for 4 h, and by giving prescriptions to continue treatment at home, after 4 h 43% of children are released, rising to 61% if a dose of oral prednisolone is added [116] . Also in asthmatics with acute forms and admitted to ED and hospitalized, relapses are reduced by 50% and nocturnal disturbance by 75%, if referral to an asthma specialist is facilitated and treatment continued thereafter, compared to patients treated by a family doctor [750] . The effectiveness of treatment in subjects with status asthmaticus is such that on the 3rd day of hospital treat-however, with progressive respiratory failure. Therefore, dependent on their condition, they should be transferred to the ICU. Table 11 .47 [56, 485, 509] lists data evaluating the relevance and urgency of hospitalization. The first item on the list of decisive factors is if the equipment for blood gas level tests or drugs necessary to continue treatment are unavailable. We recommend that O 2 be administered as needed in a hospital environment and, during treatment and that HR, RR, PA, blood gas level tests and/or SaO 2 and electrolyte levels be monitored [406] . In life-threatening cases, to avoid the need of assisted ventilation [47] , terbutaline and albuterol have been injected IV. The first by a bolus of 10 mg/kg administered over 30 min and repeated after a further 30 min, followed by maintenance dose of 0.5 mg/kg/min over 44 h [146] , the second by a bolus of 10 mg/kg over 10 min, followed by a gradually increased maintenance dose up to an average of 1.7 mg/kg/min over 36 h [47] . Kelly et al administered terbutaline to children 4.5-14 years old, nebulized continuously in doses of 0.4 mg/kg for an average of 9.4 h, for up to 24 h [288] . Current guidelines [434] [435] [436] suggest starting with an albuterol dose of 0.15 mg/kg (minimum of 2.5 mg, maximum of 5 mg) per nebulizer treatment for all age groups. For infants <6 months, half the dose (1.25) can be used if 2.5 mg provoke unacceptable tachycardia. During the first hour of wheezing, 3-4 albuterol nebulizer treatments are given every 15-20 min. If there is an inadequate response to treatment, the child is placed on continuous nebulization. Others have shown that doses of 0.15 mg/kg of albuterol repeated every 20-30 min are better than doses of 0.05 mg/kg and both have no side effects, and that children (under careful surveillance) respond more promptly to higher doses [564] . High doses of albuterol, especially in very young infants, are devoid of side effects and can be justified by above-mentioned studies [488] . Therefore, aggressive doses of albuterol (every 30 min) are more effective than those administered every 1-4 h [116] . To achieve positive results, higher doses of albuterol, which are needed because the decreased airway caliber de- Data from [615] . ment there is a significant reduction -correlated with amelioration of bronchoconstriction -of T, IL 2 R, HLA-DR cell levels, present in higher concentrations than in normal controls [119] . An intubated child with status asthmaticus was treated with two doses of intratracheal recombinant human DNase (rhDNase) therapy, a mucolytic agent used to relieve peripheral airway obstruction. The child was extubated 26 h after receiving the rhDNase treatment with no adverse effects [163] . A dramatic sustained improvement followed this treatment in a 3-year-old boy with acute life-threatening asthma in whom 48 h of aggressive therapy had failed [473] . If symptoms evolve towards a concrete improvement, it is suggested that children remain under observation for 12-24 h, monitoring both symptoms and parameters, weaning the child to a drug regimen that includes bronchodilators and steroids, either inhaled or orally, then discharging the child, prescribing therapy for 3-5 days and ensuring that the child is able to follow the inhalatory technique correctly, with a follow-up with the family pediatrician about 1 week after discharge [272, 406, 437] , which was positive in 59.8%-74.% of cases [121] . Drugs prescribed at discharge were bronchodilators (95.3%), CSs increasing with age group, and theophylline (21%-34%) [121] . Having achieved remission, the therapeutic strategy continues the drug regimen for at least 3-4 weeks, during which the family pediatrician will check the clinical progress by means of twice daily measurements of PEFR and sending the child to a center for infantile respiratory physiopathology for necessary PFT follow-up [164] . The month-long interval can be usefully spent establishing how the problems related to environmental and pharmaceutical prophylaxis will be managed, and in informing both the child and family how to handle the situation [434] , also to work on a plan of action for frequent asthma, which is dealt with in the next section. We underline that in children aged <5, the necessary compliance for PEFR measurement is missing, while the child is at greater risk of a symptom worsening. Therefore attention paid to the clinical parameters (Tables 11.31, 11.34, 11.38 and 11.41) can prove equally valid for defining a post-attack strategy [436] . Given that BHR and/or PFT changes tend to persist for an indeterminate time in the form of chronic coughing, nocturnal asthma, or as a result of physical activity [359] , therapy must overcome all of these, before a possible treatment discontinuation can be considered (though not in <2 months), also and above all to ensure the normal quality of life [164] recently ensured by omalizumab [342] and formoterol [183] treatment. The family and older children should understand that if asthma is not dealt with decisively and controlled effectively it will eventually become a disease that will render the sufferer an invalid in adulthood [218] . Treatment of asthma must be personalized according to the frequency and severity of symptoms ( Differentiating among these types of asthma is essentially didactic, to better understand the various therapeutic particularities. The possibility of finding the therapy suitable for the control of the symptoms will enable asthmatic children to experience a quality of life that as much as possible resembles that of their healthy companions. From a therapeutic point of view, many treatment alternatives exist, proposed by several authors of proven experience, all of which are usually effective. The problems most frequently met with are represented by asthmatic attacks, by severe forms and by the day-by-day or maintenance treatment. We will try to give precedence to the aspects correlated to symptom severity based on the child's age. Evaluating these factors separately, even if in practice a certain overlapping between frequent, more demanding forms and moderate, chronic forms is possible, it seems to us useful for ensuring greater clarity. This is a mild and infrequent form; ª75% of asthmatic children experience mild episodes of coughing and wheezing every 2 months on average (in relation to season and stimuli), then remaining asymptomatic for first choice of drugs is always for inhaled or nebulized b 2 -adrenergics. If results are good, step-down treatment with cromones (see "Prevention"); if insufficient, consider stepping in with ICSs and anti-LT or theophylline [434] , associating flunisolide with albuterol inhalation [228] . However, albuterol bronchoprotection lasts <4 h, formoterol DPI at least 8 h in 2-to 5-year-old asthmatic children [441] and bambuterol (once daily dose) [158] (see Tables 11.12, 11.16 and 11.23 for doses). This therapy is recommended in children with persistent cough or asthma. In moderately severe cases, one or two doses should be sufficient. Furthermore, BUD, DPI or BPD by spacers + VHCs as indicated can be used as a good alternative. In children with almost continuous relapses or suffering from chronic asthma and steroid-dependence who are undergoing systematic treatments, we advise ICS once the acute phase of the crisis has been overcome. Given that steroid maximal effects are usually delayed 6 h, it is necessary that children be under control with antileukotrienes, active on immediate and late reactions. relatively long periods. They are therefore able to play, attend school and take part in sporting activities without any problems, and usually their sleep is not interrupted by coughing. Prophylactic treatment should be sufficient in most cases. Measurements of PEF in 75% of these asthmatics is usually of no use [700] . No daily medication is usually required. It is characterized by frequent or infrequent attacks, but of moderate severity, use of bronchodilators prn, persistent airway obstruction not correlated with clinical symptoms, reduction of physical activity, night awakenings by asthma 1-2 nights a month, routine reduction in school attendance. A course of treatment is illustrated in Fig. 11 .55 [434-437, 699, 700] . Recommendations for treatment of infants and young children with moderate or severe cases of asthma are based on extrapolations from studies in older children and adults [434] . As can be seen, the 823 Treatment  As we have already stated, asthma is an inflammatory process that, beyond the immediate episodes, continues in chronic form as a result of the persistence of inflammatory cells. Usually, chronic asthma is related to children affected with asthma in the first few years of life, but the disease assumes its maximal severity after the age of 5 years. At recruitment the children with severe asthma totaled 8 (11%), but at age 42 the people with severe asthma totaled 33 (47%) with reduced lung function [264] . Generally, the symptoms appear early without an allergic nature being promptly identified, nor proper treatment started. Often, a careful study leads to the discovery of a variety of allergic diseases, for example AR, frequently complicated by sinusitis. It is therefore necessary to ascertain its presence, especially in children affected with chronic asthma. Usually frequent symptoms without perceptible periods of well-being are observed, given that bronchoconstriction and effort-induced dyspnea are constantly present, in practice children learn to live with asthma. This form, whose prevalence is 4%-5%, often induces invalidating symptoms, which can be summarized as follows: persistent bronchoconstriction, almost daily symptoms, frequent night-time coughing and limited physical activity [476] . In 37 randomly recruited children with chronic asthma compared to 37 controls with episodic asthma, we noted significant early onset of symptoms, delayed diagnosis, and poorer spirometry results, in addition to a positive personal or FHA, as always a potent determinant of atopy. Especially significant was the greater number of children sensitized to multiple aeroallergens. A strong influence of environmental factors on the development of severe asthma is demonstrated by the significant prevalence of maternal smoke during pregnancy, parental smoke, damp houses, and viral infections. Among the drugs available, we have four possible options: cromones, b 2 -adrenergics (even with a long halflife), ICSs, and theophylline in drops or the long-acting type from 2-3 years of age onwards. Chronic asthma is subdivided into three types, according to whether symptoms are mildly persistent, moderately persistent or severely persistent, each subclass being present in 60, 30 and <10% of cases, respectively [476] . The intermittent form [436] , which could be defined as the transitory form between acute and chronic asthma, is considered to belong to the mild forms, to be treated only as needed [437] , with four stages: mild intermittent, mild persistent, moderate persistent and severe [437] . It should be noted that NIH guidelines (Expert Panel Report 2) tabulate treatment as follows: firstline therapy may begin first with ICSs (low dose), then with cromolyn, or nedocromil as preferred therapy, or alternatively with sustained-release theophylline, or an anti-LT [437], or GINA (global initiative for asthma) guidelines introduce a daily base treatment with CSs, adding cromones only for mild forms and using b 2 -adrenergics as symptomatic (rescue) drugs [436] . The Expert Panel Report 2002 believes that a diagnostic trial of inhaled bronchodilators and anti-inflammatory medications may be helpful; however, infants consistently requiring symptomatic treatment more than twice a week should be given daily long-term-control therapy, and ICSs should be the preferred treatment [434] . These guidelines have not been confirmed by three longitudinal studies [210, 465, 575] , and the Melbourne 37-year longitudinal study in asthmatic children followed up to adulthood show no differences between those who did and those who did not take steroids [210] , nor has the proposal to introduce CS use from the onset of the infantile asthma been validated, not even in the mild forms [465] . The PFT impairment in the group with persistent asthma was greater in those with persistent BHR and in those treated with ICSs [575] . Cromones and/or theophylline are important for reducing CS doses [437, 566] . Nor are GINA guidelines productive, since a retrospective study of 175 children followed on average for 8.4 years concluded that, contrary to what the guidelines suggested, starting treatment with cromones and not with CSs improves the outcome, while in the mild-moderate forms positive effects are obtained with bronchodilators [311] . Without doubt, further prospective studies are needed. For our part, we have seen the positive results of early treatment with cromones, in agreement with the 3rd Consensus for infantile asthma [700] . One of the tasks of a pediatrician is to strive for a better compliance and quality of life for asthmatic children. There are often reasons for noncompliance to long-term medications when these are numerous, including in adolescence the fear of CS side-effects, a poor understanding of treatment, and a wish to be like one's peers [158] . To our knowledge, one proposition consists of simplifying the treatment program by reducing the frequency of drug administration from twice daily, as usually recommended, to once daily. However, if efficacy is preserved, can prophylactic asthma treatment be prescribed once daily for each drug and for each child, whatever the age, the device and the asthma severity [158] ? Normally, PFT basic anomalies are absent in mild persistent asthma (Fig. 11.56 ) [435-437, 699, 700] . There are asymptomatic periods between exacerbations, symptoms often follow physical activity, exposure to environmental allergens or respiratory infections, with a decrease in FEV 1 of 20% or less [198] . PEF offers adequate indications, even if in children of 3-5 years the results may be not significant. Symptoms must be carefully checked: coughing, wheezing, difficulty in daily activities or physical exercise, nocturnal disturbance, even if intermittent [589] . Treatment is begun at the first signs of the illness or if PEF measurement is underway, when Moderate persistent asthma (Fig. 11 .57) [435-437, 699, 700] is characterized by two or more weekly acute asthma exacerbations with a 60%-80% PEF decrease and with PFT values up to 20% below existing readings or personal best [198] . For treatment, cromones are considered, which, in addition to their anti-inflammatory action, have the advantage of not being absorbed throughout the system, which renders them preferable to theophylline, remembering that for some cases a long-term prophylactic treatment might be required. If cromones have no effect within 4-8 weeks, the use of ICSs, which have a good anti-inflammatory action, can be started. We have treated with inhaled BUD (200 mg/day) 74 children aged 3.5-5.9 years (mean 4.2 years) and affected by moderate to severe asthma, despite conventional therapy, compared to 71 controls of similar age range and treated with antihistamines. The primary outcome measure was the change in asthma severity, as measured by the mean asthma score during the last 2 weeks of a baseline period and the last 2 weeks of each treatment. The mean difference in asthma score between BUD and antihistamines was: -7.5; 95% CI, -11.70 to -3.29 (p<0.0001). Spirometric data demonstrated a significant improvement. ICSs are suitable for it decreases by 10%-20% [273] . During symptomatic periods, children should be treated with nebulized b 2 -adrenergics (Table 11 .16), every 4-6 h prn for the duration of the episode, until PEF is stabilized or there is a clear and constant improvement [566] . In children <5 years of age, PEF measurements can be substituted by clinical parameters, such as coughing and dyspnea, while in children >5 years of age, starting a continuous PEF monitoring period at home to evaluate the severity of asthma is suggested [699] . The choice of drugs is less difficult, since response to b 2 -agonists is often variable in young infants, provided they are used correctly [26] . Inhaled b 2 -adrenergics can be used prn if control of symptoms can be coupled with a normal level of activity, absence of nocturnal coughing and PEF stabilization, [697] . If, on the other hand, the condition progressively worsens and b 2 -agonists are taken more than twice a week, reaching the point of daily intake dosages or 3-4 times/day, long-acting theophylline or cromones can be introduced. In children ≥2 years we suggest that anti-LT can be considered when inhaled medication delivery is suboptimal because of poor technique or adherence, or BUD which fared well at a dose of 0.25, 0.5, or 1 mg once daily in 359 children aged 6 month to 8 years [290] . If control is missing or incomplete, Fig. 11 .57 will be useful to reach the most appropriate decisions. Fig. 11 .56. Therapeutic algorithm for pediatric mild persistent asthma: a stepwise approach (step 2) see Table 11 .33 asymptomatic symptomatic PEFR ≥ 80% of predicted values variability > 20% MANAGEMENT pretreatment as required b 2 -agonists (see Table 11 .15) 2 puffs of b 2 -agonist or cromolyn <5 years nebulized or spacer + VHC and facemask before a physical activity, >5 years inhaled or exposure to allergen, etc 2 puffs q 4-6 hours as required or once daily or depending on severity of symptoms in alternative sustained release theophylline or inhaled cromones, or anti-LT * children >5 years who take cromones, but who also need b 2 -adrenergics 3-4 times a day, or who have nocturnal asthma [476] . Recently, with once daily morning treatment, monometasone furoate DPI 440 mg significantly changed FEV 1 compared with BUD DPI 440 mg [117] . b 2 -adrenergics, especially those with a long half-life and limited to 1-2 doses a day, are useful together with IB [566] . Long-acting theophylline has the advantage of oral administration. Regularly monitoring its serum concentrations and recording any adverse symptom [198] , it proves to be very effective in this form of asthma, as in mild forms [649] . With regular use of these drugs, b 2 -adrenergics can be stopped, or retained as part of the treatment only as needed [435] . When prescribing long-term treatment, parents should be informed of the latency time of the drugs being used. Severe asthma increases the risk of the airways progressing into a persistent and unresponsive airflow narrowing [274] . Children with severe asthma (Fig. 11 .58) [435-437, 699, 700] , despite appropriate treatment, often display PEF variations >30%-50% and PFT <60% of predicted or personal best, which can worsen during most severe exacerbations [198] . For daily therapy, bronchodilators are prescribed, namely long-acting theophylline and b 2 -adrenergics prn, up to 3-4 times a day, in association with CSs [559] . In children 16 months and older [136] , ICSs are suitable for anti-inflammatory effects, recurring to oral preparations if problems of compliance or financial difficulties arise. Infants use the more economical formulations per os [435, 476] critical points such as asthma attacks and symptoms [396] . All CS-treated children should receive specific medical advice regarding calcium intake and vitamin D supplementation. Review treatment every 1-6 months; a gradual stepping down in treatment may be possible and is needed to identify the minimum therapy required to maintain control. If control is not maintained, consider stepping up after reviewing patient medication technique, adherence, and environmental control (M•Plan Asthma Expert Panel). In conclusion, being the cause of acute and chronic symptoms, infantile chronic asthma should be viewed a multiform pathology, whose therapeutic strategy should be based on multiple grounds, that is treating other allergies and eliminating food, environmental and infectious triggering factors, as well as on SIT, which recorded excellent results in asthmatic and rhinitissuffering children (Table 13 .2). The pharmacological choices summarized in Table 11 .50 [335, 698, 699] can be recommended, according to age and symptoms. Table 11 .51 focuses on the difficulties that can be encountered in the treatment of the very young [472] . preferred, such as flunisolide = h 1.6±0.35 and BUD = h 2.8±1.1, compared to the 15 h of BDP [633] , tapered to the lowest effective single regimen (which provides the same results as that of dividing the administration into four doses) [497] taken on alternate days in the early afternoon (3:00-5:30 PM) [378, 497] to wean to the least undesirable effects, chief among which is that of inhibiting the HPA axis [198, 633] . The ICS dose should be gradually stepped down to the lowest possible doses of medication required to maintain asthma control and perhaps discontinued if a child remains asymptomatic for more than 1-2 months [198, 290, 418, 566, 634] . By following this guide, danger of the baby or child encountering any sort of problem can be avoided; most of the symptomatic benefit obtainable from ICSs occurs by reducing doses of BUD to 100-200 mg/day, with little effect from dose increments [487] . Such lines have been confirmed in a 4-month pediatric trial, which evaluated many varied parameters: BDP achieved the best clinical results, but associated with albuterol and theophylline proved to be most effective in reducing asthma attacks, and in 10 out of 16 parameters that evaluated the most frequent adverse reactions, it registered the smallest rate (albuterol + theophylline the greatest), including the [485, 566, [698] [699] [700] ∑ In babies and infants up to 1 year of age ( Fig. 11.59) , it is unnecessary to treat mild and infrequent symptoms, especially if there is no interference with daily life, night-time sleep and behavior. Often the infant whistles as a result of the greater elasticity of the bronchial tree or for intercurrent VRIs, thus rendering CS use difficult [620] . If the child is well and growing normally, only follow-ups are necessary. If symptoms intensify, even if infants show little therapeutic response to b 2 -adrenergics, treatment with spacers/nebulizer and face mask is called for, with recourse to cromones or to theophylline if the desired effect is not achieved. If the condition de-teriorates, intervention with IB and/or CS by nebulizers and/or with epinephrine, and O 2 therapy in emergencies is suggested. ∑ In children 1-3 years of age ( Fig. 11 .60), inhaled drugs must be administered by nebulizer and face mask. If symptoms are mild, satisfactory results can be obtained with b 2 -adrenergic and/or theophylline. If attacks should become of moderate intensity, with persistent wheezing and coughing, the use of associated cromolyn/nedocromil sodium is advised, making use of CSs in the case of a further deterioration of the symptoms, always by nebulizer and face mask and orally in the minimum effective dose, on alternating days in single-doses. ∑ In children 3-5 years of age (Fig. 11 .61) and with mild asthma, b 2 -adrenergics may be useful. If coughing and wheezing persist and inhaled bronchodilators fail to elicit a significant improvement, prophylactic treatment with cromolyn/nedocromil sodium or, alternatively, theophylline is called for. The combined use of b 2adrenergics and MDI + spacer CSs should be reserved for when symptoms become acute again. A further worsening will require a CS treatment in the forms indicated, such as inhaled BUD at a total dose of 800 mg daily, which significantly improved symptom scores, asthma exacerbation rates, PFTs, and BHR in asthmatic children aged 2-5 years [440] . Anti-LT medications should be introduced as symptoms step up. ∑ In the age range from 5 to 18 years (Fig. 11.62) , the differences separating cases of mild and medium/moderate asthma should be observed, alternating or combining the drugs and modifying the routes of administration. As can be seen in the figure, if asthma is severe and persistent, recourse to CS use is necessary. Asthma improves only in 41.3%-47.5% of cases (Table 5 .15) (the earlier the age of onset, the greater the risk of relapses) [575] , so in most adolescents who are not SIT-treated, delivery of medical care may also be challenging [476] . Anti-LT medications should be introduced as symptoms step up. CHAPTER 11 Asthma There are very few controlled studies on asthma therapy and they are often related to older children The response to bronchodilators is variable, at the first place remains epinephrine in case of need The younger the child is, the more conditions there are that may masquerade as asthma URTIs make patients vulnerable to asthma development or recurrence and potentially to the establishment of chronic forms. The considerable impact on the asthmatic child who experiences irritations more frequently, often more coincident with VRIs than with the numerical increase of mites in the air or in mattresses, should not be forgotten. For this reason, as virus trigger relapses, CS preventive administration caused a significant decrease in the number of wheezing days, attacks, ED visits, and hospitalizations [60] . In conclusion, the necessity for a targeted use of the diverse drugs should be recognized in relation to the characteristics of age-related clinical symptoms. Cromones are effective even in the very young, and advantage can be taken of their preventive abilities and of their use in combination with albuterol + flunisolide, all inhaled. Anti LT-medications should be introduced as symptoms step up in alternative with SIT. A three-part respiratory diary should be kept, divided into symptoms (asthma, EIA, malaise, cephalea, abdominal symptoms, insomnia, nervousness, etc.), prevention and therapy, noting in addition PEFR and school absences. Symptoms are classified on a graded scale as follows: 1 intermittent, 2 mild, 3 moderate, 4 severe. Treatment   Fig. 11.59 . Algorithm for management of asthma in children aged 0-1 years: a stepwise approach. Inhaled medications are delivered by pMDI/with spacer + VHC with face mask or nebulizer. Face mask devices should be close fitting, especially if a valved spacer is used,with nebulizers the mask should be held as close fitting as practicable without undue disturbance. Any gap reduces the dose dramatically. (Data from [485, 566, [698] [699] [700] ) The fact that parents often make no mention of their children's EIA seems more closely related to the objective difficulties of not being able to recognize EIA than to its absence; but its occurrence in 63% of 273 subjects is relevant, the greater part of whom asthma had not been diagnosed [446] .Whereas EIA diagnosis should be made with urgency, given that it can be prevented, thus allowing the child to enjoy a normal social life. Children depend on taking part in sporting activities for correct mental, social and physical development. Parents, often easily troubled by the parallel between exercise and the onset of an attack, often constrain their children to limit, or even stop, these activities, forcing them to adopt a sedentary and solitary life, with negative repercussions. It is therefore indispensable that parents be instructed on the significance of and how EIA can occur, since EIA worsens the prognosis of asthma [214] . The cornerstone on which diagnosis relies is history. Typical EIA appears in asthmatic children, but it may also become clinically manifest with exercise in children experiencing a subclinical degree of obstruction [214] . EIA diagnosis was possible in 88 children of 12.4±3.2 years by employing a treadmill test in which the speed was gradually increased, with positive results in 73%; 35 of 36 boys complained of pain and dyspnea, but not of wheezing, entirely reduced after albuterol inhalation [720] . Significantly, without these tests, 64% of those affected [542] and, often, also 40% of children complaining of thoracic pains [720] remain undiagnosed. Correct identification therefore is essential. Sporting activity must represent in an asthmatic infant or child -as it does in a healthy one -an appreciable part of life, and the child should be made aware of his or her virtual competitiveness even with healthy subjects [214] . EIA can be effectively pre- action lasting 6.5 h in reducing 50% of symptoms, while albuterol in doses of 200 mg lasts for 1.5 h. Using halved doses, albuterol was shown to be equal to formoterol [247] ; therefore effectiveness is linked to a dose of 100 mg/puff. Salmeterol has a lasting action of 12 h [343] and bambuterol even more [159] . Long-acting theophylline administered to 12-year-old asthmatics 2 h before the challenge prevented both IAR and LAR (8 h), thereby covering an ample time period [270] . Among CSs, BUD is indicated in modest doses; 53% of the maximal effect is reported in children with doses of 200 mg/day, and 83% with doses of 400 mg/day, registering significant differences with 100 mg/day [487] , and parallel results with doses of 400 mg/day [216] . Often, children forget preventative medical measures or are reluctant to be seen while they are taking the medication. In such cases, oral bambuterol [158] , salmeterol [343] , formoterol [441] and theophylline [270] , anti-LTs [482] , vented both by warming up, as well as by inhalations of b 2 -adrenergics about 5 min, or cromones about 15-20 min before beginning the activity [476] . This has proved effective in 70% of cases [39] . Studies in children have yielded significant results: after administration of cromolyn/nedocromil sodium, 10 or 4 mg, respectively, with MDI [113, 134, 451] , there was a significant lowering of FEV 1 compared to basic tests [134, 451] . Cromolyn remained effective for up to 4 h and procaterol up to 8 h after the test, though with reduced effect [419, 450] . b 2 -adrenergics are preferred due to the better clinical results obtained as well as to their duration of action. Despite recognized shortcomings in the treatment of moderate to severe asthma, cromones are preferred for limited or zero incidence of adverse effects [603] . In more resistant cases, b 2 -adrenergics can be associated with cromones: both offer equal protection to children after only 30 min. Formoterol in doses of 9-12 mg has an 831 Treatment Fig. 11.61 . Algorithm for management of asthma in children aged 3-5 years: a stepwise approach. Inhaled medications are delivered by pMDI/with spacer + VHC with face mask or nebulizer. Face mask devices should be close fitting to the face, especially if a valved spacer is used; with nebulizers the mask should be held as close fitting as practicable without undue disturbance. Any gap reduces the dose dramatically. (Data from [566, 698-700]) levo-cetirizine, and oral bambuterol [158] are useful. As an alternative, the following measures are suggested: ∑ Before beginning whatever form of activity, choose a warm, humid environment: free running in cold and dry ambient air causes much greater bronchoconstriction than swimming [214] . ∑ Nasal respiration is preferred because, as noted, it humidifies the inhaled air and reduces the cooling effect on the airways. ∑ Do a gradual warming up exercise almost to the point of provoking a bronchospasm, thus delaying an asthmatic attack about 2-3 h. ∑ Alternatively, wear a mask with a filter that retains heat and humidity and that has proved to be effective [618] . Usually, the pharmacological pretreatment is followed by a warm-up period of 10 min requiring light effort. This is followed by intermittent training, which alternates more demanding exercises with lighter ones; and finally a training period (for 6-8 weeks, 2-to 3-fold a week for 45-60 min) with a submaximal work-load in such a way that HR does not go beyond 160-170 beats/ min in prepuberal children and 180 in the younger ones [214] . Another frequently encountered problem is the child doing sports. Commonly, asthmatic children seem to be unwilling to take part in sports, but this presumed inaction toward sports in general is often caused by the limitations imposed by the EIA of which they suffer [617] . As for athletes in all branches from sport, including those taking part in athletic competitions, EIA is not a contraindication for children. Not all children are natural sportsmen, but all children should have a chance to share sporting with companions. Usually limitations imposed by asthma on daily childhood activities are not recognized until the child begins to participate, and then gains interest in physical activity [617] . In addition to pretreatment, children should avoid activities in asthma and circadian reductions in histamine concentrations is cited as evidence of a so-called permissive effect on mast cell histamine release, a mechanism that could explain the asthmatic attacks recurring over several consecutive nights following a single exposure to provoking allergens [32] . The relationship between nocturnal asthma severity and PFT during the daytime is still the subject of study, in that as yet no conclusive results are available. A controlled study in children has confirmed that nocturnal asthma is not dependent on an increase in bronchoconstriction [665] . Concerning treatment, the drugs used for daytime treatments, especially inhaled bronchodilators, do not last long enough to cover the night-time as well [364] . In these patients, a dose of long-acting theophylline at the time of sleeping is generally effective [83, 760] . On the basis of previous analysis on theophylline and circadian rhythms, a treatment with equal doses at regular intervals will be able to increase theophylline serum levels at night compared to daytime levels [760] . The persistence of nocturnal symptoms may indicate the necessity of including an anti-inflammatory treatment [379] . This option generally seems to be unnecessary since at precisely 4:00 AM the drug blocks the flow of inflammatory cells in BALF, an effect mediated by LTB 4 [316] . If theophylline, and inhaled b 2 -adrenergics and steroids taken as late as possible do not control night-time symptoms, it will be necessary to resort to the usual therapy for day-time asthma. In children, slow-release terbutoline is more effective than inhaled b 2 -agonists in preventing nocturnal asthma [398] , while ICSs are more effective and less harmful if taken between 3:00 and 5:30 PM, as noted above. A pre-eminent position might be held by formoterol [183] , salmeterol, bambuterol [159] , and long-acting antihistamines may ensure overall night-time symptom reduction, which of course do not offer the anti-inflammatory potency of theophylline [760] . Differential Diagnosis. Nocturnal asthma might identify those children at risk for severe exacerbations caused by lability of airway function, total IgE levels, changes in clinical symptoms and need for albuterol, which are more likely to predict nocturnal awakening than a decrease in PEF [626] . Maximum environmental prevention is essential against dust mites and pet epidermal derivatives, particularly in children allergic to dog or cat when there is a large amount of dog or cat allergen in the environment also rich in Der p 1 [626] . The bulk of evidence stresses the time the child spends at home; the largest part of which is sleeping, commonly spent for the most part in this environment (see Chap. 24). The influence of environmental factors also relies on the threshold of bronchial reactivity in hyperreactive subjects that is further reduced at night, not related to airway obstructions, but to fluctuations of circadian rhythms [380] . In some cases, the possible association with GER, often occurring during night-time because of the lack of opposition places with excessive air pollution and/or high concentrations of allergens; if all conditions are optimal, warmup exercises can begin [419] . Swimming, ball games, relay races and dancing are examples of useful activities in the training and rehabilitation of children and adolescents with EIA. We suggest that asthmatic children and adolescents be helped to participate with others in the most suitable sports (in asthmogenic ascending order): swimming, water polo, canoeing, long-distance skiing, volleyball, free dance, speed walking, baseball, basketball, etc. When treatment does not control the problem, then further diagnostic evaluation should be done to rule out conditions other than EIA, and all children with cough, shortness of breath, or history of recurrent bronchitis should be followed to make sure that the correct diagnosis is made and to make sure that treatment is effective [482] . Cough is the distinctive characteristic of asthma and nocturnal symptoms may be so dominant and bothersome as to disrupt the sleep of both the child and family. Much has been written on the condition, but a significant trend was found with more nights awakened in the past 4 weeks and with reduction in the quantity and quality of sleep and daytime sequelae of nocturnal asthma, including missing school, educational problems, and parents missing work or other usual activities [147] . Nocturnal cough generally reflects PEFR diurnal variations. Usually, examining at what time the episodes occurred, it can be seen that they do not always coincide with PEFR minimum level. Cough is more frequent about 2 h after the child goes to bed, and then again before awakening in the morning, and not between 3:00 and 5:00 AM when PEFR is lowest, reaching its nadir around 4:00 AM [32] . BALF studies in adults with nocturnal asthma have shown an extraordinary correlation: at 4:00 AM, BALF was found to contain a significantly greater number of lymphocytes, eosinophils, neutrophils and epithelial cell than at 4:00 PM [379] . This data shows that BHR is greatest at 4:00 AM compared to the corresponding afternoon hour, in correlation with FEV 1 and PC 20 equivalent variations [380] . Such are the effects of circadian rhythms, linked to the hypothalamic clock, which is linked in turn to the solar clock, with night and day alternation, which is why night-shift workers register the best test scores during nocturnal hours [32] . Another potential factor is the nocturnal body cooling independent of ambient T, correlated with clinical evidence that small reductions of body T provoke cold-induced bronchoconstriction [378] . Relative to allergen influx on circadian rhythms, it has been noted that exposing mild asthmatics without nocturnal asthma to an allergenic burden, they all responded with IAR both in the daytime and night-time, but also showed LAR after the evening test [364] . The connection existing between nocturnal by gravitational forces and, by means of a reflexive obstructive mechanism stimulated by gastric juices, could also be critical [221] . Furthermore, GER could increase bronchoconstriction by activating a vagal reflex (see "Collateral Pathologies"), but the links with nocturnal asthma are not yet clear [398] , also because of a lack of precise correlation between esophagus acidity and altered respiratory function [170] . A general summary of the many causes of persistent coughing is given in Table 11 .36. This is considered to be a mild form of asthma that is frequently unrecognized, resulting in inadequate treatment. Persistent coughing is a form of asthma that is not always well defined, which, according to recent data, is commonly found in all age groups as a variant of clinical asthma and presents symptoms that frequently result in asthma escaping detection and correct classification. At least onethird of asthmatics suffer from chronic cough [741] and among 10,063 asthmatic children, 785 (7.8%) had cough variant asthma [100] . Several groups of children with and without wheezing [306, 472, 741] and aged <18 months [279] were kept under observation. With the meta-analysis of the data collected from these studies [151, 306, 455, 472, 653] , we have ascertained that the risk of developing asthma is statistically very significant (p=0.0001) and we agree with those authors who have defined it as hidden asthma. Regarding the pathogenesis, the cough depends on the following [151, 306, 455, 472, 653] : 1. Upper airway obstruction where cough receptors are more numerous 2. Respiratory difficulty due to peripheral airway obstruction where receptors are scarce 3. Use of anti-cough medications, potentially in relation to cough receptor hyperresponsiveness 4. Possibly a higher wheezing threshold, apparently with no difference in BHR. In children with classic asthma as well as in those with the variant form, a marked FEV 1 reduction has been noted, as though there was an increased bronchoconstriction. Symptoms may be summed up in a few points [741] : symptoms reminiscent of a mild form of asthma with chronic, persistent, nonproductive cough that causes interference with sleep, vomiting, and interrupted school attendance, exacerbated by airborne viral infections, physical exercise and inhaled cold air [279] . For diagnostic purposes, the algorithm of Fig. 11 .63 [279, 472] can be followed. Moreover, chest objectivity is scarce; PFT and BPT can be normal and the only diagnostic confirmation is the positive response to bronchodilators [741] . However, since the prevalence of risk factors (atopy, FHA, and allergy) are similar to classic asthma, it is not easy to diagnose those children who, subsequently, have wheezing [472, 741] . Among the 785 children, only 1/3 had a correct diagnosis [100] . Above all, differential diagnosis is needed (Table 11 .36), and atopy may distinguish groups of coughers from groups of wheezers [395] . The natural history is highly variable: 9%-75% of children (on average 40%-50%) develop full-blown asthma over 6-96 months [279] , while a number of cases not easily quantified (about 50%) evolves toward a disappearance of clinical symptoms. In two groups of children aged 5.7 (mean) [653] or 7-15 years [306] to 54% [653] to 55% [306] developed classic asthma. Interestingly, asthma-positive children developed cough variant asthma at a young age [653] . For example, GER may be the cause of chronic cough and BHR [170] . In children with clinical wheezing the methacholine PD 20 test significantly decreased as these children developed wheezing [306] . On the other hand, 83% of a group who were SPT+ to inhalants and asthma-like night cough and worsened by exercise, was found to have improved at follow-up 2 years later, while 25% developed recurrent wheezing [348] . In 93% of cases, these children enjoyed the benefits of antiasthmatic therapy [151, 279] . To achieve satisfactory control of the disease, it is also necessary to eliminate the triggering mechanisms. Some infants, children or adolescents continue to suffer from asthma that is either greater or lesser in severity, despite the apparently appropriate treatment they are undergoing. This could be caused by various factors (Table 11 .52) [476] : inappropriate doses of medication, poor child compliance, and inability to regularly follow the treatment. A more uncommon cause is a variety of atypical outdoor antigens to be considered in all children with nonresolving chest disease or unresponsive asthma [137] . It could also be the result of objective elements related to asthma severity requiring the continuous use of steroids, especially if elevated doses are needed [633] , as well as GER [179] . From a pathogenic point of view, this could be a result of anomalies of the CS receptors (CR) (Table 11 .22), whether for an IL-induced reduced linking ability [23] due to a receptor irreversible reduction or because different T subpopulations are active, which, in resistant subjects, are more activated as they have an increase in CD25 and HLA-DR [131] or because of different CR links to DNA [23] . A cohort of 103 entrants aged 9-17 suffering for years from poorly controlled severe asthma and admitted several times, were hospitalized on average for 75 days to rationalize their treatment [624] . After a year, follow-up visits, admittance to hospital as well as days requiring hospitalization, visits to EDs or doctors' offices for acute asthma were found to be significantly reduced, with an obvious amelioration in 82% of the hospitalized chil-ment could be appropriate since in severe chronic asthma there is a deficiency of one or more IgG subclasses, which respond favorably to IVIg treatment [468] . The effect could also be due to the correction of steroid-induced hypogammaglobulinemia [253] . A trial with recombinant IFN (rIFN) in a group of children with analogous dependency did not prove effective [46] , although rIFN reaches the airway epithelium [276] . In adolescents with unresponsive asthma, only theophylline proved to be effective [707] . Use of methotrex-dren [624] . On the other hand, children with similar clinical characteristics did not gain any benefits from treatment at a hypoallergenic center [489] . New horizons could be opened by high-dosage IVIg treatment (2 g/kg/month) on steroid-dependent children. After 6 months, doses of oral cortisone for the maintenance and control of asthma exacerbations were reduced 3.2fold, with an equal reduction in PEFR, clinical score and SPT results [388] . The only doubt is that the sample of this study was not very representative: IVIg treat-835 Treatment Fig. 11.63 . Algorithm for the diagnosis of cough variant asthma. (Data from [279, 472]) ate and cyclosporine in the pediatric age raises motivated doubts [365] , as they provoke toxicity at the pulmonary and hepatic level and blood alterations as well as nephrotoxicity and hypertension [131] . The collaboration of both children and parents is of primary importance to make a treatment successful. In recent years several educational programs have been proposed. We have mentioned the relevance of psychotherapeutic and psychosocial factors in the whole spectrum of treatment for pediatric asthma. We believe the intervention of a specialist in this area to be particularly appropriate and productive. On the other hand, a group of pediatricians has devised a program aimed at improving the quality of life of children, with particular emphasis on educating the family, who received basic physiopathological information and were followed by a specialized team who tended to the cleaning of the environment, in addition to participating in meetings aimed at ensuring maximum compliance with the prescribed therapy. At the end of the follow-up, an overall improvement was noted in all clinical and psychological parameters [708] .An analogous program should be centered on the following points: an informative meeting, distribution of preprinted forms to assist in the recognition and treatment of acute attacks and follow-up visits every 2 months. At the end of the program, the disappearance of ED visits, the better understanding by parents of the measures to be taken during acute episodes and a greater confidence in their own ability to effectively handle their child's disease are necessary. GER may be one of the possible contributing factors in any child with recurrent and persistent respiratory complaints, so evaluation for GER should be considered in infants with persistent wheezing [170] . Children with GER-associated cough often show signs of BHR, and therefore the presence of GER should be suspected when faced with persistent wheezing. Symptomatic or functional GER therapy also appears to be necessary for the possible complications related to nocturnal asthma. The basic principles are: 1. Small meals, but more frequently, with food-thickening agents for bottle-fed babies 2. Avoid eating and drinking between meals and 2 h prior to reclining 3. Avoid excessive intake of lipids 4. Keep the head elevated,in a prone position on a surface inclined 30°adopting an anti-Trendelenburg position. To this end we suggest placing pillows (10-15 cm depending on the child's age) to raise head of the bed and keeping the child upright by lifting the upper part of the body with foam rubber supports or air cushions Especially in young children, early diagnosis and antireflux therapy in cases with GER-related respiratory complaints can result in significant improvement in symptoms. Drugs heightening lower esophageal sphincter pressure are used, for example domperidone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg/ 3-to 4-fold a day 20 min before meals or metoclopramide 0.1 mg/kg qid by monitoring side effects. If esophagitis is present, antacids, H 2 -receptors, or in severe cases, omeprazole or lansoprazole are indicated. During follow-up visits to the age of 4.5 years, in 25% of infants (age, 4-11 months) asthma treatment was necessary [170] . Omeprazole (0.3-1.0 mg/kg daily) was effective in 78 children. After 8 weeks of therapy, rebounding was reduced by 66%, heart burn by 56%, vomiting by 33%, abdominal pain by 64% [132] . The use of H 2 antagonists (to impede the production of gastric acid) such as ranitidine 5-10 mg/kg/day divided into two doses for 8 weeks as an attack therapy, to be subsequently halved during the maintenance phase (in the evenings for 6 months), is justified in the presence of GER-induced disease, documented by endoscopy. We suggest making PFT control before and after antireflux therapy [170] . The outcome over 1-4.5 years of follow-up was excellent; only one patient required further asthma medications [170] . Finally, asthmatic symptoms present in children with FA (Table 9 .12), the numerous triggering foods (Tables 9. 18, 9.19) and pseudoallergy from additives (Chap. 10) should not be neglected. The clinical situations which can complicate asthma are pulmonary and extrapulmonary [41] . Pulmonary Complications. Atelectasis can be either segmental or subsegmental and often involves the middle lobe. In the absence of immunological deficiencies or of aspiration of foreign bodies and with negative results to the sweat test, even though having undergone regular treatment, hypoxemic children affected with astinum [93] . Pneumomediastinum generally resolves spontaneously within a few days, 6 in the girl or 1-5 days in 5 asthmatic children [211] , meaning that ambulatory treatment is usually appropriate. Management consists of treating the underlying cause, rest, analgesics, and simple clinical monitoring [93] . Pneumothorax is the rarest complication of acute infantile asthma, which can, for example, also become present following paroxysmal coughing or as a result of IPPB. It should be suspected in cases when the child suddenly worsens together with signs of hyperphonesis and reduction of the murmur of the affected side [41] . If it is not widespread, is self-limiting, but in case of pneumothorax tension, it provokes respiratory breathing difficulties and continuous aspiration is necessary [313] . Pulmonary infiltrations are frequent radiological findings, but they do not require urgent interventions. Conversely, total pulmonary collapse can be provoked both by the severity of asthma as well as external incidental factors [41] . Extrapulmonary Complications. Generally, extrapulmonary complications are rhinitis, sinusitis and secretory otitis media that interact with asthma, but see Chaps. 12 and 15 for the appropriate treatment. Nonetheless, sinusitis (whether acute or chronic), common among allergic children, can accompany the worsening of asthma or forms of difficult asthma [334] , whereas suitable therapy reflects positively on asthma (Chap. 15). Other complications are more or less frequent and diverse according to whether the asthma is acute or chronic (Table 11 .53) [584] . The most frequent compli-middle-lobe syndrome can have frequent relapses, or cough, wheezy breathing or dyspnea persistency, etc. [336] . Using fiberoptic bronchoscopy and a count of BALF cells, a study on 3.3-year-old asthmatic children showed the presence of pathogenic bacteria in 47.6% of cases, re-evaluating the role of infections [610] , often favored by malformations and, in 11.5% of cases, by GER [336] . In these children, the possibility of underlying asthma must be suspected, especially if faced with a documented parenchymal thickening [481] . In a group of 56 asthmatic children, only 5 of 63 episodes had physical symptoms of middle-lobe syndrome [577] . This was the case of a 7-year-old boy with intubated status asthmaticus complicated by refractory mucus plugging and atelectasis [163] .Atopy is present in 35% [577] to 38% of cases [336] . The right middle lobe is most commonly involved due to anatomical factors, which facilitate its obstruction, further aided by the combined action of bronchospasm, edema, mucosal thickening, and mucus plugging, with the possible complication of bacterial infection. It follows that the bronchus tends to twist with hyperinflation, resulting in a partial occlusion with repercussions on the middle lobe [41] . Atelectasis and hypoventilation are also sustained by the particular relationships of this lobe with the others, which are not ideal for ensuring a collateral circulation of alveolar gases [41] . It is not clear if the occlusion of the right middle lobe is more prevalent among females [41, 481, 577] or males [163, 610] . The boy was successfully treated with two 10-mg doses of intratracheal rhDNase (see "Treatment of Status Asthmaticus") [163] . Pneumomediastinum presents itself as a sudden complication in 5% of children with status asthmaticus [554] . The most common cause in children is asthma [93] , but it is not a characteristic of severe asthma and rarely is manifest before the age of 2 [336] . The only exception is an 18-month-old girl who also had subcutaneous emphysema [211] . Paroxysmal cough and bronchospasm superimposed on hyperinflation, or related to atelectasis, pneumonia, structural weakness, intermittent positive pressure breathing (IPPB), cause air to rupture alveolar bases and spread along vascular sheaths, consequently causing pulmonary interstitial emphysema. This may lead to severe cardiovascular insufficiency with reduced venous return, cardiac output and blood pressure [41] . If the air makes its way to the mediastinum and reaches the pericardium, one has auscultatory findings of a crackling sound synchronized with heart beats (Hamman's sign), pathognomonic of pneumopericardium. In other cases, air, through the fascial planes, may escape into the subcutaneous tissue of neck, shoulders and axillae, releasing the mediastinal pressure [41] . Diagnosis is made following tachycardia, retrosternal pains that spread to the arms and neck aggravated by breathing and sometimes by swallowing [336] . However, the association with severe hypoxia, tachycardia, metabolic acidosis, and high ventilation pressures indicates clinically significant tension in the medi- Psychological/emotional problems cations are bacterial infections, especially in asthmatics <5 years, acute and chronic asthma and viral infections, to which asthmatics are particularly susceptible. Another possible complication is vasopressin excessive production (inappropriate ADH secretion): such levels are high in patients with severe asthma, independent of natremia, probably as a result of the effect of severe asthma on pulmonary circulation. Vasopressin levels fall parallel to patient improvement. Since during an asthma attack hyponatremia can occur, in case of hospital admission BE must be carefully monitored as well as electrolyte levels, and the subsequent parenteral fluid administration must be handled accordingly [41] . For a long time asthma mortality was low: only during the first half of the 20th century was it observed that it could be fatal in children [623] . Starting in the 1960s, a few English authors noted a sudden increase in the mortality rate among asthmatics, attributing the cause to the b-adrenergic isoproterenol, the use of which was discontinued though the doubts had not been clearly proved [479] . The pharmaceutical industry introduced new b 2 -adrenergics on the market, but in the 1970s, other scientists from New Zealand spoke out against the most widely diffused of these: fenoterol. These authors said that the problem was not due to the drug's direct toxic effect, but rather to its abuse because it provided immediate relief [326] . Both isoproterenol and fenoterol are relatively nonselective potent full agonists with both greater long-term and immediate adverse effects than other b-agonists. Likely the regular use of these agonists led to worsening asthma control and their overuse to treat life-threatening asthma attacks caused an increased risk of death resulting from adverse cardiac effects in the presence of severe hypoxia [569] . In the US, high-dose fenoterol and isoproterenol were not approved for use. In effect, after the ban on the drug, the mortality rate among 5-to 34-year-olds fell from four to <1 case/10 6 [480] . Consequently, albuterol was given preference as it was less dangerous according to New Zealand scientists [738] since fenoterol prescription was associated with an increased risk of death compared to albuterol [608] . We have prescribed albuterol without noting adverse effects and a case-control study recognizes that such alarm was unjustified [738] . Recent studies have instead documented that mortality rates decreased, while sales of ICSs increased [628, 630] , as well as of b 2 -adrenergics [331] . Some ecological studies conducted in various countries state that the introduction and sharp increases in the use of ICSs correlate to important reductions in the asthma death rates, whereas other cohort or case-control studies indicate that ICSs might not prevent asthma death [628] . An analysis of 96,258 UK asthmatic patients has confirmed in vivo that regular use of ICSs is associated with a decreased risk of asthma death [331] . Despite the progress made in the diagnosis and therapy of asthma, since 1980 the mortality rate is again on the increase at the rate of 6.2 ± 1.2% a year, especially among 5-to 14-year-old children [710] . As can be seen in Fig. 5.19 , the increase in the world population (1985) (1986) (1987) places Israel in the first position, followed by Finland and Denmark, but if the rates in the 5-to 34-yearolds in 1987, compared to the level in 1980, is calculated, Australia ranks first, followed by Singapore and New Zealand, whereas Israel is in ninth place and Finland and Denmark are absent [569] or in the last places (Table 5 .17). These rates in patients with severe asthma are markedly greater than mortality rates in asthmatic patients in the general US population, which can be estimated at 0.02% if the death rate is 1.5¥10 5 and asthma prevalence is 3%-5% [595] . After a gradual decline in asthma mortality rates in the 1960s and 1970s, rates have increased progressively in the US during the past 2 decades. In most other Western countries, the rate of asthma mortality decreased during the 1990s after progressive increase through the 1980s (0.36¥10 5 in some European countries vs 0.47¥10 5 in the US. The underlying reasons, including the role of management, will require further investigation if strategies are to be implemented successfully to reduce asthma mortality rates [29] . In a PICU, a 6-year study resulted in an 8.9% incidence of acute severe asthma, while all pediatric admission totalled 1.9% [464] . However, the marked underestimation, varying between 36% and 127% for 5-to 34-year-olds, should be noted, results from a position common to other European countries with the highest levels [375] . Contrary to the statistical findings, beginning from the 5th year, an epidemiological study has established a mortality rate among 11-to 14-yearolds of 0.34¥10 5 (Tables 11.54, 11.55) [190, 192] . The inclusion of 45.5% of 13-to 16-year-olds and of 32% of 1-to 4-year-olds is very significant [190] (p=0.0006). In another cohort [192] , the death rate among 1-to For example, in Australia, the government has been engaged in distributing guidelines among doctors for treating asthma [598] . A correlation between the increase in both death and asthma prevalence has also been hypothesized; nevertheless, in some countries the mortality rate has diminished, despite the increase in prevalence [598] . Epidemiological studies have shown that in addition to the age factor, the following categories of pediatric patients are particularly at risk (Table 11 .57): ∑ Children in a home where family interference is dominant. A paradigmatic case of late referral is that of a 5-year-old male whose parents had objected to steroid treatment and had even hesitated 5 days in taking him to hospital [464] . ∑ Adolescents suffering from chronic asthma and from a recent episode of acute asthma, who frequently do not regularly follow treatment for a variety of reasons [478] , whose family rarely looks after him or her or on the contrary whose supervision has been rejected [326] . ∑ Adolescents who do not go to their doctor and do not follow their therapy, with periodical relapses of status asthmaticus as a result of undertreatment [595] , only occasionally undergoing therapy with insufficient doses 19-year-olds dropped and among 15-to 24-year-olds doubled, with a male prevalence in the former (55% of cases) and of females in the second group (59%) [190] . Underdiagnosis is more common among females; therefore the cases of death seem to be more frequent precisely in the groups that statistically appear to be least at risk, that is the 15-to 34-year-olds, 5-to 14-year-old females [14] and children 1-4 years of age in general [190] . Tables 11.56 [80, 145] and 11.57 [67, 403, 579, 623] indicate the possible causes of a worsening of the prognosis, including so-called self-management and possible undertreatment [623] . This assumption is based on the fact that asthma is a very common disease, implies a substantial impairment in children's quality of life and requires challenging medical interventions and treatments often accepted by children reluctantly [375] . Moreover, the deeper understanding of asthma by patients, along with the undeniable positive aspects can, in some cases, give way to a loss of the doctor-patient relationship, which on the contrary is indispensable [67] . Among other frequent disadvantages of self-management is the improper use of some drugs, particularly b 2 -adrenergics [569] . Continuous drug dependency occurs, which is reflected negatively on the quality of life and involves a condition of undertreatment, since the patient does not use, or misuses, those drugs that are needed in his or her case [478] . Chronic underuse is also attributable to a false feeling of safety occasioned by masking the effects that systematic use of medications has on symptoms [109] . Thus, on the one hand a masking or an underestimation of the underlying inflammatory process can occur, so that when a sudden emergency materializes, the use of ICSs and/or cromones is delayed [67, 375] ; on the other hand, the rapid beneficial effects on clinical features prevents the patient from realizing that hypoxia worsens [296] , dangerously postponing a doctor's visit. Undertreatment increases death cases, since the moderate reduction in mortality is related to the progressive increase of ICS sales [596, 628, 630] . It is recommended to closely follow subjects who have experienced fatal crises or near-fatal attacks [326] . [192] . [377], to the point that the prescribed drug serum levels are between 0 and subtherapeutic levels [43] . This is especially alarming when these drugs are ICSs: their regular, uninterrupted use significantly reduces the risk of death from asthma by at least 50%. Instead, treatment interruption is associated with an almost fivefold increase in asthma deaths [630] , likely because the CS effect disappears after 2 weeks [593] . ∑ Young patients under proper observation, who are faced with sudden attacks, progressively becoming worse to the point of respiratory insufficiency and death within 20 min to 3 h [190] , probably because of the effect of a heavy allergenic load or the intervention of other highly negative factors, but who did not avail of help quickly enough [409] . It happens, however, that children and/or adolescents do not fall into this classification and die as a result of insufficient management of asthma [623] , or for excessive delays in the final moments [190] ; 80% of the cases studied were preventable. They can be divided as follows: fact, postmortem findings are often marked by highly thickened bronchial walls, with mucus plugs blocking the bronchial lumen and diffused throughout the airways [578] . Death by asthma can be sudden or progressive: in the first instance, the preponderant role of an intense bronchospasm is suspected, as it has been ascertained that recovery from a near-fatal attack occurs more quickly in these forms than in those that evolve more slowly, characterized by respiratory insufficiency following generalized bronchoconstriction and long-term inflammatory phenomena [578] similar to that found in status asthmaticus. Two potentially contributing causes should not be underestimated: drug cardiotoxicity, especially if hypoxemia is present, and the onset of respiratory insufficiency, rapidly aggravated by severe hypoxia [409] . Thus, the underlying mechanism can be represented by a reduced perception of dyspnea and by a very low chemosensitivity to hypoxia [296] . Sears et al returned to the risks associated with continuous therapy (in adults) with high doses of fenoterol, including a worsening of asthma and an increase in aspecific BHR [569, 571] . At the end of a retrospective study on 12,301 Canadian asthmatic adults, Spitzer et al [608] declared there was a danger related to the use of bronchodilators in MDI spray cans, maintaining that all b-adrenergics, including albuterol, but also theophylline and oral steroids, worsen asthma and can be related to fatal cases, without in effect providing clear evidence related to a cause-effect relationship [109] . Cromones as well as ICSs are totally excluded from a careful analysis in this data, as is albuterol if not taken in combination with fenoterol, which was the most common drug used among the deceased [608] . Following the publication of the preliminary results, the North American press underlined the serious dangers deriving from the abuse of b 2 -adrenergics and the American College of Allergy and Immunology sent photocopies of the articles to all its associates as well as its Position Statement on the matter [185] . The dissertation by Spitzer et al [608] brought in a large number of controversial letters. The New Zealand authors exclude that in their country the use of albuterol had increased the cases of death between 1969 and 1976 [738] , which occurred when the less selective fenoterol was commercialized [571] , and therefore it is the prolonged use at high doses that is correlated with the risk of death by asthma or near-fatal asthmatic attacks [331] . The same group [629] subsequently quantified the risk in 10 5 asthmatics/year. The statistics are 42.8% for nebulized b 2 -adrenergics and 19.2% for oral b 2 -adrenergics, 44.6% for oral CSs; in direct comparison, fenoterol alone vs albuterol alone was 60.2% vs 7.4%, so the conclusion is that albuterol is safe if inhaled alone ∑ A long period of undertreatment, or of scant medical care (64%) ∑ Inadequate care in the final stage (45%) or delays in asking for help, or insufficient physician knowledge of emergency treatments Some families hesitate to call a doctor during weekends or at night [190] ; In fact 75% of deaths occur between 7:00 PM and 6:00 AM [375] and life-threatening attacks and deaths show a pattern of occurring on Sunday [527] . Two studies showed that 68% of Swedish children and 35% of English children died within 3 h of the onset of the attack [190, 192] . Therefore, there is an impact of unpredictability that could also be due to overlooked nonsevere cases [192] , whereas in dispatching an ambulance with a doctor on board (the person making the request had indicated asthma to the hospital operator), the arrival of help was shortened by 64% and the mortality rate decreased sixfold [595] . Survival in the period after the attack is made difficult by mistakes, for example, inadequate monitoring [377] or inadequate actions on the part of patients, especially those at high risk. Some consented to regular check-up requesting a medical visit after 7 h, others refused and died, having requested the medical visit only after 3 days [410] . The cause of death in cases of severe asthma can vary [76, 578] : 1. Some patients, who died suddenly of a heart attack preceded by tachycardia and extrasystoles, had in all likelihood taken drugs in excessive doses. To this end an abnormal pharmacological mechanism could be regarded as being the cause (possibly prostaglandins), triggered by an exogenous agent [578] ; such cases habitually occur at home [190] . However, postmortem examinations carried out on some children have shown equal amounts of specific cardiac lesions among those who had abused b 2 -adrenergic drugs and those treated with other drugs [595] , although probably the severity of the complications in these patients was due more to hypoxia than to cardiac factors [409] . 2. Often the abuse of inhaled drugs, such as b 2 -adrenergics [375, 569, 578] has been stressed, both because they are very handy to use as they are supplied with dispensers, and because some have a longer and more intense action and an MDI dosed at 200 mg/puff [479] , whereas, for example, the dosage of albuterol is reduced by half. 3 . The theory that the abuse of b 2 -adrenergics can lead to a masking of worsened underlying disease, whereas CS treatment could be needed [571] , is, however, contradicted by the increase in sales for both classes of these drugs [480] . 4 . Another probability is that in status asthmaticus the lack of use or underuse of CSs, if taken in a timely manner, prevents the formation of obstructive plugs [76] . In with MDI, as are inhaled cromones and CSs [629] . Abuse is dangerous because b 2 -adrenergics exacerbate BHR. Studies [110, 456] have reconfirmed that b 2 -adrenergics show tolerance with continued exposure with a loss of clinical effect that can worsen asthma. Abuse and high doses during acute attacks lead to hypoxemia and/or hypokalemia as well as a delay in seeking medical assistance [409, 410, 479] . Therefore the use of bronchodilators is not intrinsically dangerous, but the substantial irrationality of treatment based only or mainly on b 2 -adrenergics should be pointed out; its use should be associated with regular anti-inflammatory and preventive therapy [62, 68] . The main risk in the use of fenoterol is a dose-effect ratio between mortality and prescription [30] , potentially caused by excessive basic dosages, as mentioned above. In line with such reports, on the one hand there is a recourse, as urged by some authors, to halve the dosages [612] ; on the other hand the drug has been shown to be effective in moderate forms even in dosages between 10 and 50 mg, even reduced up to 1/20 of the recommended dosage [196] . However, the adverse effects of fenoterol became known when it was compared to placebo for 6 months [571] . What criteria is used to freely commercialize b-adrenergics controlled by studies lasting barely 4 weeks [133] ? In a large sample of 16,787 patients treated for 16 weeks with salmeterol, the number of cases of death by asthma were 12 [91] , among which only one boy 14 years of age (0.006%) [197] . There were only two deaths in the group treated with albuterol, one of whom was 20 years old [197] . Therefore we do not agree with the concerns raised by the potential danger of salmeterol in young people, provided that -as with formoterol -it is not used to treat acute asthmatic attacks since it has no effect in a short time, a specification included in illustrated leaflets only in 1994. Therefore it should not be taken too often because of the risk of accumulation causing adverse effects. As a consequence, it is necessary to start preventive maintenance therapy [76] with cromolyn, nedocromil sodium, ICS or long-acting theophylline, resorting to inhaled b 2 -adrenergics prn [467] , while taking care to eliminate the environmental allergenic load [76] . Theophylline (RR, 1.0), cromolyn and steroids (RR, <1.0) were associated with decreased mortality [331] . It has been highlighted that exposure to high titers of Alternaria alternata spores (Fig. 1.79) can trigger severe asthma exacerbations and is a risk factor for respiratory arrest in asthmatic children and young adults [457] , with mortality cases significantly correlated with spore counts >1,000/m 3 [641] . In a total of 6,840 children with respiratory allergy, we have evaluated Alternaria prevalence. Only 89 of 6,840 children (1.3%) had monosensitization to this allergen, and all were asthmatic. Of these, 29 had perennial manifestations, 18 seasonal prevalence, which was in autumn-winter in 13 of these 18, and in spring-summer in 5. Thus, this allergy should not underevaluated, due to its protean mani-festations with possible life-threatening reactions [84] . It is therefore necessary for infants and children allergic to this aeroallergen to wear an identification bracelet so that they can be quickly identified in case of need, as well as asthmatic adolescents or children also suffering from FA. Of children who died or suffered from severe shock (see Chap. 20), 92.3% were in fact asthmatic. It is assumed that some fatal episodes have occurred in countries lacking a widely available National Health Service, or that such fatalities should be related to an absence of specialized medical assistance as well as to a lack of proper facilities to deal with such emergencies in schools [596] . Prevention comprises a series of articulated measures aimed at reducing the occurrences or severity of reexacerbations, to possibly enable children to enjoy a normal life similar to that of their healthy peers. In 1881, it was clear that "to prevent a return of new attacks one must advise the patient to avoid all harmful influences... to all asthmatics one must recommend to live in pure, dry air, to avoid places exposed to dust, smoke and wind..." [82] . As will be seen in Chap. 24, numerous factors have contributed to the increased prevalence of allergic disease. Proof of the negative influences of these factors in children with FH+ is provided by the double reactivity in 74% of children to Der p 1 and to pets and in 84% to pollens and molds [483] . Given the severity of infantile asthma, it can be understood how important it is that interventions for allergen avoidance are scrupulously carried out, which, we note incidentally, are overlooked in several guidelines where emphasis is placed above all on drug therapy [272, 435, 504, 545, [698] [699] [700] . Some environmental measures are truly effective. It is known that asthmatics improve markedly in aseptic environments, residence in dust-free places can have positive effects on clinical features, children improve when transferring to houses so meticulously cleaned of allergenic factors as to be comparable to a hospital room, with 50-fold reduced Der p levels [624] . Preventive therapy is required once allergic asthma has been recorded to adopt appropriate measures to prevent recurrences. It is carried out using cromolyn, nedocromil sodium (Figs. 11.64, 11.65), ketotifen and other preventive medications [105] . The indications for prophylactic therapy, especially for a long-term therapy, are summarized in Table 11 .58 [476] . These medications have no particular role in international [272] and US guidelines [434] [435] [436] [437] . It was proposed to remove cromolyn from international guidelines recommending it as a first choice in prophylactic asthma treatment [642] ; however, the Expert Panel's opinion is that cromolyn for children of all ages and nedocromil for children >5 years of age could be considered in the treatment of persistent asthma, but they are not preferred therapies [434] . Cromolyn is a widely used preventive drug that, by blocking mast cells mediator release, inhibits both early and late bronchospastic reactions induced by allergen inhalation, cold or nebulized air, fog and various irritating chemical substances. Thanks to these characteristics, it is currently used in the prevention of asthma and EIA symptoms in childhood [134, 419, 458, 476] , starting from 13 months of age [107] , having the advantage of inhibiting the response to BPT with allergens both in the early and late phases, and that of reducing aspecific BHR [251] . The numerous and extensive long-term studies that have been referred to so far in this book have confirmed both its clinical safety and its therapeutic efficacy. A recent meta-analysis on 24 trials out of 251 selected and mostly on hospital-based populations of children [642] demonstrates no improvement in the outcome of 1,000 children aged 1-4 years with mild asthma given inhaled cromolyn at a dose of 10 mg tid. However, cromolyn had a statistically significant effect on cough and wheeze compared to placebo (95% CI) and an additional decrease in cough score compared to placebo (0.13 to 0.27) and in wheeze score (0.11 to 0.26) [166, 642] . Usually, the relatively low dose of cromolyn used and the inclusion of only children with milder symptoms makes it difficult to draw conclusions about the efficacy of cromolyn in children who are given higher doses for moderate asthma [282] . Several letters commented negatively on the paper, one very well documented [166] . A meta-analysis followed reaching the same conclusions [643] . In our clinic and personally, it has always been prescribed because of its preventive capacity, which has been recognized by two International Consensus papers on the treatment of pediatric asthma [698, 700] , which places it in the pole position in the prophylaxis of asthma. Its effects can be summarized as follows [86, 105, 251, 258, 545] : ∑ Stabilization of mast cell membrane, which can be explained by: Cough and wheezing more than 1-2 times a week or more than 1-2 nights a week Necessity of bronchodilator use more than 1-2 times a day Persistent PEFR alterations, an index of airway obstruction Frequent exacerbations (>1 every 4-6 weeks) and of >24 h duration Frequent hospital admissions Modified from [476] . Fig. 11.65 . Target cells and tissues for sodium cromoglycate and nedocromil sodium. Cromolyn sodium cromoglycate, NS nedocromil sodium -Closure of Ca channels, with a subsequent inhibition of mediator release -Inhibition of phosphodiesterase, with an increase of cAMP intra-mast cell levels -Blockage of oxidative phosphorylation that prevents mediator release ∑ Inhibition of the activation of leukocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils and blood platelets ∑ Inhibition of PAF action ∑ Attenuation of contractile response to acetylcholine, histamine, serotonin, bradykinin and PGF 2a ∑ Up-regulation of PGE 2 -Inhibition of O 2 metabolite production ∑ Additional properties inhibiting CD4, CD8, CD19 (B cells) and PBMCs expressing sCD23, demonstrated at the skin level (Chap. 7), making cromolyn potentially useful for treating asthma ∑ In vitro inhibition of IgE synthesis by B lymphocytes [297] , probably by blocking their IL 4 -primed isotypic switching [358] , suggesting an early prophylactic effect ∑ Enhancement of IgG production by B cells [297] , also with tachykinin antagonizing properties (Chap. 7) . Based on what has been stated, cromolyn's use in acute forms is not advisable. Cromolyn is administered: ∑ By DPI, in capsules each containing 20 mg, with a predosed dispenser (Spinhaler, see "Predosed Pressurized Sprays"), with a dose of 60-80 mg/day, in 3 fractionated doses ∑ By MDI (20 mg/2 ml of solution), ∑ By pressurized MDI, with 5 mg release (average dose of 2 puffs qid). In the US an MDI formulation of 1 mg/puff is available, which is less able to decrease BHR compared to the MDI formulation of 5 mg/puff which is available elsewhere, thus possibly delivering less medication to the lower airways [252] . Compared with the convenience of 1-2 daily doses of BUD inhalation, the dosing of cromolyn bid-qid likely increased caregiver burden [422] . Several weeks of regular use are required before it is able to carry out its effect on LAR. However, the delivery system may by a limiting factor in the efficient cromolyn delivery to young children [549] . Cromolyn is indicated: ∑ In short-term prophylaxis: 15-30 min preceding the allergen encounter, or before intense physical exercise ∑ In long-term prophylaxis: from 4-6 weeks preceding the critical period until the end of exposure ∑ If a small airway obstruction remains after bronchodilator administration Cromolyn associated with CSs confers a significant protection against asthma exacerbations, asthma drug therapy, inhaled anti-inflammatory agents, hospitalization, and ED visits [5] . All asthmatic children can derive benefit from cromolyn therapy [436] , which is virtually devoid of any side effects [86] . Nedocromil, disodium salt of pyrano-quinoline-dycarboxilic acid, is an antiallergic and anti-inflammatory drug endowed with the following properties [397, 407, 424, 507, 578, 659, 704] : ∑ In vivo: -It inhibits mediator release by sensitized mast cells, induced by the specific antigen and anti-IgE antibodies. -It reduces the amount of histamine and PGD 2 released by sensitized mast cells, both spontaneously and following aspecific stimuli. -It suppresses IL-dependent IgE production. -It inhibits chemotactic responses by eosinophils (to FMLP and NAP-1/IL 8 ) that are stimulated by cytokines (GM-CSF and IL 3 ). -It inhibits neutrophil chemotactic action. -It inhibits BHR induced by IL 3 R-stimulated PAF. -It may inhibit the activity and functionality of T cells. ∑ In vitro: -Even in very low doses, it inhibits chemotactic factorinduced activation of neutrophils and eosinophils, probably acting on proteinkinase C. -It inhibits the PMN-mediated mechanisms that lead to histamine release. -It inhibits the release of mediators by neutrophils and eosinophils and the release of LCB 4 and 5-HETE by alveolar macrophages. -It prevents the IgE-mediated monocyte and blood platelet activation and, in high doses, activation of complement-induced proteins associated with eosinophil granules. -It reduces the release by the bronchial epithelial cells exposed to asthmogenic stimuli of arachidonic acid metabolite able to induce mast cell degranulation and mucus hypersecretion. -It inhibits the variation in density of eosinophils and LTC 4 production. -As opposed to cromolyn, it also acts on MT mast cells and on basophils. Moreover, nedocromil mitigates or halts MBP-induced harmful mucociliary dysfunction [648] . Several clinical studies have documented its efficacy in adults, also noting that it is less so in children [71, 113, 134] . In children, it significantly reduced urgent case visits and courses of oral prednisone as compared with placebo [645] . In our experimental double-blind placebo-controlled (DBPC) study [71] in children affected by grass-induced bronchial asthma, the results showed an sensus since there are noticeable variations regarding the type of molecule or the dosages [105] . While azelastine can reduce IAR, several other drugs seem to express their effect on LAR, an important result for the known correlation between these reactions and symptom severity [139, 303] . Table 11 .59 [105, 139, 303, 528] summarizes the principal effects that are attributed to these overall improvement both in asthmatic symptoms and in PFT compared to controls. The different opinions expressed by both physicians and parents were statistically highly significant. The dosage is two puffs (2 mg) qid. Table 11 .14 details the cromone's action mechanism. Ketotifen has a mechanism partially analogous to that of cromolyn and is capable of the following: [105, 462, 528, 545] : ∑ It inhibits mast cell mediator release, in particular of PGD 2 [462] . ∑ It interferes with the action carried out by some of these mediators. ∑ It carries out antihistamine activity at the level of H 1 receptors. ∑ It is active on the two phases of the asthmatic response. ∑ It inhibits blood platelet migration and PAF release, so that anti-PAF activity can explain many positive effects [528] . Additionally, it prevents b 2 -adrenergic hyporesponsiveness and restores their responsiveness, thus improving in asthmatics b 2 -adrenoceptor function and b 2adrenergic bronchodilation [528] . In five DBPC pediatric studies [74, 511, 545, 589, 667] , the following effects were documented: ∑ Reduction of asthmatic attacks and auscultatory findings of long-term wheezing ∑ Reduction in the number of days of disease ∑ Statistical reduction in the use of other drugs [511, 545] ∑ Anti-asthma prevention in 91% of cases after 3 years of therapy [74] The effects in other pediatric studies were controversial [589, 667] . In one DBPC study, ketotifen proved less effective than cromolyn, possibly because one dose of syrup 4 ml/day was used on subjects weighing 14-18 kg; no data regarding compliance was noted [127] . Dosages. For dosages, see Table 7 .19. Younger children find ketotifen particularly pleasant since it is also available in syrup form, has a pleasant taste and is easily administered. Drowsiness is its only side effect [406] , which, however, we noted disappears after a few days of use. The prescribing physician should inform parents of this effect. In older children, the capsule form can be taken, preferably at night. For some years second-generation antihistamine drugs have been utilized and experimented in pediatric treatment of asthma [259] (Fig. 11.66 ). It should be noted, however, that experimental studies have yielded no con-845 Treatment Structural formula of some antihistamines drugs; therefore we will simply clarify a few points (see Chap. 12). These drugs fulfill a protective activity related to their half-life with a variable interval of time, ranging from 4 to 12 h [105, 139] . Azelastine has proved to be a powerful inhibitor of histamine-induced bronchoconstriction. Once optimal serum levels have been reached, however, it is not also able to antagonize LTC 4 -induced bronchoconstriction, though it is able to significantly reduce SP levels in BALF [439] . A randomized DBPC study has concluded that azelastine is capable of significantly inhibiting IAR, without, however, having any noticeable impact on LAR [662] . Various studies on humans have shown that cetirizine can reduce eosinophil, neutrophil and basophil recruitment by 75% [303] , as well as PAF-induced bronchoconstriction, without leading to a similar LAR reduction in the airways, as demonstrated by PFTs, [636] . An antiallergic effect is produced on epithelial cell CD54 expression [81] . Recent evidence suggests that it inhibits eosinophil adhesion to endothelial cells [322] . A randomized DBPC study among adults has shown that cetirizine is able to reduce the number of eosinophils in BALF and inhibit their enrollment [519] ; cetirizine's ability to induce consistent reductions of FEV 1 and of histamine-induced bronchoconstriction is also known. In 348 children and adolescents with grade II and III asthma, cetirizine reduced the number of days with symptoms as well as the need for other drugs, on a par with cromolyn [303] . The formulation in drops has allowed us to treat very young children (aged 6 months and older), always with very good results. Long-term Levocetirizine has proved to have a firstrate preventative activity in >200 asthmatic children aged 5-6 years and older treated by us (one tablet = 5 mg/day). Fexofenadine is a new drug that can be given to children. It is more useful in the treatment of AR and has no effects either on the cardiovascular system or the CNS. In vitro, loratadine significantly inhibits PAF-induced eosinophil activation, superoxide generation, and nasal secretion of histamine and PGD 2 after the challenge [165] . Another long-term antihistamine is desloratadine (a loretadine metabolite), with anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic activities in addition to its antihistaminic activity, it has a 27-h elimination half-life, which facilitates once-daily dosing. Desloratadine does not cause sedation or prolong the corrected QT interval, can be administered without regard to concurrent intake of food and grapefruit juice (Chap. 12), like the other antihistamines. We have prescribed doses of 2.5 mg (1.15 ml of syrup)/day to children aged 2-5 years and of 5 ml (2.5 ml of syrup)/day to children aged 6-11. In addition to having an antidegranulation effect on mast cells, inhibiting even the activity of serotonin at the receptor level and, partially, of LTs with spasmogenic activity, oxatomide reduces the bronchoconstriction induced by methacholine and by physical exercise, as has been demonstrated by a DBPC study in asthmatic children [301] . The formulation in drops has allowed us to treat young children, always with effective results. Asthmatic children are strongly encouraged to participate in a sport. As a preventive measure, the family doctor should be consulted on the choice of the most appropriate activity. Though not everyone agrees [359] , swimming in a swimming pool is most certainly advisable because the effort is well balanced, warm and humid air is inhaled, it helps to develop respiratory functions and it tones up the body. It is useful to know in advance the percentage of Cl in the water, because high levels could be an irritant.We have seen how an airway cooling down linked to hyperpnea can provoke EIA. As previously suggested, a preventative measure for this form of asthma -a filtering mask -could protect bicycling or motorbiking asthmatics or those engaged in long-distance skiing in the winter, by covering the nose and mouth and thus avoiding the continued inhalation of asthmogenic cold and dry air [618] . It is possible that the increased prevalence of asthma in long-distance skiing [335] is dependent on the lack of attention given to preventive measures. The disease impact on the asthmatic's everyday life: information on asthma and on its treatment provided to the family (in the manner deemed most appropriate) enables children to better face their disease and follow their medical therapies with greater diligence; moreover, performing their breathing exercises more frequently to help them relax, leads to a possible reduction in the sometimes excessive use of their medications [272] . Greater education also improves the quality of life: by reducing problems such as cough, wheezing, trouble chology of asthmatic children and adolescents and will assist them in facing the disease and daily activities. In adolescents, psychological problems occur more frequently: the doctor should treat these special aspects of the disease, including the refusal to acknowledge symptom presence, widespread emotional problems including lack of cooperation, social aspects, excessive recourse to inhalers, smoking, etc. Even some aspects related to school can require the doctor's assistance. In schoolboys, schoolgirls, young adolescents, problems related to modifications of behavioral attitudes or learning disabilities caused by medication are often present. It is for this reason that doctors must educate both children and parents about exceptional cases of disturbances possibly occurring, and that such problems often last not less than 2 weeks [711] . To better illustrate the seriousness of the problems relating to pediatric asthma, the results of two studies done on 100 asthmatic children aged 9-13 years [657] , and in 4,161 adolescents (958 asthmatics and 3,203 nonasthmatics) and 1,104 of their teachers [213] (Table  11 .60 [213, 657] ) are reported. The trial showed that 42%-59% of the subjects believed that asthmatics can become addicted to their drugs, 70%-82% that there could be fewer problems if the drugs could be taken in class, 36%-45% that asthmatics are embarrassed about using their inhalers and 47%-56% that teachers are worried about taking asthmatics on school outings or to summer camps. Even if comprehension toward asthmatics was greater among students than among school teachers (p<0.0001), the teacher's positive participation in asthmatics' problems is significant [213] . The results of a subsequent trial on 381 students aged 8-18 years are more optimistic: the findings showed that there is only a 30% restriction on their participation in youth activities [41] . Nevertheless, it is difficult to quantify that many young children will not be able to fulfill their dreams, for example that of being able to run and play football like so many other children with no restrictions whatsoever. Table 11 .61 [284, 435] summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the main therapeutic methods outlined so far. We have gathered the relevant data in Table 5 .15, defining positive outcome in 41%-47% of cases. In the last few years, a high percentage of children (43%-76%) whose asthma persisted as they grew into adulthood has been noted. A large number of children or adolescents who remain asymptomatic can have relapses and/or anomalies in their PFT that do not return to normal, even after 3 years [219, 575] . It is important that these children are regularly examined by their pediatrician, enabling a timely identification of those subjects who are at risk of suffering from relapses on reaching adult-breathing, activity limitation, anxiety, loss of sleep or frequently interrupted sleep and worry over the physical symptoms of their disease and the possibility of future attacks, the array of stressors that a child has to face as a consequence of suffering chronic asthma [448] , the patient can be ensured a life that is as normal as possible, even regarding school, sports and above all social activities, etc. The overall situation can be made easier and improved if pediatricians act promptly and effectively not only during the critical attacks, but also in the intercritical times, via focused treatments aimed at preventing future attacks. We are referring to the serious problems faced by a child prone to EIA who will return to play and take part in sporting activities as a direct result of an adequate preventive therapy. A good pediatrician-patient relationship will undoubtedly be beneficial to the psy-847 Treatment  Days missed at school due 78 to asthma Asthma attacks at school 43 hood. On this matter, in the studies cited in Chap. 5, various parameters were predictive of asthma at an adult age. Up to the present time, no study has demonstrated that pharmacotherapy is able to modify the natural history of asthma, whereas SIT is able to do so. On the contrary, as has been noted, the discontinuation of a therapeutic cycle is followed by a reappearance of symptoms [671] , which also confirms our experience. The inflammatory process at the basis of asthma persists even after years of CS treatment, even if it can be reduced [652] . Nonetheless, it can resurface displaying all its functional characteristics [671] . As we have seen, there are various antiasthmatic treatments available for use at an infant age and we could additionally recommend ensuring a timely diagnosis and early adoption of preventive measures. In the long term, anti-inflammatory strategies could include nonactivation of T lymphocytes or of IL 4 , inhibition of the isotypic conversion after the second signal emitted by the cytokines, and direct elimination of B IgE cells through anti-IgE monoclonal antibodies [24, 301] . There are two treatments that cure asthma, in addition to SIT. In a randomized DBPC study, a cohort of 334 entrants aged 6-12 years with moderate or severe allergic asthma received a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody that binds to free IgE at the same site as the high-affinity (FceRI) receptor (omalizumab). A 28-week treatment reduced the requirement for ICS while protecting against disease exacerbation, while serum free IgE was reduced in 95%-99% of cases [405] . Children in the omalizumab-treated group reported significant improvements in the activities and symptoms domain scores as well as in the overall asthma-related quality of life compared with placebo [342] , but also formoterol [183] . In a pooled analysis of three multicenter, randomized DBPC studies, omalizumab reduced the rate of serious asthma exacerbations and the need for unscheduled outpatient visits, ED treatment, and hospitalization in children with moderate-to-severe allergic asthma [118] . Anti-LT could have a positive influence on ASA and/or block bronchoconstriction responses in BPT, leading to a decrease in CS use [329] . Figures 11.60 and 11 .61 sug-848 CHAPTER 11 Asthma Table 11 .61. Advantages and disadvantages of medications for treating pediatric asthma The most potent and rapid bronchodilator The regular use may mask the airway drugs available at the moment inflammation and disease progression The most potent anti-inflammatory drugs Oral: the side effects suggest their use as for treating both asthma and airway a maintenance therapy in the most severe hyperreactivity currently available, forms topical steroids offer the most secure Inhaled: unconfirmed growth hypothalamictherapeutic range pituitary-adrenal axis suppression. The best available drug to add an Narrow therapeutic range, variable clearance, extended bronchodilation and anti-requiring careful monitoring of theophylline inflammatory effects levels, unconfirmed negative effects on temper, learning, etc. Antihistamines See Table 11 .59 Continual anti-inflammatory therapy Anticholinergic Delivered by nebulizers may be added Modest bronchodilators less potent than to b-agonist therapy in acute conditions b-agonists Reduces symptom scores, airway hyper-Prophylactic, is less potent than corticoreactivity and necessity of other medications steroids, not effective in all children Reduces symptom scores, airway hyper-Prophylactic, is less potent than corticoreactivity and necessity of other medications steroids, not effective in all children Allergen-specific, may reduce None, major discomfort for children and eliminate symptoms and families Immunotherapy Definitive cure of asthma, abatement Poor compliance in small children, high cost, (Chap. 13) of symptoms, airway hyperreactivity children should be observed 30 min after and need of medications injection should be started early, well before that asthma aggravates with controls, and in younger children a significant increase in weight. A mean difference between study children and controls was evidenced by spirometric data. We conclude that in pediatric asthma management, chewable tablets of LT modifiers can be used as substitutes of long-acting b-agonists and ICSs, especially in young children who may have difficulty in using in-gest the use of anti-LT drugs, though they have yet to be thoroughly tested: zileuton, an inhibitor of LT synthesis and montelukast, pranlukast and zafirlukast, competitive LT receptor antagonists, as well as pobilukast, tomelukast and verlukast, though the last three are more properly inhibitors of the activation of cysteine-derivatives receptor (LTC 4 , LTD 4 and LTE 4 ). The spirometric data of children of 6-14 years with chronic asthma, who were treated with montelukast (oral monodose of 5 mg), demonstrated a net improvement [308] , added to BUD in 279 children aged 10.4 ±2.2 years, it induced a clinically relevant decrease in the number of asthma exacerbation days [591] .A DB, multicenter, multinational study at 93 centers on 689 children (aged 2-5 years) with persistent asthma given 12 weeks of treatment with 4 mg of oral montelukast has shown significant improvements compared with placebo in multiple parameters of asthma control, including daytime and overnight asthma symptoms, percentage of days with and without asthma symptoms, need for b-agonists or oral CSs, physicians' global evaluations, and peripheral blood eosinophils [309] . We have treated 40 children aged 3.1-5.1 years (mean, 3.7 years) with montelukast. Compared to 41 controls, there was a significant reduction in the mean incidence of day (74%) and night (69%) wheezing in addition to a significant amelioration in EIA compared Fig. 11 .67. Biochemical pathways of LT formation and action and sites of action of LT-modifying drugs. Enzymes are shown in blue, products in yellow, essential cofactor in green, and drugs in red. Although the synthesis of LTB4 and LTC4 proba-bly takes place in close proximity to the nuclear membrane, for clarity they are shown throughout the cytosol. LTB denotes the LTB receptor. An individual cell may produce the cysteinyl leukotrienes, LTB4, or in rare cases both halers. Montelukast was significantly effective when catsensitive children aged 6-14 years with mild persistent asthma were exposed to high levels of cat allergen [492] . Table 11 .62 reports the related doses, and Fig. 11 .67 shows the biochemical pathways of LT formation and action. It should be noted that in 32 children 6 to <24 years old the 4 mg dose was equally effective and free of untoward adverse effects [402] . Montelukast administration also reduced the increased Th2-like T cell IL mRNA expression in lung tissue and protein in BALF found in OVA-sensitized or challenged mice, and markedly reduced the increased lung mRNA expression of Th2-like T cell ILs [246] . In other animal studies, CD54 modulation during treatment with CSs could represent a new and more selective treatment for the control of the chronic airway inflammation and BHR that characterize asthma. The effect of CD54 could be associated with significant reductions of eosinophilia and consequently, of BHR [230] . Apart from other immune effects, CSs (Figs. 11.43, 11.44) inhibit IL action on eosinophils, and cetirizine and picumast inhibit their activation in vitro, even though not originally introduced for this purpose [528] . The initiative to positively alter the levels of PAF by means of SIT [265] or ketotifen [528] and, finally, that of blocking BHR by inhibiting iNOS by means of CSs [443] is a stimulating prospective. Of special interest would be a method that could monitor NO production in infants and young children, aiming at focusing on the role of the inflammation in early asthma and fostering a strategy for timely intervention [759] . The list of new compounds for the pharmacological control of asthma is long and, in addition to new applications of antihistamines, also include PDE IV inhibitors, anti-TXA 2 and anti-TXA 2 -synthetase, tachykinin antagonists, inhibitors of peptide releases from C-fibers, K + , Ca and Cl channels deactivators, M 3 -selective antagonists, inhibitors of IL 5 , CD antagonists of adhesion molecules, and inhaled NSAIDs [418] . Also foreseeable are antagonists of PAF, tryptase, quinines and of some chemokines, inhibitors of FLAP and of PLA 2 , antagonists of a-adrenergic receptors, modulators of transcription factors and new antimuscarinic drugs. Finally, the antagonists of tachykinin receptors could eliminate bronchial smooth muscle contractions [426] and cold-induced bronchoconstriction [744] . Most strikingly [243] , an anti-IL 17 mAb (monoclonal antibodies) treatment regimen has been shown to abate bronchial neutrophilia in parallel with reduction of bone marrow and blood neutrophilia. This treatment also raised eosinophil counts in the bone marrow and bronchial IL 5 production, without alteration of allergeninduced BHR. A crucial role may be played by TARC (thymus and activation-regulated chemokine) CCR4 receptor expressed by Th2 cells in bronchial airway epithelium. Asthmatic patients exposed to a relevant allergen release large amounts of TARC in their BALF; costimula-tion with IFN-g, but not with the duo IL 4 -IL 13 , stimulated human bronchial epithelial cells to further increase TARC mRNA and protein expression. TNF-a amplifies IFN-g ability to induce TARC 30-fold [38] . TARC concentrations are elevated in childhood asthma [345] , thus TARC up-regulated in bronchial epithelial cells may play a role in the pathogenesis of allergic asthma [38] . This marker is also linked to plasma total IgE levels and cat allergen sensitization [345] . As a consequence, CCR4 antagonists may have a substantial impact in treating allergic asthma. In another area of increasing interest, administration of a stable analog of lipoxin A4 (LXA4) blocked both BHR and pulmonary inflammation, as shown by decreased leukocytes and mediators, including IL 5 , IL 13 , eotaxin, prostanoids and cysteinyl LTs [349] . Moreover, blocking IL 13 [150] , receptors, or the downstream signaling pathway activated by their ligation, could provide one strategy to improve the specificity of asthma treatment [321] . In the animal model, TrkAd5 is able to modify the airway late hyper-responsiveness to histamine, brg sequestering endogenous NGF. Notably, the TrkAd5 administration causes the contractile response to histamine to be lower than control after ovalbumin challenge, thus showing potent effects in allergic asthma [686a]. These are pulmonary interstitial disorders having an immunological pathogenesis, caused by the inhalation of various antigenical agents active in subjects who are particularly vulnerable; such disorders are rare at the pediatric age. Also known as hypersensitivity pneumonitis, farmer lung disease (described by Ramazzini in 1713, Chap. 4), and pigeon breeder's, EAA can occur in children aged 3-15 years [111, 319, 395] . It is rare in infants [168] and >80 pediatric cases are known [111, 137, 168, 223, 248, 319, 389, 411, 748] . The pathogenesis is of sensitization to inhaled allergens, generally thermophilic actinomycetes or avian antigens [111, 319] . In addition to the classic cases of actinomycetes that contaminate fodder [111] or of other mycetes that pollute houses [319] , there is evidence of a growing number of cases related to contaminated heating and air-conditioning systems [132] and to birds in cages, pigeons, etc., in the barn, house, and the child's bedroom [248, 319] . The latter form is the most widely studied in children, with cases caused by free-roaming city pigeons [137] , a problem in most countries. There can be type III reactions with formation of antigen-antibody complexes at the alveolar level [411] , but by studying BALF a significant lymphocytosis may be unremarkable [248] . PFTs show a restrictive ventilatory defect with reduced lung volumes and compliance [111, 319] . SPTs positive to pet danders provide both immediate and delayed results [411] . Lymphocytosis is found in BALF (>50%), a net reduction of both CD4 and CD8 rates and of NK cells, with 87% sensitivity and 72% specificity [319] , or 85% of CD8 expressing the activation marker HLA-DR and 32% of CD4 + and 16% of CD56 + [389] . Follicle-like aggregates of B cells in the lung interstice may indicate that local antibody synthesis may be involved in an antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxic mechanism [389] . Differential diagnosis is illustrated in Table 11 .63 [319] and should be extended to children presenting with unusual respiratory symptoms and signs early [223] . Avoidance of triggering agents entails that clinical findings subside within a few days [425] . CSs are effective and resolutive, especially if accompanied by environmental clearance [75] , unless insufficient child compliance or a relapse due to a new exposure to specific allergens occurs [319] . Though rare in children, ABA is often found in adult studies reporting the onset of symptoms in childhood [75] . Often it is caused by airway colonization by the mold Aspergillus fumigatus (AF) (with 18 different allergens, Table 1 .74), which proliferates in soil in great numbers where it can be isolated (Fig. 1.77 ). In addition to being found in wheat fields and more generally wherever there is vegetation, it is also found in humid houses, trash cans, vegetable substances, rotting wood, freshly cut grass, old hay, fallen leaves, in bedding and during the acute period, with CD8 predominant intervention, has been demonstrated. These reactions could therefore assume a more significant pathogenetic role [319] . Pulmonary damage is the result of the immune response characterized both by antigen-specific antibodies and cellular hypersensitivity with IL releasing PBMCs. Complement activation in the airways and the irritating effect of thermophilic actinomycetes [95] should also not be overlooked. The insidious onset of acute forms, secondary to exposure to high concentrations of avian antigens, includes increasing lethargy, weight loss, a febrile bronchopneumopathy with a prevalence of respiratory symptoms such as breathlessness and cough, which can also be spasmodic, and effort-induced dyspnea appearing 4-8 h after exposure, with auscultatory findings of rales at pulmonary bases [111, 319] . Complications may occur in the form of sudden respiratory failure [111] . If exposure is prolonged or repeated, the process becomes chronic with aspecific insidious signs such as worsening of the overall general condition, effort-induced dyspnea and even at rest [411] , and marked weight loss [319] . More frequently, the picture is subacute with coexisting respiratory and systemic symptoms; among these a general feeling of ill health, anorexia, asthenia, etc. [111] . Diagnosis depends on history of exposure to birds, clinical findings, positive avian precipitins, restrictive defects on PFTs, and a suggestive chest X-ray appearance [223] , and in children exposed to birds or playing in barns with a history of breathlessness, or strolling amidst city pigeons [137] . X-ray results reveal a fine miliary pattern, diffused to both lungs with interstitial infiltration in the lower fields and hilar enlargement in acute forms, and diffused interstitial fibrosis with accentuation of the network in chronic forms (Fig. 11.68 ), but 851 Other Pediatric Allergic Lung Disease Fig. 11 .68. Chest radiograph of an 11-year-old boy with EAA (for details see text).After a short course of oral corticosteroids a complete resolution is seen with fading pulmonary parenchymal shadows in common household floor dust [95] . Since it is very small, with an average diameter of nearly 3 mm, inhaled spores can reach the peripheral airways where they can proliferate, aided by internal temperature [95] . In ABA other species of AF, Candida albicans, Mucor, Penicillium spp., Cladosporium herbarum, Helminthosporium spp., Stemphylium spp., Torulopsis spp., Curvularia lunata, Rhizopus spp., Drechslera spp., Pseudallescheria spp. [416] are likewise implicated. Mold growth is accompanied by an intense type I, III and IV immune response: antigen release with production of IgE and IgG antibodies. Activation of Th2 T cells orchestrating pulmonary inflammation has also been shown in ABA together with the expression of genes for several ILs present on the 5q chromosome [95] . They are restricted by HLA-DR2 and HLA-DR5 and produce high concentrations of IL 4 but few of IFN-g [99] . ABA is characterized by five stages: I acute, II remission, III recurrent exacerbation, IV progressively ingravescent and steroid-dependent, which, if not treated, evolves into stage V, with diffuse pulmonary fibrosis [75, 95] . Some 28 pediatric cases have been reported [75, 292, 369, 416, 425, 631, 693] , aged 0.11-18, including 3 girls aged 0.11-8 with cystic fibrosis [292, 369, 425] , two girls aged 6-7, with GER of asthmatic origin and multiple sensitizations to mycetes [75] and a 6-year-old boy with cladosporiosis [416] . The symptoms are an asthma-like syndrome with recurring afebrile bronchospastic episodes, coughing, dyspnea, wheezing, and pulmonary infiltration [95] . ABA diagnosis is made on the presence of classic hyphae in the sputum (Fig. 11.69 ) and on X-rays pulmonary parenchymal wedge-shaped shadows, typical of ABA can be observed depending on the phase of activity ( Fig. 11 .70a). In the pediatric age, a CAT scan is more appropriate, as it permits a more rapid diagnosis [580] . The presence of marked eosinophilia serves as a guideline. The presence of precipitant antibodies, findings of fungal hyphae in the sputum and fungal isolation in cultures [95] may have diagnostic value. SPTs reveal immediate and/or delayed reactions to the molds. For the diagnosis of the condition, high levels of total IgE (>1,000 ng/ml) [369] and IgE antibodies are relevant such as the significant association with sIgE and IgGs to AF [75] (Table 11 .64) [95] . Children with CF [292, 369] also have anti-AF sIgE [369] ; therefore, to obtain a higher specificity, it is safer to take sIgE for CD46 measurements using ELISA [355] , but a child with CF and acute symptomatic ABA with low serum IgE levels has been reported [369] . Steroid therapy for a few months causes remission (stage II), which continues after 10-15 months of followup [75, 416, 693] . Under steroid treatment, clinical findings improve, regression can be seen in the X-rays (Fig.   852 CHAPTER 11 Asthma 50 20 Precipitant antibodies to Af Not specific to ABA 60-90 25 35 Eosinophilia Absent if treated with steroids 100 40 20 High specific IgE/IgG to Af Essential and specific to diagnosis 100 <5 <5 Apart from pulmonary disease caused by mycetes, the secret of successful management in asthmatic children is to avoid prescribing only symptomatic therapies, but to try to find the casual factors first, specific to each child; therefore every form of treatment should be tailored to the individual child. The negative psychological factors to which we have already referred can trigger asthmatic symptoms, aggravate the attacks and negatively influence compliance with the therapeutic regimen. From our examination of doctor-patient relationships the importance of the pediatrician's role emerges. This doctor must not appear to be simply one who prescribes drugs or tests, but must also fulfill the role of being a friend full of enthusiasm, encouragement and understanding, both to young patients and their families. He must also instill a responsible attitude toward the disease and bring them to an understanding that asthma that is not treated effectively can, more often than not, result in the child or adolescent growing into an invalid adult. Especially in cases such as these, pediatricians should be particularly close to children and their family. Following an asthmatic child for a long time provides an opportunity for acquiring important information on the course of disease and the physical and mental repercussions asthma can have on those involved. Problems related to quality of life and limitations to leading a normal life, or playing and participating in sports are problems with which children must contend. Here we underline the different character of both asthmatic children and adolescents. The real difference is school absenteeism, chronic infirmity, the causes of delayed growth and the effects of HPA-axis depression, which should be considered carefully, especially if alternative treatments are available. The positive aspect, which we have always preferred, is that of giving value to the intercritical periods rather than to side effects, recommending the practice of sports, which can improve quality of life. On the other hand, self-treatment programs have yielded disappointing results, or are based on cycles of hospitalization and do not always achieve positive results. In other cases that we have regularly noted, treatment of children may involve their families in a better understanding of the clinical effects after giving an informative overall picture.  
