4269d2ec844ac77f329cfcecb1c4ff51916add6d

Donna  Stewart 

University Health Network 
Globally a woman's sense of psychological well-being is inextricably intertwined in the social-cultural fabric of her environment. Poverty, access to healthcare and education, domestic and sexual violence, stress related to multiple roles and gender discrimination are some of the major psycho social factors identified as having a significant impact on the mental health of women. This presentation will discuss the importance of the identification and modification of risk factors across the life span through research, policy and program development. Particular emphasis will be placed on the need for fostering social support networks for women within their cultural context, and the importance of listening to the stories women tell of their unique experiences and the individual meaning they give to their life stories. Strategies will be suggested for the creation of an advocacy agenda for women's mental health, beginning with a brief review of the recommendations from the UN Fourth World Conference on Women held in Beijing in 1995 and the follow-up review conducted at a UN Special Session ''Women 2000: Gender, equality, development and peace for the twenty-first century, Beijing þ5''. This presentation will also focus on the need for building grassroots coalitions of individuals, organizations and consumers in order to provide an effective voice for gender equality and the empowerment of women. Social, cultural and economic perspectives Abstract: Besides affecting the hypothalamus and other brain areas related to reproduction, ovarian steroids have widespread effects throughout the brain, on catecholaminergic neurons and serotonergic pathways and the basal forebrain cholinergic system, as well as the hippocampus and amygdala. Because of the widespread influences of these various neuronal systems, ovarian steroids have measurable effects on affective state as well as on cognition, with implications for dementia. One of the most interesting effects is the regulation of synapse turnover in the hippocampus of the female rat, mouse and rhesus monkey. In rat, where we know most about mechanism, the formation of new excitatory synapses is induced by estradiol (E) and involves NMDA receptors, and estrogen receptors (ER) whereas down-regulation of these synapses involves progesterone and intracellular progestin receptors. As far as the mechanism for synapse formation, besides NMDA receptor activation, inhibitory interneurons play a pivotal role as they express nuclear ER, and decreased GABAergic activity is believed to be involved. Considering the need for NMDA receptor activation, it appears likely that a more local regulation by E in the excitatory pyramidal neurons is also necessary. The rat hippocampus expresses both ER and ER. Although, at the light microscopic level, autoradiography shows nuclear 3H-and 125I-E uptake in a distribution that reflects the localization of ER-immunoreactive interneurons in the dorsal hippocampus, electron microscopic immunocytochemistry has revealed extranuclear ER immunoreactivity within select dendritic spines on hippocampal principal cells, axons, axon terminals and glial processes. These findings have led to studies of E regulation of signalling pathways involving PI3kinase and Akt phosphorylation, as well as CREB phosphorylation leading to transcriptional and translational events that increase production of key pre-and postsynaptic proteins. We have proposed a ''distributed model'' of E action including both genomic and non-genomic actions with inhibitory and excitatory neurons and include actions of estrogens pre-and post-synaptically as well as trans-synaptically. There is growing evidence that such E effects on synapses occur in other brain regions. Supported by NIH grants NS07080 and 5 P01 AG16765. Meir Steiner, McMaster University, St. Joseph's Healthcare, Hamilton, Ontario L8N 4A6, Canada, e-mail: mst@mcmaster.ca The differences in prevalence, course and response to treatment of major mood and anxiety disorders between men and women are believed to be affected by hormonal, reproductive and genetic factors. These differences are further highlighted by differential exposure=response to environmental influences and by physiological differences. The role and potential relevance of sex hormones to female specific psychiatric disorders is even more obvious. Levels of estrogen (E) and progesterone (P) vary significantly across the female lifespan. Behaviours such as moodiness, irritability and relationship conflicts around the time of puberty may in part reflect increased sensitivity of neurotransmitter systems to changes in sex hormone levels. The constant flux of E and P levels continues throughout the reproductive years. PMS=PMDD may be the result of an altered activity (or sensitivity) of certain neurotransmitter systems to hormonal fluctuations in genetically vulnerable women. Pregnancy and delivery also produce dramatic changes in E and P levels which help explain the increased vulnerability to perinatal depression, and finally at menopause the loss of modulating effects of E and P may underlie the development of perimenopausal mood disorders. Differences caused by genetic polymorphism, combined with the flux in the hormonal milieu, may determine how women react to environmental stress and predict the development of mood disorders. Impact of prenatal stress on human fetal development and implications for later health Pathik D. Wadhwa, University of California, Irvine College of Medicine, 3117 Gillespie Neuroscience Research Facility Irvine, CA 92697-4260, U.S.A., e-mail: pwadhwa@uci.edu Abstract: Behavioral perinatology is as an interdisciplinary area of research that involves conceptualization of theoretical models and conduct of empirical studies of the dynamic time-, place-, and context-dependent interplay between biological and behavioral processes in fetal, neonatal and infant life using an epigenetic framework of development. The biobehavioral processes of particular interest to our research group relate to the effects of maternal pre-and perinatal stress and maternal-placental-fetal stress physiology. We propose that behavioral perinatology research may have important implications for a better understanding of the processes that underlie or contribute to the risk of three sets of outcomes: prematurity, adverse neurodevelopment, and chronic degenerative diseases in adulthood. Based on an understanding of the ontogeny of human fetal development and the physiology of pregnancy and fetal development, we have articulated a neurobiological model of pre-and perinatal stress. Our model proposes that chronic maternal stress may exert a significant influence on fetal developmental outcomes. Maternal stress may act via one or more of three major physiological pathways: neuroendocrine; immune=inflammatory, and vascular. We further suggest that placental corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) may play a central role in coordinating the effects of endocrine, immune=inflammatory and vascular processes on fetal developmental outcomes. Finally, we hypothesize that the effects of maternal stress are modulated by the nature, duration and timing of occurrence of stress during gestation. The conceptual and empirical basis for this model, as well as some relevant issues and questions, including recommendations for future research in this area will be highlighted. Anita Riecher-Rössler, University Psychiatric Outpatient Department, Petersgraben 4, Basel 4031, Switzerland, Literature Reference: Riecher-Roessler, A. (2003) . Oestrogens and schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Psychiatry 16: 187-192. Objectives: Riecher-Roessler, A. (2003) . Oestrogens and schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Psychiatry 16: [187] [188] [189] [190] [191] [192] . Abstract: Purpose: The meaning of menopause and aging for women's mental health will be discussed. Methods: Some controversial topics will be highlighted. Results: The influence of menopause and aging on mental health is still controversially discussed -partly due to lack of sound knowledge, partly for ideological reasons. Many studies suffer from methodological limitations so far, and discussion often fails to clearly differentiate e.g. between perimenopause versus postmenopause, menopausal transition versus aging, mental disorder versus minor changes of wellbeing, incidence versus prevalence, changes as causal versus triggering factors, prophylaxis versus treatment. Not all, but certain vulnerable women may suffer from hormonal changes of perimenopause and=or from aging and=or the manifold psychosocial changes in this phase of life. Physiologic estrogen production is lost with menopause. As estrogens have important neuro-and psychoprotective activities, this loss can probably trigger or aggravate mental disorders in vulnerable women. Substitution might be helpful in some cases, but also bears risks. More research on indications and contraindications as well as on new, safer compounds is needed. Conclusions: Women in this phase of life have very specific diagnostic and therapeutic needs. Gender sensitive psychiatry has to take into account these needs -hormonal and biological as well as psychosocial ones. Ideology should be substituted by empirical evidence, which allows our female patients to make their own informed decisions. 1. recognize early signs of mothers at risk for infanticide 2. demonstrate a psychosocial paradigm for infanticide and neonaticide 3. demonstrate knowledge of infanticide legislation in US, UK and other countries. Abstract: Maternal infanticide, or the murder of a child in the first year of life by its mother, is a subject both compelling and repulsive. The killing of an innocent elicits sorrow, anger, and horror. Yet the perpetrator of this act is often a victim, too, and that recognition makes for a more paradoxical response. These contradictions represent the theme of this discussion. Neonaticide or infant murder on the day of birth is often preceded by denial of pregnancy. Well-documented clinical case reports of neonaticide describe a presentation of pregnancy denial, dissociative symptoms or psychosis. This paper will be a discussion of infanticide associated with mental illness. Case vignettes of women who killed infants will be presented. Early identification of women at risk and detection of infanticidal ideation will be a central focus. Legislation will be compared from US where women are charged with murder to the UK and most European states who provide more lenient legislation through infanticide laws. Using contemporary diagnostic criteria and the biopsychosocial model of psychiatry the author identifies risk factors and clinical presentations, which may provide mechanisms for treatment, rehabilitation and education. This paper suggests that common variables exist in a subset of these women. Similarities in history, presentation and circumstances of pregnancy and delivery suggest a pattern of shared psychopathology. The goal of this discussion is to encourage further systematic exploration and early identification of women at risk. The effects of hormones on mood and cognition during midlife and the perimenopause (overview) Literature Reference: Schmidt, P. J., Nieman, L., Danaceau, M. A., Tobin, M. B., Roca, C. A., Murphy, J. H., Rubinow, D. R. (2000) . Estrogen replacement in perimenopause-related depression: a preliminary report. Am. J. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to recognize the roles of the perimenopause in the development of depression and of estradiol therapy in perimenopause-related depression. Abstract: We have employed several strategies to investigate the effects of perimenopause-related alterations in reproductive function, hypogonadism, and hormone replacement on mood and behavior. Three groups of subjects have been studied: women with the onset of depression occurring during the natural perimenopause, asymptomatic premenopausal women followed prospectively with behavioral and reproductive measures until their final menses, and women with GnRH agonist-induced hypogonadism. A double blind, placebo-controlled trial of estradiol significantly improved measures of mood in depressed perimenopausal women. Therapeutic response to estradiol was not predicted by either baseline or post-treatment plasma levels of estradiol or the presence of hot flushes. Twenty-nine asymptomatic premenopausal women were followed for an average of five years until their final menses. Nine of the 12 episodes of depression that were observed occurred in the 24 months around the final menses suggesting that the late perimenopause is a period of increased risk for depression. In younger women, GnRH agonist-induced hypogonadism was associated with changes in libido but not mood or cognitive function. Our data suggest that gonadal steroids do not display uniform effects on mood but do positively modulate mood in the context of perimenopausal depression. Literature Reference: Bloch, M., Schmidt, P. J., Danaceau, M. A., Adams, L. F., Rubinow, D. R. (1999) . Dehydroepiandrosterone treatment of mid-life dysthymia. Biol Psychiatry 45: 1533-1541. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to understand the role of the adrenal androgen DHEA in the treatment of men and women with depression at midlife. Abstract: Midlife in both men and women is characterized by a steady decline in the production of the adrenal androgen dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) . A relationship between DHEA and depression has been suggested by reports of alterations in plasma DHEA levels in depression (both decreased and increased) and initial reports of antidepressant like effects of DHEA (either as monotherapy or combined with traditional antidepressant agents). In this randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover trial, we examined the therapeutic efficacy of DHEA as monotherapy in men (n ¼ 23) and women (n ¼ 23) aged 45 to 65 years with midlife-onset depression. Medications (DHEA and placebo) were administered for 6 weeks each with a 2 week washout prior to crossover. The dose of DHEA was 90 mg=day for the first three weeks and 450 mg=day during the second three weeks. Outcome measures consisted of the 17-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, the Center for Epidemiologic Studies depression scale, and Derogatis's Inventory of Sexual Functioning. Results were analyzed by ANOVA and Bonferroni t tests. We observed a significant improvement in depression severity (e.g., in both men and women on DHEA compared to both baseline (p < 0.01) and placebo conditions (p < 0.01). Additionally, DHEA administration was associated with a significant improvement in measures of sexual functioning (p < 0.01 and p < 0.05 compared to baseline and placebo, respectively). There was no difference in the response to DHEA between men and women in any outcome measure. DHEA administration increased plasma testosterone in women but not men. Predictors of the therapeutic response to DHEA remain to be determined. These data suggest that DHEA is an effective monotherapy antidepressant in men and women with midlife-onset depression. Additionally, although there is a sexual dimorphism in the profile of steroid hormone metabolites of DHEA, the antidepressant response does not differ across genders. Maternal stress and coping: from pregnancy to lactation Inga D. Neumann, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, 93053, Germany, Objectives: This pre-clinical symposium provides detailed results from laboratory studies on maternal stress adaptations in the peripartum period. The knowledge of these complex and reversible emotional and neuroendocrine alterations is important for the better understanding of mood changes occuring at this time in humans. Abstract: Pregnancy, parturition and lactation comprise a continuum of adaptive alterations necessary for the pre-and postnatal development of the offspring. Among such adaptations, a dramatic change in the general stress responsiveness of the maternal organism has been described which will be in the focus of the symposium entitled ''Maternal stress coping from pregnancy to lactation'' chaired by Inga D. Neumann. This symposium will cover maternal alterations of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis responsiveness in pregnancy and during parturition (Alison Douglas), as well as in lactation (Dominique Walker) which occur at different brain levels. Such adaptations include, for example, an attenuated responsiveness of the brain CRH system which results in lower HPA axis responses as shown in rats and mice. Also, in lactating women, reduced stress responses were described especially during breast-feeding (Markus Heinrichs). The attenuated stress responsiveness seen in pregnancy seems to be of particular relevance for the development of the fetuses, as exposure to prenatal stress by exposure of the mother to stressful events in pregnancy results in various maladaptations of the infants (Suzan King). Oliver Bosch will then summarize effects of chronic exposure to relevant stressors throughout pregnancy on maternal parameters post partum, which demonstrates that HPA axis downregulation might be effective to protect the maternal brain against dramatic fluctuations in circulating sex steroids which may otherwise result in emotional disturbances. Stress hyporesponsiveness during pregnancy and parturition: involvement of noradrenergic mechanisms in rodents in term pregnant rats via a noradrenergic pathway. Endocrinology 142 (2): 633-644. Objectives: The talk will reveal changes in neurotransmitter mechanisms in the brain and peripheral hormone secretion that contribute to reduced stress responses in pregnancy and parturition. These are part of a complex set of synergistic maternal adaptations in the peripartum period that optimise the mother-offspring interaction and maternal coping strategies. Abstract: Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis responses to stress are attenuated perinatally in mother rodents. We have investigated the central noradrenergic mechanisms underlying stress hyporesponsiveness in pregnancy and sympathetic activation in parturition. We have shown in pregnancy that a reduction in the noradrenergic input contributes to stress hyporesponsiveness: basal and stress-stimulated noradrenaline release within the paraventricular nucleus are less in pregnancy versus virgins, and antagonising central noradrenaline action inhibits stress responses in virgin but not pregnant rats. Stress responses to CCK, which increases ACTH secretion via noradrenergic pathways in virgins, are also attenuated in mid-late pregnancy. Additionally, a1-receptor mRNA expression in the paraventricular nucleus decreases perinatally. During parturition the HPA axis is not activated indicating that birth is not stressful; even exposure to stress during birth has no effect on the HPA axis. However, stress does delay birth in rodents, and evidently the sympathetic system is activated since peripheral administration of b-receptor antagonist restores the birth profile and giving a b-receptor agonist mimics the stress effects. Thus, decreased excitation and increased inhibition by noradrenaline in the stress axis contributes to perinatal stress hyporesponsiveness, but peripheral sympathetic responses to stress are retained and mediate delay in birth. Support: Wellcome Trust, BBSRC, DAAD=British Council. Effects of repeated pregnancy stress on behavioural and neuroendocrine changes post partum Oliver J. Bosch, Institute of Zoology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, 93040, Germany, e-mail: oliver.bosch@biologie.uni-regensburg.de Abstract: Chronic stress during pregnancy has frequently been used as a model for prenatal stress in the offspring, whereas effects on the maternal organism have rarely been monitored. But especially the peripartum period is a time of high risk for the development of psychopathologies in women with elevated vulnerability to depression disorders. Here, we stressed pregnant animals from two Wistar rat lines bred for high (HAB) or low (LAB) anxiety-related behaviour between pregnancy days 4 to 18 by defeating them as an intruder in the maternal defence test, a psychosocial stressor. After parturition, patterns of maternal behaviour including the retrieval of pups was different between lactating HAB and LAB rats (p < 0.01), but independent of prior pregnancy-stress. The maternal aggressive behaviour against a virgin intruder rat was significantly increased in pregnancy-stressed LAB dams compared to controls (p < 0.01), but unchanged in lactating HABs. In tests for anxiety-related behaviour and active vs. passive stress coping, line-specific differences could be seen without a significant influence of stress exposure in the pregnancy. When exposed to a mild stressor on lactation day 8 ACTH and corticosterone plasma levels increased significantly in pregnancy-stressed, but not in control HAB rats (p < 0.01); no change was seen in either pregnancy-stressed or control LAB rats. In summary, chronic exposure to a psycho-social stress in pregnancy significantly alters neuroendocrine stress responses in rats with a high inborn level of anxiety, whereas behavioural patterns are rather robust. Psychobiology of stress coping in women: role of oxytocin Markus Heinrichs, Beate Ditzen, Inga Neumann, Ulrike Ehlert Dept. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, University of Zurich, Zurich Switzerland, Literature References: Heinrichs, M., Baumgartner, T., Kirschbaum, C., Ehlert, U. (2003) . Social support and oxytocin interact to suppress cortisol and subjective responses to psychosocial stress. Biological Psychiatry (in press). Heinrichs, M., Neumann, I., Ehlert, U. (2002) . Lactation and stress: Protective effects of breast-feeding in humans. Objectives: This presentation gives an overview over the advantages of breast-feeding for the mother. A new pharmacological target for oxytocin aside from parturition and lactation will be presented. Abstract: Aside from the peripheral role of oxytocin in parturition and lactation, recent studies suggest that the neuropeptide is implicated in the central nervous control of prosocial behavior and stress coping. In animal research, oxytocin has been stimulated by exogenous (e.g., intracerebroventricular injection) and endogenous (e.g., lactation) methods. Intracerebral oxytocin has been shown to inhibit stress-responsive neurohormonal systems and to function as a regulator in social attachment. Similar to studies in animals, we determined the effects of endogenous stimulation (lactation, massage) and exogenous stimulation (intranasal administration) in humans. In lactating women, a suppression of cortisol stress responses (p < 0.001) was observed if breast-feeding starts 30 min before psychosocial stress exposure (Heinrichs et al., 2002) . Standardized massage by the partner 30 min before stress also reduced cortisol stress responses in women (p < 0.05). The combination of intranasal oxytocin (24 I.U.) and social support exhibited the lowest cortisol stress responses (p < 0.01) as well as increased calmness (p < 0.05) and decreased anxiety (p ¼ 0.052) (Heinrichs et al., 2003) . These results concur with data from animal research suggesting an important role of oxytocin as an underlying mechanism for stress protective effects of breastfeeding and positive social interaction. suggesting that fear could participate in ''gating'' the stress responses. In humans, hyporesponsiveness of breastfeeding (BF) mothers compared to bottlefeeders (BO) was found with a physical, but not a psychological stressor, although the role of infant-related emotional stimuli on the magnitude of the stress response remains unknown. Another important aspect of the HPA response is the ability to habituate to repeated stressors although no study has investigated parity effects on the stress axis. We tested whether stimulus salience and parity could modify the HPA response of post-partum (PP) mothers to psychological stressors. We measured basal diurnal and reactive salivary cortisol levels to two psychological stressors with (viewing of validated videos) or without (TSST) child-related content in BF and BO primiparous and multiparous mothers during the 6-18 weeks postpartum. Trait anxiety, sleep disturbances and salivary estradiol levels were covariates in the data analysis. We compared responses of PP mothers to nonpostpartum (NPP) mothers of older children (1-6 yrs of age). Despite significant perturbations in sleep pattern, basal diurnal cortisol rhythm of PP women remained similar to that of NPP mothers, except for blunting of the morning awakening peak. When presented with the TSST, primiparous PP mothers exhibited significant cortisol responses, comparable to NPP mothers. Multiparous BF, but not BO mothers showed blunted responses. Although NPP mothers had significant increases in salivary cortisol to the viewing of an emotional video, none of the post-partum groups, except the mutiparous BO mothers showed a cortisol response to this stressor. Our results suggest that the stress hyporesponsiveness of post-partum mothers is stressor-specific and influenced by parity. Unlike the rat model, human hyporesponsiveness to stress may be independent of the suckling stimulus in primiparous mothers, but the ''protective'' effect of suckling might be revealed in multiparous mothers. Supported by CIHR (Canada) and FRSQ (Quebec). Elias Ericksson, Dept. of Pharmacology, Goteborg University, Goteborg, SE 405 30, Sweden, e-mail: elias.eriksson@pharm.gu.se Literature Reference: Eriksson, E., Andersch, B., Ho, H. P., Landen, M., Sundblad, C. (2002) . Diagnosis and treatment of premenstrual dysphoria. J Clin Psychiatry 63 (Suppl 7): [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] Objectives: After this presentation, the participant should be aware: a) of the most characteristic clinical features of premenstrual dysphoria, b) of current theories regarding the biological mechanisms underlying this condition, and c) of the literature supporting the efficacy and short onset of action of serotonin reuptake inhibitors when used for PMDD. Abstract: Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) afflicts 5-10% of all women of fertile age and leads to a marked reduction in life quality, and to an enhanced risk of suicide. Cardinal symptoms are irritability, de-pressed mood, tension, and affect lability; of these, irritability is usually the most prominent one. The importance of sex steroids in triggering the symptoms is underlined by the findings that they can be reduced by ovulation inhibitors and reinstated by administration of estrogen þ gestagens. A large number of controlled trials support the notion that serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs) are very effective for the treatment of PMDD; in contrast, non-serotonergic antidepressants are not. The onset of action of SRIs is much shorter when used for PMDD than when used for depression, enabling women with PMDD to restrict the medication to the luteal phase. New data showing the onset of action of an SRI to be less than 24 h will be presented, as well as recent results from studies on the possible association between PMDD and serotonin-or sex steroid-related genes. Premenstrual dysphoric disorder from genetics to daily practice Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation the participants should be able to understand the burden of PMDD on a brazilien sample, the treatment response and correlation with serotonergic polomorphisms. Abstract: 2% a 9% of women are affected by severe symptoms during luteal fase, with impact on their social, occupational and relational lifes similar to depression. Serotonergic abnormalities are described from literature, and genetic factors have been associated with this disorder as treatment withdrawal return symptoms. Objectives: Associate serotonergic polimorphism to clinical characteristics of PMDD patients. 135 patients prospectively diagnosed, and tested with group therapy for 8 ¼ 12 sessions and then treated with serotonergic agents. The improve with cognitive technics is very significant and similar to pharmacological treatment. Polimorphism of TPH and 5HT Transporter were found. Menopausal transition and mood disorders: who is at risk? Objectives: 1. Understand the mechanisms by which some women may have their mood affected by reproductive hormones while approaching the menopause. 2. Learn the extent to which women who suffer from depressive disorders and menopause-related symptoms could benefit from hormonal and nonhormonal interventions. Abstract: Only in the United States, more than 1,300,000 women are expected to transition to menopause every year. The search for a ''perimenopausal depressive syndrome'', however, has led to inconclusive findings. While some studies suggested that the menopausal transition might constitute a period of heightened vulnerability to depressive symptoms (and consequently cause psychosocial impairment) among sub-groups of women, others have failed to demonstrate such increased risk for depression. Most studies examining this question vary greatly in design. For example, data used to address this putative association derived from a variety of settings (gynecologic clinics, specialized 'menopause clinics'. In addition, there is a lack of consistency in the definition used for menopausal status, as well as the absence of more systematic assessment of psychiatric symptoms or disorders, or more rigorous criteria to define depressive disorders. This presentation will review recent data derived from The Harvard Study of Moods and Cycles, a population-based prospective study of women with and without a lifetime history of major depression. This study is unique from other population-based studies because of the rigorous systematic assessment of psychiatric morbidity and menstrual cycle changes over time. consequent formation of a corpus luteum. Several neurotransmitter receptor families have been examined as potential regulators of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. These putative causative agents include GABA receptors, serotonin (5HT) receptors and noradrenaline receptors. Altered GABAA receptor function has been demonstrated in clinical studies of PMDD. By use of proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy it was recently established that the GABAergic system is substantially modulated in PMDD patients, particularly during the follicular phase. Another way of estimating the functional GABAA receptor sensitivity is by measuring specific behavioral responses to drugs that act at the GABAA receptor. The saccadic eye velocity (SEV) is one such measure, since the SEV reliably decreases in response benzodiazepines, operating via the GABAA receptor. In this pharmacodynamic model patients with PMDD have a reduced sensitivity to benzodiazepines. This subsensitivity to benzodiazepines was further accentuated in patients with severe premenstrual symptoms compared to those with moderate symptoms. Also, consistent with the subsensitivity to benzodiazepines in PMDD patients, is the finding of greater panic response to the benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil during the luteal phase among PMDD patients. Objectives: The overall objectives of this interdisciplinary symposium are to describe the mechanisms for sexual differentiation of the brain and discuss how this impacts behavior, using examples from sexual behavior, addiction, cognition, and depression. At the conclusion of this symposium participants should be knowledgeable about sex differences in brain physiology and the behavioral and clinical implications of these differences. Abstract: In April 2001 the Institute of Medicine issued the report Exploring the Biological Basis of Human Health: Does Sex Matter? which examined the evidence that biological sex is a crucial variable in biomedical research. The findings of the report are best summarized by committee chair Dr. Mary Lou Pardue, who noted that ''[s]ex matters. It matters in ways we did not expect. Undoubtedly, it matters in ways that we have not yet begun to imagine.'' Sex differences in the nervous system are pervasive and complex. Sexual differentiation of the brain results from influences of gonadal hormones during development as well as the direct action of sex chromosome gene products. Consequentially, the way that males and females perceive and respond to their environment is sexually dimorphic. Jill B. Becker, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, U.S.A., e-mail: jbbecker@UMICH.EDU Abstract: Women begin using cocaine and enter treatment at earlier ages than men and have more severe cocaine use at intake than men. While there are still more men than women who are cocaine addicts, the percentage of women is increasing, and women may be more sensitive to the addictive properties of cocaine than men. This may be due, at least in part, to underlying neurobiological sex differences. Results of studies in laboratory animals find that the acute behavioral response to the psychomotor stimulants (cocaine and amphetamine) reflects both sex differences and is modulated differentially by gonadal hormones in male and female rodents. We find that in the adult rat there are sex differences in the rate of behavioral sensitization to cocaine and in the acquisition of cocaine selfadministration behavior. These sex differences occur independent of circulating gonadal hormones: ovariectomized females exhibit greater sensitization and more rapid onset of cocaine self-administration than do castrated males. Furthermore, estradiol treatment to ovariectomized females, but not to castrated male rats enhances both sensitization and acquisition of cocaine self-administration. There sex differences in the effects of cocaine are thought to be due to hormonal modulation of the ascending dopamine pathways, where estradiol rapidly enhances presynaptic dopamine release in the striatum and nucleus accumbens. We postulate that hormonal modulation of this pathway evolved because of its role in the motivation to engage in sexual behavior, since extracellular dopamine increases during sexual behavior in the female rat. The mechanism by which estradiol exert its effects on the behavioral and neurochemical responses to the psychomotor stimulants is novel. Estradiol appears to be acting on a membraneassociated receptor to rapidly down-regulate presynaptic inhibition of dopamine release. Arthur Arnold, Department of Physiological Science, University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1606, U.S.A., e-mail: Arnold@ucla.edu Literature Reference: Carruth, L. L., Reisert, I., Arnold, A. P. (2002) . Sex chromosome genes directly affect brain sexual differentiation. Nature Neuroscience 5: 933-934. Objectives: Participants should understand methods to distinguish effects of gonadal steroids from effects of the genetic sex of brain cells. Abstract: Although most sex differences in the structure and function of the brain are attributed to effects of gonadal steroids, the genetic sex of brain cells also plays a role. We analyzed mice in which cellular genetic sex is independent of the animal's gonadal sex. In primary cell cultures of embryonic mesencephalon, XY cultures develop more dopamine neurons than XX cultures irrespective of the gonadal sex of the embryo, showing that XX and XY cells have a different phenotype in identical hormonal environments. In adult mice, the density of vasopressin fibers in the lateral septum is greater in XY than XX animals of the same gonadal sex, suggesting a direct action of X or Y genes. In zebra finches, genetic females induced to develop testes have a feminine brain. We analyzed the brain of a gynandromorphic zebra finch (genetically male on the right side of its body and genetically female on the left side of its body). The right brain was more masculine than the left, a difference not caused by gonadal secretions. Male and female brains therefore may function differently because of the sex differences in expression in brain of genes encoded on the X and Y chromosomes. Jeffrey D. Blaustein, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003-9271, U.S.A., e-mail: blaustein@cns.umass.edu Literature References: Mani, S. K., Blaustein, J. D., O'Malley, B. W. (1997) . Progesterone receptor function from a behavioral perspective. Hormones and Behavior 31: 244-255. Objectives: The participants should be familiar with a model to study the integration of hormones and environmental stimuli by steroid hormones, and subsequent effects on sexually dimorphic brain functions. Abstract: In our sex-based biological research, we study the cellular processes by which estradiol and progesterone regulate the sexually dimorphic expression of feminine sexual behavior in rats and mice. This regulation requires the actions of estradiol and progesterone on intracellular estrogen and progestin receptors acting as transcriptional regulators in neurons within the hypothalamus and related areas. However, in addition to hormones regulating sexual behavior, mating stimulation by male rats influences the subsequent behavioral response of female rats, and it modulates genomic response in populations of neurons. Like the effects of progesterone, the effects of mating stimulation on the sexually dimorphic neural substrate for feminine sexual behavior are mediated by activation of neuronal progestin receptors. In contrast, though, activation by mating stimulation is indirect and occurs in the absence of progesterone. Because activation of D1dopamine receptors also facilitates the expression of feminine sexual behavior by ligand-independent activation of neuronal progestin receptors, we suggest that social=genital stimulation modulates behavior, in part, by dopamine-mediated, hormone-independent activation of progestin receptors in populations of neurons involved in the regulation of sexual behavior. This neuroendocrine model provides a means to study the integration of hormones and sensory=social=environmental stimuli by steroid hormone receptors in populations of neurons and subsequent effects on sexually dimorphic brain functions. Midgley, A. R., Carlson, N. E., Brown, M. B. (2000) . Alteration in the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Ovarian axis in depressed women. Archives of General Psychiatry 57: 1157-1162. Objectives: Participants should be able to describe the influence of ovarian steroids on responsiveness to stress mediate by the HPA axis. Abstract: Depression is twice as common in women and a number of theories have been proposed for this increased vulnerability. Stress is a critical trigger for the onset of depression, so stress systems have been a focus of research. Our studies have focused upon HPA axis regulation in depression and differences in stress responsiveness and glucocorticoid negative feedback between men and women. Sex differences in stress response have been shown for a number of species including rats and human. Basic science studies examining the direct effects of gonadal steroids on HPA axis function have suggested that estrogen increases stress responsiveness and inhibits glucocorticoid negative feedback, as well as decreasing the number of Type I glucocorticoid receptors. In normal women, we noted resistance to the suppressive effects of infused cortisol, when cortisol was administered during the luteal phase, but normal suppression to cortisol during the follicular phase, when progesterone levels were low. Similar data have beeen seen with dexamethasone suppression. Our data and those of others suggest an influence of ovarian steroids on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal that results in both greater stress responsiveness and resistance to the inhibitory effects of glucocorticoids both of which may contribute to depression. Objectives: Participants will have a better understanding of the interaction of psychosocial work conditions, conflicting role demands and mental health outcomes for women. They will be able to recognize symptoms related to different psychosocial factors and stressors in the workplace. Sex differences in stress responses, symptoms and coping strategies will be demonstrated. Abstract: Psychosocial work conditions and gender roles influence women's mental health. A Swedish study showed that women had greater total workload, devoted more time to household work and children and perceived greater stress from paid work than men. Prevalence and intensity of symptoms was higher in women than in men. The stress experienced by women was influenced by an interaction between psychosocial work conditions and household duties, whereas men responded more selectively to work conditions. A Canadian study examined the psychological stress that the SARS epidemic had on physicians. All physicians experienced stress and their patient care, teaching and research activities were disrupted. The female physicians expressed more concern about infecting family members whereas male physicians were more worried about impact on their income and career. The emotional wellbeing of informally employed women in Lima was studied. They experienced more psychological distress and had a lower self-esteem than those formally employed. Increased autonomy in the workplace may improve health. A national US study found that time-flexible work policies reduced stress among women and men. Overall, the effect of specific stressors in the workplace, gender role and form of employment are important variables affecting women's mental health and wellbeing. How time-flexible work policies can reduce stress, improve health, and save money Diane F. Halpern, Berger Institute for Work, Family, and Children, Claremont McKenna College, Claremont, CA 91711, U.S.A., e-mail: Diane. Halpern@claremontmckenna.edu Literature References: Kristensen, T. S. (1996) . Job stress and cardiovascular disease: a theoretic critical review. J Occup Health Psychol 1 (3): 246-260. Teuchmann, K., Totterdell, P., Parker, S. K. (1999) . Rushed, unhappy, and drained: an experience sampling study of relations between time pressure, perceived control, mood, and emotional exhaustion in a group of accountants. J Occup Health Objectives: The paper provides a model of the way in which time flexible work policies can improve health. Participants will be able to advocate for these policies based on empiricial studies. Abstract: Women are participating in the work force at rates that are close to that of men, yet women assume the primary care responsibilities for children and older family members at rates that dwarf the comparable figures for men. Thus, although men have family and home responsibilities outside of work, women spend significantly more time working at home than men do, even when men and women work a comparable number of hours at their paid employment. Thus, I hypothesized that women would derive greater health benefits than men from flexible work arrangements that would allow them to control their time commitments. Data from the National Study of the Changing Workforce (1997) were used to test the hypothesis that employees who needed time-flexible work policies and who had these policies available, reported less stress, higher levels of commitment to their employer, and reduced costs to the organization because of fewer absences and fewer missed deadlines. The model provides persuasive findings for the hypothesized relationship for time-flexible work policies, but the model did not differ for women or men. This study offers important suggestions to employers who can translate reduced illness into savings on health benefits, fewer absences and late days into higher productivity, and increased commitment into better employees for both women and men. By showing that timeflexible work policies provide employer benefits, we can hasten the change to a new worker model -one that is family and employer friendly. The business case for family-friendly work policies may prove to be the best tool we have in changing how we live and work. Total workload, work stress and symptom perception in Swedish male and female white collar workers Mårdberg, B., Lundberg, U., Frankenhaeuser, M. (1991) . The total workload of parents employed in the white collar jobs: construction of a questionnaire and a scoring system. Scand J Psychol 32: 233-239. Objectives: The differences in total workload, responsibilities for household tasks and childcare and the resulting symptom perception will be demonstrated for male and female white collar workers, aged 32-58, working full time in a Swedish setting. Abstract: Purpose: To analyse how the distribution of responsibility for paid and unpaid household tasks and childcare and subjective ratings of perceived total workload contribute to symptom perception in Swedish male and female white collar workers. Methods: In 2001, 743 women and 595 men, (response rate 65%), responded to a questionnaire containing items on perceived health, total workload and subjective indices on work stress. Gender differences were tested by analyses of variance. Odds ratios were used to estimate the bivariate associations between work related variables and symptom prevalence. Multivariate analysis was used for paid and unpaid work interaction and workchildcare interplay. Results: Women had a greater total workload, devoted more time to household work and childcare and perceived more stress from paid work. Prevalence and frequency of symptoms was higher in women than in men (p < 0.0001). Childcare (<21 h=w) seemed to have a buffering effect on the risk of symptom perception in men working long hours, (OR 1.46; . Conclusion: Traditional male and female gender roles still exert a strong influence on the division of labour in the family. Working life and private circumstances need to be taken into account to curb stress related ill health in both men and women. Literature Reference: International Labor Organization. (2003) . Time for Equality at Work, Report of the 91 Session, ILO, Geneva, 39-72. Objectives: Recognize the impact that the lack of social protection has on the stress level and the self esteem of women working in the informal sector. Abstract: Most women work in the informal sector which comprises from the clandestine production of legal goods and services to officially sanctioned microenterprises in all sorts of industries. Contrary to expectations, formal economic activity does not in due time replace informal work. On the contrary, larger numbers of women are absorbed into it each year and it is the primary job generator in Latin America. Informal workers do not have access to state funded health care services, pension plans or other forms of social protection. Semi-structured interviews with 200 female informal workers and 200 formally employed women in Lima show informal workers have lower levels of self esteem and less positive perception of their health, they have higher levels of distress (as measured by the Personal Health Scale) and higher levels of depression (Beck Depression Inventory). They have more physical and psychiatric complaints for which they have not received any health care. The conclusion is that belonging to the informal sector constitutes an additional source of stress for women which should be taken into account by legislators and health care providers. Objectives: Paricipants should be able to: 1. recognize infanticide practices such as gender selection 2. demonstrate knowledge of infanticide laws in most countries 3. identify mental illnesses associated with infanticide 4. recognize the need for policy changes in countries that discriminate against girls on cultural and political grounds 5. recognize the need for international guidelines on puerperal psychiatric disorders. Abstract: The worldwide experience of infanticide speaks to unjust discrimination against women and children. It reaches from facilitation of gender selection in some countries to lethal execution of mothers as perpetrators. Today, the very same society that practices gender selection may also prosecute a mother for killing an infant. While infanticide laws make it a less severe crime mandating probation and treatment in most western countries, the Victorian Law Reform Commission lobbies for abolition. In the US, a psychotic Andrea Yates drowned her five children in the bathtub of her Houston, Texas home (June 2001) and received a sentence of life in prison. We explore the medical, legal, political and culture specific attitudes towards infanticide. Mr. George Parnum, defense attorney for Andrea Yates will discuss the US laws and the infanticide trial. Dr. Wisner will discuss the need for formal international diagnostic standards for postpartum psychiatric disorders. Dr. Spinelli will discuss the worldwide social and cultural policies of gender selection and infanticide such as poverty, dowry and labor potential. We emphasize the universal obligation of worldwide research and policy for prevention of infanticide. Infanticide: a subject of discrimination Objectives: Identify the need for women to be proactive in legislation. This extends from US who executes mentally ill women who kill their babies to China and India where sex selection continues because of poverty and dowry. Abstract: Purpose: Introduction of the subject of infanticide is met with complex reactions. Paradoxically, the very same society that practices gender selection may also prosecute a mother for killing an infant. Methods: Worldwide estimates of infanticide are grossly underreported. Infant death statistics are likewise underestimated. This work presents contemporary worldwide experiences of infanticide and explores culture specific attitudes towards this tragic cause of infant mortality. Results: The worldwide experience of infant murder reaches from facilitation of gender selection to lethal execution of mothers as perpetrators. Little information exists on the causes, prevention and phenomenology of childbirth associated disorders. Furthermore, poverty, dowry and labor potential continue to encourage sex determination in contemporary societies. The impetus for worldwide research and policy for prevention of infanticide remains a universal obligation. Conclusion: The overall association of infanticide with crime, postpartum illness, population and sex selection speaks to unjust discrimination against women and children. Results: The biological vulnerability associated with childbirth is the basis for infanticide legislation in most countries where infanticide laws provide for more lenient treatment of women accused of infanticide. A further purpose of this presentation is to provide a comprehensive understanding of childbirth-associated psychiatric illness as it relates to infanticide. Differential diagnosis, etiology, phenomenology, evaluation and state-of-the-art treatment will be discussed. Emphasis is placed on identifying mothers at risk for infanticide and for preventing recurrence of postpartum disorders in mothers at risk. A sensitive and thorough inquiry into infanticidal ideation will be illustrated so that mothers at risk can be identified in time for treatment and intervention. Recent data underlying physiological mechanisms and neuroendocrine events as etiological triggers will be presented. Clinical descriptions of obsessional infanticidal ideation vs. psychotic infanticidal ideation will be illuminated. Conclusion: The unique clinical phenomenology of postpartum psychosis will be a focal point of this talk emphasizing the need for a formal diagnostic place in the ICD and DSM. Strategies for research development will be emphasized. Clinical case vignettes of women who have been at acute risk of infanticide will be presented. 1. demonstrate knowledge of infanticide legislation in UK, US and other countries 2. recognize the necessity to educate legislators in all countries about mental illness in postpartum women 3. understand the concerns for other countries with infanticide legislation in view of abolitionists such as Victorian Law reform. Abstract: Mr. George Parnham who represented Andrea Yates in her infan-ticide=filicide trial in the US presents his participation in the case of Texas v. Andrea Yates through use of videotape presentation. This presentation will discuss contemporary American legislation and the insanity defense which essentially ignores the psychiatric vulnerability of postpartum women. US laws will be contrasted with infanticide legislation of the UK and other European countries. Furthermore the threat of abolition of infanticide legislation in the UK by the Victorian Law Reform groups will also be discussed. In addition, there will be a discussion of the American criminal and civil courts'; discrepant treatment of postpartum psychiatric disorders-contrast the admissibility of postpartum syndromes on women's behalf in the civil courts (as in child custody suits) versus their inadmissibility in criminal cases. The final goal will be to provide a mechanism for psychiatry to share our knowledge with the judicial system and vice versa, to discuss the importance of accepted knowledge in the psychiatric community as a scientific standard in the courtroom, propose a standard for the insanity defense in the United States and discuss the utilization of 1853 M'Naghton law in 21st century neuroscience and potential for change. Psychiatrists can learn what lawyers need to know in order to prosecute and defend these cases. Finally, attorneyclient 'countertransference'; with infanticidal mothers will be presented. How to prevent neonaticide and abandonment in a public place? Objectives: As neglect in pregnancy is mostly neglected, it is important that healthcare providers in Maternity Unit and planning centre should be trained to detect neglect and denial pregnancies. Then they may guide women towards a psychological support in order to prevent infanticide. Abstract: Purpose: Welcome any woman who neglects her pregnancy, can prevent from neonaticide as abandonment in a public place. Methods: To compare the follow up of 13 women who were welcome before birth and the one of 5 women who committed infanticide or were victims of violence just after birth with brief psychotherapy in a centre in Paris. Results: 1. Brief psychotherapy to women who deny their pregnancy. Among the women who deny their pregnancy some expresses violent fantasies against the fetus. They are afraid of their fantasies because they don't know how to content them. They might beat the foetus during the pregnancy as the fetus reacts their past traumatic sexual abuse: forced sex in teenagers, forced marriage, gang rape, domestic violence, war rape, prison rape for politic reasons, trafficking. 2. Support their decision-making for the future of newborn. If they are forced by some one to become a mother, it can be very dangerous for the baby. They may become violent towards the baby. 3. Anticipate the delivery time. Some of them are unable to content their violence fantasies and their act. The murder act is quicker that their fantasies. The prevention is to not let them alone when they deliver. 4. Offer the choice to have anonymus welcome. Prenatal and postnatal anonymity can prevent from infanticide. Conclusion: Follow up before birth reduces neonaticide and abandonment on a public place at birth. Objectives: Recognize the affect of gender based discrimination in the identification of health and mental health problems and the impact on the access to and utilization of health care services. Understand the affect of poverty of the health and well-being of women and their families; identify programs and resources to increase economic security and promote mental health of women and girls. Abstract: Women and their families are underinsured, uninsured, or have little to no access to formal health care due to socio-economics, lack of policy, geography, and general health care disparities. Although women in the more prosperous western nations fare better in life circumstances than women in many of the less wealthy nations of the world, economic, political, social, and cultural forces in all societies operate to the disadvantage of women and girls. These disadvantages affect education; health care, including reproductive and mental health; crime, especially as victims of violence; employment; and social welfare, especially income maintenance programs. These disadvantages affect the well-being of women and their families at all stage of the life cycle, from girlhood to old age. Additionally, complex psychosocial and cultural issues continue to find women and girls increasingly at risk for HIV=AIDS and other STIs, for example. Providing culturally competent care is critical to effective health and mental health services, and requires both appropriate and acceptable clinical assessment interventions for the consumer. depression in pregnancy and the postpartum. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 57: 269-274. O'Hara, M. W., Swain, A. M. (1996) . Rates and risk of postpartum depression -a meta-analysis. International Review of Psychiatry 8: 37-54. Objectives: At the conclusion of the presentation participants will be aware of the current science in the following areas of perinatal depression: 1) The incidence of depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period. 2) The accuracy of different screening tools. 3) The outcomes from and barriers to screening. Abstract: Purpose: Recognizing the need to highlight unappreciated complications related to pregnancy, nine federal agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) have joined forces to obtain a systematic review and analysis of evidence related to perinatal depression. The systematic review, conducted by RTI International addressed the following questions: 1. What is the natural history of d perinatal depression? 2. What is the incidence of depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period? 3. What factors increase the risk for developing perinatal depression? 4. What interventions are effective for women with depression during preg-nancy=postpartum period? 5. What is the accuracy of different screening tools? 6. What are the outcomes from and barriers to screening during pregnancy? Methods: RTI International completed the following: 1. Conducted a preliminary literature search and abstraction searching MEDLINE and other data bases. 2. Reviewed abstracts against predetermined inclusion=exclusion criteria. 3 . Assessed the quality of each eligible study and rated the strength of the overall body of evidence. The results of the review will be summarized and an overview of what is known about depression during and after pregnancy as well as what research questions remain unanswered will be presented. Conclusions: The results of this evidence-based review will help assess whether women should be screened routinely for depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Perinatal depression: a review of the evidence Wanda Jones, Bradley N. Gaynes, Norma Gavin, Samantha Meltzer-Brody U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Women's Health, Washington, DC 20201, U.S.A., e-mail: wjones@osophs.dhhs.gov Literature References: See individual abstracts for the session. Objectives: At the conclusion, the participants will be able to identify the exisiting evidence on: 1) whether perinatal screening for depressive symptoms with subsequent intervention leads to improved outcomes; 2) on the accuracy of screening for perinatal depression and gaps in this evidence, and 3) for the treatment of perinatal depression; Abstract: Purpose: Untreated perinatal depression has serious adverse consequences on the woman, her newborn child, and other families. However, a systematic evidence-based review is needed to guide research, practice, policy and public education. To address this need, the Safe Motherhood Working Group, 8 Department of Health and Human Services agencies within DHHS and led by Dr. Wanda Jones of the Office of Women's Health, is jointly funding, through AHRQ's Evidence-based Practice Centers (EPCs), a systematic evidence report on perinatal depression. Methods: The authors systematically reviewed MEDLINE, CINAHL, PsychINFO, Sociofile, and Cochrane databases to identify studies on perinatal depression that met predefined criteria. They abstracted selected articles and assessed the study quality and strength of evidence.Meta-analytic methods will be used. The symposium will address 3 questions: 1) Does perinatal screening and treatment of depression lead to improved outcomes? 2) What is the accuracy of screening tools for perinatal depression, and 3) What do we know about treating perinatal depression? Results: Despite stringent criteria, a substantial body of literature was defined. Meta analytic results will be presented. Conclusions: These results will be most useful to groups using evidence to guide research, practice, policy and public education on perinatal depression. What is the incidence of perinatal depression? A systematic review of the evidence (1996) . Rates and risk of postpartum depression-A meta-analysis. Int Rev Psychiatry 8(1): 37-54. Matthey, S., Barnett, B., Howie, P., Kavanagh, D. J. (2003) . Diagnosing postpartum depression in mothers and fathers: Whatever happened to anxiety? J Affect Disord 74 (2): 139-147. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to identify the incidence rates for depressive illness during pregnancy and the first postpartum year. Abstract: Purpose: Perinatal depressive illness has a high prevalence similar to women in non-childbearing periods (10-15%). Prior frequency studies, however, have not consistently employed criterion-based diagnoses. To clarify the incidence rate (IR) of depression during pregnancy and the first postpartum year, AHRQ and the Safe Motherhood Group requested an evidence review. Methods: We systematically reviewed MEDLINE, CINAHL, PsychINFO, Sociofile, and Cochrane databases to identify prevalence or incidence studies that used a criterion standard diagnosis of depression. We abstracted selected articles and assessed study quality; we are currently meta-analyzing the results to clarify point estimates for distinct perinatal periods. Results: 39 abstracts were reviewed, 21 were selected for inclusion. Studies were generally representative of the target population. The bulk of studies were prospective, and the overall quality of the selected studies was good. Three studies provided IRs during pregnancy, 3 provided IRs within the first month, and 6 provided IRs between months 2 and 12. Most studies do not specifically exclude cases of bipolar disorder. We will report our metaanalytic results at presentation. Conclusions: Prior studies have used differing types and timing for their rate estimates. We will report incidence rates that take into account the various measurement methods. What do we know about treating perinatal depression? A systematic review of the evidence Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants will be able to identify the strength of existing evidence on the accuracy of screening for perinatal depression and gaps in this evidence. Abstract: Purpose: Untreated perinatal depression has serious adverse consequences on the woman, her newborn child, and other family members. Regular postpartum and well-baby visits provide opportunities for depression screening. This study reviews the evidence on the accuracy of various screening instruments. Methods: We systematically reviewed MEDLINE, CINAHL, PsychINFO, Sociofile, and Cochrane databases to identify prospective studies of the accuracy of screening instruments for perinatal depression that met predefined criteria, including a validated diagnosis of depression. We abstracted selected articles, assessed their quality, and will conduct a meta-analysis of study results. Results: More than 60 abstracts were reviewed and reference lists of identified articles were searched; 34 articles were selected for review, including one prior systematic review and 3 articles validating instruments in non-English languages. The articles used different instruments; screened women at different times and frequencies; and were generally of good internal validity, but poor external validity. Estimates of overall sensitivity and specificity will be provided. Conclusions: A fair amount of good quality evidence on the accuracy of screening instruments exists. However, greater consistency in the timing of screening and better representation of target populations is needed. Does perinatal screening and treatment of depression lead to improved outcomes? A systematic review of the evidence Literature References: Brugha, T. S., Wheatley, S., Taub, N. A., et al. (2000) . Pragmatic randomized trial of antenatal intervention to prevent post-natal depression by reducing psychosocial risk factors. Psychol Med 30 (6): 1273-1281. Armstrong, K. L., Fraser, J. A., Dadds, M. R., Morris, J. (1999) . A randomized, controlled trial of nurse home visiting to vulnerable families with newborns. J Paediatr Child Health 35 (3): 237-244. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants will be able to identify the existing evidence on whether perinatal screening for depressive symptoms with subsequent intervention leads to improved outcomes. Abstract: Purpose: Although effective treatments for perinatal depression are available, many women do not receive adequate screening or treatment of their depression. This study reviews the evidence addressing whether screening leads to improved outcomes. Methods: We systematically reviewed MEDLINE, CIHAHL, PsychINFO, Sociofile, and Cochrane databases to identify randomized controlled or cohort trials of screening and treatment methods for perinatal depression that met inclusion criteria, including a criterion standard diagnosis of a depressive disorder. We abstracted selected articles, assessed the quality of evidence and plan to conduct a meta-analysis of study results. Results: Greater than 60 articles were reviewed, and 17 were selected for inclusion. Studies examined screening in the prenatal period and postpartum period. The types and frequency of screening and treatment interventions differed among the studies. Overall quality was fair to good, whereas generalizability was poor. We will also report our meta-analytic results. Conclusions: Overall, the evidence base for whether perinatal screening and treatment leads to improved outcomes appears to be of reasonable quality and strength. However, greater consistency in the timing of screening and type of intervention in target populations is needed. Abstract: According to a report by the United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women, women account for the majority of the older population in almost every country, and the proportion women increases with age. Worldwide, women make up just over half of the age group 60-69, and they account for 65 percent of those 80 years and older. The challenges that women and men face as they age differ. Older women are more likely to be widowed, to live alone, and to live in poverty. Older women tend to have lower educational attainment, less formal labor force experience, and more family caregiving responsibilities than do older men. Women are also more vulnerable to certain age-related diseases. This session will focus on four areas of research in Women's Mental Health and Aging. Separate presentations will focus on two of the most common mental health challenges that women face as they age -depression and dementia. A third presentation will focus on findings from recent cross-cultural studies of sex differences in personality characteristics that may predispose women to certain mental health disorders. The final presentation will introduce the concept of ''active aging'' as an effort to improve quality of life in older women. Pirkko A. Lahti, The Finnish Association for Mental Health, Helsinki, 00240 Helsinki, Finland, e-mail: pirkko.lahti@mielenterveysseura.fi Abstract: The paper deals with connections between ageing, mental health and coping. The rapid growth of the ageing population is a great challenge to society. This applies particularly to the 'developed' countries where the number of older people (over 60-years-olds) reaches 25% in some areas, that is, one quarter of the entire population. The ageing population will place new pressure on the social and health care system in every society. Relatively few services are exclusively targeted at the aged. The life expectation has significantly risen particularly in the Western world. This is not necessarily only a positive phenomenon since it has simultaneously increased various health problems. Active promotion of health is one solution in coping with health problems. Measures promoting health can be employed to improve the wellbeing of older people in many countries. Since 1990, WHO has marketed a concept of 'active ageing'. The concept and associated policy support health, participation and security aiming at an improved quality of life. The policy emphasises the maintenance of autonomy and independence and aims at ensuring everyone as healthy a life expectancy and good quality of life as possible. Women, estrogen, and cognitive aging: influence of serms and phytoestrogens Pauline M. Maki, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60605, U.S.A., e-mail: pmaki@psych.uic.edu Literature References: Woo, J., Lau, E., Ho, S. C., et al. (2003) . Comparison of Pueraria lobata with hormone replacement therapy in treating the adverse health consequences of menopause. Menopause 10: 352-361. Objectives: To describe the influence of selective estrogen receptor modulators on cognitive function To describe the influence of naturally occurring estrogens on cognitive function To describe the mechanisms by which estrogenic agents can exert neuroprotective effects. Abstract: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is an incurable disease of aging, and the prevalence of the disease will increase dramatically as the population ages. A recent epidemiological study predicted that the prevalence of AD will triple in the next 50 years -to 13.7 million Americans -unless treatments are identified that lower disease risk or delay disease onset. Women have a longer life expectancy than men, and many more women than men die of AD. In 2001, the death rate from AD among American women was almost 2 1 2 times higher than that among men. It is unclear whether the higher prevalence of AD among women is due entirely to women's greater life expectancy or whether some other factor or combination of factors might put women at increased risk of the disease. There is a pressing need for information about factors that might increase or decrease a woman's risk of the disease. Research studies indicate that the female hormones, estrogen and progesterone, influence cognition and brain aging. Those studies raise an important concern -how do other medications with estrogen-like properties affect brain function? This presentation will review the effects of selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) and phytoestrogens on cognition and function. Unutzer, J., et al. (2003) . Depression treatment in a sample of 1,801 depressed older adults in primary care. JAGS 51: 505-514. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants will better understand the public health impact of depression in older women, associated conditions, and effective preventive and treatment interventions. Abstract: While rates of clinical depression are lower among older adults relative to younger persons, the prevalence of depressive symptoms increase with age. Women have more depressive symptoms in adulthood and later adulthood than their male counterparts. Higher rates are found in primary care offices or long-term care settings, where as many as 15-20 percent of older women have symptoms of depression. Depression in later life is associated with functional impairment, poor recovery from other illnesses, increased use of general medical services, and increased early mortality risk. This mirrors findings from the World Health Organization that depression is one of the leading causes of disease burden in the developed world. In addition, the global population is growing older, highlighting the urgency to apply preventive and treatment interventions to reduce disease burden. Despite substantial evidence that depression is treatable, recognition of depression remains problematic. It is often attributed to normal aging, particularly among persons who are widowed, live alone, and have multiple physical illnesses -the majority of older women in this country. While we have ways of adequately assessing, treating and possibly preventing depression in later life, challenges in implementing effective practices remain. Examples of effective interventions will be provided and discussed. Objectives: To understand recent findings on sex differences in personality traits and their implications for women's mental health. Abstract: Personality traits can be summarized by the Five-Factor Model. This structure is universal, having been replicated in many cultures. Studies using self-reports find that gender differences are also universal, with women scoring higher than men on Neuroticism and Agreeableness, as well as on some specific traits such as Warmth and Openness to Aesthetics. Surprisingly, sex differences are most pronounced in progressive, Western nations. New data from over 30 cultures (N ¼ 7000þ) suggest that similar sex differences emerge when observer ratings of personality traits are analyzed, and when either men or women are the raters. Observed sex differences are small, but they have implications for mental health. Because women are higher in Neuroticism, they are more prone than men to depression and anxiety disorders; because they are higher in Agreeableness, women are less prone to antisocial and psychopathic disorders. With age, Neuroticism declines and Agreeableness increases. As a result, some mental disorders (e.g., Borderline Personality Disorder) wane with age. In general, mental health should improve with age for most women around the world. Andrea Braverman, Women's Institute & Pennsylvania Reproductive Associates, Plymouth Meeting, PA 19462, U.S.A., e-mail: andrea@womensinstitute. org Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation the participant should be able to recognize the ethical issues that exist in the field of reproductive medicine and recognize the different global perspectives on these issues. Abstract: Reproductive medicine grows at a very rapid pace and clinicians, patients and society are hard pressed to keep up with the changes. Ethical issues present constantly to the patients and professionals in the field and different societies have varied interests and influence on these issues. One example is the area of gamete donation. Many countries have made an outright ban on the practice whereas other countries have allowed recruited paid volunteers. Questions arise from these practices such as whether compensation is appropriate for donors or how many cycles should donors be allowed to complete. Individuals and couples pursuing treatment must consider concerns regarding a higher incidence of multiple births and society has a direct vested interest because of the high cost of medical care that attends these multiple births. Discussion will focus on identifying the myriad of issues which attends the field of reproductive medicine as well as the discussion will explore how many countries have chosen to address these issues. Particular attention will be given to the state of the art of Assisted Reproductive Technologies in the United States. Updates in infertility: psycho-social and ethical issues This symposium will explore the psychological aspects of infertility and parenthood through assisted reproductive technology. Currently, one in six individuals experience infertility. At the same time, treatment of infertility through assisted reproductive technologies is a burgeoning field. Therefore, a growing number of men and women must wrestle with the impact of infertility on themselves, their relationships with their partners, and their social networks. In three lectures, the following issues will be addressed: psychology of pregnancy and attachment (developmental perspective); psychological theories of response to infertility including stress theory, boundary ambiguity, close relationship model, central identity, transition to non-parenthood, developmental model, grief and loss theory, chronic sorrow, theory of passage. Psychological responses to infertility including common emotions, loss of control, and impact on self-esteem, identity, and beliefs will be examined in relationship to the individual, the couple and family structure. Medical and psychological interventions will be outlined as well as issues that arise for participants and offspring. Family dynamics for the families created through third party reproduction will be discussed. Finally, the symposium will explore the ethical issues that arise from the new reproductive technologies. Rocio A. Barrios, Deborah Rich, Ph.D. Reina Sofia Clinic, Bogota, 00000, Columbia, Abstract: The enormous scientific advances in infertility produced a ''cultural revolution'', giving the opportunity to many couples to fulfill one of the primary and basic desires in the life of a human being: the continuation of his or her life thorough their sons and daughters. Sometimes, to accomplish this wish, the couples have to pass through a complex and painful process, and they need very powerful emotional tools, adaptive, flexible, and mature measures to succeed, and they must use them during the long periods of waiting. The inadequate handling of stress, low frustration tolerance, and small capacity for waiting, difficulties with previous losses, and individuals with non-adaptive autocritical personalities contribute the main risk factors more commonly observed in infertile individuals and couples. This presentation presents a thorough analysis of these risk factors, its causes and consequences, and shows a therapeutic approach that gives support, repair and well-being to individuals and couples. Women's mental health: does sex matter? Claudio N. Soares, M.D. Ph.D., Teri Pearlstein, M.D., Kimberly Yonkers, M.D., Hadine Joffe, M.D., M.Sc. Massachusetts General Hospital -Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, U.S.A., e-mail: csoares@partners.org Literature References: Soares, C. N., Poitras, J. R., Prouty, J. (2003) . The role of Reproductive Hormones in the Management of Depression during Menopause. Drugs & Aging 20 (2): 85-100. Steiner, M., Pearlstein, T. (2000) . Premenstrual dysphoria and the serotonin system: pathophysiology and treatment. J Clin Psychiatry 61 (Suppl 12): 17-21. Objectives: To appreciate the extent to which gender differences and hormone aspects may influence the phenomenology and treatment of psychiatric disturbances across the female life cycle. Abstract: The impact of sex hormones on brain functioning is frequently cited as one of the factors that contribute to the gender differences observed in the prevalence, outcome, and response to treatment of mental disorders. For example, accumulating data suggest that an increased vulnerability to depression and anxiety exists among subgroups of women during periods of heightened hormonal variability (i.e., premenstrual periods, puerperium, and the menopausal transition). It is therefore intuitive that gender related characteristics and hormone aspects should be taken into account while planning treatment strategies for reproductiverelated mood and anxiety disturbances. This presentation will focus on female-specific characteristics regarding prevalence, risk factors, and phenomenology of mood and anxiety disturbances, and their impact on quality of life across the life cycle of women. Dr. Steiner will review existing findings on how sex hormones modulate mood and behavior in women. Dr. Pearlstein will address specific considerations regarding the disease burden and psychosocial impairment caused by premenstrual mood disturbances. Dr. Yonkers will review the extent to which depressive disorders may contribute to poor perinatal outcomes. Dr. Joffe will discuss the etiology and treatment of hot flushes and menopause related sleep disturbance, as well as recent data on psychotropic treatments of vasomotor symptoms. Lastly, Dr. Soares will explore the association between menopausal transition and mood disturbance, and review novel treatment strategies for symptomatic menopausal women, in light of recent controversy involving long term use of hormone therapy. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to better understand the relevance of gonadal hormonal fluctuations to female specific Mood disorders. Abstract: The differences in prevalence, course and response to treatment of major mood and anxiety disorders between men and women are believed to be affected by hormonal, reproductive and genetic factors. These differences are further highlighted by differential exposure= response to environmental influences and by physiological differences. The role and potential relevance of sex hormones to female specific psychiatric disorders is even more obvious. Levels of estrogen (E) and progesterone (P) vary significantly across the female lifespan. Behaviours such as moodiness, irritability and relationship conflicts around the time of puberty may in part reflect increased sensitivity of neurotransmitter systems to changes in sex hormone levels. The constant flux of E and P levels continues throughout the reproductive years. PMS=PMDD may be the result of an altered activity (or sensitivity) of certain neurotransmitter systems to hormonal fluctuations in genetically vulnerable women. Pregnancy and delivery also produce dramatic changes in E and P levels which help explain the increased vulnerability to perinatal depression, and finally at menopause the loss of modulating effects of E and P may Underlie the development of perimenopausal mood disorders. Differences caused by genetic polymorphism, combined with the flux in the hormonal milieu, may determine how women react to environmental stress and predict the development of mood disorders. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to understand the diagnosis of premenstrual dysphoric disorder, the impact of premenstrual symptoms on quality of life and role functioning, and available treatment options. Abstract: Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) is a constellation of emotional, physical and behavioral symptoms that leads to a significant decrease in quality of life and psychosocial impairment in approximately 5% of menstruating women. Although the severity of functional impairment in PMDD is similar to that of major depressive disorder, women with PMDD have more impairment in their home and social roles than in their work roles. Several treatment options now exist for PMDD including antidepressant medication, anxiolytics, hormonal medications and calcium. Issues of tolerability of pharmacological treatments is important due to the long-term treatment of most women with PMDD. Kimberly A. Yonkers, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, U.S.A., e-mail: kimberly.yonkers@yale.edu Literature Reference: Orr, S., James, S., Prince, C. B. (2002) . Maternal prenatal depressive symptoms and spontaneous preterm births among African-american women in Baltimore, MD. American Journal of Epidemiology 156(9): 797-802. Objectives: To review the data illustrating a possible association between depression and poor perinatal outcomes. Abstract: Preterm delivery (PTD) (<37 weeks gestation) and the associated phenomenon of low birth weight (LBW) (<2500 gms) occurred in 11.9% and 7%, respectively, of infants born in the U.S. during the year 2000. Among African-American women, the rates for PTD were 17% while LBW occurred in 13% demonstrating the disparate impact these events have for selected racial minorities. Two-thirds of all infant deaths occurred in this group, illustrating the disproportionate morbidity and mortality among babies that are LBW or preterm. Moreover, babies born preterm are about 15 times more likely to die in the first year of life than babies born at term. Regrettably, rates of PTD and LBW rose throughout the past decade underscoring the need for new approaches to address these adverse perinatal outcomes. A number of factors, including infection, coagulopathies, hypertensive disorders and multiple gestation underlie the risk of PTD and LBW. However, the important impact of psychosocial variables, in particular depression, is increasingly recognized. For example, in one study each point increase on the Beck Depression Inventory increased the risk of PTD and LBW increased by 7% and 6%, respectively, in adult women. A 2002 study found that among African-American women, the risk for spontaneous preterm birth was twofold greater for those scoring in the highest decile of the Center for Epidemiological Studies Scale for Depression (CES-D). After controlling for biomedical factors, depression conferred a risk for preterm birth that was higher than the risk for smoking, drug abuse or previous poor perinatal outcome. Large, controlled studies evaluating birth outcomes among women who took antidepressants during pregnancy show rates for PTD that are 1.5 to 3-fold higher than for untreated controls. This presentation will review data associating depression with poor perinatal outcomes and will address possible mechanisms underlying the possible association. postmenopausal women. Participants will also be able to use psychoactive medications to treat hot flushes in women unable or unwilling to take estrogen for management of menopausal symptoms. Abstract: Hot flushes are the most common menopausal symptom, occurring in up to 75% of perimenopausal and recently postmenopausal women. Symptoms of hot flushes disrupt quality-of-life by interrupting sleep repeatedly throughout the night and interfering with daytime function. Erratic fluctuations and declining levels of estrogen in menopausal women cause hot flushes through the effect of estrogen on the thermoregulatory region in the hypothalamus. Like estrogen, serotonin and norepinephrine have hypothalamic inputs and may play important roles in hot flushes. Recent Women's Health Initiative reports on hormone replacement therapy (HRT) have changed the risk: benefit ratio on HRT use for postmenopausal women such that the primary indication for HRT use is now short-term treatment of hot flushes. Although HRT remains the first-line treatment for hot flushes, there has been increasing attention to non hormonal treatments of hot flushes for women who are unable or unwilling to take HRT. In light of the Women's Health Initiative findings, this presentation will discuss recent advances in the management of hot flushes. Data supporting the use of serotonin-reuptake inhibitors and other psychoactive medications in the treatment of hot flushes will be presented. Objectives: Recognize some universal themes underlying violence against women in different cultures around the world. Abstract: Violence against women is epidemic throughout the world. Rates of sexual assault, domestic violence and femicide remain high in both developed and developing countries. Types of violence may differ slightly depending on the cultural context. In North America attention is being paid to sexual harassment and stalking while in East Asian countries dowry deaths and honour killings are seen. Consequences of such violence include low self-esteem, hopelessness, depression, anxiety, substance abuse, physical injuries and death. Despite the policy statements and directives by the World Health Organization, governments do not seem to be taking a strong stand to change patterns in their countries. Patriarchal attitudes which accept views of women as secondary citizens must change in order to decrease violence against women. Laws against violence need to be enforced in order to give a clear message that such violence will not be tolerated. This symposium will present an international perspective on violence against women. Drs. Robinson, Rondon, Douki and Niaz will speak about violence in North America, South America, Arabic countries and East Asian countries respectively. Dr. Stewart will address the treatment of female victims of violence. Objectives: Recognize the attitudes common in Latin America which perpetuate violence against women. Abstract: Violence against women is widespread and highly tolerated in Latin America. In this paper, I will argue that this is so because violence stems from deep cultural roots and because women are brought up in a patriarchal familial organization which promotes passivity and dependence. Traditional religious culture, which poses the Virgin Mary figure as role model, is ambivalent and distorted, repressing sex while overvaluing motherhood and self denial and demeaning women who do not conform to the established stereotypes. Patriarchal violence against the woman has serious emotional consequences for women. The stressful violent circumstances in women's lives leads to increased drug abuse which further exposes them to police and institutional violence. Political instability and civil wars in South America have caused many deaths, and have left many women with traumatic sequelae. Efforts at improving quality of life and diminishing violent conditions for women and girls in Latin America should include consideration of local cultural, political and economic peculiarities. Saida Douki, Hpital Razi, Tunisia, e-mail: saida.douki@gnet.tn Literature Reference: Douki, S. (in press). Violence Against Women in Arab and Islamic Countries. Archives in Women's Mental Health. Objectives: Identify the types of violence seen in Arabic countries and recognize the attitudes that perpetuate violence against women. Abstract: In Arab and Islamic countries, domestic violence is not yet considered a major concern despite its increasing frequency and serious consequences. Surveys in Egypt, Palestine, Israel and Tunisia show that at least one out of three women is beaten by her husband. The indifference to this type of violence stems from attitudes that domestic violence is a private matter and, usually, a justifiable response to misbehaviour on the part of the wife. Selective excerpts from the Koran are used to prove that men who beat their wives are following God's commandments. These religious justifications, plus the importance of preserving the honour of the family, lead abusers, victims, police and health care professionals to join in a conspiracy of silence rather than disclosing these offences. However, a fair reading of the Koran shows that wife abuse, like genital mutilation and ''honour killings'' are a result of culture rather than religion. Unaiza Niaz, The Psychiatric Clinic & Stress Research Centre, Karachi, Sindh 75500, Pakistan, e-mail: drunaiza@cyber.net.pk Literature References: Niaz, U. (in press). Violence Against Women in South Asian Countries. Archives of Women's Mental Health. Objectives: Recognize types of attitudes and beliefs that perpetuate violence against women in South Asian countries. Abstract: In South Asian countries the amalgamation of Buddhist, Confucian, Hindu, Islamic and Christian traditions have shaped the personalities of women and determined their social status. Rigid cultures and patriarchal attitudes which devalue the role of women, result in the wide spread occurrence of violence against women. The family structure, in which the man is the undisputed ruler of the household and activities within the family are seen as private, allows violence to occur at home. As well as traditional forms of violence such as wife battering and sexual assault, women in these countries are also exposed to dowry crimes such as bride burning, kidnapping for the purposes of prostitution, and (honour killings). Laws permit discrimination against women and discourage reporting of violent acts. Efforts to remedy this situation must include changes in local laws as well as assistance from the United Nations and the international community. Gail Erlick Robinson, Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2C4, Canada, e-mail: gail.robinson@uhn.on.ca Literature References: Robinson, G. E. (in press). Violence Against Women in North America. Archives of Women's Mental Health. Objectives: Recognize the many types of violence experienced by women in North America. Abstract: Although North America is viewed as a place where women have equal rights and status, violence against women is still rampant. Forty to 51% of women experience some type of violence in their lifetime including child abuse, physical violence, rape and domestic violence. The perpetrator is most likely to be a current or former partner. Such violence stems from historical views of women as property and may flourish because of the public's reluctance to get involved in family matters. The concept of violence has been expanded to include non-traditional types such as sexual harassment, breeches of fiduciary trust and stalking. Treatment of victims of violence must include ensuring their safety, encouraging them to make healthy choices and helping them to understand they are not at fault. Education at all levels is required to change attitudes which perpetuate violence despite laws which forbid it. Objectives: 1. Recognize the methodological challenges in doing research among lesbians, and the recent progress that has been made. 2. Recognize issues for parents of lesbians, and for lesbian parents. 3. Understand possible sexuality differences between lesbians and gay men. Abstract: This symposium will present new and updated information about four areas that are of great interest to lesbian mental health researchers researchers and of great import to any clinicians working with lesbian clients. Dr. Johnson will present the most current data from population based samples regarding the prevalence of various mental health diagnoses, and will compare these where possible to heterosexual controls. She will also address the methodologic challenges researchers in this area face. Relationships between lesbians and the family have always been of intense interest. Two presentations will address this area. The first, by Dr. Downey, will address counseling for families in whom children ''come out.'' The second, by Dr. Haller, will address the considerable body of literature that has accumulated regarding the lesbians who have children, and how those children fare developmentally. Finally, Dr. Barber will address what is know about differences in sexuality between gay men and lesbians. She will include a general overview of dimensions of sexual expression, coming out, and sexual identity for lesbians. Objectives: 1. Compare and contrast these types of epidemiological sampling frames: clinical series, convenience sample, and population-based sample. 2. Describe the prevalence of mental health diagnoses among lesbians based on population-based sample. 3. Describe the prevalence of substance abuse among lesbians based on population-based sample. Abstract: Much of the original research regarding mental health issues among lesbians was conducted in clinical populations, and among women gathering in bars. The impression from these studies was that lesbians had high rates of mental illness and substance abuse. In the 1970's and 80's, survey research performed in large convenience samples modified this view considerably, but this weak methodology left many questions unanswered. The major challenge at that point was to find ways of identifying representative samples of lesbians, and appropriately matched heterosexual controls. The methodologic advances will be summarized. The results of populationbased studies that have been conducted since then will be summarized. Herzberg, H. (1998) . The Narcissus survey. New Yorker, January 5, 1998, pp. 27-30. Objectives: 1. Describe the common reactions of parents upon learning that their child is either gay or lesbian. 2. Describe helpful counseling strategies for these parents. Abstract: The parents of most lesbian=gay people are heterosexual and many harbor homophobic attitudes. Although they seek assistance from mental health professionals for many reasons, parents who consult psychotherapists about their adult children's homosexuality are usually motivated to preserve the child-parent bond. Still, as the New Yorker survey of parental homophobia demonstrated, a significant number of parents would prefer their children to suffer unhappy marriages rather than be homosexual. Issues which motivate the parents' consultation with a mental health professional include beliefs that gay=lesbian individuals are sexually promiscuous, that their children will engage in shame-inducing gender atypical behavior, that the parents caused the homosexuality, and that the therapist can be enlisted to ''convert'' the young person to heterosexuality. Such parents ordinarily do not see themselves as patients, but their own personal and couple issues frequently motivate the consultation. Strategies for addressing these clinical challenges will be discussed. Objectives: 1. Describe the challenges lesbians face as they try to create families. 2. Describe the literature regarding the developmental and psychosocial development of children raised in lesbian families. Abstract: Throughout history, lesbians have been parents through heterosexual relationships or marriages. However, many lesbians and gay men are now choosing to become parents after coming out, creating what has been called a ''Gayby Boom.'' Lesbians planning motherhood face multiple complex decisions including the initial choice of becoming a parent through adoption, foster parenting, or pregnancy. If pregnancy is chosen, additional decisions include whether to use a known or unknown donor, whether to use fresh or frozen sperm, and if using a known donor, what the nature of his relationship will be with the child. Legal issues for lesbian mothers are also potentially quite complex. Multiple myths exist about families with gay or lesbian parents including that they will be unfit parents, that lesbians are less maternal, and that children will have abnormal development of their gender identity, gender role behavior, sexual orientation and peer relationships. Each of these beliefs has been clearly refuted by numerous research studies. This presentation will summarize issues faced by lesbians mothers as well as published research concerning their children. Examining differences in sexual expression and coming out between lesbians and gay men Objectives: 1. Describe the elements of the ''coming out'' process. 2. Describe the possible differences in the coming out process between lesbians and gay men. 3. Appreciate the methodological challenges in conducting this type of research. Abstract: In both the lay and scientific literature on gay and lesbian people, it is commonly stated that gay men and women differ in the expression of their sexuality. Self-identified lesbians are said to be more bisexual than gay men with respect to their feelings and behavior -to have more heterosexual fantasies and attractions, and more past and current sexual experiences with the opposite sex. Lesbians are also reported to self-acknowledge their gay identity (''come out'' to themselves) at a later age than gay men. The speaker will give a general overview of dimensions of sexual expression, coming out, and sexual identity for lesbians. The data used to back up impressions about gender differences in sexual expression between gay men and women will be reviewed. In general, the studies are fraught with methodological problems, and much of the data are inconclusive. Difficulties and complexity involved in measuring dimensions of sexual cognition and behavior will be discussed. Objectives: Participants will have increased awareness of the importance of early detection and intervention, and the role of health professionals in detection and management. Abstract: Authors will present findings from their recent and current research, related to screening antenatally for depression. This includes preliminary findings from a National Australian PND study, of the current mental health literacy of professionals and postnatal women with respect to antenatal and postnatal depression, early intervention involving trained midwives in pregnancy and the mother infant relationship early in the management of depression. Literature Reference: Buist, A., Barnett, B., Milgrom, J., Condon, J., Ellwood, D., Boyce, P., Austin, M. P., Hayes, P., Pope, S. (2002) . Screening for Perinatal Depression -Should we or Shouldn't We? Medical Journal of Australia. Objectives: Participants will have an increased knowledge of the strengths and limitations of current education and awareness programs on mental health literacy, and the needs for future directions in education. Whilst this is an Australian study, findings and other studies suggest there are similarities throughout the Western world. Abstract: Purpose: Prior to commencing a major National screening and educational program, a National survey was conducted to assess status of knowledge and attitudes to perinatal depression. Methods: A random sample of postnatal women, midwives, maternal child health nurses and general practitioners were surveyed for attitude and knowledge re antenatal and postnatal depression, using vignettes. Results: Whilst GP's were better informed and more likely to consider depression both antenatally and postnatally, all health professionals were reluctant to treat antenatal women, both with antidepressants and alternative therapies. Nursing staff were more likely to consider inappropriate therapies. Women themselves were much less likely to recognise depression, and were less likely to get help, but were more positive about the sufferer. Conclusions: Whilst many health professionals are aware of PND, better education on antenatal depression and management is required, particularly for midwives. The general public also need more awareness campaigns. Early mood disturbance in the puerperium: an opportunity for early detection and intervention? Carol A. Henshaw, Keele University School of Medicine, Stoke on Trent, Staffordshire ST4 6TH, United Kingdom, e-mail: chenshaw@bankhouse. u-net.com Abstract: Purpose: To provide participants with an overview of early mood disturbances in the puerperium, their relationship to subsequent depression and the possibility of early detection of women at increased risk. Methods: A systematic review of the literature up to December 2003 and additional data gleaned from a large cohort study the author is currently engaged in. Results: The range of symptoms, timing and measurement of mood disturbance in the early puerperium will be discussed. The prevalence and risk factors for postpartum blues and elation are examined. The most convincing relationships are between blues and dysphoria during pregnancy, a past history of depression, neuroticism and premenstrual depression. Biological research is inconclusive. Blues and elation are predictors of subsequent postpartum depression and appear to be an index of affective vulnerability. Additional results from a large cohort study will be available by the Congress. Conclusions: Postpartum blues and elation predict subsequent postpartum depression and may afford opportunities for early identification of women at risk. Evaluating a midwife-led brief counselling intervention for depressed pregnant women Objectives: Demonstrate the utility and feasibility of engaging antenatal midwives in assessing, monitoring and providing brief counselling intervention recognise the need for antenatal monitoring of depressed moods in pregnancy. Abstract: A study was undertaken of every pregnant woman attending the Booking-In Clinics at a large suburban maternity hospital and a small rural hospital during a three months period. Antenatal midwives were provided additional training in structured interviewing techniques, psychometric assessments and brief counselling skills to provide a complete psychosocial assessment as well as antenatal monitoring of the pregnancy. Six hundred and forty-one women were interviewed at 12-16 weeks gestation in the crosssectional Phase I study. Invitations were then accepted by 422 women to continue in the Phase II component, a prospective randomised controlled repeated measures enquiry of moods, social supports and relationship quality carried out at 24 weeks, 36 weeks and 6 weeks postpartum. Women allocated to the Intervention group had a significantly lower rate of negative moods compared with the Control group. Primiparous mothers benefited especially during the antenatal phase though there was no significant difference by parity group at the postnatal assessment. Midwives reported considerable satisfaction with their enhanced clinical role. These findings support the utility and feasibility of antenatal screening carried out by midwives, of negative moods and adverse psychosocial conditions that frequently remain unnoticed yet which can be assisted with immediate counselling assistance. Genetics and women's mental health: global issues, ethical dilemmas, and standards of practice Objectives: 1. To gain an overview of practical genetics as it applies to women's mental health 2. To increase awareness of the ethical and psychosocial implications of genetic testing 3. To identify opportunities and challenges for health and mental health providers in applying genetics to their practice 4. To consider multicultural, economic, and other national and international aspects of genetic services and learn about genetic resources and standards of practice. Abstract: Rapid discoveries in genetics and genomic continue to identify genetic components of common diseases such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's, mental illness, and even behavioral characteristics, affecting virtually everyone from clients and patients to ourselves as providers. Since virtually all families are affected by genetic components of common diseases, it is imperative that health and mental health care providers become knowledgeable about heredity and gene functioning as well as aware of the ethical and psychological implications of genetic diagnosis and genetic testing. Today with the rapid advances in genetics, science and technology, it has become increasingly important that health care providers be aware of the ethical, legal, and psychosocial implications. Objectives: 1. To gain an overview of practical genetics as it applies to women's mental health 2. To increase awareness of the ethical and psychosocial implications of genetic testing 3. To identify opportunities and challenges for health and mental health providers in applying genetics to their practice 4. To consider multicultural, economic, and other national and international aspects of genetic services and learn about genetic resources and standards of practice. Abstract: For more than 40 years, social work as a profession has recognized the importance of genetics disorders in relation to social work practice and education. However, as critical issues are identified in the field of genetics, physical health and mental health, such as, bipolar disorder, Alzheimer's, cancer and obesity, social workers need to become more informed. The National Association of Social Workers (NASW) has also recognized the need to integrate knowledge of genetics into social work practice in the context of the NASW Code of Ethics. A social worker is often the first to provide psychosocial services to individuals and families with genetic disorders. Therefore, it is imperative that social workers become more aware of the ethical, legal and psychosocial implications of a genetic diagnosis, genetic testing and genetic research in order to empower individuals and families to speak out for their rights as public citizens. NASW's Standards for Integrating Genetics in Social Work Practice are designed to enhance social workers' awareness of the skills, knowledge, values, methods, and sensitivity needed to work effectively with clients, families, health care providers, and the community and to increase their understanding of the impact that the field of genetics has, and will have, on them. Objectives: 1. To gain an overview of practical genetics as it applies to women's mental health 2. To increase awareness of the ethical and psychosocial implications of genetic testing 3. To identify opportunities and challenges for health and mental health providers in applying genetics to their practice 4. To consider multicultural, economic, and other national and international aspects of genetic services and learn about genetic resources and standards of practice. Abstract: Many complex and challenging ethical and social issues result from the discovery of hereditary susceptibility genes and the lack of knowledge about issues surrounding genetic testing among both clients and physicians. Genetic scientific advancements promise new treatment and preventive strategies for diseases like breast and ovarian cancer. However, women in particular must face many psychosocial and ethical issues in deciding whether or not to have new genetic tests and to participate in research studies. Health and mental health providers need to have an understanding of how genetic information can be beneficial or misused. This presentation will include a woman who herself has had genetic testing for breast and ovarian cancer in order to give providers the client's perspective. Objectives: At the conclusion of the symposium, the participants will be acquainted with the clinical management issues for bipolar women ranging from efficacy of treatment to the impact of treatment on reproductive endocrine function. Abstract: Bipolar women require special consideration with respect to treatment. Only recently have researchers begun to study gender based differences with respect to the phenomenology of bipolar disorder and response to treatment. Increased attention has also been given to management considerations for bipolar women in special clinical settings such as pregnancy, the postpartum period, and lactation. Given the evolution of pharmacologic management of bipolar disorder, including therapy with a wide range of psychotropic agents, the potential impact of these compounds on female reproductive function must also be considered. This symposium will address special treatment issues relevant to bipolar women at various times across the life cycle. Drs. Cohen and Viguera will address special considerations for bipolar women during pregnancy, the postpartum period and lactation. These presentations will review the risk benefit decision process for managing patients across these critical times. Lee S. Cohen, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, U.S.A., e-mail: lcohen2@partners.org Objectives: At the conclusion of the symposium, the participant will be aquainted with the appropriate treatment of bipolar disorder in pregnancy and the postpartum period. Abstract: While the postpartum period has typically been considered a period of risk for relapse of bipolar disorder, systematic data regarding the course of bipolar disorder during pregnancy are sparse. The management of bipolar women who plan to conceive or those who are pregnant or puerperal poses significant challenges for clinicians who care for these patients. Recent data suggest that pregnancy is not ''protective'' against relapse of psychiatric disorder and that for bipolar women specifically, relapse is common after lithium discontinuation. This presentation reviews the major clinical dilemmas associated with management of pregnant bipolar patients as well as recent data on the course of bipolar disorder during pregnancy and the postpartum period. Treatment guidelines for the management of bipolar illness for women trying to conceive and during pregnancy will be presented. An algorithm for assessment of risks and benefits using both older and newer psychiatric medications across a variety of classes of compounds including antipsychotics and mood stabilizers will be presented. Given the growing use of anticonvulsants to treat bipolar illness, particular attention will be given on available reproductive safety data regarding these compounds. Objectives: At the conclusion of the symposium, the participants will be acquainted with the course and management of bipolar illness during the postpartum period. Abstract: The postpartum period is a period of risk for emergence of new onset psychiatric disorder, or for substantial worsening of pre-gravid mood and anxiety disorders. Recent work suggests that many bipolar women are especially vulnerable to relapse during the postpartum period. Estimates for risk of relapse among bipolar women during the postpartum period are between 30 to 50%. Several investigators have evaluated the extent to which postpartum prophylaxis relapse in women who receive lithium during the first 48 hours postpartum compared with women who do not receive prophylactic treatment. However, there is no consensus on the best timing of prophylaxis and whether lithium is superior to other mood stabilizers as a prophylactic neonatal toxicity with the use of mood stabilizers proximate to delivery, neurobehavioral outcome following exposure to mood stabilizers, and breastfeeding with mood stabilizers. The goal of this presentation is to review data on the epidemiology, course and treatment of bipolar illness during the postpartum period as well as to highlight controversial clinical issues related to mood stabilizers and neonatal outcome, neurobehavioral outcome and breastfeeding which are areas requiring further research. Children and adolescent mental health overall abstract Gwendolyn P. Keita, Kathy Katz, Nathan Fox, Gayle Porter American Psychological Association, Washington, DC 20002, U.S.A., e-mail: gkeita@apa.org Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to: 1. recognize the critical issues that must be addressed in order to reduce the crisis in child and adolescent mental health; 2. recognize gender differences in depression and anxiety during childhood; 3. demonstrate interventions that are especially useful to help ethnic minority girls cope with the negative life events, including the impact of their racial=ethnic identity and sex role socialization. Abstract: This panel draws attention to the critical need to address the mental health needs of female children and adolescents. As noted by Dr. Kathy Katz, a crisis exists in child and adolescent mental health, and we need to address that need. Her presentation will examine some of the broad issues that must be addressed if this crisis is to be reduced, broader issues such as public awareness and policies. Although we know a great deal about gender differences in depression and anxiety among adults, we know very little about the distribution of these disorders among children. Dr. Nathan Fox will review the research on gender differences in depression and anxiety during childhood and possible etiology of these differences. Dr. Gayle Porter will address interventions used to help adolescent girls, especially ethnic minority girls, cope appropriately and effectively with the negative life events they encounter and emotional reactions to those events, including the impact of their racial=ethnic identity and=or minority status on their sex role socialization. Crisis in children's mental health: addressing the need Kathy Silver Katz, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, U.S.A., e-mail: katzk@georgetown.edu Abstract: Purpose: A crisis exists in child and adolescent mental health. While 1 in 5 US children have a mental health problem, only half of these get any service. This presentation will discuss needed changes in mental health policy. Discussion: There is limited public awareness of the mental health needs of children. There has not been broad education focusing on promoting emotional health, or campaigns to make mental health an integral part of primary care. Awareness is needed by parents, educators and health providers of ways to promote emotional health and identify early signs of problems. Barriers that exist to children receiving mental health services include stigma, access and funding. Because of stigma fears, many families fail to seek help. Mental health services are rarely co-located with health and education facilities. There is no parity with physical health in the financing of mental health care. Conclusion: Changes are needed in public attitudes and policies towards child mental health. Principles that must guide the development of national policies include 1) Recognizing mental health as an essential part of child health, 2) Integrating child and family mental health services into all systems that serve children, and 3) Developing a public-private health infrastructure to support these efforts. Abstract: A variety of data suggest that there are differences in the frequency of reported depression and anxiety between men and women. Less is known about the gender distribution of these disorders in childhood and even less is known about the etiology of these gender differences. This talk will review the research on gender differences in depression and anxiety during childhood and discuss factors, which may contribute to the etiology of these differences. Minority adolescent girls: the relationship between negative life events and depression= = =anxiety= = =violence Gayle K. Porter, American Institutes for Research, Washington, DC 20007, U.S.A., e-mail: gporter@air.org Abstract: The relationship between negative life events, low socioeconomic and=or minority status and psychiatric disorders especially depression, anxiety, and conduct disorder has been well documented. There is also increasing evidence that major medical problems, myocardial infection, cancer, diabetes and hypertension as well as less significant somatic symptoms are also often associated with stressful life events, especially when they are perceived as numerous, chronic and uncontrollable. Adolescent girls consistently report higher levels of subjective distress, especially depression and anxiety than their male peers. Their rate of distress is also much higher than their parents report. They are more likely than adolescent boys to be concerned and affected by multiple problems such as health and physical development, home and family issues, physical and sexual abuse, and peer and romantic relationships. However, like boys they are also concerned about their educational and vocational futures and their adjustment to school and work. Minority girls, especially lower income African Americans living in mother headed households, report higher numbers of negative life events i.e. parental deaths, poor health, violence than their Caucasian peer. The particular adaptive or maladaptive psychosocial or coping behaviors expressed by adolescent girls in response to: feelings of depression, anxiety or anger; and negative life events are significantly influenced by the impact of their racial=ethnic identity and or minority status on their sex-role socialization. This presentation will discuss specific interventions, which can be used to help girls in general, and minority girls in particular cope more appropriately and effectively with their life events and emotional reactions. Objectives: Recognize the impact of different ethnic, political, social and cultural circumstances on the well being of selected groups of women, and take these into account when approaching the individual patient. Abstract: It has been recognized that several political, social and economical factors have a crucial impact on the emotional health of women. Psychiatrists all over the world are interested in assessing the relative importance of these factors and in learning of probable novel interventions to offset the burden of inequality, discrimination and poverty on women's mental health. In this symposium experts will describe the peculiarities of women who live at high altitudes and their precise physiological and emotional coping strategies, the difficult plight of women who have been forced to abandon their countries as refugees and the measures taken to lessen their suffering, the advantages and caveats of renewing the interest of professionals and patients in the spiritual and religious aspects of women and their families and the resilience and maturity shown by women who have managed to make an important contribution not only as well known authorities in their fields but also as leaders in professional organizations. Both the psychosocial aspects as well as the economic and political implications of the four topics mentioned will be discussed and practical suggestions regarding the better approaches to the individual patient, in diverse cultural settings, will be presented. Objectives: Identify the influence of environmental factors as altitude in the success of newborns female to stay alive. Abstract: The ecosensibility is present when a human being, male or female, responds quickly to moderate adverse environment circumstances, exposing himself or herself to a higher risk that impedes their growing and development, if it is an infant or adolescent, or sickness and death. The favorable or adverse environmental conditions influence the human life differently in their life quality if it is the case of an andean women or an andean men. The genetic structure, the higher altitude and the life style conditions the different reaction in growing and development of the andean population. Reactions as increase in the female newborn, increase in number of newborn male death, and others. The moderate altitude (3200 msnm) is a factor that conditions a smaller number of male newborns, increases the male fetal obits and increases the female population. Severe altitude changes (4200 msnm) affects the same, low number of newborn survivors, in the male and female population. The higher altitude, risky activities, fatal accidents, and stressed life styles beside poverty and lower tolerance to pain, has as consequence a higher morbi-mortality in males and a higher resistance in andean women. As female fortress faces the moderate environmental adverse condition, new answers to the traumatic stresses, conditions a new social organization and modifies the survivor culture. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation the participants should be able to recognize the main dynamic issues faced by immigrant minority women when they succeed in achieving positions of leadership in their new country. Abstract: In most societies leadership for women is still a complicated experience. The reality of a glass ceiling, where women if accepted in non traditional roles do advance only to middle management positions and are still paid only a percentage of the male salary for the same job is still pervasive. The social inertia in accepting the challenge to traditional roles is paralleled by the presence of psychological factors that complicate the women's personal struggle when pursuing leadership positions. The still frequent negative social response often confuses women's assertion with aggression and domination. Women are made to feel less feminine, less true to their gender if venturing outside of the expected roles. Minority women who migrate to a host country and pursue leadership positions in their new country face issues of cultural identity, integration of different cultural norms, competition with members of the host country which compound the already complicated issue of women venturing into leadership positions. The author will elaborate on these issues utilizing her personal experience and clinical vignettes from her professional work with women in leadership positions. Objectives: Understand the relationship between the power of the mind and health outcomes. Understand the relationship that spirituality plays in recovery from many illnesses. Understand the role spirituality plays in coping with chronic and terminal illness. Learn the basics for a spiritual assessment. Abstract: Spirituality is often primary for people dealing with chronic illness and health. It helps people find meaning in their suffering and helps them cope with the pains and frustrations of chronic illness. A wide range of studies have shown that spirituality plays a significant role in improving patient outcomes in such illnesses as heart disease, cancer, recovery from surgery, depression, and substance abuse. It is therefore important that healthcare providers address their patients' spiritual concerns and provide an opportunity for patients to utilize their own spiritual resources. This lecture will describe how spirituality can be beneficial to patients in dealing with chronic illness. Integrating psychosocial services in women's health care: innovative models of collaboration Abstract: This symposium will examine four models of collaborative care in women's health. Each mental health presenter provides interdisciplinary care in different clinical settings to women across the life span with a host of medical, mental health and psychosocial concerns. Specifically, Dr. McDaniel is a faculty member in a Department of Family Medicine and Dr. Poleshuck is a faculty member in a Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology at an academic medical center. In contrast, Dr. Braverman is the psychologist in a private fertility, endocrinology and menopause practice with four reproductive endocrinologists, while Dr. Coons is self-employed but rotates to different women's primary care, obstetrics, gynecology and oncology groups. Presenters will describe their interdisciplinary practice settings, XXII discuss collaborative assessment and treatment strategies with providers from other disciplines, review successful steps in practice development, and outline the benefits and challenges involved in integrating mental health services. Dr. McDaniel, a national expert on collaborative care, will comment on the varied models of practice and facilitate a discussion with the audience. Integrating psychosocial services in women's health care: innovative models of collaboration Abstract: This presentation will focus on interdisciplinary collaboration in women's primary care, obstetrics and gynecology, and oncology. Dr. Coons rotates to different clinical practice settings where she collaborates with physicians, physician assistants, nurse practitioners and nurses in the care of women across the life span with a host of physical, mental health and psychosocial concerns. Consultation and treatment are provided to women with depression and panic disorder; chronic and life threatening medical problems (e.g., breast, ovarian and lung cancer, Lupus, Rheumatoid Arthritis, incontinence, Interstitial Cystitis and other pelvic pain symdroms, HIV=AIDS); infertility; pre and post-partum complications; changes in sexual functioning; PMS; histories of childhood sexual abuse, sexual assault and partner violence; relationship and occupational problems; etc. The presentation will review the three interdisciplinary practice settings, collaborative assessment and treatment strategies with providers from other disciplines, successful steps in practice development in women's health care, and the benefits and challenges involved in women's health practices. Abstract: This presentation will describe a systems-oriented approach to collaboration in which the mental health professional is part of the primary care treatment system, just as the patient is part of a family. Both systems, the team and the family (broadly defined), need to be taken into consideration in formulating a comprehensive treatment plan for women in primary care. Like a family, the dynamics of a professional treatment team can involve conflict and power dynamics, as well as support and consultation. This presentation will elaborate on the cultural differences between mental health and medicine that can inhibit or prevent successful collaboration. Cases from Family Medicine, drawn from the variety of problems across the lifespan that present in that setting, will illustrate the usefulness of tending to family relationships and professional collaboration in the successful treatment of complex primary care problems for women. Abstract: Many women's primary resource for mental health care is their obstetrician=gynecologist's office, yet women's health care providers often feel ill-prepared to address the vast array of psychosocial issues facing their patients. Integration of a mental health professional into a women's health care practice can assist providers in addressing more effectively the psychosocial needs of women coping with significant life stressors, mental disorders, chronic illnesses, and interpersonal problems. Practicing as a mental health professional in obstetrics and gynecology has been valuable for the opportunities to offer psychosocial care to women and their families who may not otherwise have access to treatment, and to facilitate the education of future practicing obstetrician=gynecologists and mental health professionals. This presentation will focus on a collaborative model of practice in an academic department of obstetrics and gynecology that involves: a) education of residents and psychotherapy trainees; b) facilitation of the mental health referral process; c) consultation to the women's health care providers; and d) provision of psychotherapy to the patients and families in close collaboration with their women's health care providers. Specific strategies used for coping with challenges and enhancing the development and growth of our program will be discussed. Objectives: At the conclusion of this symposium, participants should be able to: 1) describe three models for integrating mental health and health psychology services into women's primary care and ob=gyn settings, 2) distinguish between mental health services which are co-located versus integrated into women's health care settings, and 3) identify clinical strategies utilized in collaborative care models to enhance outcomes in women's health and mental health. Abstract: The rapid growth and development in the field of reproductive medicine has placed even greater emphasis on the need for collaborative care. In this discussion, the role of the mental health professional working within a medical practice will be explored as well as how the collaborative role extends to working with attorneys and administration. Women and men confront emotional issues and decisions that move fluidly between the realm of medicine and psychology. The mental health professionals who work in this field must have a working knowledge of reproductive medicine in order to be effective with their patients and the medical team. The medical team is comprised of physicians, nurses, embryologists, and other medical support professionals. Mental health professionals can be working independently of the medical team in private practice or can be an employee of the medical group, health system or hospital. There are many advantages and disadvantages of being independent or employed by the medical team. Particularly in areas in which the mental health professional is screening potential volunteer candidates, s=he must be careful about establishing the role s=he is playing and remain clear that it is independent of any financial pressures of the practice. (2000) . Gender and Its Effects on Psychopathology. American Psychopathological Association. American Psychiatric Press, Inc., Washington, DC. Objectives: At the end of this presentation participants should be able to describe those conditions that are amenable to psychotherapeutic interventions as well as ways to train psychotherapists to be maximally sensitive to the mental health needs of women. Abstract: While there are data to demonstrate the value of targeted psychotherapy for acute depression, little is known about its long-term preventative effects. We sought to determine whether increased frequency of maintenance interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT M) has greater prophylactic effect than once-a-month treatment. We studied 99 women with recurrent depression who remitted with weekly IPT treatment and were randomly assigned to weekly, bimonthly or monthly IPT-M for two years. Only 19 (19.2%) subjects experienced a recurrence. Mean length of survival for recurring subjects was 36 weeks. Mean recurrence-free survival for the entire sample was 84 weeks in the 104-week trial. Survival analysis by randomized treatment frequency showed no effect on recurrence-free survival. Using actual frequency of treatment attendance, survival analysis demonstrated significantly longer survival in those attending ''monthly''. We conclude that IPT-M at any of the frequencies studied provided excellent prophylaxis although the modal patient was in her fifth episode of depression and had had at least one additional episode in the 2.5 years prior to study entry. A treatment sequence of weekly IPT followed by monthly IPT-M appears to hold considerable promise of long term prophylaxis for women with recurrent depression. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation participants should be familiar with the prophylactic capacity of maintenance interpersonal psychotherapy. Abstract: Psychotherapy has a critical role to play in the treatment of disorders that commonly afflict women, including mood, anxiety and eating disorders. These conditions are most prevalent during the childbearing years when many women express a clear preference for non-pharmacologic treatments. This symposium will address both psychotherapy training and interventions relevant to women's mental health. Dr. Ravitz will review ideals in psychotherapy supervision, including the importance of sensitivity to gender issues and offer a model for the use of health education research findings to guide the design of psychotherapy training programs. Dr. O'Hara will address issues related to the psychotherapeutic treatment of postpartum depression, reviewing the relevant research from the U.S. and Europe, with an emphasis on the use of interpersonal psychotherapy. Dr. Miranda will present results from a trial comparing pharmacotherapy and cognitive behavioral therapy among impoverished women suffering from depression. Dr. Frank will present outcomes from a long-term maintenance study of women with recurrent depression that compared the efficacy of different ''doses'' of maintenance interpersonal psychotherapy. Taken together, these presentations make a strong case for the inclusion of the manual-driven psychotherapies in the armamentarium of clinicians working in the area of women's mental health. Objectives: 1. Appreciate the unique challenges of learning, teaching and evaluating psychotherapy expertise. 2. Become familiar with ways to improve the impact of our teaching of psychotherapy based in health education research findings. Abstract: The acquisition of expertise in psychotherapy is central to the development of psychiatrists with a broad therapeutic repertoire. Changes in Canadian post graduate and continuing education in the psychotherapies over the past decade follow the emergence of research that supports the efficacy of psychotherapy and an integrated understanding of bio-psycho-social pathophysiologic factors. This presentation reviews ideals in psychotherapy supervision including the importance of sensitivity to gender issues with a focus on women's mental health concerns. Health education research findings can be applied to the design of educational programs to increase the impact of teaching in psychotherapy and facilitate the transfer of research into clinical practice. Objectives: Participants should understand the outcomes of care for lowincome and minority women. Participants should learn about steps necessary to engage this population in care. Abstract: Impoverished women experience a higher burden from depression than do white women because they are less likely to receive appropriate care. Little is known about the effectiveness of guideline based care for depression with impoverished minority women. A randomized controlled trial conducted in the Washington D.C. suburban area examined care for depression in 267 women. Participants were randomly assigned to an antidepressant medication intervention, cognitive behavioral therapy, or referral to community care. Both the medication (p < .001) and psychotherapy intervention (p ¼ .006) reduced depressive symptoms more than the community referrals did. Guideline concordant care for major depression is effective for ethnically diverse and impoverished women. More women engaged in a sufficient duration of treatment with medications compared with psychotherapy, and outcomes gains were more extensive and robuse for medications. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to: 1. describe the key elements of Interpersonal Psychotherapy for depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period; and 2. describe the important considerations in providing psychotherapy to poor women in the perinatal period. Abstract: Depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period is common around the world. Women, their children, and families all suffer from these maternal depressions. Only in recent years has there been a concerted effort to validate specific psychotherapeutic interventions for depressed pregnant and postpartum women. Initial findings from work done in the U.S., the U.K., and Europe more generally suggest that depressed women respond well to brief psychotherapies coming out of the traditions of IPT, CBT, and Client-Centered Counseling. With a few exceptions most of the existing work has been done with middle and upper middle class women. Important questions are unanswered regarding the applicability of conventional psychotherapies to poor women whose lives and cultures are very different from the women for whom existing treatments have been validated. Current efforts to address the needs of poor depressed perinatal women XXIV include specific efforts at outreach, engaging key opinion leaders in poor communities, presenting psychotherapy in a non-stigmatizing manner, and developing capacity within poor communities to provide good mental health care. Almost 100 Healthy Start programs that serve poor communities around the U.S. have begun an effort to identify depressed perinatal women and facilitate their entry into appropriate care. These efforts are providing new qualitative data that will assist researchers and clinicians in developing more effective psychotherapeutic interventions for these vulnerable women. Points of high risk for relapse to smoking in women Abstract: Increasing data suggest that there are sex differences in withdrawal from and relapse to smoking that have important implications for relapse prevention. This symposium focuses on understanding points of high risk for relapse to smoking in women, and how sex differences in withdrawal can inform the development of sex-specific relapse prevention interventions. The points of high risk that will be highlighted include adolescence, periods of dysphoric mood and affect dysregulation, and periods of hormonal change. Dr. Suchitra Krishnan-Sarin will present prospective data on adolescent male and female smokers that show gender differences in subjective and objective abstinence measures during acute tobacco abstinence. These sex differences extend to pain tolerance and cognitive performance as well as to symptoms of nicotine withdrawal. Dr. Sherry McKee will present data from a laboratory study examining how presence of dysphoric mood, as another point of high risk, and cognitive mechanisms govern sex-specific smoking behavior. Dr. David Wetter will present real-time data examining affect regulationrelated constructs and their associations to tobacco withdrawal and relapse in women undergoing a quit attempt. Dr. Sharon Allen will present data demonstrating that ovarian hormones, modulated by menstrual cycle or hormone replacement therapy, appear to influence smoking cessation barriers such as withdrawal, certain premenstrual symptoms, and depressive symptoms. Dr. Ken Perkins will be the discussant and provide a critical review of this work and this area of research. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation participants will (a) be able to recognize tobacco abstinence effects in adolescent smokers, (b) be familiar with potential gender differences in tobacco abstinence effects, and (c) understand reasons why females are more compromised by, and at a greater risk of relapse to, cigarette smoking. Abstract: Purpose: Tobacco dependence is a ''pediatric disease'' that is established, in most instances, in adolescence. Recent CDC reports (MMWR, 2001) indicate that of the 34.5% of adolescents who are currently smoking cigarettes, 60% had tried to quit in the past year. We know very little about what maintains smoking behavior and makes quitting smoking so hard for adolescents. Methods: Our group conducted the first prospective evaluation of the acute effects of quitting smoking including alterations in cognitive and stress responses as well as changes in mood and nicotine withdrawal symptoms in male and female adolescent smokers. Smokers and control, nonsmokers were assessed during a three-hour outpatient (no tobacco abstinence) and a 48hour inpatient (tobacco abstinence required) session. Results: Preliminary analyses indicate that male smokers experienced significant decreases in pain tolerance during tobacco abstinence, an effect that was not seen in female smokers. In contrast, female smokers experienced significantly greater time-dependent decrements in verbal learning abilities and mood changes. There were no sex differences in nicotine withdrawal symptoms. Conclusions: These data suggest that there are significant gender differences in these tobacco abstinence effects in adolescents that could mediate differences in ability to quit as well as relapse to tobacco use (Supported by R01 HD31688, M01-RR06022, P50-DA13334). Negative mood and memory as sex-specific determinants of smoking behavior Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to better understand (a) how mood affects smoking behavior, (b) how cognitive mechanisms govern smoking behavior, and (c) sex differences in mood and cognition that affect smoking behavior. Abstract: Purpose: Women are more likely to hold expectancies that smoking alleviates negative affect and are more likely to smoke in response to negative affect, putting them at high risk for relapse. The goal of this project was to examine the contributions of mood and accessibility of smoking expectancies from memory on smoking behavior in women and men. Methods: 90 daily smokers (50% female) completed a laboratory session that consisted of a mood induction (negative, positive, or neutral) followed by a reaction time task that assessed memory accessibility of smoking expectancies. Participants then had a 30-min period of ad-lib smoking. Results: For both women and men, negative mood was strongly related to smoking behavior during the 30-minute smoking period. Specifically, participants high in negative mood, compared to those low in negative mood, smoked more quickly and more intensely. Women who could readily access beliefs that smoking would reduce negative emotion, compared to men, smoked more cigarettes and smoked more intensely. Conclusions: The results of this project advance our understanding of how mood and cognitive mechanisms govern smoking behavior. These results are the first to show a link between gender, mood, memory accessibility of smoking-related beliefs, and smoking intensity. In summary, negative emotion and memory accessibility that smoking will reduce negative emotion were related to more intense smoking behavior, particularly for women (Supported by NIH grants M01RR000125 & P50DA13334). Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to (a) identify several key factors related to affect regulation that influence tobacco withdrawal and relapse among women smokers, and (b) better understand how the influence of affective mechanisms may differ across time and situations. Abstract: Purpose: Affect regulation-related constructs have been hypothesized to be key mechanisms underlying smoking cessation and relapse (Baker, Morse, Sherman, 1986) , and to be of particular relevance to women (Borrelli, Bock, King, Pinto, Marcus, 1996) . This study examined the associations of affect regulation-related constructs with tobacco withdrawal and relapse among 302 women smokers who were attempting to quit. Methods: Data were collected during a quit attempt using ecological momentary assessments (EMA) via palmtop computers and standard questionnaires. Results: Generalized linear mixed models revealed that affective vulnerability increased the severity of negative reactions to quitting (i.e., more craving and higher levels of negative affect) and that these effects were more pronounced with respect to disruptions in daily functioning than in increased severity of urge episodes. Conclusions: Our findings demonstrate that (a) differential trajectories associated with affective vulnerability and relapse emerge almost immediately after quitting, and (b) the relations among affect regulation constructs, withdrawal, and relapse are complex. Both background phenomena, as well as phenomena associated with urge episodes, appear important (Supported by NIH grants R01CA74517, R01CA74517S1, and K07CA84603). Literature References: Allen, S., Hatsukami, D., Christianson, D., Nelson, D. (1999) . Withdrawal and premenstrual symptomatology during the menstrual cycle in short-term smoking abstinence: effects of menstrual cycle on smoking abstinence. Nicotine and Tobacco Research 1: 129-142. Allen, S. S., Hatsukami, D. K., Christianson, D., Brown, S. (2000) . Effects of transdermal nicotine on craving, withdrawal and premenstrual symptomatology in short term smoking abstinence during different phases of the menstrual cycle. Nicotine and Tobacco Research Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation the participants should be able to understand: (a) the role of ovarian hormones (physiologic and exogenous) in smoking behavior, (b) the influence of ovarian hormones (physiologic and exogenous) on withdrawal symptomatology in short-term smoking cessation, (c) the modulation of ovarian hormone effects with transdermal nicotine in short-term smoking cessation, and (d) the role of ovarian hormones (via the menstrual cycle) in relapse. Abstract: Purpose: The stagnant smoking prevalence rate in women (22%) has fueled the search for more effective cessation strategies. Researchers have postulated that withdrawal symptoms and nicotine sensitivity are modulated by ovarian hormones. Methods: Short-term smoking abstinence trials were conducted to investigate, in pre-and postmenopausal women, effects of menstrual cycle phase or hormone replacement therapy (HRT), with=without transdermal nicotine replacement. Results: Smoking behavior was unaffected by either cycle phase or HRT use. Nicotine craving and premenstrual pain and water retention were diminished in premenopausal women on active nicotine patch; the effect was greatest in the late luteal phase. Among postmenopausal women, HRT use had no effect during smoking abstinence, excepting an increase in depressive symptoms. During the placebo=active patch trial, withdrawal, craving, and intention=desire to smoke scores were lower in the active patch group after one week of abstinence; at two weeks, the HRT group had improved mood and lower BDI scores. There was no interaction, however, between HRT status and patch condition. Lastly, preliminary results from a 26-week treatment trial indicate that women on active patch who quit in the late luteal (versus follicular) phase are more likely to relapse. Conclusions: These findings have implications for the development of new gender-specific smoking interventions. Worldwide, more than 90 percent of all adolescent and adult HIV infections have resulted from heterosexual intercourse. Women are particularly vulnerable to heterosexual transmission of HIV due to substantial mucosal exposure to seminal fluids. This biological fact amplifies the risk of HIV transmission when coupled with the high prevalence of non-consensual sex, sex without condom use, and the high-risk behaviors of their partners. Older women are also increasingly being diagnosed with HIV infection. As of December 2001, women aged 45 and older accounted for 18 percent of the female AIDS cases reported to CDC. HIV infection disproportionately affects African-American and Hispanic women. Together they represent less than 25 percent of all U.S. women, yet they account for more than 82 percent of AIDS cases in women. Women suffer from the same complications of AIDS that afflict men but also suffer gender-specific manifestations of HIV disease, such as recurrent vaginal yeast infections and severe pelvic inflammatory disease, which increase their risk of cervical cancer. Women also exhibit different characteristics from men for many of the same complications of antiretroviral therapy, such as metabolic abnormalities. Frequently, women with HIV infection have great difficulty accessing health care, and carry a large burden of caring for children and other family members who may also be HIV-infected. They often lack social support and face other challenges that may interfere with their ability to adhere to treatment regimens. To confront the growing problem of HIV infection and AIDS in women, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) has made woman-focused research an important component of the Institute's AIDS research program. Although efforts to find a cure for AIDS have not been successful, AIDS is preventable. To reduce the spread of HIV infection and its psychiatric consequences, NIMH has sponsored the development of both primary and secondary prevention programs. This symposium will present five of the investigators who have designed these research programs. The symposium is designed to: (1) identify the contexts in which women make HIV-risk related choices and the triggers for unsafe behavior and mental distress; (2) examine how the health beliefs, perceptions and values affect HIV-related behaviors and mental health; (3) describe mental health problems associated with HIV infection and AIDS; and (4) discuss the implications of these findings for developing culturally appropriate mental health and AIDS prevention programs both nationally and internationally. The first speaker will present data from several studies of married women in Indian and contrast that with her extensive work with women in this country. The second speaker will report on findings from an intervention in Chicago and Durban that address the role of trauma in revictimization in the acquisition of HIV. He will also discuss the construction of systems to strengthen and support women's mental wellness. The third speaker will examine the stress, coping and mental health issues of women in the rural south and in South Africa. The fourth speaker will present data from multiple studies of the mental health issues with women and their adolescent children and those factors that predict better mental health in the children. The discussant will review these studies based on her extensive experience in developing prevention programs for seropositive women and their families in New York City and the mental health consequences of child-headed households in Zimbabwe. Shalini Wahi, Ames Counseling and Pyschological Services, Ames, IA 50014, U.S.A., e-mail: shaliniwahi2000@yahoo.com Abstract: Recent estimates indicate that about 4 million people are infected with HIV in India. Attention is being focused on factors that increase the HIV XXVI related risks for married women in the general population living in both rural and urban settings. Data from studies conducted in India and the U.S. were designed to identify socio-cultural, relationship-specific and sexual practices that increase rural and urban married women's risks for domestic violence and HIV. The study in India as conducted in four hospitals that serve urban and rural populations free of cost in Chennai and New Delhi. There were 459 HIV positive (n ¼ 243) and negative women (n ¼ 216), ages 18 and older. Women were recruited by health professionals who screened, consented and interviewed them privately for one half hour in Tamil or Hindi. Univariate, multivariate and logistic regression analyses revealed few differences between women residing in rural or urban areas or culture-bound circumstances of their marriages, regardless of sero status. However, HIV positive women were more likely to live alone and have fewer children. HIV positive women also reported being forced to have sex in marriage, to be beaten by their husbands, to have more depressive symptoms, and less marital satisfaction. With regard to sex-related risks, HIV positive women were more likely to report that their husbands had sex out of marriage and used condoms less in the past 6 months. The influence of coercion rather than culture appears to be related to these married, Indian women's HIV related risks. The implications of these findings for HIV prevention interventions in India and the U.S. will be discussed. Carl Bell, Community Mental Health Council, Chicago, Illinois 60617, U.S.A., e-mail: carlcbell@pol.net Abstract: Drawing from several research sources, this presentation will present research that indicates that adverse childhood experiences (psychological abuse, physical abuse, sexual abuse, violence against the mother, living with household members who were substance abusers, living with household members who were mentally ill or suicidal, living with household members who were ever imprisoned) that clearly indicates that trauma and victimization has an impact on women's mental health. Previous studies have shown that women's history of adverse childhood experiences increases suicidal, substance abuse, and risky sexual behavior (e.g., having four or more adverse childhood experiences results in a seven times greater likelihood of alcoholism, a ten-times greater likelihood of substance abuse, a twice greater likelihood of having greater than fifty sexual partners, a two and a half times greater likelihood of having a sexually transmitted disease, and a twelve-times greater likelihood of suicide attempts). In addition, exposure to repeated adverse childhood experiences also has a major impact on health behaviors that places individuals at higher risk for physical disease (e.g., having four or more adverse childhood experiences results in a twice greater likelihood of ischemic heart disease, a twice greater likelihood of having cancer, a four times greater likelihood of having a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and two and a half greater likelihood of having liver disease. Finally, based on his NIMH funded, international research, theoretically sound and practically tested health behavior change strategies which would either prevent or ameliorate the outcome of trauma or victimization of women will be presented. Developing secondary prevention interventions to enhance social support networks for women living with HIV in the U.S. and South Africa Gina Wingood, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30324, U.S.A., e-mail: gwingoo@sph.emory.edu Abstract: The epidemic of HIV is disproportionately affecting women in the United States as well as women in South Africa. Prevention programs for women living with HIV that are designed to increase women's social support networks as a strategy for reducing stress and depression are desperately needed both in the U.S. and in South Africa. The presentation will: (1) describe the design of a secondary HIV prevention program that was implemented with approximately 400 women living with HIV in the U.S. and, (2) discuss the feasibility of designing a secondary HIV prevention program for Xhosa women living with HIV in South Africa. Implications for the maintenance of secondary HIV prevention program efforts for women living with HIV will be addressed. Mental health issues in women and children confronting aids in the U.S., China, India and Australia Mary Jane Rotheram, UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute, Los Angeles, CA 90024-6521, U.S.A., e-mail: rotheram@ucla.edu Abstract: Most of the 45 million persons living with HIV are parents, resulting in at least 13 million AIDS orphans and 30 million extended families coping with seriously ill relatives. All parents living with HIV face challenges of: 1) maintaining their own health, 2) stopping transmission to others, 3) caring for their children while ill, and 4) maintaining positive mental health over time, despite stigma, isolation, and increasing poverty. Psychosocial programs targeting these outcomes have been successful in the developed world where governmental safety nets provide schooling, shelter, health care, and food. In South Africa, strategies for implementing psychosocial programs in combination with economic development programs are necessary. While social safety nets are key in the United States, social and economic safety nets are needed by families in South Africa. The research team's experience in mounting programs for families living with HIV in each environment will be presented, together with solutions in each environment. Objectives: By the end of this session, participants will: 1. Recognize the importance of conducting subgroup analysis to detect sex differences in drug testing and surveillance 2. Learn novel methods for conducting subgroup analysis in early phase clinical trials 3. Understand federal regulations regarding sex analysis of trial and surveillance data. Abstract: In May 2000, a U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) report revealed that although women are now participating in clinical trials in numbers proportionate to their numbers in the general population, data collected in this research are not routinely being analyzed by sex. Without such analysis, clinically relevant information about potentially lifesaving treatments could be lost. Further, data analysis must be continued during post-marketing surveillance in order to detect potential sex differences in adverse events. The purpose of this symposium is to educate researchers on the importance of sex analysis, provide novel tools for conducting such studies, and to familiarize them with federal regulations concerning subgroup analysis. The importance of detecting sex differences in clinical trials: the science Sherry Marts, Society for Women's Health Research, Washington, DC 20036, U.S.A., e-mail: sherry@womens-health.org Objectives: By the end of this session, participants will: 1. Recognize the importance of conducting subgroup analysis to detect sex differences in drug testing and surveillance 2. Learn novel methods for conducting subgroup analysis in early phase clinical trials 3. Understand federal regulations regarding sex analysis of trial and surveillance data. Abstract: In July of 2001, the U.S. General Accounting Office issued a report that found that most of the drugs withdrawn from the market in recent years had greater health risks for women. This presentation will provide a general overview of the importance of properly designing and conducting research studies to detect sex differences, as well as the necessity of reporting sex analyses in published literature. Objectives: By the end of this session, participants will: 1. Recognize the importance of conducting subgroup analysis to detect sex differences in drug testing and surveillance 2. Learn novel methods for conducting subgroup analysis in early phase clinical trials 3. Understand federal regulations regarding sex analysis of trial and surveillance data. Abstract: The FDA is the last oversight body before a drug is made available to the consumer. Citing concerns that the FDA has paid insufficient attention to sex-based research, in 2002 Congress directed the agency to develop an agency-wide database focused on women's health activities to include demographic data on clinical trials. This presentation will provide an overview of FDA regulations regarding the reporting of sex-based analyses and a progress report on current pilot programs and a capability assessment of the agency's ability to review clinical trial databases coordinate data collection and identify areas in which gaps exist. The importance of detecting sex differences in clinical trials: the science: the practice Carol Braun Trapnell, Globomax, LLC, Vice President for Medical Affairs, U.S.A. Objectives: By the end of this session, participants will: 1. Recognize the importance of conducting subgroup analysis to detect sex differences in drug testing and surveillance 2. Learn novel methods for conducting subgroup analysis in early phase clinical trials 3. Understand federal regulations regarding sex analysis of trial and surveillance data. Abstract: During the drug development process, pharmacokinetic= pharmacodynamic analysis is often done after phase 2 or 3 trials are well under way or completed. Many companies seem willing to move forward with information from male subjects, and only later look for sex differences, often after dosing regimens have been established. This presentation will discuss the pitfalls of this approach and offer alternative strategies for identifying sex differences earlier in the clinical trials process. How does stress during pregnancy influence the physical and mental health of a mother in the fetus Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to understand the impact of stress on obstetrical complications and fetal development and learn basic techniques to assess stress in pregnant women. Abstract: Epidemiological research shows that there is a correlation of stress during pregnany with early misscarriage, chromosomal abnormalities, small for gestational age, low birth wight, premature birth and neonatal neurological development. Psychoendocrine investigations show that placental CRF plays an imortant role in fetal maternal communication and coordination of maternal and fetal metabolism. At the same time CRF is influenced and involved in HPA axis regulation both in the mother and in the foetus, thus providing the basis for a possible postnatal increased stress vulnerability of the newborn. Stress assessement in the pregnant woman is not a standard procedure in obstetrics because: a) Lack of standardized instrument in obstetrics due assess the distress of the pregnant women. b) Obstetricians are not trained in evaluating mental health problems. c) Pregnancy is a time limited period with usually brief physician patient contacts. We have established a psychoendocrine instrument to determine stress vulnerability in pregnant women: Women perform a calculation test which is accompanied by cardiovascular assessment of the pregnant women and sonographic observation of the foetus. A the same time CRF and cortisol are measured to evaluate the endocrine response. Mental health or quality of life? Elizabeth M. Alder, Napier University, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, Edinburgh, EH9 2TB, U.K., e-mail: E.M.Alder@napier.ac.uk Objectives: Participants should be able to demonstrate an understanding of the concept of quality of life and its relationship to mental health. Abstract: The term 'Quality of life' may be used to mean psychosocial aspects, mood or anything that biological or medical science can't measure. WHO's 1993 definition has been widely used but the WHO (2001) International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health has many advantages and shows how quality of life can have real meaning. If the measurement of mental health is carried out in isolation, it has little meaning for holistic care and to practising health professionals. Mental health is affected by social circumstances (deprivation, relationships) current physical health (endocrines, age, gender) and of course, life events. Childbirth and the transition to menopause are two major events that are biologically determined but have significant effects on quality of life. The assessment of quality of life following these two events will be discussed. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to understand the problem of body image changes in breast cancer patients from a multifactorial perspective. They should know about the effectiveness of different intervention strategies to treat body image problems including breast reconstruction and psychological interventions. Abstract: Breast cancer is different from all other cancers in that it not only causes pain, suffering and the possibility of death but also imposes a threat to a woman's self-concept, self-esteem, and feminine body identity through its attack on the female body. The literature will be reviewed with respect to the following claims: (1) older women suffer less from mastectomy, (2) type of surgery is related to severity of body image problems (3) breast reconstruction helps women to recover from body image problems (4) a positive cosmetic result is associated with better body image and (5) adjuvant treatment has an impact on body image. A multifactorial model will be derived from these data focusing on predisposing, triggering and maintaining factors responsible for body image problems. In the second part, intervention strategies will be presented, including operative and psychological methods. After a general overview, the development of a cognitive-behavioral group intervention will be described and first experiences with this group intervention will be depicted. Aila R. Collins, Department Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institute, Karolinska Hospital Z6, Stockholm, 171 76, Sweden, e-mail: aila.collins@ cns.ki.se Objectives: Participants will have a better understanding of the interaction of psychosocial work conditions and women's health at menopause. They will XXVIII be able to identify symptoms related to psychosocial factors and stressors in the workplace. Abstract: Menopause is considered a turning point in women's lives associated with biological and psychological changes affecting health and working capacity. Many women occupy jobs with high demands and low decision latitude. The aim of an ongoing population-based study was to assess the health profile of perimenopausal women in reation to psychosocial factors and perceived quality of work role. 2000 women received a health questionnaire. A subsample of 150 women of those who responded participated in a biannual follow-up including biological stress measures, completion of self-rating scales and a psychological interview focusing on health and perception of work role. Factor analyses of symptom scales yielded seven independent factors; burnout, musculoskeletal symptoms, anxiety and vasomotor symptoms explaining most of the variance. Burnout was related to low social support and low decision latitude. Vasomotor symptoms were related to having a high strain job and to postmenopausal status. The results showed that working excessive hours and receiving low social support increased women's biological stress levels. In conclusion, perceived quality of work role and degree of social support are important contributors to women's health at menopause. Increasing autonomy and social support in the workplace may be critical for preventing stress-related disorders among perimenopausal women. Psychosocial distress and preterm delivery: searching for the evidences Abstract: The association between pre-term delivery (PTD) and psychosocial distress is a good working-hypothesis rather than a clinical based evidence. PTD is certainly more prevalent in the worst social-cultural conditions and it is directly related also with heavy work. Far less clear however, is the link between psychosocial distress and pre-term birth. Number of studies have demonstrated that there's a positive correlation between prenatal maternal stress and adverse birth outcomes such as low birth-weight and PTD (1) . Trying to understand how chronic stress before pregnancy affects pregnancy outcomes we pay our attention on the concept of allostatic load proposed by McEwen (2, 3) . Allostasis is the ability of the body to achieve stability through changes. In a prospective case-control design, women admitted for pre-term labour (regular uterine contractions associated with changes of cervical score) were administered various questionnaires. Asymptomatic women matched for gestational age and parity served as controls. Interviews took place at 31.2 (AE 2) weeks. Ten of the cases (24%) and 3 of the controls (7.3%) delivered pre-term. Cases were less educated, reported a lower acceptance of pregnancy and had worse relationship with their husband. Their anxiety as well as their feelings of inadequacy were double than in controls. Moreover cases showed a reduced ability of self control, a lower personal maturity and seemed to have few positive interpersonal relationships. In conclusion, we confirm that pre-term uterine contractility is a poor predictor of PTD. Such symptom seems however to be determined by pregnancy-specific psychosocial distressors as well as by psychosocial factors linked to inadequate personal growth. Yonkers, K. A., Bruce, S., Dyck, I., Keller, M. (2003) . Chronicity, Relapse and Illness -Course of panic disorder, social phobia, and generalized anxiety disorder: Findings in men and women from 8 years of follow-up. Depression and Anxiety 17: 173-179. Objectives: At the conclusion of this panel, participants should have increased understanding of sex differences in the risk, clinical course and presentation of panic disorder with or without agoraphobia, generalized anxiety disorder, post traumatic stress disorder and obsessive compulsive disorder. Abstract: Although men and women are at equal risk for development of a psychiatric disorder, risks associated with various llnesses differ greatly in men and women. For example, substance abuse and dependence disorders occur more commonly in men while prevalence rates for unipolar depressive disorders are higher in women. Less attention has been devoted to sex differences in the prevalence, characteristics and course of anxiety disorders despite the fact that some of the most robust sex differences exist for the expression of these illnesses. Some of the better documented differences in anxiety disorders include the highly replicated differences in prevalence rates for anxiety disorders and the sex differences in clinical course of disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder and panic disorder. A woman's reproductive function may also influence the expression of an anxiety disorder. In this panel, sex differences in the prevalence, course and presentation of panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder will be reviewed. In addition, the impact of gonadal steroids on risk of anxiety disorders will be discussed. The course of panic, gad and social phobia in men and women Objectives: At the conclusion of this panel, participants should have increased understanding of sex differences in the risk, clinical course of panic disorder with or without agoraphobia, generalized anxiety disorder and social phobia. Abstract: Anxiety disorders are chronic illnesses occurring more often in women than men. In recent years, longitudinal, prospective studies have contributed to mapping the clinical course of anxiety disorders in males and females. Several studies in adolescents document that the sex difference in illness rates begins during childhood and increase over time contributing to the overall higher illness prevalence in females. Work in adults find low rates for recovery among individuals with agoraphobia in conjunction with panic compared to uncomplicated panic. This disproportionally increases risk in women since they are far more likely to have panic with agoraphobia than uncomplicated panic. After recovering, women are more likely to relapse into panic than are men. Conversely, men may be more likely to relapse after recovering from GAD. These and other differences will be discussed during the presentation. Margaret Altemus, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, U.S.A., e-mail: maltemus@med.cornell.edu Abstract: Clinical observations indicate that reproductive events alter the course of anxiety disorders in women, but the neurobiological determinants of these findings are not well understood. Anxiety disorders are likely to involve dysfunction of brain fear circuits, potentially through abnormalities in neurotransmitter=neuropeptide activity or structural changes within the fear circuits. There is evidence that reproductive hormones can alter both neurotransmitter activity and neuronal structure, although effects of reproductive hormones within the fear circuit has not been well described. Emerging evidence from animal studies indicates that females have less severe behavioral and neurobiological changes in response to stress, despite greater and prolonged HPA axis responses to stress. These findings highlight the potential dissociation between HPA axis and behavioral=neurobiological responses to stress and suggest a potential therapeutic utility of female reproductive hormones. Because multiple hormonal changes occur with the menstrual cycle, pregnancy, lactation, and menopause, isolation of the effects on anxiety of individual reproductive hormones is not possible in naturalistic studies. Available evidence from experimental clinical studies and from animal studies indicate that estrogen and progesterone suppress HPA axis and autonomic responses to stress. Both estrogen and progesterone also seem to have anxiolytic effects in animal models of anxiety, but effects on anxiety in humans are less clear, and may vary depending on the type of anxiety disorder. In addition, hormonal changes during pregnancy and lactation suppress stress responsivity and may also modulate the course of anxiety disorders. Several neurobiological changes which occur during pregnancy may be maintained and gradually normalized during lactation and gradual weaning, while bottle-feeding immediately postpartum or abrupt weaning may lead to disruption of physiological homeostasis and increased anxiety in vulnerable individuals. Abstract: Gender is an important, yet underexplored issue in the prevalence, etiology, presentation and treatment of PTSD. A number of epidemiologic studies demonstrate that PTSD is approximately two times as common in men as compared to women. Gender is also a factor in the type of trauma exposure and the social environment that mediates the effect of trauma. Biologic differences between men and women may moderate the impact of trauma exposure as well as the expression of PTSD symptoms. Gender differences in stress responding and the impact of hormonal fluctuation on the stress response will be reviewed. There is evidence for gender differences in response to psychotherapeutic and pharmacotherapeutic treatments. Promising future directions for investigation will be discussed. (1997) . Obsessive-compulsive disorder in pregnancy, the puerperium, and the premenstrum. J Clin Psychiatry. Jul; 58 (7): 330-334. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation the participants should be able to discuss the potential impact of gender on the clinical presentation and clinical course of OCD. Abstract: This part of the symposium will review the clinical presentation and course of OCD in women. In comparison to men, women with OCD appear to have some unique clinical features including a later onset of illness, a more severe course, and a higher risk of comorbid depression. Gender also appears to have a signficant impact on the relative lifetime risk of occurrence of certain comorbid conditions in OCD including Tourette's Syndrome, eating disorders, and trichotillomania. Available evidence supporting a critical role for female reproductive cycle events in the onset and clinical course of OCD in women will also be covered during this presentation. As will be discussed, most of the gender differences identified in OCD are derived from relatively small and=or preliminary investigations. However, these findings are intriguing and suggest that future gender-based research endeavors are particularly warranted in OCD. Objectives: 1. Demonstrate understanding of the prevalence of co-occurring disorders (CODs) and trauma. 2. Recognize the special needs of children of mothers with CODs and trauma. 3. Recognize the importance of race=ethnicity in the treatment of women with CODs and trauma. 4. Discuss the parenting support needs of women engaged in treatment for trauma. Abstract: This is the symposium's overall abstract Despite the prevalence of trauma in the lives of women with co-occurring mental health and substance use disorders effective services to meet complex needs of this population are generally not available. This symposium presents findings from the Women Co-Occurring Disorders and Violence (WCDV) Study. The WCDV Study is a five-year (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) initiative financed by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) to develop, implement and evaluate gender sensitive, integrated, trauma informed services for women with cooccurring disorders and histories of violence. The study employed prospective meta analytic methods to analyze outcomes of services provided to study participants. Data were collected at baseline, and at 3,6, 9 and 12 months follow-up at nine study sites located in Culver City, CA, Stockton, CA, Thornton, Co, Washington, DC, Avon Park, FL, Boston, MA, Cambridge, MA, Greenfield, MA, and New York City, NY. Symposia speakers will present papers describing the population characteristics and study outcomes. Presenters will describe women's trauma experience and the impact of services on mental health, substance abuse and trauma symptoms. Outcomes for children of women enrolled in the study and the parenting needs of the population will be discussed along with implications for policy and practice. Parenting under stress: mothers with co-occurring disorders and histories of abuse Objectives: 1. Recognize the special needs of mothers with co-occurring disorders (CODs) and trauma. 2. Demonstrate an understanding of the connection between mental health, substance abuse, and trauma symptoms and parenting difficulties. 3. Understand the relationship between child custody status and mothers' behavioral health treatment needs. Abstract: In ''Missing Out on Motherhood'' Lisa Fox writes, ''Being a mother is hard work, but when you add a mental illness, motherhood can seem like an impossible task.'' Add a substance abuse disorder and history of abuse to the mother's situation and the problems become exponential. Despite the fact that a large proportion of women receiving behavioral health services are mothers, their special needs have received very little attention. Mothers who abuse alcohol and=or drugs and have a co occurring mental disorder have historically faced almost insurmountable obstacles when attempting to voluntarily access treatment for either or both disorders. Using quantitative and qualitative data from the Women Co-Occurring Disorders and Violence (WCDV) Study this presentation will describe the parenting status and parenting support needs of women (N ¼ 2292) with children under 18 years enrolled in the study. The relationship between current mental health symptoms, substance abuse severity, trauma and child custody status will be discussed along with the importance of children in the lives of women studied. Qualitative data will include mother's perception of services received and the things that were both helpful and hurtful to their recovery. Implications for services development and recommendations for policy and practice will be discussed. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to discuss racial=ethnic differences in trauma history, experience and symptomatology and their implications for treatment services. Abstract: Purpose: While there is general agreement about the profound negative impact of interpersonal violence on women's substance use and mental health, much less is known about the clinical profile, service needs and efficacy of trauma interventions among Latina and African American women. This paper presents data on racial=ethnic differences and predictors of trauma history, mental health and social-economic risk factors among a diverse sample 2,729 women intervention study participants with co occurring disorders presenting for treatment. Method: Recruited into the intervention were adult women presenting treatment at nine U.S. study sites. Structured in person interviews conducted at baseline were used to test the following hypotheses: Black and Hispanic women will differ significantly from non-Hispanic white women in a) social economic risk factors, b) trauma history and symptomatology, c) access to and utilization of services, and d) pathways to services. Results: Results describe multivariate regression models testing racial= ethnic differences in trauma symptomatology, service systems pathways, and race=ethnicity interactions with predictors of trauma symptomatology. Conclusions: Racial and ethnic differences in history of trauma, social capital and pathways to service systems need to be considered in the design and delivery of clinical services. Implications for clinical treatment of African American and Hispanic women will be discussed. Joseph Morrissey, Elizabeth Jackson Sheps Center=University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3386, U.S.A., e-mail: joe_morrissey@unc.edu Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation participants should be able to recognize the effects of a nine-site intervention study on the mental health, substance abuse, and trauma outcomes of women with co-occurring disorders and trauma experiences. Abstract: Purpose: Report 6-and 12-month outcomes for a nine site intervention study. Methods: Quasi-experiment using meta-analysis and hierarchical models. Results: Small positive effects (.08-.10) at six months for mental health, trauma, and substance abuse outcomes; effects intensify at 12-months for mental health and trauma outcomes (. 17-.19) . Conclusions: Interventions led to significant reductions in symptoms & behavioral outcomes. Promoting resiliency: examining the effects of a comprehensive, trauma-informed treatment intervention for children of mothers with histories of co-occurring disorders and trauma  1) Demonstrate increased knowledge and awareness of the unique needs of children who have histories of witnessing=experiencing violence and trauma 2) Recognize the importance of providing comprehensive, trauma-informed treatment services for this population which promote resilience 3) Understand a model for delivering such an intervention and its impact upon children's outcomes. Abstract: Little is known empirically about the service needs and treatment outcomes of children who have histories of witnessing and=or experiencing domestic violence and trauma, and who also have a maternal history of co-occurring substance use and mental health disorders. We hypothesize that treatment strategies that are trauma-informed, comprehensive and which promote resiliency by teaching self-confidence and skills-building, as well as by fostering trust and mutual respect, can significantly affect the outcomes for children with these life circumstances. This session will present findings from SAMHSA's WCDVS Children's Subset Study, a multi-site, longitudinal study of outcomes for children with such histories. As such, an overview of the Children's Subset Study will be provided, including a discussion of the needs and challenges faced by these children. A brief description of the trauma-informed intervention model that was developed for use in this study will also be provided. Results of the cross-site analyses of both short-term (6-months) and long-term (12-months) outcomes for children who participated in the standardized intervention will be presented, including a discussion of related factors which promote positive change for these children. This session will conclude with a discussion of the implications of these finding for both policy and practice. Literature Reference: Kersting, A., Reutemann, M., Ohrmann, P., Baez, E., Klockenbusch, W., Arolt, V. (in press). Grief after termination of pregnancy due to fetal malformation. J Psychosom Obstet Gynecol. Objectives: The aim of the symposium is to show that like miscarriages, an unplanned as well as a planned pregnancy may be experienced by the women concerned as a stressful life event, one that may lead in some cases to long-term psychological sequelae. Abstract: Pregnancy as a stressful life event Chair: Anette Kersting, Germany, Pamela Geller USA Like miscarriages, an unplanned as well as a planned pregnancy may be experienced by the women concerned as a stressful life event, one that may lead in some cases to long term psychological sequelae. In the first contribution, Christian Fiala (Austria) reports the results of a study on termination of pregnancy in the first trimester. The paper by Anette Kersting (Germany) deals with psychological sequelae of terminations of pregnancy following the diagnosis of fetal malformation in the second trimester. The focus of the third paper, by Claudia Klier (Austria), is on fetal abuse. Dorothy Castille (USA) outlines the psychological sequelae of miscarriage again the background of a model by Brown and Harris. The contribution by Pamela Geller (USA) deals with the impact of a miscarriage on a subsequent pregnancy. Methods: 80 women who had undergone termination of pregnancy between 1995 and 1999 were compared with 40 women 14 days after termination and a control group of 60 women to whom a healthy child had been born spontaneously. Psychometric instruments covered posttraumatic symptoms and grief. Results: Even years after termination, 48.8% of the women experienced posttraumatic stress responses corresponding to or even higher than those of the comparison group 14 days after termination of pregnancy. With respect to the level of grief, this applied to 75.1% of the women in the study group. Conclusions: Termination of pregnancy remains an emotionally traumatic major life event that leads to a severe posttraumatic stress response and an intensive grief response that are still detectable some years later. What happens next? Pregnancies subsequent to miscarriage Objectives: At the conclusion of this symposium, participants should better understand the psychiatric and psychological consequences of miscarriage, as well as the anxiety and depressive reactions of women during pregnancies subsequent to reproductive loss. Abstract: Purpose: Both the distress and anxiety many women experience after a spontaneous abortion and the fact that as many as 50% of women who miscarry become pregnant again within a year following the loss, highlight the importance of examining such symptoms during the pregnancy subsequent to miscarriage. Methods: Rates of anxiety symptoms, measured with the Composite Anxiety Symptom Scale (derived from the PERI), and depressive symptoms, measured with the CES-D, were assessed in 49 women treated for spontaneous abortion who conceived again within 6 months after loss. These rates were compared with those of women who miscarried but did not become pregnant in the study time frame (n ¼ 180), and pregnant women without recent reproductive loss (n ¼ 277). Results: Initial data analyses revealed that neither anxiety nor depressive symptoms in miscarrying women that conceived again appeared significantly different from those of miscarrying women that did not conceive again within 6 months. Early in the pregnancy, women with subsequent pregnancies displayed significantly more depressive and anxiety symptoms than women in the pregnant cohort (p < .0001). Conclusions: Availability of clinical intervention for women with a loss history who display increased levels of anxiety about their current pregnancy may be beneficial and may prevent the anxiety from advancing to a significant degree. Research addressing whether conceiving again right away or waiting until women have resolved their grief and depressive symptoms, best helps limit anxiety in the subsequent pregnancy would assist health care providers in advising women. Objectives: The main advantages of medical abortion are: the possibility to have the abortion very early in the pregnancy, not to hand over control, not to undergo a surgical procedure or general anesthesia are. These aspects should be part of the counseling prior to an abortion. Abstract: Purpose: This study evaluates the reasons for choosing medical abortion, the psychological aspects of the patients during treatment and their judgment after the treatment. A better understanding of the needs, fantasies and anxieties can help to improve the counseling before and care during the treatment. Methods: Medical abortion was introduced at the General Public Hospital of Korneuburg in Austria in January 1999. Since, 1.589 patients have been treated with gestational ages up to 49 days of amenorrhea. Results: 1346 of the patients got a questionnaire at the follow-up visit and 997 (74%) returned it. The remaining 243 had the follow-up with their gynecologist (161), were lost for follow-up (69) or had seen the gestational sac and did not see the need to come to a follow-up (13). The possibility of having the abortion early was the most frequently cited reason for the choice of the method (66%). This corresponds with the finding that most women came very early in their pregnancy. In 62% of the cases, no fetal cardiac activity could be visualized in ultrasound at the beginning of the treatment. Conclusions: Women should have easy and unrest icted access to medical abortion, which can be done very early in pregnancy, as soon as the pregnancy test is positive. Other advantages cited were the fact that the women did not need to hand over control over their body. And going through the experience fully conscious which allows them to correct their mostly horrifying fantasies by the non dramatic reality. From fetal abuse to fatal child abuse -a case report Objectives: Screening for mental health problems and history of abuse should begin immediately after the expectant mother contacts a health professional for prenatal care. Mental health assessments should be performed as vigorously as medical check ups in order to prevent morbidity and mortality of mothers and their babies. Abstract: Purpose: Women experiencing unwanted pregnancies may try to harm the fetus. Support for this hypothesis is found in the research literature. In one study, as many as 8% of 112 normal pregnant women acknowledged an urge to hurt or punish their unborn children (Condon, 1987) . A recent unpublished study identified two women who abused their fetuses, and another two who had reported an impulse to do so, out of a total of 104 pregnant women who were assessed prospectively (Brockington, 2003) . Method: An interview with a 20 year old woman accused of murdering her 8 month old child. Results: The interview with the woman revealed a history of physical abuse and childhood depression. When she became pregnant, she experienced depression and when the fetus started to move she repeatedly punched her abdominal wall. Birth was a traumatic event, with an emergency cesarean section and subsequent infectious complications. The child developed feeding problems and started to refuse food when five months of age. The mother resorted to forced feeding by closing the baby's nose, thus forcing him to open his mouth. The baby died of a head injury after having been thrown to the ground. Conclusion: During mid-pregnancy, there were clear signs of depression and fetal abuse displayed by the mother. Neither of these conditions were noticed or reported by health professionals during prenatal care or after the birth. The possible association between fetal abuse and child abuse had been documented before (Condon, 1987) . Objectives: Health care providers should be alert to the context and meaning of miscarriage to their patients, specifically those most vulnerable to anxiety and depression due to youth and social support. Abstract: Introduction: Miscarriage is most consistently understood to be a loss event triggering depressive symptoms and disorders. However, a growing body of research recognizes anxiety symptoms and disorders as potential psychiatric consequences of miscarriage (Geller et al., in press) . Purpose: The aim of this study of the psychiatric sequelae of miscarriage is to test the hypothesized association between the meaning of miscarriage as a stressful life event signifying loss, danger, or both loss and danger, and subsequent symptoms of anxiety and depression (Brown and Harris, 1989) . Methods: Interviews were conducted between 2 and 4 weeks following miscarriage with 224 women. 277 pregnant were interviewed at roughly the same point in gestation as the miscarrying women had experienced their loss, and 290 non-pregnant community women were interviewed at approximately the same calendar time period. The Composite Anxiety Symptom Scale (derived from the PERI), based on DSM-IV criteria for anxiety disorders, was used to measure anxiety symptoms. Results: Observed symptom mean of the miscarriage cohort on the CASS was 24.0, significantly different (p < 0.05) from that in the pregnant (20.4) and the community (20.2) cohorts. Miscarriage exerted a substantially greater effect on anxiety symptoms among clinic patients and among childless women. However, when the effect of contextual factors surrounding the miscarriage event are considered, young single women are most likely to experience symptoms of both anxiety and depression. Conclusions: These findings support the Brown and Harris hypothesis that miscarriage, a life event with meanings of loss and danger, may provoke symptoms of anxiety. Floter, A., Nathorst-Boos, J., Carlstrom, K. et al. (2002) . Addition of testosterone to estrogen replacement therapy in oophorectomized women: effects on sexuality and well-being. Climacteric 5(4): 357-365. Objectives: 1. Participants will be able to describe what types of women may benefit from estrogen and=or androgen therapy for low libido or other sexual problems. 2. Participants will be able to describe the various aspects of female sexual function affected by estrogen and=or androgen therapy. Abstract: Many peri-and postmenopausal women are free of sexual problems, including low libido. But for those women who are distressed by sexual problems associated with menopause, estrogen and=or androgen therapy may be beneficial. As such, many of the randomized control trials reflect populations of women who appear to be symptomatic rather than a sample of the general menopausal population. Estrogen replacement versus placebo after surgical or natural menopause has been examined by a number of authors. When estrogen was replaced in these women, improvements (compared to placebo) were seen in terms of desire, fantasies, enjoyment, satisfaction, orgasm=sexual activity=frequency of coitus, masturbation frequency orgasm, lubrication, and maturation of vaginal cells. In addition, both vaginal dryness and pain were decreased by estrogen replacement versus placebo. Another set of trials examined the affect of testosterone replacement therapy in the estrogen replete woman. When testosterone was added to estrogen replete women, they exhibited increased clitoral sensation, orgasm, desire, libido, fantasies, arousal, pleasure=orgasm, pleasure, pleasure with masturbation, increased enjoyment, satisfaction, relevancy=importance of sexuality, sexual activity=frequency of coitus, and overall sexual function. Thus many postmenopausal women with sexual complaints may benefit from local or systemic treatment with estrogen and=or testosterone replacement therapy. Objectives: 1. To review the synthesis of sex steroids during the menopausal transition, the factors involved in target tissue response and the heterogeneity of the process. 2. To define the endocrine basis and the clinical presentation of sexual dysfunction in menopausal women, differentiating central from local factors. 3. To apply the above to the pharmacologic management of sexuality in menopaus women. Abstract: The endogenous synthesis of estrogen and androgen throughout the female life cycle has been clearly defined. Factors relevant to sexuality in menopausal women include: androgens (DHEAS; DHEA; androstenedione and testosterone) are the predominant circulating sexsteroid; androgens are pre-hormones to estrogen (estrone; estradiol); target tissue response depends on the prevalence of free bioavailable ligands (testosterone; estradiol) and the presence, distribution and affinity of androgen and estrogen receptors. Testosterone can induce its biologic effect directly via 5a reductase conversion to DHT or by aromatization to estradiol. The synthesis of sex steroids continues post-menopausally, with the peripheral conversion of androgens to estrogen, a major confounding and variable issue. The endocrine sexual health of menopausal women is related to CNS (central) and lower genital tract (local) factors, and is related in part to the issues noted above. Clinical diagnostic measures of sexual health=dysfuncdysfunction will be outlined, including the use of simple questionnaires, physical examination and diagnostic aids such as vaginal rH monitoring. The utility of serum hormone assays will be reviewed. Finally, the principles and pharmacologic approach to the treatment of sexual dysfunction in menopausal women will be reviewed. Factors involved include: the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of estrogen, androgen and=or combined estrogen=androgen treatment; systemic versus local therapy; oral versus transdermal therapy. The tailoring of HT to include the non-sexuality needs of individual women will also be briefly adressed. Objectives: 1. Understand the effects of aging and social factors on female sexual functioning. 2. Understand the relative importance of the hormonal changes associated with natural and surgical menopause on female sexual functioning. Abstract: This paper examines rigorous observational studies to determine whether there are changes in sexual functioning associated with the menopausal transition and the relative roles of aging and hormonal factors. A particular focus is a recent international survey of women's health and sexual functioning using validated questionnaires concurrently in different European countries and the USA (WISHES). This study found significant differences between countries in women's sexual functioning, a substantial age related decline in sexual functioning and an added incremental decline associated with the menopausal transition and surgical menopause. There have been relatively few prospective, population-based studies utilising validated measures of sexual functioning and concurrent hormonal sampling. The prospective Melbourne Women's Midlife Health Project found the percentage of women with scores indicating sexual dysfunction rose from 42% to 88%. By the postmenopausal phase there was a significant decline in sexual arousal and interest, frequency of sexual activities, and the Total Score. There was a significant increase in vaginal dryness and dyspareunia and women's reports of their partner's problems in sexual performance. Women with low scores of sexual functioning were more likely to be distressed. Conclusions: There is a dramatic decline in female sexual functioning with the menopause. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation the participants should be able to understand the domains that determine quality of life through and beyond menopause, and should be able to appreciate and utilize appropriate instruments to measure quality of life. Abstract: Quality of Life (QOL) is an outcome variable requiring measurement in clinical care or pivotal regulatory research. Until recently, all menopause-related QOL measures have predominantly been life phase or disease symptom inventories or scores. These will be reviewed. The latest generation of instruments validated for quantifying sense of well-being in a perimenopausal population is represented by the Utian Quality of Life Scale (UQOL). Details will be presented of the domains and value in clinical care or research. Utilization of such instruments in clinical care will be elaborated, and the value of combining pure QOL instruments with symptom scores will be considered. Menopausal sex steroids peprivation, personality and mental health Andrea Genazzani, N. Pluchino, F. Bernardi Department of Reproductive Medicine and Child Development, University of Pisa, Section of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Italy, e-mail: argenazzani@tiscalinet.it Abstract: The central nervous system (CNS) is one of the main target tissues for sex steroid hormones, which act on both through genomic mechanisms, modulating synthesis, release and metabolism of many neuropeptides and neurotransmitters, and through non genomic mechanisms, influencing electrical excitability, synaptic function, morphological features and neuron-glia interactions. During the climacteric period, sex steroid deficiency causes many neuroendocrine changes. At hypothalamic level, estrogen withdrawal gives rise to vasomotor symptoms, as well as to eating behaviour disorders and altered blood pressure control. Noradrenergic, dopaminergic and opioidergic tones are involved in the control of thermoregulatory centers: a fall in opioid tone occurs in postmenopause, while a sudden increase in plasma?-EP appears during hot flushes. On the other hand, at limbic level, the changes in serotoninergic, noradrenergic and opioidergic tones contribute to the modifications in mood, behaviour and nociception. ERT positively affect climateric depression throughout a direct effect on neural activity and on the modulation of adrenergic and serotoninergic tones and may revert the decrease in cognitive efficiency observed in climaterium. On the other hand, many biological mechanisms support the evidence that estrogens protect against Alzheimer's disease by influencing neurotransmission, increasing cerebral blood flow, modulating growth proteins associated with axonal elongation and blunting the neurotoxic effects of b-amyloid. The identification of the brain as a de novo source of neurosteroids modulating cerebral function, suggests that the modifications in mood and cognitive performances occurring in postmenopausal women could also be related to a modification in the levels of neurosteroids, particularly allopregnanolone and DHEA, GABA-A agonist and antagonist, respectively. HRT is able to modify neurosteroids levels influencing allopregnanolone=DHEA ratio. These findings open new perspectives in the study of the effects of sex steroids on the CNS and on the possible use of alternative and=or auxiliary HRT. Abstract: In the first quarter of 2003, a cross-sectional survey was conducted in four European countries (Germany, Great Britain, France and Spain) to ascertain the current profile of menopausal women. A stratified sample of 8,012 women aged 45-75 years was interviewed via standardized computer-aided telephone interviewing. Quota were used as to age, regional distribution and educational level to ensure that a representative sample of women was drawn from four different survey countries. A total of 73% of all interviewed women were aware of HRT as a treatment option for menopausal symptoms, this percentage varying from 41% in Spain to 90% in Great Britain. Among non-HRT users, the proportion of women who had heard of HRT was, on average, 60%. Women were well informed about the most widely discussed benefits and risks of HRT, osteoporosis prevention and breast cancer. When it comes to less well known risk such as uterine or colon cancer, the majority of HRT users as well as never users do not appear to be adequately informed. Regarding the effect of HRT on heart diseases, the opinion of two-thirds of the women rather reflect uncertainty either due to inadequate counseling or reinforced by the ongoing scientific debate on this topic. European women do not only start HRT usage for present symptom relief, although 70% of the users state that this was one of the main reasons to XXXIV initiate therapy. They also greatly value the possibility of preventing postmenopausal osteoporosis. Both effects of HRT remain unchallenged by the results of the WHI. Maintenance or improvement of general wellbeing is also closely linked to HRT usage. There is some variability in the ranking of the main reasons to start HRT use; e.g. French women putting highest weight on the prevention of osteoporosis instead of relief of hot flushes, British women rather consider relief from depressive mood, anxiety and irritability as highest ranking, only followed by osteoporosis prevention. In order to further objectify well-being, the Menopause Rating Scale had been applied in all countries. Mean MRS scores for individual symptoms were registered. The mean MRS score of HRT never (n ¼ 2.154) vs ever (former and current, n ¼ 2,596) users was 11 vs 9 resp. However, while these differences are significant in Germany and the UK, the scores in France and Spain are indistinguishable. Of those women who identified themselves as symptom-free when starting HRT, a total of 86% (n ¼ 524) would admit mild symptoms in at least one of the subscales of the MRS. Of the three MRS subscales, somato-vegetative factors scored on top, immediately followed by psychological factors such as irritability, anxiety, depressive mood as well as physical and mental exhaustion. This dominance of mental health is most apparent in France and Spain, less so in Great Britain and Germany. There are major differences in the knowledge of HRT's benefits and risks among women in the four survey countries. Expectations of the therapy vary according to different cultural backgrounds. Among reasons for starting or continuing HRT, items of mental health are high-ranking. Quality of life is perceived as major HRT benefit. Objectives: 1. explore methods for intraindividual and interindividual analysis of patterns of depressed mood among midlife women 2. identify challenges for analytic strategies for understanding depressed mood as it is experienced by midlife women, with special concern for its relationship to the menopausal transition. Abstract: Purpose: To describe the patterns of depressed mood across the menopausal transition and beyond and to identify factors related to individual patterns. Methods: Women (N ¼ 508) were recruited in 1990 from multi-ethnic neighborhoods and followed annually to the present. They completed the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CESD) scale, an annual health update, and menstrual calendars throughout the study. In addition a subset of women completed monthly symptoms and stress ratings and provided a first morning voided urine specimen on days 6 thorugh 10 of their cycles from 1998 to present. Urine samples were assayed for estrone, testosterone, FSH, cortisol, and catecholamines. K Cluster analysis was used to identify patterns of CESD scores over time, clustering both the scores and slopes over time. Results: Nine clusters were identified from the CESD scores obtained from 1990 through 2001. The pattern of scores over time in each cluster and the number of cases per cluster included: moderate scores over time (n ¼ 33); low scores, falling over time (n ¼ 23); high scores over time (n ¼ 19); nondepressed (n ¼ 79); low scores rising over time (n ¼ 30). Three clusters with fewer than 10 cases had extreme scores on one or more occasions or extremely low scores and were excluded from further analysis. Women with a history of sexual abuse=assault were over-represented in the cluster with the highest CESD scores. Pattern was not associated with the menopausal transition stage. Conclusions: The most prevalent pattern revealed consistently low scores across all occasions. There was no indication of a universal pattern of depressed mood that either increased over time or coincided with a single menopausal transition stage. Instead, a history of sexual abuse was associated with a pattern of chronic depressed mood. Further analyses will explore endocrine differences across these clusters. Abstract: Historically, eating disorders have been considered to be primarily of sociocultural origin. Over the past decade, this perspective has been resoundingly rebuffed by a systematic series of enlightening family, twin and molecular genetic studies. Family studies have revealed that both anorexia and bulimia are highly familial with the relative risk between 10-12. Twin studies have shown that genetic factors are strong contributors to the observed familial patterns. Several population-based twin studies conducted around the world have similarly concluded that anorexia and bulimia nervosa, as well as related phenotypes such as perfectionism, body dissatisfaction, and drive for thinness are moderately heritable. In a series of studies supported by the Price Foundation of Geneva Switzerland, our group has completed linkage studies for both anorexia and bulimia nervosa leading to the identification of areas on chromosome 1 for anorexia and chromosome 10 for bulimia nervosa which may harbor susceptibility loci for these disorders. The next stages of our research will be to further refine our search for specific genes that may influence risk for eating disorders as well as to capitalize on our genetic findings in order to develop new approaches for understanding the manner in which environment influences risk. Sophisticated approaches to unraveling gene-environment interactions and gene-environment correlations will no doubt be critical to the full understanding of the etiology of these disorders. Abstract: Few studies have examined risk factors for eating disorders using longitudinal data and existing studies typically have very small numbers of full syndrome cases. The National Growth and Health Study-Wave II was initiated to examine correlates of and risk factors for eating disorders involving binge eating as a defining symptom (bulimia nervosa, BN, and binge eating disorder, BED). Risk factor data were collected annually for ten years. Diagnosis was established retrospectively. Data were analyzed using an exploratory method, signal detection. The analysis began with all participants with relevant data, including 67 women met research criteria for BN=BED and 1575 women with no history of an eating disorder. Results suggest three risk subgroups: those (1) who had high weight concern before age 14; (2) who were less weight concerned than group 1 but reported high perceived stress; and (3) whose weight concern and perceived stress were lower than groups 1 or 2 but who reported behavior conduct problems before age 14. Limitations of the design will be discussed. Objectives: To provide an overview of CAM therapies associated with the management of menopausal symptoms; to review how botanicals and dietary supplements are different from drugs; to review the role of NCCAM in the generation of objective data on safety and efficacy; to provide an international perspective (Japanese) on the menopausal transition; and to review factors and risk for memory disorders and dementia among women in this age group. Abstract: This panel will address menopause from the perspective of complementary and alternative medicine. The first presenter, Dr. Heather Miller of NCCAM, will briefly describe the range of CAM modalities for this population, including a number of over-the-counter herbal or botanical products. The presenter will also give a brief overview of how regulatory oversight in the U.S. is different for dietary supplements than drugs, the role of NCCAM in research to determine the safety and efficacy of CAM modalities for menopausal symptoms, and the challenges in conducting such research. The second presenter, Dr. Fredi Kronenberg of Columbia University, will provide a more indepth discussion of alternative medicine strategies for treating menopausal symptoms and syndromes. Ms. Melissa Melby of Emory University and Tokyo University of Agriculture, will discuss the menopausal transition as women in Japan experience it. Finally, Dr. Robert Krikorian of University of Cincinnati will discuss the risk factors associated with cognitive changes in the age group of women. After the panel has presented its material, we will invite questions from the audience. Objectives: This presentation will provide an understanding of: The options women have in alternatives to HRT for symptoms and long term changes in menopause. The research to support these options: What is known about the safety of herbal medicines and the quality of products in the stores. What should women do if they want to discuss choices in alternative medicine with their doctor. Abstract: Women are the primary users of the mainstream health care system, and they are also the primary users of alternative and complementary therapies, for themselves and their families. They use these therapies for many problems and complaints throughout the lifecycle, both chronic conditions and acute problems. They are often eager to try a variety of approaches. With the increased media attention on complementary and alternative medicine, women are increasingly asking their physicians about these therapies. But in most cases, the research does not yet exist to inform women and their doctors about which therapies that might best work for them, or whether there are any side effects to be concerned about. Dr. Kronenberg will discuss some of the common treatments that women have been trying and that researchers are now investigating in clinical trials. She will also discuss results from a national survey of CAM use by women for women's health conditions. How can women make choices in this period of uncertainty-uncertainly about the science and uncertainty about the products? Lifestyle factors, dementia, and the role of phytoestrogen supplementation after menopause Robert Krikorian, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0559, U.S.A., e-mail: robert.krikorian@uc.edu Literature References: Cotman, C. W. (2000) . Homeostatic processes in brain aging: The role of apoptosis, inflammation, and oxidative stress in regulating healthy neural circuitry in the aging brain. In: Stern, P., Carstensen, L. (Eds.). The Aging Mind. Washington DC: National Acade Cotman, C. W., Berchtold, N. C. (2002) . Exercise: A behavioral intervention to enhance brain health and plasticity. Trends in Neuroscience 25: 295-301. Objectives: To illustrate the nature of progressive, age-associated cognitive decline and discuss alternative approaches to prevention and amelioration. Abstract: Current projections indicate that the prevalence of dementia will increase dramatically over the next several years and will become epidemic in the expanding elderly population. It is noteworthy that while the risk of dementia accelerates with increasing age, such risk increases at a higher rate for women than for men. There is substantial evidence that dementia develops over many years and is related to aberrations of fundamental, biological repair and maintenance mechanisms. However, these aberrant processes may be amenable to intervention, even in the absence of effective pharmaceutical treatments. Alterations of western lifestyle habits involving diet, physical activity, and stress potentially would prevent or forestall the development of dementia. In addition, it may be possible to intervene effectively even at the initial stage of clinically evident cognitive decline, typically designated Mild Cognitive Impairment. Aerobic exercise and supplementation with phytoestrogen agents are among a number of alternative approaches that hold promise as potential therapies for age-associated cognitive deterioration. Objectives: Participants will gain an understanding of the biological differences that underlie sex differences in drug abuse. Abstract: Using a multi-disciplinary approach, our group is trying to understand neurological mechanisms, which underlie sex differences in cocaine abuse and dependence. We have demonstrated fundamental sex differences in cocaine induced behavioral effects. For example, female rats have exaggerated behavioral responses after acute and chronic cocaine administration, sensitize faster to cocaine induced behavioral responses and maintain this sensitization longer when compared to male rats. Female rats also develop associations between environmental stimuli and cocaine's rewarding effects more quickly and at lower doses than males do. We have three major clues suggesting the contribution of estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone hormones to the observed sex differences in cocaine's behavioral effects and reward. First, cocaine-induced behavioral alterations are affected by the stage of the cycle. Second, after gonadectomy, females lose their ability to sensitize faster than males after repetitive cocaine administration, and their ability to produce a strong reward association between cocaine and the environmental stimuli. Finally, estrogen replacement enhances behavioral responses to cocaine, while progesterone can block cocaine-induced behavioral responses as well as cocaine-induced reward effects. The observed sex differences and differential effect of estrogen and progesterone in cocaine responses may in part explain current sex disparities in overall cocaine use and rates of relapse. Objectives: Participants will learn about evidence for sex differences in drug abuse and some of the neurological processes that may contribute to enhanced vulnerability in women. Abstract: Women begin using cocaine earlier, have a faster onset of addiction with shorter periods of abstinence, crave cocaine more, enter treatment at earlier ages and have developed more severe cocaine dependence at intake than men. Basic research on the role of sex and ovarian hormones in the neurochemical and behavioral responses to acute and repeated exposure to cocaine will be discussed. Dr. Sofuoglu will begin with an overview of clinical evidence that ovarian hormones can affect the XXXVI behavioral effect of drugs of abuse. Dr. Kuhn will provide a bridge to animal research, discussing the neural systems mediating drug abuse and evidence that there are sex differences in these neural systems. Dr. Quiñones will discuss evidence that estrogen and progesterone Replacement affect behavioral responses to cocaine. Dr. Mani will discuss the mechanisms mediating the interaction between steroid hormone receptors and neurotransmitters and the relevance of this to drug abuse. Mary Thomas will discuss rapid and longterm effects of estrogen on serotonin reuptake, and the impact of this on the behavioral response to cocaine. Dr. Becker will discuss rapid and long-term effects of estradiol on brain dopamine systems and the implications for drug abuse. The influence of ovarian hormones on drug taking behaviors in women Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation participants will be aware of the potential use of progesterone for treatment of female drug abusers. Abstract: We recently reported that female cocaine users in the luteal phase of their menstrual cycle, compared to those in the follicular phase, had an attenuated subjective response to cocaine. Since, the luteal phase, compared with the follicular phase, is characterized by higher progesterone levels, it was of interest to examine whether the attenuation of cocaine response in luteal phase was due to the effects of progesterone. Two studies were conducted to test this hypothesis. In the first study, the effects of a 200 mg dose of progesterone treatment on cocaine response were examined in 5 cocaine dependent women. Progesterone, compared to placebo attenuated some of the subjective effects of cocaine. In the second study, the effects of progesterone treatment on the subjective and physiological effects of cocaine and cocaine self-administration behavior were examined in both male and female cocaine users. A total of 10 subjects, 6 men and 4 female cocaine users had 2 experimental sessions. Before each session, subjects received either two oral doses of 200 mg of progesterone or placebo. Progesterone treatment attenuated the rating of some of the subjective effects of cocaine. These results suggest that progesterone may have utility for the treatment of cocaine dependence. Objectives: Participants will begin to understand some of the biological factors crucial for designing gender-specific prevention and treatment programs. Abstract: There are differences in drug use between men and women, and these can be caused by differences in life experience, social conditions, or biological differences. Research shows that women report more intense responses to cocaine and MDMA than men, and that female animals may voluntarily consume more cocaine or heroin. These drugs, like all addictive drugs, stimulate the dopamine system that controls sexual behavior and voluntary movement -the system that is damaged in Parkinson's disease. They stimulate it more in females than males. Do women have a different dopamine system? Animal studies suggest that the answer is yes, and that estrogen plays a critical role. Dopamine neurons may need estrogen to survive. The daily presence of estrogen also modulates this system in more subtle ways -affecting specific neuronal processes like the release of neurotransmitter and the way neurotransmitter stimulates its targets. These effects of estrogen might increase addiction liability in women. However, they may also explain why women have less Parkinson's disease. We are working to understand these differences. Untangling the web of social and biologic factors is difficult, but crucial for designing gender-specific prevention and treatment programs. Objectives: Participants will learn about ligand-independent activation of steroid receptors and potential role in drug abuse. Abstract: Estradiol and progesterone, modulate neuroendocrine functions in the central nervous system resulting in alterations in physiology in females. Studies from our laboratory demonstrate that in addition to the steroid hormones, intracellular steroid receptors can be activated in a ''ligand-independent'' manner by factors that can alter the dynamic equilibrium between neuronal phosphatases and kinases. Using biochemical and molecular approaches we have elucidated that the signaling cascade initiated by neurotransmitter, dopamine, converges with steroid hormone-initiated pathway to regulate neuroendocrine pathways associated with reproductive behavior. Furthermore, we have also demonstrated that such functional interactions could play an important role in mediation of psychotropic effects by drugs like cocaine and marijuana. The studies suggest a high level of cross talk and reinforcement among multiple intracellular signaling pathways for the mediation of hormone-dependent behavior in mammals. The molecular mechanisms, by which a multitude of signals converge with steroid receptors to delineate a genomic level of cross talk, provide new avenues for understanding the role of steroid hormones in drug abuse. 30, 2002) . Estrogen regulation of gene expression in the brain: a possible mechanism altering the response to psychostimulants in female rats. Mol Brain Res 100(1-2): 75-83. Objectives: Participants will gain an understanding of estrogen regulation of serotonin transporter activity. Abstract: Estrogen plays a key role in coordinating many complex physiological functions that are essential for successful female reproduction. In addition to fertility and mating, successful reproduction requires appropriate alterations in such things as food consumption, energy balance, and maternal behavior. Thus, it is not surprising that estrogen influences many neuronal functions, and that multiple cellular mechanisms have evolved to mediate these influences. Emerging evidence indicates that in addition to regulation of gene transcription, estrogen can function at extranuclear and membrane sites linked to multiple signaling cascades that elicit rapid cellular responses. The serotonin reuptake transporter (SERT) provides an example of an important neuronal function that is modulated by estrogen via both rapid, nongenomic actions as well as by transcriptional mechanisms. For example, estrogen decreases the abundance of SERT mRNA. In addition, estrogen rapidly decreases serotonin reuptake in cell culture systems. Serotonin reuptake modulates neural circuitry important in multiple mental health problems, including depression and the response to abused drugs. Thus, an understanding of estrogen regulation of SERT activity by fluctuations in estrogen levels throughout the female life cycle as well as under pharmacological conditions of exposure are necessary to develop rational approaches to the assessment and treatment for these psychiatric problems. Supported by NIDA DA11428 and DA00260. Objectives: The partipants will learn on different aspects of the perinatal mental health network in different countries and cultures. Abstract: In 1858, Louis Victor Marc e e, after whom our society is named, published ''Trait e e de la folie des femmes enceintes, des nouvelles accouch e ees et des nourrices''. Since then perinatal psychiatry has expanded at different rates in different countries. A perinatal psychiatric care system implies multidisciplinary collaboration. We will present different aspects of the perinatal mental health network in different countries and cultures. Liaison psychiatry in maternity wards is the first step in prevention and treatment in perinatal psychiatry. During pregnancy, women at risk of psychiatric episodes can be managed prenatally in collaboration with midwives and obstetricians. Because immigrant women may be more vulnerable for social and cultural isolation, the network for their mental health care must include ethnological and psychiatric dimensions. Pathways towards specific forms of perinatal mental health care, such as mother-baby units, depend on the national characteristics of the health care system and on the legal status of parents and children. Although the prevalence of postpartum depression is quite similar cross-culturally the pathways towards care may be very different. For the assessment, management, and follow-up of future parents when one member of the couple has HIV infection. Medical psychological interviews are useful, as part of a multidisciplinary management group. Characteristics of admission to a mother baby unit (MBU) for maternal mental health disorders in different countries: national data collection in France and in Belgium Objectives: The participants will be able to understand what factors are related to mother-baby separation and=or to mental health improvement after a women and her child were admitted to a mother baby unit. Abstract: The aims of MBU treatment are: to treat the mother's disorder, to facilitate and enhance a secure mother-baby attachment, to promote the child's development and, when necessary for the child's safety, to arrange separation from the mother and placement at discharge. We used data collected (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participant should be able to understand the functioning of a perinatal network, and to locate to which correspondant address a women presenting with a perinatal psychological or mental disorder. Abstract: Historical point of view of Liaison Psychiatry in France and 10 years report on liaison psychiatry. Purpose: 10 years report on liaison psychiatry in one of the biggest Maternity Unit in France. Methods: Retrospective evaluation of the characteristics of the patients, description of care given and report on the issues for the women. Results: The development of liaison psychiatry in maternity wards in collaboration with midwives, obstetricians, social workers, and the community, permitted the apparition of a real prevention step, which succeeded to the eviction of very serious cases to be taken into account in an urgent manner. The details about the diagnosis and the type of care will be developed. Conclusions: Liaison psychiatry in maternity wards is the first step of prevention and of cares in perinatal psychiatry. Objectives: To recognize the importance of screening the pregnancies at psychiatric risk in order to implement prevention and specific cares. Abstract: Both first psychiatric episodes and relapses are frequent during pregnancy and the postpartum period. More women with mental illnesses now have children. These psychiatric disorders may have serious consequences on the course of pregnancy and on the mother infant relationship and they require specific psychiatric management in addition to the obstetrical follow-up. The concept of pregnancies at psychological risk, based on clinical symptoms and mother's history of the mother is a useful addition to that of pregnancies at obstetrical risk. Our purpose is to present the prenatal management (screening, observation and psychiatric care) implemented in the obstetrical hospital in Lille, a city in northern France. The psychiatric intervention is designed as a part of the global management of mothers-to-be, closely tied to the care provided by midwives and obstetricians and to community services. Our experience shows the importance of this collaboration in helping these women through pregnancy, birth and the postpartum period. Objectives: The participants will be able to understand what factors are related to mother-baby separation and=or to mental health improvement after a woman and her child were admitted to a mother baby unit. Abstract: Purpose: Medical-psychological interviews are systematically proposed to couples in which at least one partner is HIV positive and who desire to have a child, to help assess the difficulties involved without stigmatizing the couple. We remain available to the couple at the various ART stages and during the pregnancy and the post partum period. We look at the emotional dynamics of parenthood and its transformations to throw light on the decisions by the multidisciplinary team handling the patients, their ART, and their HIV disease. Methods: From May 2002 through July 2003, we interviewed 100 couples undergoing ART. We evaluated their affective stability in the face of this long and uncertain process, their ability to deal with the difficulties inherent in this situation, and the psychological changes of the parents-to-be during the course of this high-risk pregnancy. Results: During these interviews, the couples can move forward from discussing the HIV issues to tackle the complex trajectories that have led them to attempt parenthood. Conclusions: A psychodynamic approach during the preconceptional period allows these couples to reappropriate their own history as a prelude to working through their guilt feelings. Objectives: The participants will be able to: 1. Delineate the components and objectively diagnose female sexual arousal disorder. 2. Become aware of psychotherapeutic and potential new pharmaceutical treatments for women with arousal difficulties. 3. Be more aware to prevent sexual boundary crossings in the health care setting. Abstract: The most current state of knowledge in determining methodology, diagnosing and treating the spectrum of female sexual arousal disorder will be addressed in this symposium. Also included will be a segment on control and prevention of sexual boundary crossing in the health care setting. Dr. Clayton will discuss the components and assessment of female sexual arousal. Dr. Polan will present her new research developing objective, experimental methodology used to assess female sexual arousal. Dr. Saks will review psychological and new pharmaceutical treatment possibilities. Dr. Plaut will discuss sexual boundary management in the health care setting. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to recognize times in a woman's life when she is vulnerable to depression and sexual dysfunction, understand the biochemical causes and the pharmaceutical and psychological treatments. Abstract: Treatment of depression and anxiety in women requires knowledge of sexual psychology, biochemistry, and physiology since women are more vulnerable to suffer from sexual dysfunction and depression during certain times of their lives. Antidepressant medications have differential effects on libido, arousal and orgasm. While dopamine agonists and testosterone have been shown to have influence on libido, arousal has been another focus for pharmaceuticals. Two new 5 phosphodiesterase inhibitors, entering the market this year, have been shown to exhibit the same pharmacokinetics in women as in men. Mechanisms of action, efficacy, side effects and safety of the newer antidepressants and sexual enhancers will be discussed with particular reference to treatment of female sexual arousal disorder. Objectives: 1. Recognize the risk factors in both patient and provider that may lead to boundary violations. 2. Take appropriate steps to minimize the possiblity of boundary violations with patients, students, and employees. Abstract: One of the sources of sexual victimization of women is unfortunately in the health care setting. Boundary violations of providers may range from excessive personal disclosure or ill-advised humor to romantic relationships and inappropriate touch in the clinical setting. Offenders range from those naive about the coercive influence that a health care provider can have on a patient to the sexual predator who repeatedly and deliberately takes advantage of a patient's vulnerability. Consequences of sexual boundary crossings can be severe for both the patient and the offending provider. Key suggestions for maintaining appropriate boundaries might include the following: (1) Avoid intimate relationships with people over whom you have professional influence; meet your needs for intimacy outside the practice setting. (2) Be aware of risk factors that may make you or your patient vulnerable to a boundary violation. (3) When crossing a boundary with a patient, consider the possible consequences and consider the patient's needs above your own. (4) Seek peer consultation if you are caught in an ethical dilemma; document any questionable occurrences. Timely education of health professionals about boundary management is imperative not only for prevention but for assisting patients to address alleged sexual offenses by other providers. Objectives: The objective of this study was to correlate peripheral physiologic responses with subjective sexual arousal in women viewing erotic videotapes. Abstract: Study Objective: This study was designed to develop an objective experimental methodology assessing female sexual arousal using a combination of physiologic Measures and self-reported assessment of arousal. Study Design: Twenty subjects viewed a 23-minute sequence of randomly ordered relaxation and erotic tapes, both with and without auditory stimulus. The physiologic parameters of vaginal blood flow, galvanic skin resistance (GSR), respiration, pulse, and blood pressure, as well as self reported level of arousal using a dial potentiometer, were simultaneously recorded and correlated with video segments of either erotic or relaxation material. Setting: An academic teaching hospital. Patients: The 20 subjects (mean age AE SD; 24.9 AE 3.0) included Caucasian (10), Hispanic (2), Asian-American (4), and African-American (4) women. All women were screened for normal sexual function using the Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) and with the Beck Anxiety Inventory and Beck Depression Inventory. Main Outcome Measures: Physiologic and behavioral data, as well as subjective arousal rating, were acquired. The resulting set of multi-channel data was correlated with erotic segments and analyzed for sound vs. no sound and time to maximal physiologic arousal. Results: Four independent variables were found to have beta values significantly different from 0: respiration (mean ¼ À0.239, SD ¼ 0.177, range ¼ À0.55À0.09, t ¼ À6.04, p < 0.0001), VPP (mean ¼ 0.158, SD ¼ 0.37, range ¼ À0.48-0.80, t ¼ 1.91, p < 0.071), rVPP (mean ¼ 0.161, SD ¼ 0.35, range ¼ 0.537-0.686, t ¼ 2.075, p < 0.052), and erotic marker (mean ¼ 0.582, SD ¼ 0.191, range ¼ 0.16-0.85, t ¼ 13.6, p < 0.0001). Neither heart rate nor GSR beta values approached significance. Respiration period was correlated negatively with arousal rating indicating that subjects breathed faster when aroused. Auditory stimuli during erotic segments did not increase subjective arousal and for both subjective arousal rating as well as VPP measurement, maximal response occurred within two minutes. Conclusions: Simultaneous measurement of vaginal blood flow, respiration, pulse, and a variable accounting for the onset and offset of erotic video segments accounts for approximately 50% of the variance in predicting subjective female arousal. Regardless of the presence or absence of audio input, two minutes was the average minimum time required to reach asymptotic arousal response in young, sexually functional women. Objectives: Assess sexual dysfunction in women and identify specific arousal problems=disorders. Abstract: Assessment of sexual functioning in women should address the specific complaint, including current and prior sexual functioning, symptom onset and course, determine which phase(s) of the sexual response cycle are involved, identify the primary phase affected, and assess the woman's level of distress and=or interpersonal difficulty. Two aspects of arousal in women must be considered: physiologic arousal involving genital sensitivity, ability to achieve and maintain vaginal lubrication, and genital pain, and cognitive= central arousal involving the subjective experience of focused, building sexual excitement. Central arousal may or may not be associated with genital=physiologic arousal or may be inhibited despite vaginal lubrication. Women are more likely to experience problems with physiologic arousal when post menopausal due to diminished sex steroids, and=or if a desire disorder is present. In addition, an inadequate arousal phase may limit a woman's ability to achieve orgasm. A comprehensive sexual history should include information about reproductive function including onset of puberty, history of pregnancies, and phase of the woman's menstrual cycle or peri-or post-menopausal status; age and circumstances of the first sexual experience; history of sexual abuse or trauma=assault; current relationship status, and sexual orientation. The medical and psychosocial evaluation and history should focus on conditions associated with sexual dysfunction in women, and identify any substances that might contribute to sexual dysfunction such as medications, alcohol, illicit substances, and tobacco. A focused physical examination including genital exam, neurological evaluation, and assessment of vascular function can be helpful. Targeted laboratory studies such as sex hormone levels, thyroid function tests, and hemoglobin A1C may be helpful. Once a thorough assessment has clarified the sexual dysfunction=disorder and identified a potential etiology, then specific treatment interventions may be initiated. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to: 1. Recognize feminist alternative models to biomedical perspectives on postabortion mental health; 2. Recognize the relationship between gender identity and psychological functioning; 3. Recognize the importance of cultural and gender sensitivity in working with women from different cultures. Abstract: This panel with explore feminist perspectives on Women's Mental Health from four dimensions. First Nancy Felipe Russo will challenge the biomedical perspective on women's mental health focusing on post-abortion mental health to illustrate how assumptions from this perspective are being inappropriately applied and provide alternative feminist models. She will also stress the importance of prevention strategies aimed at empowering women and attacking societal contributions to women's inequality. Kedibone Letlaka-Rennert examines the relationship between psychological function and gender identity as gauged by the stage of gender identity development among South African women-women with a legacy of secondclass citizenship. Pamela Reid will also discuss ''marginalized'' women, but from the perspective of a model of inter-group exchange that might be useful in our understanding across cultures. Her method of dialogue and story telling also provides a method of considering individuals' location of gender, class, and ethnic identity in an informative and revealing, but non-threatening way. Kathryn Norsworthy will address the importance of cultural and gender sensitivity needed by Western Psychologists in working with women in other countries. In her presentation, she will use examples from her work with women in Burma and Thailand and a proposed American Psychological Association policy resolution on gender and cultural sensitivity in International Psychology. Institute for Research on Women & Gender, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, U.S.A., e-mail: pamreid@umich.edu Abstract: In this paper, we describe a program of exchange between two groups of women, African Americans and Dalit Indians, each at the margins of their communities. The program was constructed to initiate a crosscultural dialogue so that women might move beyond their own location to understand others. The experiences of these marginalized women provide a model for inter-group exchange that might be used in research and educational settings to expand the knowledge of women and women's mental health issues nationally and internationally. Autobiography or self-story telling was employed as an analytic tool for examining one group's experiences and comparing them with others. University and students from each group met in Chennai to interview and discuss feminist issues with each other. The dialogue and story-telling proved useful as it permitted the consideration of each individual's location of gender, class, and ethnic identity. Major issues that defined commonalities across groups were: a) the importance of family support as either a protective or inspirational factor, b) coming to awareness of self in relationship to outside dominance, c) development of moral certainty and the injustices imposed by society, and d) the strategies for selfempowerment that allowed women to deal with the emotional traumas of marginality. Nancy Felipe Russo, Psychology Department, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, U.S.A., e-mail: nancy.russo@asu.edu Abstract: Feminists have challenged the biomedical perspective on women's mental health, creating new understandings of the links between women's lives and circumstances and psychological disorder and emphasizing the importance of prevention. This presentation focuses on research on postabortion mental health to illustrate how assumptions used in biomedical perspectives are being inappropriately applied in such research, and describes the application of alternative stress and coping models from a feminist perspective. Given the central role that cognitive appraisal plays in shaping women's mental health, the importance of prevention stratigies aimed at empowering women, enhancing their self-efficacy, and attacking societal contributors to women's inequality is underscored. Kedibone Letlaka-Rennert, Arlington, VA 22207, U.S.A., e-mail: wrennert3@ comcast.net Abstract: This study explores the impact of tertiary education and work on the psychological well being of South African women. Both in educational settings and vocational settings, South African women are expected to feel good enough and confident about themselves and their situation to perform and compete with men on an equal footing. This, in an environment that historically has not supported women in the same ways it has men. Despite essential recent reforms such as the Employment Equity Act of 1998, and the Skills Development Act of 1998 which seek to render the workplace an equitable and enriching environment for all previously disadvantaged groups, including women, one has to wonder how women have been affected by a legacy that explicitly differentially (mis)treated them and in effect rendered them second class citizens in all respects. To this end, a study examining Gender Identity relative to their psychological functioning as measured by constructs of Self-Efficacy and Locus of Control will be reported on. The hypothesis here is that levels of psychological functioning are directly linked to how South African women perceive themselves in their society, as gauged by the stage of Gender Identity development they happened to be in. Both educational and vocational settings are discriminatory towards women and are controlled and dominated by men. However, in educational settings women typically find greater success than men. Why then does this not translate into rapid promotions and greater success in the workplace? Furthermore, how might this disappointing betrayal affect women at work? Exportation of western psychology: psychological colonization or creative collaboration? Kathryn L. Norsworthy, Rollins College, Winter Park, FL 32789, U.S.A., e-mail: knorswor@rollins.edu Abstract: Over the past several years, several divisions of the American Psychological Association are sponsoring a resolution focusing on increasing gender and cultural sensitivity in the internationalization of psychology and avoiding neocolonialism in the internationalization process. This presenter will discuss key elements of the proposed APA Resolution and present case examples from her own experiences of research and practice in Thailand with refugee women of Burma and Thai women from multiple social locations. After providing an overview of the cultural and socio-political contexts of Burma and Thailand, the presenter will discuss some issues and connundrums that arise for a western feminist psychologist working with women from a country outside the west. Additionally, textual material and videotaped self-representations of the local feminist collaborators will be provided. In these segments, local collaborators (from Burma and Thailand) will describe their perspectives on the issues that arise for them in working with western psychologists. Special emphasis will be placed on the ways in which feminist psychology can inform the ethical practice of research, collaboration, and activism by western mental health professionals working outside the western context. Recommendations for future directions in collaboration across cultures will be provided. Objectives: This presentation will anable participants: 1. To understand the current issues in balancing risk and benefit of postmenopausal hormone use 2. To comprehend the similarities and dissimilarities between various organizational position statements. Abstract: Purpose: To present the major points of similarity and variance between major organizational position statements on postmenopausal hormone usage. Methods: The literature was reviewed for current organizational position statements published after the termination of the EPT arm of the WHI in July 2002. Results: There is remarkable concordance of positions but some major areas of difference in point of view. These will be presented. Conclusions: Lack of concordance indicates areas of this subject still in need of major further research. Objectives: At the conclusion of this symposium, participants should be able to recognize: 1) how women with depressed mood can alter their emotions through various strategies and coping measures; 2) how this knowledge, when placed within cultural context, can inform culturally specific and=or community based interventions. Abstract: The goal of this symposium is to: 1) explore how women who report depression under special circumstancesaging, pregnancy, HIV infection or diagnosed emotional disorders can become resilient and resist depressed mood states; 2) examine the cultural contexts associated with resistance to depression; and 3) suggest culturally specific or adapted interventions that make facilitate positive coping with depressed mood states and promote resilience in women from the four cultural groups studied. Objectives: The goal of this presentation is to examine emotion regulation in older Spanish women with regard to the strategires they use to cope with negative situations ans negative mood in order to resist depression. Participants will understand how cultural context, gender roles and community life affect emotion regulation strategies. Abstract: Overviews of studies of depression suggest the need for indepth, longitudinal explorations of emotion responses (evaluative and behavioral) to social events and situations framed by cultural context and mediated by gender roles. This approach can expand our understanding of the management of depressed mood by contextualizing patterns of both risk and resistance in individual women. Methods: A pilot study of how women over 45 years of age express and respond to depressed mood in a small Andalusian city was conducted. Interviews, observation=participation and a daily diary exercise yielded data on the extent to which women were active in community life and how they used these and other social behaviors to respond to negative situations and depressed moods. Other forms of coping with negative situations and mood were also observed. These data were compared with scores on standardized measures (in Spain) of optimism, symptoms of depression and coping with depressed mood to evaluate whether there were characteristic responses regardless of life situations and whether certain coping patterns were associated with depressed mood or optimism. Results: Women active in community groups (women's clubs or churchbased) or those who held rewarding jobs (a few) were able to convert negative situations and moods to positive emotions. Coping responses and characteristic mood differed; women who reported more depressive symptoms tended to utilize strategies of expression and communication when confronted with a negative event or mood. These respondents contrasted with women who reported significantly fewer depressive symptoms, who appraised and looked for meaning in negative events and became socially active and planned social events. Conclusions: These data, although preliminary, highlight the need to understand the community=cultural context of emotion regulation, comparing women who tend to meet negative situations with depressed mood with those who can meet negative situations with positive moods. Available resources are utilized by the latter group that are embedded in community organization. A model of the two patterns of emotion regulation strategies is developed to inform community based intervention programs for depressed older women. Cultural perspectives on women's mental health: An asian viewpoint Objectives: At the conclusion of this symposium, participants should be able to recognize: 1) how women with depressed mood can alter their emotions through various strategies and coping measures; 2) how this knowledge, when placed within cultural context, can inform culturally specific and=or community based interventions. Abstract: The traditional assessment and treatment of mental health has been derived primarily from a Western viewpoint that has resulted in the assumption that mental illness is a universal concept. This has led to an erroneous belief that treatment would be the same for all women regardless of their ethnic or cultural background. However, research suggests that culture plays an important part in mental health with regards to influencing the conceptualization of mental illness, the manifestation of symptoms, helpseeking behavior and treatment expectations and outcome. This presentation will focus on the Asian women's perspective on mental health. Cultural responses to mental illness and the role of Asian women will be presented. Issues of misdiagnosis due to the lack of knowledge and understanding of the Asian culture or misinterpretation of the culture will be discussed, along with an exploration of culturally sanctioned Asian idioms of distress. The presentation will also present an outline of the cultural challenges in working within a traditional Western framework. The George Washington University, Washington, DC 20006, U.S.A., e-mail: SLJARAMA@GWU.EDU Abstract: This exploratory study investigated the stigma associated with HIV=AIDS among adult immigrant Latinas. Focus groups were conducted with HIV þ Latinas who were asked about their HIV experience (initial reactions to their HIV status, disclosure, and coping). Twenty women from Central and South America participated in the study. Women expressed deep feelings of depression and sadness when they learned about their HIV positive status. They noted the stigma associated with HIV among Latinos, such as viewing HIV þ women as prostitutes. Stigma resulted in participants' reluctance to disclose their status to family and friends, in social isolation, distress and lack of social support. Main coping mechanisms involved relying on God and prayers, using available clinical resources, and attending support groups. These women demonstrated strong resilience by focusing on the ''positive aspects'' of their condition. They felt stronger self esteem and greater appreciation for their lives and their families. They noted the importance of educating people about HIV, but fear of stigma prevented them from actively educating others. Findings highlight the need to address HIV stigma among Latinos and to develop support interventions for HIV þ Latinas, especially after they learn their diagnosis. Integrated interventions that emphasize coping strategies to enhance emotional, spiritual, and physical well-being are recommended. Objectives: Participants will gain an understanding of the cultural= protective factors associated with depression among low-income Latina pregnant women, and how these factors may be targeted in preventive interventions of maternal depression. Abstract: As women are at highest risk for developing depression during childbearing years, pregnancy and postpartum are critical periods to prevent the onset of major depression. Risk factors for maternal depression have been well documented. However, protective factors have not been widely studied, and little is known about the impact of culture on these factors. The purpose of this study was to examine protective factors that decrease risk of developing maternal depression in a sample of low-income Latina pregnant women receiving public sector obstetrics services in Northern California. Twelve Spanish speaking women (age: M ¼ 24.1, SD ¼ 4.6; 68% with annual income < $10,000) classified as ''vulnerable'' to developing depression participated in two focus groups after completing a 12 week cognitive behaviorally-and developmentally-based preventive intervention of maternal depression. Focus group content were transcribed and coded for themes that enabled these women to manage their reality in a healthy and positive way. Preliminary results indicate that seeking social support from family and friends, feeling competent as mothers-to-be, and spirituality served as protective factors to facilitate positive coping and enhance mood. Implications for incorporating protective factors in preventive intervention trials of maternal depression will be discussed. Objectives: The participant should be able to -know the most relevant sexand gender differences in schizophrenia and their therapeutic implicationsrecognize the specific needs of women with schizophrenia -recognize the specific needs of mothers with schizophrenia and of their children -meet these needs with specific diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Abstract: Overall abstract of symposium: Purpose: This symposium will give an overview on the specifities of schizophrenic disorders in women. Biological as well as psychosocial differences between men and women which influence age of onset and course of this disorder will be outlined and the implications of these differences for diagnostic procedures as well as therapy (pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, social measurements) will be discussed. On the biological side, hormonal aspects, menstrual and sexual function will be emphasized. On the psychosocial side, the focus will be on problems of motherhood. Aspects of early parenting such as mother-infant interaction or bonding behavior will be discussed as well as the difficult issues of children's safety, women and children's rights and children's emotional health. Conclusion: A gender-sensitive approach improves our understanding of mental illness as well as our therapeutic strategies not only in schizophrenia, but also in other disorders. Objectives: The participants should be able to -recognize the different needs of mothers of small children presenting with depression -meet these needs in a specific psychotherap eutic approach -know about the advantages of a specific manualized group-psychotherap -recognize the specific needs of women with schizophrenia -meet these needs with specific diagnostic and therapeutic approaches Abstract: Purpose: Sex and gender differences in schizophrenia will be reviewed and potential therapeutic implications will be discussed. Methods: Review of literature and different own studies. Results: Schizophrenic psychoses show marked sex and gender differences. Although the lifetime risk is the same for both sexes, mean age of onset is on average three to five years higher in women than in men. Women not only show a delayed onset of the disease in the younger age group, but also an excess of onsets after age 45. The course of the disease seems to be better in young women than in young men and in elderly women. As to pathogenesis, there is some evidence that the age difference might be due at least partly to the female sex hormone estradiol being a protective factor. Differences in course might also have to do with this biological factor, but at the same time with the psychosocial advantages of a higher age of onset and other psychosocial factors like gender differences in illness perception, in help-seeking, coping behavior and compliance, in comorbidity and, last but not least, the differing roles of men and women. Conclusions: Sex and gender differences in schizophrenia have important implications for pharmacotherapy, but also psychotherapy and social measures. A gender-sensitive approach could generally improve our understanding of mental illness and our therapeutic strategies. Mary Seeman, Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario M4V 2X1, Canada, e-mail: mary.seeman@utoronto.ca Abstract: Background: Fifty percent of women with schizophrenia become mothers but a relatively large percentage lose custody of their children to family members, expartners, foster care, or adoption. Purpose: Based on the experience of a women's clinic for psychosis, this presentation will discuss the rights of a woman to parent her own child, the rights of children to be brought up by their biological families, safety issues for children, emotional health of children, stages of child development and parental tasks during successive developmental stages. Conclusions: These are difficult issues with no correct answers. Solutions need to incorporate the rights and needs of children and parents and be concerned with those who are most vulnerable and least able to speak for themselves. Objectives: At the conclusion of the presentation the participants should know 1. that all conventional and some atypical antipsychotics cause hyperprolactin emia in about 60% and menstrual irregularities in about 50% of women 2. That hyperprolactinemia contributes to sexual dysfunction in psychotic women 3. Basic principles of the managment of symptomatic hyperprolactinemia. Abstract: It has been estimated that about half of all women treated with prolactin elevating drugs have hyperprolactin-emia. Elevated prolactin levels suppress normal hypothalamic-pituitary activity and disrupt ovarian function with resulting menstrual irregularities, amenorrhoea, infertility and hypooestrogenism. Recent studies suggest that some schizophrenic women may have an illness-related dysfunction in the hypothalamic-pituitary axis which predisposes them to menstrual irregularities. Nevertheless prospective studies leave no doubt that prolactin-raising antipsychotics frequently cause menstrual irregularities and that these resolve on cessation of medication. Recent studies indicate that prolactin has a role in the regulation of sexual behaviour. This evidence comes from clinical observations in patients with hyperprolactinemia unrelated to drugs, from the distribution of prolactin receptors in the brain and studies in healthy volunteers. In one recent study of women treated with prolactin raising antipsychotics, prolactin levels correlated with physical arousal problems such as poor vaginal response. It should be emphasized though that hyperprolactinemia is only one of several mechanisms by which psychotropic drugs can influence sexual behaviour. Its net outcome is also dependent on other central and peripheral drug actions, the effects of premenopausal oestrogen deficiency and factors related to the psychotic illness. Management options for antipsychotic-induced endocrine symptoms will be discussed. Christiane Hornstein, S. Poppe, E. Rave, S. Schenk, S. Wortmann, M. Schwarz Psychiatric Hospital Nordbaden,Wiesloch, 69168, Germany, e-mail: christiane. hornstein@pzn-wiesloch.de Abstract: Women with psychotic disorders carry behavioural and psychosocial risk factors in their reproductive phase of live, during pregnancy and after delivery especially. These risk factors effect the newborns. The impact of the mothers psychotic disorder on the interactional style with their babies and their bonding behaviour will be discussed according to the literature. Our own experiences with more than 30 mother-baby-dyads, treated in the mother-baby-units of the psychiatric hospital (Wiesloch, Germany), will be demonstrated by video-micro analytic techniques of mother baby interaction. Psychopathological and psychosocial data of these dyads will be shown as well as treatment-outcome. Treatment outcome was documented by several global ratings (CGI, GAF) and the Bethlem mother infant scale (Kumar and Hipwell, 1996) . Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should recognize that adrenal and gonadal steroid hormones influence cognition during aging. In particular participants should know that (1) cortisol elevations can affect memory adversely, (2) a woman's use of postmenopausal hormone therapy has the potential to influence both cognitive aging and the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease, and (3) at least in certain clinical contexts estrogen plus progestin hormone therapy can adversely affect global cognition and dementia risk. Abstract: Decreases in memory and certain other cognitive skills are a common, if not near-universal, accompaniment of aging. Incidence of Alzheimer's disease and other forms of dementia also occur with increasing frequency in old age. The brain is a target of steroid hormones, including cortisol (an adrenal steroid) and estrogen, testosterone and progesterone (gonadal steroids). Considerable evidence links adrenal and gonadal steroids to cognitive processing. This symposium will review recent and new findings on influences of the stress hormone cortisol on memory in older adults, estrogen; progestin containing hormone therapy on cognitive aging in healthy postmenopausal women, hypogonadal function in women with Alzheimer's disease, and hormone therapy on Alzheimer's disease risk. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should recognize that hormone therapy is not indicated for the treatment or prevention of Alzheimer's disease but that questions remain concerning effects of early hormone therapy exposures and the long-term risk of Alzheimer's disease. Abstract: Based on limited clinical trial data by us and others, hormone therapy (HT) initiated after the onset of Alzheimer disease (AD) symptoms does not appear to have a substantial effect on symptoms or progression of the illness. However, it remains controversial whether HT use by healthy women in the menopausal transition and postmenopause increases AD risk, decreases AD risk, or perhaps even does both depending on exposure characteristics. Recent results from the Women's Health Initiative Memory Study demonstrate that estrogen plus progestin in the late postmenopause significantly increases dementia incidence after exposure durations as short as one year. This finding contrasts with that of most observational studies, including research reported by us, where the association between HT and AD has generally been one of reduced risk. One difference between observational studies and findings from the Women's Health Initiative is that most HT exposure in the former occurred in younger women, often during the menopausal transition and early postmenopause. One speculative interpretation is that early HT use may be protective, whereas late HT use is harmful. However, a strong biological rationale for an early critical window is not well established, and possible bias and confounding in observational studies suggest the need for caution in the face of seemingly conflicting clinical trial data. In the clinical setting, the answer is clear: HT is not indicated for the primary prevention of AD or other dementing disorders. However, in the scientific arena, the new question arises: What is the effect of early HT exposure on AD risk? Acute and chronic effects of the stress hormone cortisol on human memory Objectives: At the end of the presentation the participant should have a more differentiated view on how the stress hormone cortisol influences memory in humans. This knowledge could be of relevance for the development of diagnostic tools and the development of drugs aimed at preventing cognitive decline during aging. Abstract: In response to acute stress activation of the hypothalamus pituitary adrenal (HPA) axis increases, leading to enhanced secretion of the adrenal hormone cortisol. Studies in rodents have established that consolidation of an emotional or stressful event is enhanced, while on the other side learning and subsequent memory retrieval is impaired in situations of stress. Studies from our laboratory have established that stress or cortisol treatment also impairs memory in humans. Importantly the acute effects appear to be influenced by age as well as by sex. During human aging subtle changes occur in HPA axis regulation, leading to elevated basal cortisol levels. Epidemiological studies have observed that higher basal cortisol levels are associated with poorer declarative (hippocampus dependent) memory. Studies from our group have documented that cortisol levels are associated with smaller hippocampal volumes. In addition a recent study observed an association between impaired glucose tolerance and hippocampal atrophy in healthy older subjects. Since elevated cortisol levels as well as impaired glucose tolerance often co-occur as part of the metabolic syndrome these findings suggest that these endocrine alterations are not only harmful to several peripheral target systems, but also have a negative impact on the aging brain. Objectives: Participants should understand the current status of studies of hormone therapy and cognition, including the distinction between observational studies and randomized trials. Participants will understand what recent randomized can and cannot tell us about the effects of hormone therapy on cognition. Abstract: Studies of hormone therapy (HT) and cognition in postmenopausal women have yielded inconsistent findings. A number of small randomized trials of younger women following surgical menopause and larger observational studies of older postmenopausal women, including the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA), suggest benefits of HT on memory. In contrast, a larger trial of combination estrogen and progestin (E þ P) in older women with cardiovascular disease did not support these findings, and data from the Women's Health Initiative Memory Study (WHIMS) suggest a small detrimental effect of combination E þ P on changes in a global measure of cognitive function. Prior studies were limited by small samples, women with pre-existing disease, test batteries lacking sensitivity to age and hormone effects, or observational designs confounded by the healthy user bias. WHISCA, an ancillary study to WHIMS, investigates combination E þ P and estrogen alone on age-changes in specific cognitive functions and affect in women without dementia within the context of a large randomized trial. This presentation will discuss the WHISCA study design, initial results for the E þ P arm of the study, and will compare findings with those from the BLSA observational studies of HT. Objectives: At the end of this presentation participants recognize that levels of sex steroids are not lower in women with Alzheimer's disease and that the sensitivity of estradiol assays is very important in interpreting results Abstract: Purpose: Sex steroids, such as testosterone and estradiol, might protect the brain against Alzheimer's disease (AD). We wanted to investigate whether primary or secondary hypogonadism occurred in women with AD and age-matched controls. Methods: We included 55 women with AD (McKhann, 1987) and 71 controls from the Oxford Project to Investigate Memory and Ageing. Total testosterone (TT), estradiol (E2), luteinizing hormone (LH) and sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG, which determines the amount of free testosterone and estrogens) were measured using enzyme immunoassays. Fourteen women using HRT were excluded from the analyses Results: Non-parametric Mann-Whitney tests indicated that, similar to our earlier findings (Hogervorst et al., 2003) , levels of E2 were higher in cases (27.5 SD 17 pmol=L) than controls (20.7 SD 13 pmol=L, p < 0.005) but there was no difference in TT (AD: 1.06 SD 0.68 nmol=L vs. CON: 0.93 SD 0.56 nmol=L, p ¼ 0.34), LH (AD: 35 SD 15 vs. CON: 40 SD 18 IU=L) or SHBG (AD: 73 SD 31 vs. CON: 79 SD 30 nmol=L) levels between AD cases and controls. Results were unchanged when controlled for age and time of storage of samples. Conclusion: Although normal, LH was slightly lower in cases which would be in line with the elevation in E2 levels. Our results support a preliminary conclusion that secondary hypogonadism occurs in women with AD, which could be a consequence of brain degeneration. We earlier (Hogervorst and Smith, 2002) found that women who have high levels of serum folate with high levels of E2 remain above the cut-off score for dementia when compared with those who have low serum folate. Mechanisms for this association are discussed. Abstract: There is a growing concern that the dominant approach to mental health has been disease focused, with much too little attention to wellness, including resilience. The purpose of this symposium is to examine factors impacting psychological wellness and resilience. The first author, Susan XLIV Nolen-Hoeksema, PhD, will examine women's relationship and the ways that close relationships act as resilience and vulnerability factors for women's mental health. Deborah Belle, PhD, will discuss the implications of poverty and economic inequality for women's well being, including coping strategies that provide women with protection from the threats to well-being caused by being poor in a wealthy nation. Charlotte Brown, PhD, will present data on the similarities and differences in African American and Caucasian women's perceptions of their identity and security at midlife. The final speaker, Jeannette Ickovics, PhD., will present data from a study of resilience factors for women with HIV=AIDS, linking psychological resources to survival and immune function. Her guiding question, and that for the panel, is what psychological resources enable individuals to deal effectively with illness and other life events. Findings have important implications for clinical and community interventions that could improve women's mental health. Psychological adjustment to breast and gynecological cancer diagnosis= = =treatment Gwendolyn P. Keita, Deanna M. Golden-Kreutz American Psychological Association, Washington, DC U.S.A., e-mail: gkeita@ apa.org Abstract: Cancer, described as one of the most stressful medical diagnoses a person can receive (Shapiro et al., 2001) , is know to elicit acute emotional distress at diagnosis and early treatment. Depressive symptoms (i.e., decreased mood, helplessness) are the most common affective symptoms reported by cancer patients, although anxiety symptoms (i.e., worry, fearfulness) are also reported. Data from two studies examining the psychological responses of women with cancer are presented. In the first study, depressive symptoms in 210 women post-surgery for regional breast cancer were examined. Approximately 20% reported clinically significant depressive symptoms. Perceptions of global stress, rumination about cancer diagnosis= treatment, and financial concerns were significantly related to increased symptoms. In the second study, depressive and anxiety symptoms in 151 women were assessed at the gynecologic oncologist consultation. Even prior to confirming a cancer diagnosis (cervix, endometrium, or ovarian), 40% reported clinically significant depressive=anxiety symptoms. Women who were older, without a partner, and had more gynecologic symptoms reported increased depression and anxiety. These studies not only highlight the psychological distress experienced by women during their diagnosis and early treatment for breast or gynecologic cancer but also the need for timely intervention if quality of life and treatment outcomes are to be improved. Objectives: Identify psychosocial contributors to women's depressive symptoms. Understand role of women's relationships in their experiences of depression. Abstract: Many women have a wide range of close emotional relationships with others. Although these relationships can be important sources of support and strength in times of stress, they can also create stress in a woman's life. I will explore the ways that close emotional relationships act both as resilience and vulnerability factors for women's mental health, focusing on the associations between close relationships and depressive symptoms in a large community-based sample of women and men. Objectives: Learning objectives are to understand better the stress produced among women by poverty and by economic inequality and to under-stand better the protective factors that buffer women who are experiencing economic stress. Abstract: Poverty imposes considerable stress on women while attacking many potential sources of social support. Not surprisingly, poverty is also one of the most consistent predictors of premature mortality, physical illness, and depression among women. Economic inequalities within societies are also associated with reduced life expectancy and with negative physical and mental health outcomes for women. This paper will review research exploring the processes through which poverty and economic inequality take their toll, and the factors which do help to maintain the well-being of women experiencing severe economic stress. Many of the stresses of poverty, such as poor diet, inadequate medical care, toxins in the environment, inadequate housing and homelessness, can be understood as elements of sheer material hardship. Yet much poverty-related stress derives from living in a society of great inequality. Coping strategies that provide women with ways to defend themselves from stigma while building pro-active social networks appear to offer the best hope of protection from the threats to well-being of being poor in a wealthy nation. Objectives: 1. Participants will learn how social identity theory explains findings of higher self esteem in African Americans when compared to Whites. Abstract: This report tests the hypothesis that African American and Caucasian women have positive perceptions of themselves at midlife, with African Americans'; perceptions being somewhat more positive because of cultural and socialization factors encouraging a positive racial identity. The sample was composed of 95 African American and 116 Caucasian women between the ages of 42 and 52. Results showed that women have a positive perception of security and personal identity at midlife, with few women reporting interpersonal isolation or hopelessness. African American women did report a more positive perception of identity and security than did Caucasian women. More optimistic women, regardless of race, reported a more positive perception of their current identity and security at midlife. Among those who reported high levels of stressful life events and difficulty paying for basics, African Americans had more positive perceptions of their security and identity, whereas Caucasians had more negative perceptions. Future longitudinal research should examine the relationship between stable characteristics such as optimism and self-reported midlife adaptation. Objectives: 1. To enhance understanding of how psychological resources can protect health. 2. To examine how psychological resources enhance survival, and consider one potential mechanism (i.e., immune function), using empirical data from a large prospective cohort of women with HIV. 3. To review implications for clinical care and future research. Abstract: Among women with HIV, there is considerable variability in disease progression that cannot be explained solely by initial health status, biological factors, or medication use. Cognitive Adaptation Theory suggests that psychological resources enable individuals to deal effectively with negative life events and result in better health -even with major illness. The study objective was to determine whether psychological resources (positive affect, perceived control over health, finding meaning in challenging circumstances) protect against HIV-related mortality and decline in CD4þ counts among 773 women with HIV from four US cities. Psychological resources were independently associated with both HIV-related mortality and time to mortality, beyond the effects of potential confounding variables such as clinical status (e.g., viral load, symptoms, antiretroviral therapy), sociodemographic characteristics (e.g., age, race), and depression at study entry (p < .05). Psychological resources also were associated with CD4þ count decline (p < .01), serving as a possible mechanism linking resources to mortality. In summary, psychological resources may protect against HIVrelated mortality and immune system decline. Findings have implications for understanding individual variability in HIV disease progression. Moreover, because psychological resources are potentially amenable to change, results can be applied to interventions aimed at improving the physical and mental health of women with HIV. Inga D. Neumann, Dept. of Behavioural Neuroendocrinology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, e-mail: inga.neumann@biologie. uni-regensburg.de Abstract: In the peripartum period, dramatic behavioural, physiological and neuronal adaptations occur in the maternal brain which are at least partly due to altered activation of various brain neuropeptide systems. The symposium entitled: Neuropeptide actions in the maternal brain chaired by Inga D. Neumann will focus on the most relevant neuropeptide systems at this reproductive period including oxytocin, prolactin , neuropeptide Y and leptins. Brain oxytocin exerts not only crucial functions in maternal-infant relationships, but is also involved in hippocampal plasticity and hippocampal -dependent learning and memory during motherhood (Kazukito Tomizawa). Similarly, brain prolactin also regulates the pregnancy-induced increase in neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb (Sam Weiss). A critical issue of maternal stress adaptations refers to the emotional adjustment including stress-sensitivity, anxiety-related and aggressive behaviour, and brain oxytocin, CRH (Tracy Bale) and=or brain prolactin (Luz Torner) seem to be involved in these behavioural alterations seen in lactating animals. Physiologically, lactation is a state of negative energy balance which can be met by an increase in food and water intake due to dramatic changes in the activity of hypothalamic neuropeptide systems, including neuropeptide Y, and a suppression of serum leptin (SU.S.A.n Smith). Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to establish a link between stress sensitivity and the development of mood disorders. Abstract: Anxiety and depressive disorders are thought to be the most prevalent form of mental illness. Women suffer from depression twice as often as males. Neuropeptides such as oxytocin and corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) are produced in the hypothalamus and are involved in mediation of stress inputs and homeostatic balance. Genetic and environmental factors influence the susceptibility of an individual to stress-related disorders. Specifically, strong evidence links the sensitivity of the individual to stress with the development of depression. CRF and its family of ligands and receptors (CRFR1 and CRFR2) are important regulators of stress responsivity. Mice deficient in CRFR2 show elevated anxiety-like behaviors and a hypersensitive stress response. This mouse model of high stress responsivity provides evidence of the involvement of CRF pathways in mood disorders and a useful tool for examining the neurobiology of stress-related mood disorders. Our previous studies have shown that CRFR2-deficient female mice display significantly greater levels of depression-like behaviors compared to males, and also showed a more robust response to drug treatment than males. These results support a possible increased sensitivity to dysregulation of the CRF system in females. Further studies will examine the sex differences in expression patterns of CRF and oxytocin family members. Kazuhito Tomizawa, Hideki Matsui Department of Physiology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine and Dentistry, Okayama, Japan, e-mail: tomikt@md.okayama-u.ac.jp Literature Reference: Tomizawa et al. (2003) . Nat Neurosci 6: 384-390. Objectives: The participants should be able to recognize that breast feeding gives not only great peace of mind to the baby but also provides a wonderful change to the mother's body, specifically in her brain. Her memory improves. Abstract: Oxytocin plays critical roles in mammalian labor and lactation. The hormone is essential for the induction of normal labor through uterine contraction and for normal development of offspring through lactation in mammals. We recently discover a new function of oxytocin in causing plastic changes in hippocampal synapses during motherhood. Oxytocin receptors were strongly expressed in the hippocampus of female mice. In oxytocinperfused hippocampal slices, one-train tetanus stimulation induced longlasting long-term potentiation (L-LTP) and phosphorylation of cyclic AMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB), and MAP kinase inhibitors blocked these inductions. An increase in CREB phosphorylation and one-train tetanus-induced L-LTP was observed in the multiparous mouse hippocampus without oxytocin application. Furthermore, intracerebroventricular injection of oxytocin in virgin mice improved long-term spatial learning in vivo, whereas an injection of oxytocin antagonist in multiparous mice significantly inhibited the improved spatial memory, L-LTP and CREB phosphorylation. In this symposium, we will review these findings and discuss the role of oxytocin in improvement of hippocampus-dependent learning and memory during motherhood. Behavioral and neuroendocrine adaptations during lactation: contribution of brain prolactin Luz Torner, Rodrigue Maloumby Institute of Zoology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Bayern, Germany, e-mail: luz.torner@biologie.uni-regensburg.de Abstract: Prolactin (PRL), a pituitary hormone, is crucial for the survival of mammalian offspring. PRL enters the brain by an active transport at choroid plexus cells, but is also synthesized in the hypothalamus. During pregnancy, hypothalamic PRL expression increases and becomes maximal in lactation. Downregulation of brain PRL-receptor expression via chronic infusion of an antisense probe against the long form of the PRL-receptor (PRL-R AS) in the lateral cerebral ventricle (icv) increased anxiety of lactating rats on the elevated plus-maze (p < 0.01). PRL-R AS treatment also impaired maternal behavior (p < 0.05). Further, PRL-R AS treatment increased (p < 0.05) stressinduced ACTH release, unmasking an inhibitory role of PRL on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis responses during lactation. PRL inhibited stress responses of the oxytocin system as evidenced by higher stress-induced (p < 0.05) plasma oxytocin concentration in PRL-R AS-treated lactating rats. Using push pull perfusion we showed PRL release within, but not outside, the paraventricular nucleus and medial preoptic area of lactating rats during suckling. Further, a significant increase of PRL mRNA (p < 0.05) in the hypothalamus 60 min after suckling, was revealed by real-time PCR. Thus, brain PRL contributes to the adaptive behavioral and neuroendocrine changes in stress responsiveness during lactation in order to support reproductive functions. Frederick Naftolin, Yale University, Center for Research in Reproductive Biology, New Haven, CT, U.S.A., e-mail: Frederick.Naftolin@Yale.edu Objectives: Participants should be able to discuss the diagnostic treatment and mental health consequences of the topics in focus. Abstract: The knowledge in obstetrics and gynecology is rapidly expanding. It directly impacts the daily practice of Gynecologists and Obstetricians XLVI as well as primary care physicians and allied professions. Many Ob=Gyn aspects influence women's mental well-being. Some of the reproductiveobstetrics topics at focus are: assisted reproductive technologies, prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling. The Barker's hypothesis=fetal programming of adult life, and immunobiology and the ins and outs of placental rejection and survival. Some of the gynecological topics to be highlighted are: Cancer as a chronic disease, women's aging and protection, pelvis pain, as well as insulin sensitivity=syndrome X. Antoni Duleba, Yale University, U.S.A., e-mail: antoni.duleba@yale.edu Abstract: Insulin insensitivity and associated with it compensatory hyperinsulinemia affect approximately 5-8% of women of reproductive age. This condition typically presents in the form of polycystic ovary syndrome, which is characterized by anovulation, excessive androgen levels and polycystic ovarian morphology. The cause-effect relationship between hyperinsulinemia and hyperandrogenism is not entirely clear, but most evidence supports the concept that excessive levels of insulin stimulate ovarian androgen production. Furthermore, hyperinsulinemia is associated with extensive metabolic alterations, including dyslipidemia, oxidative stress and systemic inflammation. All these conditions result in increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Clinical approach to patients with polycystic ovary syndrome= hyperinsulinemia includes management of excessive androgens, management of menstrual irregularities, and evaluation and treatment of cardiovascular risk factors. Recently, several studies also demonstrated the effects of polycystic ovary syndrome on mental health. Comparison with age-matched controls has revealed that patients with polycystic ovary syndrome have significantly decreased level of social and emotional function. Psychological alterations include increased likelihood of obsessive-compulsive behavior, depression, anxiety, and aggression. Women with polycystic ovary syndrome have significantly lower self-esteem and describe the adverse effect of their health on sexual function. Studies evaluating the degree of insulin resistance among patients with polycystic ovary syndrome demonstrated a correlation between the severity of insulin resistance and depression. In view of the broad-reaching effects of insulin resistance=PCOS, management of these patients should include careful evaluation of their endocrine and metabolic status, including cardiovascular risk factors, management of presenting symptomatology, as well as assessment and management of mental health issues, especially depression, low self-esteem, and psychosexual morbidity. Christiane Hornstein, George Downing, Simone Poppe, Elvira Rave, Simone Schenk, Susanne Wortmann-Fleischer, Markus Schwarz Psychiatric Hospital Nordbaden, Wiesloch, Germany, e-mail: christiane. hornstein@pzn-wiesloch.de Abstract: Cognitive behavioral therapy and interpersonal therapy are effective treatments for postpartum depression. These therapies usually deal with specific problems in role transmission and parenting stress. They are well accepted by the mothers. However the illness of the mother affects the interaction with the baby and may cause cognitive and emotional disturbances in the baby, especially in severly and chronicly ill mothers. For this selective group of mothers with the most severe and of mental illness spectrum, admitted to a mother-baby-unit, we developed an integrative therapy program consisting in a cognitive group therapy, an individual video microanalytic therapy as well as a daily support program and a psychoeducational group for fathers. The program aimes to improve mothering skills, the interaction with the baby and coping with parental stress. The program is under evaluation. First results will be shown. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to recognize that it is necessary to establish a sufficient supportsystem for the male partners of women with postpartal psychiatric disorders in order to enhance the coping abilities of all members of the family. Abstract: Introduction: Postpartal psychiatric disorders are a burden for all members of the family. Men may contribute to the coping process of women who suffer from a postpartal psychiatric disorder: either they can contribute positively to help manage the challenge of this emotional stress or they can contribute negatively by worsening the problem with their own behaviour. In contrast to the importance of the subject, rather little is known about the behaviour of the men in their different roles as fathers and as partners or about their behaviour in the relationship to the women. Objective: The aim of the investigation was to describe the qualitative aspects of the man's behaviour in different social roles and to estimate the impact on the women's capacity to cope with the situation of postpartal mental illness. Our hypothesis was that supportive men contribute to shorten the stay in hospital and help to increase the chance of child-rearing at home. Methods and Group: We investigated 31 partners of 34 women with postpartal psychiatric disorders. Three men were unreachable although we tried to contact them intensively. All women were treated as in-patients of a mother-child unit after delivery. The men's behaviour in the relationship, as a partner, as well as their behaviour as fathers were rated in a categoricalqualitative way. Each of the 4 father-, 5 partner-, and 4 relationshipcategories was a result of a consensus conference with all members of the therapeutic team; each category represents an important type of the behaviour of the men in these different social roles. The categorisation process took place after an investigation period of several weeks; in our opinion the 'main-category'; in each dimension (social role) is the best fitting one and represents the main type of the men's behaviour during in-patient treatment. Every man had at least one interview every two weeks in order to gather information for the standardized questionnaire; Operationalisierte Psychodynamische Diagnostik'; and for a clinically based diagnosis according to the DSM-IV-system. Results: We found that nearly one third of the men can be described as; 'supportive'; in respect to their different social roles. This finding is strongly correlated with the subjective experience of being supported by the corresponding wives. However in the subgroup of women who had already suffered from prepartal psychiatric disorders before index-delivery (mostly schizophrenia), the majority of the men were rated and experienced as 'nonsupportive'. Additionally, ten of these men suffered from several DSM-IV based psychiatric disorders themselves. Using the standardised questionnaire 'operationalisierte psychodynamische Diagnostik' (OPD) we describe the higher ego-strength of the 'supportmen'. In addition we found that there was a reduction of the length of stay in hospital in the families with 'supportmen'. No association could be demonstrated between the variables belonging to the group of 'supportmen' and the chance of 'child-rearing at home'. Conclusion: Our results show that it is necessary to establish a sufficient support-system for the men too. Niels E. Bergemann, Department of Psychiatry, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, e-mail: niels_bergemann@med.uni-heidelberg.de Abstract: The etiopathogenesis of various postpartum psychiatric disorders' postpartum dysphoria and depression, in particular has not been clarified yet. The available data concerning psychosocial, obstetric and endocrinological variables that can predict the onset of such disorders are heterogeneous and largely contradictory. However, a few of these variables have been validated in empirical studies. Hormones, in particular, have always been considered to play an important role in the development of postpartum disorders as pregnancy and the postpartum period not only represent phases of psychosocial change and re-orientation, but also significantly affect the hormonal system. Estrogens have been considered to be an important part of this process ever since their cerebral and psychotropic effects were demonstrated in numerous, and predominantly, animal studies. In addition, psychotropic effects of estrogens have also been demonstrated in conditions such as postmenopausal depression. However, the investigation of endocinological correlates of postpartum disorders has yielded contradictory data, which, in fact, can be attributed to considerable methodological difficulties. Last but not least, the simultaneous occurrence of numerous hormonal changes may confound the importance of hormone levels in the blood. Therefore, to be able to understand the influence of hormonal change processes on the onset of postpartum disorders, intervention studies are particularly important. A review of the current state of research and a discussion of the consequences for further research and potential treatment strategies are presented. Anette Kersting, Department of Psychiatry, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany, e-mail: a.kersting@uni-muenster.de Objectives: The aim of this lecture is to draw attention to the special situation confronting parents who have experienced the perinatal loss of their child. For such parents, the loss is often a traumatic experience that may also give rise to a pathological grieving process. Abstract: Purpose: The death of a baby during pregnancy or shortly after birth represents an incisive loss and a profoundly critical experience for the parents. They are now confronted with a totally new reality which is far removed from their previous eager anticipation of their child. Methods: Following an overview of the current empirical literature on coping with a stillbirth, the concepts of normal and pathological grief are summarized and presented with reference to case reports. Results: Recent studies show that the loss of a child through stillbirth or perinatal death is a traumatic loss experience entailing a high risk of a pathological grieving course. Psychotherapeutic counselling may be indicated to give the parents adequate support in the coping process. Objectives: Diagnose and treat reactions to therapeutic abortions, spontaneous abortions and abortions for genetic reasons. Abstract: This symposium will review the medical, psychosocial and political aspects of three types of abortion: spontaneous abortion, genetic terminations and elective abortions. Dr. Robinson will discuss the issues concerning the undesired loss by miscarriage. Women may suffer from grief reactions and fears about future infertility. Because miscarriage is a common event, health care workers may minimize the emotional consequences to the woman. Dr. Barum will discuss termination of pregnancy for genetic indications. The decision to terminate, never an easy one, is more complicated when there is uncertainty about the consequences of the genetic defect. Health care workers must be able to provide information and counseling to help the individual make the appropriate decision and also handle their own stress. Elective abortion is the type of pregnancy loss that garners the most controversy with one side declaring a woman's right to choose and the other claiming this is murder and will also lead to severe depression in the woman. Dr. Stotland will discuss the evidence about the psychological outcomes. We will also talk about the current political climate in the U.S.A. that is, once again, moving to restrict women's access to abortion. Objectives: Recognize the controversies, misinformation and actual research data on reactions to therapeutic abortion. Abstract: Mental health professionals encounter abortion issues when their ongoing patients are faced with abortion decisions; when feelings about past abortions come up in psychotherapy; and when women are referred because they have paralyzing ambivalence or their ability to make an autonomous decision is in question. Psychiatric aspects of abortion are associated with some controversy and considerable misinformation in both the lay and medical communities. Valid studies must take into account the fact that induced abortion is more often sought in situations that are inherently stressful than in happier circumstances. They must factor in the circumstances under which the abortion is performed. In some countries, safe, affordable, and legal abortion services are difficult or impossible to access. It is difficult, if not impossible, to identify and follow an appropriate control group. Most women who have psychiatric symptoms after abortion had them before the abortion. There is no psychological evidence supporting requirements that parents be informed of or agree to abortions performed on their underage minors, or that all women seeking abortions have counseling. The best outcomes ensue when women are allowed to make informed, autonomous decisions, confident that they will receive social support whatever their decisions. Politics and abortion rights in the U.S.A. Vicki Saporta, Gail Erlick Robinson, David Barum National Abortion Federation, Washington, DC U.S.A., e-mail: Vsaporta@ prochoice.org Objectives: Participants will be able to identify the major federal threats to abortion rights in the U.S.A. The political landscape and the impact of recent legislation at both the state and federal level will be discussed. Abstract: Abortion rights remain under steady assault by both Congress and state legislatures in the U.S.A.. Vicki Saporta, President and CEO of the National Abortion Federation, will highlight some of the major federal threats to abortion rights. She will also discuss state trends toward requiring biased counseling for women seeking abortions and increased government funding for ''crisis pregnancy centers'' which often engage in manipulative counseling practices. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation the participants should be able identify the important issues in counseling couples planning to abort a fetus with a genetic or congenital abnormality. In addition, participants will be able to identify the various second trimester abortion procedures and understand the medical and psychological risks and benefits of each. Abstract: This part of the symposium will address the medical and psychosocial issues related to termination of pregnancy for genetic or congenital abnormalities. In addition, the psychosocial issues facing health care providers who care for patients undergoing second trimester abortions will be addressed. Topics covered will include counseling couples prior to the termination procedure, methods of second trimester pregnancy termination including medical and surgical abortion, and counseling following the procedure. The emphasis will be on helping couples make the decision whether or not to abort and guiding them toward the most appropriate method of pregnancy termination. Helping couples to grieve and to recover from their loss will also be addressed. I will provide some suggestions on helping health care professionals cope with the stress of caring for these challenging couples. Objectives: Recognize the common reactions experienced by women undergoing spontaneous abortion or miscarriage. Abstract: Spontaneous abortion or miscarriage is the involuntary loss of a fetus prior to 20 weeks gestation. It occurs in 14-18% of pregnancies. Women in the process of miscarriage often feel sad, frightened and helpless. They may feel guilty, wondering what they had done to cause the loss. Following the loss, women grieve for the child they will not have. They are also frequently fearful of never having a child. Especially in the first six months following the loss, there is an increase in depressive symptoms. The extent of the grieving appears to be independent of the length of gestation. The woman's relationship with her other children and her partner may also be affected. In future pregnancies, women may feel anxious, especially around the time of the previous loss. However, a successful subsequent pregnancy may be healing. Precisely because miscarriage is so common, it's emotional impact often gets overlooked by healthcare workers. Women are frequently angry, feeling that they receive vague explanations for why the loss occurred. All women should be offered screening for psychiatric problems after miscarriage. The post partum period -biological and psychological aspects Anke R. Rohde, Kersting, A., Riecher-Roessler A., Rohde A. Department of Psychosomatics in Gynecology, Women's University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, e-mail: anke.rohde@ukb.uni-bonn.de Objectives: To recognize the special problems of diagnosis and treatment of PTSD post partum and to include hormonal and special psychotherapeutic concepts into the treatment of postpartum depression. Abstract: This symposium will focus on two important postnatal mental disorders. The first one is depression in the postpartum period. New clinical findings regarding the role of estrogen will be presented (C. Klier) as well as the results of a controlled study treating the patients with a manualized group psychotherapy (A. Riecher-Roessler). The second, less recognized mental disorder after childbirth which will be in the focus of the symposium is the Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, i.e. in patients who experienced childbirth as traumatic (A. Rohde) and in mothers of very low-birth weight infants (A. Kersting). Results regarding predictors, prophylaxis and treatment will be presented. Objectives: Recognize the problem of traumatically experienced delivery and subsequent psychopathology, especially PTSD, and possible risk factors. Abstract: Objectives: In case studies occasionally it has been described that after a traumatically experienced delivery (e.g. serious somatic complications, death of the child, etc.), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) can develop. Some first international cross-sectional and prospective studies (Wijma et al., 1997; Ayers & Pickering, 2001; Soet et al., 2003) approve these observations. Study Design: To gather information on the frequency of traumatic experienced labor, 149 women, who had given birth at the Bonn University Women's Hospital between 12=2000 and 10=2001, were questioned 2-5 days after delivery, 6-8 weeks p.p. and 6 months p.p. regarding their experiences of child birth and actual psychopathological symptoms. Beside of a structured interview (MINI DIPS), the EPDS (post partum depression), and the NEO-FFI (Personality) a German version of the SRS-PTSD of Carlier et al. (1998) was used (the self rating version of the SI-PTSD, Structured Interview for PTSD). Clinical diagnoses were made according to ICD-10. Results: 6-8 weeks postpartum 3 (2%) of the 149 women fulfilled the ICD-10 criteria of a PTSD postpartum, which is in concordance with the few existing studies. Evaluation the SRS-PTSD (Carlier et al.) 16 women showed a subsyndromal PTSD but not a full PTSD. 11 of these women (69%) had delivered by cesarean section. Sociodemographic and obstetric features, further course of the disorder, correlation with postpartum depression and personality will be presented. The use of the SRS-PTSD as a screening instrument after delivery will be discussed. References: Riecher-Roessler, A., Hofecker Fallahpour. M. (2003) . Postpartum depression: do we still need this diagnostic term? Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 108 (Suppl 418): [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] M., Zinkernagel Burri, C., Stoeckli, B., Wuesten, G., Stieglitz, A. (in press) . Gruppenthera pie bei Depression in der fr€ u uhen Mutterschaft: Erste Ergebnisse einer Pilotstudie. Nervenarzt. Objectives: The participants should be able to -recognize the different needs of mothers of small children presenting with depression -meet these needs in a specific psychotherap eutic approach -know about the advantages of a specific manualized group-psychotherapy which is not only specific for a disorder, but also for gender and life situation. Abstract: Objectives: Depression during the postpartum period and in the early years of motherhood is the most frequent single psychiatric disorder in mothers. Since specific psychotherapy for depressed mothers of small children is almost not existent, we developed a specific group therapy for these patients (specific not only for the disorder, but also for gender and life situation) and compared it to individual psychiatric therapy-as-usual. Methods: The manualized group program which consists of 12 group and 1 couple session was administered in 5 consecutive groups to 31 participants. The main therapeutic method used was cognitive behavioral therapy. Antidepressants were prescribed if necessary. Subsequently a control group of 21 participants receiving individual therapy-as-usual was evaluated and compared to the specific treatment group. In a pre-post-design using BDI, SCL-90-R and other scales symptom release and other outcome variables were determined. Results: Both, treatment group and control group showed significant improvement of depression. However differences were seen in acceptance, satisfaction with treatment medication needed as well as in terms of treatment costs. Conclusions: This newly conceptualized group therapy proved to be effective and well accepted by depressed mothers. The performance of the treatment program is facilitated by the manual. Anette Kersting, Anke Rohde, Anita Riecher Roessler Department of Psychiatry, University of Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer Str. 11, Muenster, Germany, e-mail: a.kersting@uni-muenster.de Objectives: The participants should be able to realize that the birth of a Very Low Birth-Weight infant is to be seen an a complex, traumatic event. Abstract: Purpose: The aim of the study was to register the extent and course of posttraumatic symptoms in mothers who have given birth to a Very Low-Birth-Weight infant. Methods: 30 mothers of Very Low-Birth-Weight infants were examined at four measuring timepoints (1-3 days pp, 14 days pp, 6 months pp, 14 months pp) with respect to posttraumatic symptoms, psychiatric diagnosis, and extent of depression and anxiety. 30 mothers who had given birth to a healthy child spontaneously served as controls. Results: At all measuring timepoints, the mothers of the premature infants recorded significantly higher values for traumatic experience and depressive symptoms than those in the control group. In contrast to the mothers in the control group, the mothers of the premature infants displayed no significant reduction in posttraumatic symptoms even 6 months pp. 14 days pp, three patients were diagnosed as suffering from a clinically relevant depression, a diagnosis still applying to one mother 6 months pp but not made in any of the control subjects. Conclusions: The situation of a mother who has given birth to a Very Low-Birth-Weight infant is to be seen as a complex, traumatic event. Psychotherapeutic support is recommended for some mothers even beyond the immediate postpartum period. Objectives: The pathophysiological understanding of the role of gonadal hormones and peripartum depression today ranges from hypogonadal states to the ''withdrawal'' theory, interaction between hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal system and the hypothalamo-pituitary-gonadal system and the fluctuation of gonadal hormones. All these theories will be discussed in the light of the results of the current investigation. Abstract: The tremendous changes of gonadal hormones during the puerperium has led to the assumption that the trigger of perinatal illness can be found in hormonal events that accompany the peripartum period. Peripartum depression (DSM-III-R diagnosis) and depressive symptoms (SDS scores) before and in the early days after birth and postpartum depression (EPDS) at 6 months and the relationship to the magnitude of change and total levels of estrogen were assessed. Methods: A sample of 193 healthy women were assessed in their 38th week of pregnancy, in the first 10 days after birth and at 6 months postpartum regarding major depression and depressive symptoms and estradiol. Results: Depression scores were significantly higher at the end of pregnancy than postpartum (p < .0004). There was no correlation of magnitude of change of estrogen to peripartum depression or postpartum depression. The correlation of total levels of estrogen to depression assessed by SCID diagnosis 5 days after birth showed a small positive correlation of estrogen levels on day three (r ¼ 0.22, p < 0.03, sig.) but this may be due to chance because of multiple testing. Conclusions: No hypogonal levels of estrogen as well as a withdrawal phenomenon in women with peripartum and postpartum depression could be shown in this study. To answer the question of the role of estrogen further studies of multidimensional, dynamic interaction of gonadal hormones and other systems (genetic, environment and psychological) are needed. (2): S87-S101. Petry, N. M. (2000) . A comprehensive guide to the application of contingency management procedures in clinical settings. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 58: 9-25. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants will know more about state-of-the-art treatment approaches for pregnant and post-partum substance abusers that may reduce the deleterious maternal and neonatal consequences resulting from continued drug use during and after pregnancy. Specifically, participants will learn about using methadone and buprenorphine to manage opioid dependence during pregnancy and applying contingency management and motivational enhancement therapy to further reduce continued substance abuse among pregnant and post-partum substance abusers. Abstract: The treatment of pregnant drug abusers is complicated by notoriously poor retention rates (20-30%) and serious maternal and fetal health risks resulting from continued maternal drug use and lack of adequate prenatal care. Polysubstance abuse is high in these populations, and 23-75% report using more than one illicit drug and up to 95% report regular use of cigarettes during pregnancy. Continued use of licit and illicit drugs during pregnancy contributes to pre-term deliveries, low birth weight babies, infant mortality, and can contribute to increased neonatal withdrawal and lengthy neonatal intensive care. This symposium highlights state-of-the-art treatment approaches for pregnant substance abusers that may reduce the deleterious maternal and neonatal consequences resulting from continued drug use during pregnancy. A group of national experts will review promising advances in the pharmacological management of opioid dependence during pregnancy and the application of behavioral interventions for further reducing continued substance abuse among pregnant substance abusers. Hendree Jones will review the latest research on using buprenorphine and Karol Kaltenbach will discuss the status of methadone treatment and the potential impact of buprenorphine in the management of opioid-dependent pregnant women. Leslie Amass and Jonathan Kamien will review the results of a multi-site trial of community-financed voucher therapy for reducing cigarette use in pregnant and parenting substance abusers. Teresa Winhusen will discuss the NIDA Center for Clinical Trials Network's efforts to study the application of Motivational Enhancement Therapy in the treatment of pregnant substance users. Loretta Finnegan will discuss the ramifications of these promising treatment interventions and their potential broad scale impact for managing pregnant substance abusers. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants will have a fundamental understanding of the deleterious effects of smoking during and after pregnancy and increased knowledge regarding an effective behavioral intervention for reducing smoking in this population. Additionally, participants will learn how to set up similar incentive-based programs in their local community. Abstract: The deleterious effects of cigarette smoking impact nearly 60 million Americans and tobacco-related illness remains the United States' leading cause of premature and preventable mortality. Voucher-based reinforcement therapy (VBT) is an effective behavioral strategy for reducing drug, alcohol and cigarette use that has not been widely studied in pregnant and parenting female substance abusers. While the cost of VBRT rewards has limited its dissemination, obtaining VBRT incentives through donations may be one way to overcome this barrier. Data from an ongoing, randomized controlled clinical trial of community-financed VBT for reducing cigarette smoking in urban, minority, low income, pregnant, postpartum and parenting substance abusers in two South Central Los Angeles community treatment programs are described. The VBT program incentives are supported entirely by donations from the local community and private corporations. Two-thirds third of a planned 90 women have been randomized to date for this 30 week study. They average 33 years old, have given birth about 5 times each, have smoked for about 19 years, and at intake had a mean carbon monoxide breath level of 17 ppm and smoked about 9.5 cigarettes=day. Two VBT conditions are being compared to a control group. In the VBT conditions, participants earn 10-point vouchers on a fixed-ratio 1 schedule of reinforcement for providing breath carbon monoxide levels <8 ppm or carbon monoxide levels <8 ppm and urine samples negative for illicit drugs during 3 data visits per week. Each voucher point can be exchanged for about 2 worth of goods or services in on-site clinic stores stocked entirely by donations. Outcome measures of carbon monoxide levels, attendance, voucher earnings and spending patterns, during the study and at follow-up will be discussed as well as the fund raising strategy used to garner donations for the VBT program. Results to date suggest that carbon monoxide levels decreased relative to baseline by about 30 to 40% in the experimental groups compared to a 10% decrease in the control group. Donations in excess of 160,000 have been received to date. Our study suggests that community-sponsored VBT programs may be an effective and feasible approach to providing relatively high magnitude, voucher-based reinforcement therapy for substance abuse treatment. L Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants will have gained understanding of the issues surrounding the treatment of pregnant opioid dependent women using buprenorphine and increased knowledge regarding the neonatal abstinence syndrome associated with prenatal exposure to opioid agonist pharmacoterapies. Additionally, participants will learn about the comprehensive services needed to effectively improve the treatment of this special population. Abstract: Introduction: Since buprenorphine is approved to treat opioid dependence, appropriate clinical data are needed regarding the safety and efficacy of this medication during pregnancy. Literature published to date suggests that buprenorphine appears to be safe and effective in both mother and infant, with a neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) that may differ from methadone both qualitatively and quantitatively; however, double-blind studies of these medications are needed. Methods: Pregnant opioid dependent women were randomized to methadone (n ¼ 15) or buprenorphine (n ¼ 15) using flexible dosing double-blind double-dummy controlled trial methodology. Maternal, fetal and neonatal safety and efficacy were assessed. Results: Similar retention rates and low rates of illicit drug use were observed for both groups during pregnancy. All neonates exhibited some signs of neonatal withdrawal. Of mothers completing the study, 55% (n ¼ 6=11) of methadone exposed and 20% (n ¼ 2=10) of buprenorphine exposed neonates were treated for (NAS), respectively. Conclusions: Both medications were safe and effective during pregnancy. Buprenorphine appears to produce less severe NAS but larger scale replications of these findings are needed. Objectives: Participants should be able to understand the complex biopsycho-social factors that make the treatment of opioid dependent pregnant women a challenge and understand the principles of the use of methadone for the management of opioid dependence during pregnancy. Participants will be able to understand the differences in using methadone and buprenorphine during pregnancy for both the woman and the outcome of her infant, including neonatal abstinence. Abstract: Methadone maintenance has been recommended for the management of opioid dependence during pregnancy since the seventies. However, there continues to be debate regarding appropriate dose levels and the relationship of maternal dose and severity of neonatal abstinence. This presentation will review the findings on the use of methadone during pregnancy, relationship of maternal dose and neonatal abstinence, the differences between methadone and buprenorphine, and the impact of pharmacological options to treatment providers. Objectives: Participants will gain a basic understanding of the principals of Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET) and how these principals pertain to treating pregnant substance users. Participants will become familiar with the rationale for, and study design of, the NIDA Center for Clinical Trials Network study of MET for pregnant substance users. Abstract: This presentation will discuss the rationale for, and design of, the NIDA Center for Clinical Trial Network's study of Motivational Enhancement Therapy (MET) for pregnant substance users; study data will not be available for the presentation. The primary objective of the study is to evaluate the efficacy of MET, compared to treatment as usual (TAU), in increasing treatment utilization in pregnant substance users. The trial is a randomized, parallel, two group study comparing MET to TAU. Two hundred pregnant women identified as needing substance abuse treatment will be randomly assigned to either MET or TAU. The active study phase will be four weeks in duration. Follow up assessments will be conducted at 4 and 12 weeks following the end of the active study phase. Participants assigned to MET will be offered three MET sessions, which will replace the intake session and the first two individual treatment sessions typically offered at the treatment program. Participants assigned to the TAU condition will be offered the standard treatment provided by the program. The primary outcome measure will be treatment utilization (defined as the percent of scheduled treatment hours attended). Secondary outcomes include substance use, utilization of prenatal care, and HIV risk behaviors. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants will have a fundamental understanding of the deleterious effects of smoking during and after pregnancy and increased knowledge regarding an effective behavioral intervention for reducing smoking in this population. Additionally, participants will learn how to set up similar incentive-based programs in their local community. Abstract: The treatment of pregnant drug abusers is complicated by notoriously poor retention rates (20-30%) and serious maternal and fetal health risks resulting from continued maternal drug use and lack of adequate prenatal care. Polysubstance abuse is high in these populations, and 23-75% report using more than one illicit drug and up to 95% report regular use of cigarettes during pregnancy. Continued use of licit and illicit drugs during pregnancy contributes to pre-term deliveries, low birth weight babies, infant mortality, and can contribute to increased neonatal withdrawal and lengthy neonatal intensive care. This symposium highlights state-of-the-art treatment approaches for pregnant substance abusers that may reduce the deleterious maternal and neonatal consequences resulting from continued drug Discussant. Frederick Naftolin, Yale University, New Haven, CT, U.S.A., e-mail: Frederick.Naftolin@Yale.edu Objectives: Participants should be able to discuss the diagnostic treatment and mental health consequences of the topics in focus. Abstract: The knowledge in obstetrics and gynecology is rapidly expanding. It directly impacts the daily practice of Gynecologists and Obstetricians as well as primary care physicians and allied professions. Many Ob=Gyn aspects influence women's mental well-being. Some of the reproductiveobstetrics topics at focus are: assisted reproductive technologies, prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling. The Barker's hypothesis=fetal programming of adult life, and immunobiology and the ins and outs of placental rejection and survival. Some of the gynecological topics to be highlighted are: Cancer as a chronic disease, women's aging and protection, pelvis pain, as well as insulin sensitivity=syndrome X. Objectives: Explore the differences prenatal screening options and how these lead to differences in patients' axiety levels during prenatal genetic counseling sessions. Abstract: Today's generation of pregnant women face decisions that a majority of their mothers and grandmothers never had to consider. Technology has introduced multiple screening and testing options to the general population of pregnant women. Obstetricians, midwives, nurses, and genetic counselors are assigned the task of helping their patients become educated about these options and to help facilitate decision making about which ones to pursue. Among the vast array of anxiety provoking decisions these women face, we will explore one of the most commonly encountered decisions: whether or not to have an amniocentesis. Today, two of the major types of screening for women in their second trimester are maternal age and maternal serum screening. While women in both groups may have an identical numerical risk for an identical indication (fetus at risk for Down syndrome), their levels of anxiety are often very different. Overall, women referred with an indication of advanced maternal age seem to have less anxiety when compared with women referred after receiving abnormal maternal serum screening results. Objectives: 1. Understand the basic prinicples of Interpersonal Psychotherapy 2. Use Interpersonal Psychotherapy to treat perinatal depression. Abstract: Purpose: Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) is a time limited psychotherapy with demonstrated efficacy for the treatment of postpartum depression and depression during pregnancy. It is applicable to perinatal women because of its focus on the interpersonal conflicts and role transition issues which they frequently experience. This pre conference workshop is designed to provide training in IPT for perinatal women. Methods: Six hours of training will be provided. The course will include an overview of IPT principles, techniques, and case conceptualization. The typical interpersonal problems encountered by perinatal women and the application of IPT to these issues will be emphasized. Participants will also participate in small group discussions and role playing exercises. Videotapes of expert IPT therapists working with perinatal women will also be reviewed and discussed. Results: At the conclusion of the workshop participants should be able to utilize IPT techniques to treat perinatal depression. Conclusions: This course is recommended to professionals who wish to learn more about IPT and gain more experience in its use. It is best suited for those who deliver psychotherapeutic treatments to women with depression or interpersonal problems, and clinicians who are in a setting in which empirically validated treatments or time-limited treatments are provided. Carol Nadelson, Carolyn Robinowitz, Sarah Romans, Nada Stotland Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, U.S.A., e-mail: carol_nadelson@ hms.harvard.edu Objectives: Participants will learn about issues and factors that affect women in leadership, as well as strategies that promote success, and how to apply these to their own professional careers. Abstract: Women and men psychiatrists have differing career opportunities and trajectories. These differences, common to all physicians, are especially marked for women in leadership. This workshop will consider the opportunities and obstacles, challenges and stresses women psychiatric leaders have experienced during their career. The panelists are women who have held many different kinds of leadership roles, and their presentations will address career planning and development, including decision making, risk taking, self promotion, negotiation, and conflict resolution. Their experiences will serve as a springboard for the audience to interact and discuss choices throughout the life cycle and how to maximize options and develop strategies for success. Objectives: 1. Identify psychosocial issues among women coping with infertility 2. Utilize psychological interventions to reduce stress associated with infertility and its treatment(s); 3. Recognize women at risk for depression and anxiety during pregnancy and post-partum; 4. Apply psychological interventions to improve outcomes in women with chronic gynecologic conditions; 5. Assess psychosocial issues among women considering genetic testing for breast and gyn cancers; and 6. Implement consultation guidelines in ob=gyn settings to enhance health and mental health outcomes. Abstract: This skills-focused, day-long workshop will present assessment and treatment strategies to promote women's health and mental heath in obstetrics and gynecology. Curriculum will include ''state of the art,'' evidenced-based interventions used by mental health providers when working with women facing: infertility, complications during pregnancy and postpartum, chronic gynecologic conditions, and decisions about genetic testing for breast and gyn cancers. Andrea M. Braverman, Ph.D. will review a broad range of psychosocial issues among women coping with fertility problems, highlight a host of controversial and ethical issues in the area of Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART), and demonstrate interventions targeted to individuals and couples to reduce stress associated with infertility and its treatment. Catherine M. Piontek, M.D. will discuss the assessment and treatment of depression and anxiety during pregnancy and post-partum. Helen L. Coons, Ph.D. will present psychosocial strategies designed to improve the health and mental health status of women with chronic gynecologic conditions (e.g., Pelvic Pain problems, ICS, PCOS, Herpes, etc.), and review techniques to enhance women's preparation for gynecologic diagnostic and treatment procedures. Susan H. McDaniel, Ph.D. will discuss psychosocial issues among women considering genetic testing for breast and gyn cancers. Guidelines for providing collaborative care with ob=gyns will also be reviewed. Examples of assessment tools and consult forms will also be provided by the interdisciplinary faculty. Each presentation will include case discussions, role-plays with the audience, and ample opportunity for questions and discussion. Cases are developed specifically to address the learning objectives of the workshop, and describe women at different points in the life cycle who are from diverse racial-ethnic, socioeconomic, sociocultural, and relational backgrounds with a broad range of ob=gyn problems. Presenters will clarify when recommended assessment and treatment interventions are based on peer reviewed research and=or clinical experience. Abstract: This workshop will provide the participants with an opportunity to familiarize themselves with the methods necessary to define and study specific periods of reproductive change (pregancy, post-partum, luteal phase, perimenopause) associated in some women with mood dysregulation. We will employ an interactive format with expert consultants in endocrinology, imaging, and affective neuroscience. Questions will be posed to the consultants by the workshop organizers and participants. Examples of topics that will be discussed are as follows: 1) Endocrine questions addressed by Drs. Nieman and Santoro -What measures define the perimenopause (e.g., is a single elevated FSH of diagnostic value)? What roles do historical characteristics and endocrinologic measures play in defining the perimenopause? What measures are necessary and sufficient to define a luteal phase as present? What is the endocrinology of the postpartum; when does the postpartum period end? 2) Imaging questions addressed by Dr. Berman -What imaging methods are suitable for repeated measures analysis? How does one best characterize=detect gonadal steroid-induced alterations in neural function or connectivity? 3) Affective neuroscience questions will be addressed by Wayne Drevets -What paradigms are best suited for characterization of steroid-induced mood changes? Can existing paradigms be employed as repeated measures? By the end of the workshop, participants should be able to select research methodologies that will result in the fewest potential confounds, the most precise diagnostic assignment, and the most relevant physiologic measures. Objectives: At the conclusion of this workshop, participants should be able to distinguish between the major perinatal psychiatric disorders, be familiar with prevalence rates and risk factors, understand rationale, procedures, and barriers to the implementation of a specialized perinatal psychiatric treatment program including staffing, programming, length of stay, follow-up considerations and interface with the obstetrical community. Abstract: Women suffering from depression or other psychiatric disorders during pregnancy or following childbirth historically, have had limited treatment options. Traditional inpatient and partial hospital settings entail separation from the infant and can be disruptive to bonding and breast-feeding. Additionally, compared to many European nations, perinatal psychiatric disorders are seriously under-recognized and under-treated in the United States. To begin addressing the need for a specialized treatment setting in this country, the Postpartum Depression Day Hospital at Women & Infants' Hospital was opened in February 2000. This workshop will describe the rationale, design, and operation of a mother-baby partial hospital program for pregnant and postpartum women suffering from depression and other psychiatric disorders. Demographic, clinical, and psychosocial characteristics will be described, along with pharmacological and psychosocial approaches. Peter J. Schmidt, Lynnette K. Nieman, Nanette F. Santoro, Karen F. Berman, Wayne C. Drevets, David R. Rubinow Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to select research methodologies that will result in the fewest potential confounds, the most precise diagnostic assignment, and the most relevant physiologic measures. Abstract: This workshop will provide the participants with an opportunity to familiarize themselves with the methods necessary to define and study specific periods of reproductive change (pregancy, post-partum, luteal phase, perimenopause) associated in some women with mood dysregulation. We will employ an interactive format with expert consultants in endocrinology, imaging, and affective neuroscience. Questions will be posed to the consultants by the workshop organizers and participants. Examples of topics that will be discussed are as follows: 1) Endocrine questions addressed by Drs. Nieman and Santoro -What measures define the perimenopause (e.g., is a single elevated FSH of diagnostic value)? What roles do historical characteristics and endocrinologic measures play in defining the perimenopause? What measures are necessary and sufficient to define a luteal phase as present? What is the endocrinology of the postpartum; when does the postpartum period end? 2) Imaging questions addressed by Dr. Berman -What imaging methods are suitable for repeated measures analysis? How does one best characterize=detect gonadal steroid-induced alterations in neural function or connectivity? 3) Affective neuroscience questions will be addressed by Wayne Drevets -What paradigms are best suited for characterization of steroid-induced mood changes? Can existing paradigms be employed as repeated measures? By the end of the workshop, participants should be able to select research methodologies that will result in the fewest potential confounds, the most precise diagnostic assignment, and the most relevant physiologic measures. 1. To recognize the wide range of emotional reactions experienced by childbearing women. 2. To understand the needs of mothers, how to assess, intervene and refer to resources. Abstract: The focus of this symposium is to understand the interaction between the cultural, psychological, and physiological components of the childbearing period. It includes the values and role of social support systems, clarification of the major maternal mood and anxiety disorders, trends in the management of childbirth as a health care, public policy and insurance issue, and the impact of maternal depression on the family. The symposium is designed for professionals who work closely with pregnant and postpartum women, and is aimed at exploring practical, hands-on solutions for achieving the well-being of families in every community around the world in the future. Objectives: Participants will be able to: 1) understand the concepts and methods used for intervention with women with PPD to improve parental functioning; 2) identify the need for further development and evaluation of group intervention; 3) recognize resources available in their community that may be used as adjunct treatment of PPD. Abstract: Background: The potential consequences of PPD can be devastating not only to the woman herself but for her family and children. A depressed mother's lowered response to her infant has a detrimental effect on the infant's development, cognitive development, interactions and attachment style. It can also affect older siblings as the children of depressed mothers function less optimally socially, personally and behaviourally. Purpose: This is a pilot study to assess the feasibility and efficacy of a parent-education group as an intervention in the treatment of PPD and to improve the parental functioning of women who have experienced PPD. Method: The participants were recruited from the Reproductive Mental Health Program and were patients who have been self-referred or referred by their care-provider at RMH. Women will use two self-rating scales to measure mood and parental stress at the start and end of the treatment. The classes are designed specifically for women who have experienced PPD. They incorporate concepts and methods derived from parent education, family systems and child developmental theories. Results: Pilot data to develop a research design to measure the program's effectiveness to increase the ability of the women to deal appropriately with their children's behaviour, reduce stress, increase self-efficacy and improve their mood. Objectives: Participants will be able to a) understand a multidisciplinary model of care as well as with the different treatment options and how they have been implemented in the treatment of pregnant and postpartum women and b) apply individual, couple, group and community strategies in their clinical practice. Abstract: Background: A multidisciplinary model of care incorporates different phases of care such as early identification, assessment, treatment and follow-up of patients. It utilizes the services of mental health professionals from different disciplines. Content: Doris Bodnar will present, ''A Postpartum Screening and Follow-up Inventory.'' This presentation will discuss prevention strategies that lead to operationalizing overall community strategies for the early identification of postpartum depression. Dr. Michal Regev's presentation, ''Psychosocial Treatments For Depressed And Anxious Pregnant And Postpartum Women'' will focus on the different non-pharmacological treatments that are being offered to women in the program. Dr. Regev will also present, ''Group Therapy for Depressed and Anxious Postpartum Women.'' Finally, Jules Smith will present, ''Parenting Skills Education for Women Who Have Experienced Postpartum Depression''. This presentation will assess the feasibility and efficacy of a parenteducation group as an intervention in the treatment of PPD aiming to improve mother-child interactions. Conclusion: This workshop will present the multidisciplinary model of care for pregnant and postpartum women who develop a mental illness. Specifically, it will focus on the way in which different modalities of care, from different disciplines are being integrated into one comprehensive model. Hands-on skills and tips will be presented as well as some very interesting case studies. Objectives: Participants will learn: a) how an integrated model of care benefits women experiencing mental illness and b) gives service providers a supportive network. Abstract: Purpose: A Postpartum Screening and Follow-up Inventory study in the province of British Columbia, Canada completed in September 2003 will lead to recommendations for standardized screening. Methods: An evidence based document collaboratively produced by the British Columbia Reproductive Mental Health Program and the British Columbia Reproductive Care Program provides the basis of knowledge for the inventory. This document is entitled, ''Best Practices Guidelines relating to Reproductive Mental Health: Principles for early identification, assessment, treatment and follow-up of women with mental illness during the perinatal period.' ' (2003) . Preliminary Results and Conclusions: A support network of service providers in BC who meet regularly via video=telephone conferencing are poised to receive the information deemed from the inventory. Further discussions about prevention strategies will lead to operationalizing overall community strategies for the early identification of postpartum depression. Objectives: Participants will learn about a multidisciplinary model of care for pregnant and postpartum women with mental illness. As well, they will learn the core principles of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy, Interpersonal Psychotherapy and Marital Therapy and how to tailor these treatment modalities to the needs of pregnant and postpartum women. Abstract: Content: There is growing evidence indicating that a variety of psychosocial treatment modalities can be as effective as medication in treating people with depression, anxiety and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Also, it has been demonstrated that combining treatment modalities such as Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy and Marital Therapy with medication can be very effective in treating as well as preventing relapse in the general population. Given the special concerns about medication use in pregnancy and lactation, these modalities are even more important for the treatment of pregnant and postpartum women. This presentation will focus on the different psychosocial (non-pharmacological) treatments that have been offered to patients of the Reproductive Mental Health Program at BC Women's Hospital in Vancouver, BC, whether in conjunction with medication or in women who are not taking any medications. These treatment modalities are offered as a part of the multidisciplinary model of care for women who experience mental illness during pregnancy and postpartum. An overview of the model will be discussed, as well case studies and clinical data. Objectives: Participants will learn about a pilot study that showed that group therapy was effective in alleviating symptoms of depression and anxiety in postpartum depressed women. As well, they will learn the ways to design an effective group therapy program for the treatment of postpartum depression. Abstract: Background: Women who have experienced postpartum depression feel isolated, blame themselves for being depressed and believe that they are the only ones who feel the way they do. Group therapy is designed to address these issues. Purpose: To evaluate a group therapy program in terms of its efficacy in alleviating symptoms of depression and anxiety and to get feedback from participant that will inform the design of future groups and a larger scale study. Method: 4 groups of 6-8 participants each were offered to patients of the Reproductive Mental Health Program. The groups lasted for 12 weeks each (once a week, 2 hours). Pre and post measures were administered to evaluate symptoms of depression and anxiety as well as self-perception and isolation. Results: Results showed a significant difference between pre and post measures in terms of remission of symptoms. All of the participants except 2 showed significant improvement in symptoms. For one participant there was no change in the severity of symptoms and another one got worse. Conclusion: this pilot study demonstrated that group therapy is a worthwhile and effective treatment modality for postpartum depression. Being a highly cost-effective treatment, group therapy should become a standard of care for postpartum depressed women. Objectives: Participants will be able to: 1) understand the concepts and methods used for intervention with women with PPD to improve parental functioning; 2) identify the need for further development and evaluation of group intervention; 3) recognize resources available in their community that may be used as adjunct treatment of PPD. Abstract: Background: The potential consequences of PPD can be devastating not only to the woman herself but for her family and children. A depressed mother's lowered response to her infant has a detrimental effect on the infant's development, cognitive development, interactions and attachment style. It can also affect older siblings as the children of depressed mothers function less optimally socially, personally and behaviourally. Purpose: This is a pilot study to assess the feasibility and efficacy of a parent-education group as an intervention in the treatment of PPD and to improve the parental functioning of women who have experienced PPD. Method: The participants were recruited from the Reproductive Mental Health Program and were patients who have been self-referred or referred by their care-provider at RMH. Women will use two self-rating scales to measure mood and parental stress at the start and end of the treatment. The classes are designed specifically for women who have experienced PPD. They incorporate concepts and methods derived from parent education, family systems and child developmental theories. Results: Pilot data to develop a research design to measure the program's effectiveness to increase the ability of the women to deal appropriately with their children's behaviour, reduce stress, increase self-efficacy and improve their mood. Objectives: Participants will be able to a) understand a multidisciplinary model of care as well as with the different treatment options and how they have been implemented in the treatment of pregnant and postpartum women and b) apply individual, couple, group and community strategies in their clinical practice. Abstract: Background: A multidisciplinary model of care incorporates different phases of care such as early identification, assessment, treatment and follow-up of patients. It utilizes the services of mental health professionals from different disciplines. Content: Doris Bodnar will present, ''A Postpartum Screening and Follow-up Inventory.'' This presentation will discuss prevention strategies that lead to operationalizing overall community strategies for the early identification of postpartum depression. Dr. Michal Regev's presentation, ''Psychosocial Treatments For Depressed And Anxious Pregnant And Postpartum Women'' will focus on the different non-pharmacological treatments that are being offered to women in the program. Dr. Regev will also present, ''Group Therapy for Depressed and Anxious Postpartum Women.'' Finally, Jules Smith will present, ''Parenting Skills Education for Women Who Have Experienced Postpartum Depression''. This presentation will assess the feasibility and efficacy of a parent-education group as an intervention in the treatment of PPD aiming to improve mother-child interactions. Conclusion: This workshop will present the multidisciplinary model of care for pregnant and postpartum women who develop a mental illness. Specifically, it will focus on the way in which different modalities of care, from different disciplines are being integrated into one comprehensive model. Hands-on skills and tips will be presented as well as some very interesting case studies. A postpartum screening and follow-up inventory Doris Bodnar, BC Women's Hospital and Health Centre, Reproductive Mental Health Program, Vancouver, BC, Canada, e-mail: dbodnar@cw.bc.ca Literature Reference: Locicero, A., Weiss, D. (1997) . Postpartum Depression: Proposal of prevention through an integrated care and support network. Applied & Preventive Psychology 6: 169-178. Objectives: Participants will learn: a) how an integrated model of care benefits women experiencing mental illness and b) gives service providers a supportive network. Abstract: Purpose: A Postpartum Screening and Follow-up Inventory study in the province of British Columbia, Canada completed in September 2003 will lead to recommendations for standardized screening. Methods: An evidence based document collaboratively produced by the British Columbia Reproductive Mental Health Program and the British Columbia Reproductive Care Program provides the basis of knowledge for the inventory. This document is entitled, ''Best Practices Guidelines relating to Reproductive Mental Health: Principles for early identification, assessment, treatment and follow-up of women with mental illness during the perinatal period.' ' (2003) . Preliminary Results and Conclusions: A support network of service providers in BC who meet regularly via video=telephone conferencing are poised to receive the information deemed from the inventory. Further discussions about prevention strategies will lead to operationalizing overall community strategies for the early identification of postpartum depression. Objectives: Participants will learn about a multidisciplinary model of care for pregnant and postpartum women with mental illness. As well, they will learn the core principles of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy, Interpersonal Psychotherapy and Marital Therapy and how to tailor these treatment modalities to the needs of pregnant and postpartum women. Abstract: Content: There is growing evidence indicating that a variety of psychosocial treatment modalities can be as effective as medication in treating people with depression, anxiety and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Also, it has been demonstrated that combining treatment modalities such as Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy and Marital Therapy with medication can be very effective in treating as well as preventing relapse in the general population. Given the special concerns about medication use in pregnancy and lactation, these modalities are even more important for the treatment of pregnant and postpartum women. This presentation will focus on the different psychosocial (non-pharmacological) treatments that have been offered to patients of the Reproductive Mental Health Program at BC Women's Hospital in Vancouver, BC, whether in conjunction with medication or in women who are not taking any medications. These treatment modalities are offered as a part of the multidisciplinary model of care for women who experience mental illness during pregnancy and postpartum. An overview of the model will be discussed, as well case studies and clinical data. Objectives: Participants will learn about a pilot study that showed that group therapy was effective in alleviating symptoms of depression and anxiety in postpartum depressed women. As well, they will learn the ways to design an effective group therapy program for the treatment of postpartum depression. Abstract: Background: Women who have experienced postpartum depression feel isolated, blame themselves for being depressed and believe that they are the only ones who feel the way they do. Group therapy is designed to address these issues. Purpose: To evaluate a group therapy program in terms of its efficacy in alleviating symptoms of depression and anxiety and to get feedback from participant that will inform the design of future groups and a larger scale study. Method: 4 groups of 6-8 participants each were offered to patients of the Reproductive Mental Health Program. The groups lasted for 12 weeks each (once a week, 2 hours). Pre and post measures were administered to evaluate symptoms of depression and anxiety as well as self-perception and isolation. Results: Results showed a significant difference between pre and post measures in terms of remission of symptoms. All of the participants except 2 showed significant improvement in symptoms. For one participant there was no change in the severity of symptoms and another one got worse. Conclusion: This pilot study demonstrated that group therapy is a worthwhile and effective treatment modality for postpartum depression. Being a highly cost-effective treatment, group therapy should become a standard of care for postpartum depressed women. Women with schizophrenia in developing countries the 'arranged marriage': two sides of the coin Kiran Rao, Department of Clinical Psychology, National Institute of Mental Health & Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore, Karnataka, India, e-mail: kiranr@nimhans.kar.nic.in Abstract: The preponderance of single males in Western samples of schizophrenia has been linked to the earlier age of onset in males, the consequent arrest in social development and greater deficit in social skills. All these, in turn, make the process of finding and keeping a stable partner difficult. Women, on the other hand, with a later age of onset and better social functioning are more likely to be separated=divorced, with children, have multiple heterosexual relationships, at high risk for HIV and other STDs, victims of abuse and violence and high users of the rehabilitation system. In India, gender differences in age of onset have not been established. This has been attributed to the effect of marriage. Both men and women are married at a younger age through the system of arranged marriages. For men, with their higher social value, this ensures continuity in care, first by the parents and later by the spouse, resulting in a better course and outcome. For women, there are two sides of the coin. For a female patient with schizophrenia, if the onset of illness, is well after the marriage has stabilized (average 10 years) and there are children (especially male), and she is relatively asymptomatic and moderately well functioning (GAF score approx. 70 & > ;able to carry out daily household chores), the chances are that she will be looked after by the spouse and remain in the family of procreation. This ensures a better course and outcome. On the other hand, if the onset of illness is soon after the marriage or the illness is 'discovered' after the marriage by the family of procreation, she is immediately sent back to the family of origin. A blame-game now ensues with each side accusing the other: the parents holding the spouse for being responsible for the illness, the spouse and in-laws accusing the parents of having hidden the illness. The patient is, however, left in her natal home. The marriage of other siblings, poverty or other stressors make the task of caring more burdensome. The female patient with schizophrenia is more likely to be abandoned, often in a religious healing center or left wandering on the street and is a victim of abuse and violence. With no alternate social support systems and the absence of adequate safe shelters, the mental hospital data in India show that women with mental illness have a longer duration of stay. This is an area that has not received much attention. Although, Non-governmental organizations have become sensitized to the problem, much more needs to be done. If marriage has a protective role, do we, as professionals, need to do more to help the female patient keep her marriage intact? There is hardly any literature on helping spouses of female patients with schizophrenia. Have we adequately addressed the needs of the individual female patient, the couple and the family unit? Benita J Walton-Moss, Jennifer Manganello, Jacquelyn Campbell, Victoria Frye Johns Hopkins University, School of Nursing, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A., e-mail: bmoss@son.jhmi.edu Literature Reference: Campbell, J. C. et al. (2003 Jul) . Risk factors for femicide in abusive relationships: results from a multisite case control study. American Journal of Public Health 93 (7): 1089-1097. Objectives: Identify differential sociodemographic risk factors for abused women. Abstract: The purpose of this secondary data analysis is to determine risk factors for abuse compared to non-abuse in a large multisite case control study that investigated risk factors for femicide. Women or their proxies (for the femicide victims) were inerviewed by telephone. Cases included 220 femicide victims and 845 women who served as abused (N ¼ 427) and nonabused (N ¼ 418) controls. Women in the control group were identified through random stratified digit dialing from the same metropolitan areas as the femicide cases.The Conflict Tactics Scale was used to identify abused women. This analysis focuses on the women in the control group. The interview schedule included questions regarding sociodemographic status, relationship characterisctics, weapon availability, drug use, psychological abuse, and responses to standardized instruments such as the Danger Assessment and the Harassment Scale. The questions on psychological abuse were based on those used in the Canadian Violence Against Women Survey. After conducting a multiple logistic regression analysis, the two variables representing women's characteristics were younger age and mental health where women who believed they had fair or poor mental health were 3.36 times more likely to be abused compared to the non-abused group. Partner risk factors independently associated with abuse included having no job, not being a high school graduate, being in fair or poor mental health, and having a problem with alcohol use. Relationship variables observed to be significant included an annual family income of less than $15,000 and the man being a former partner. These results emphasizes the importance of screening for IPV in all settings for both men and women particularly in mental health settings. Patti Horgas, Benita Walton-Moss, Phyllis Sharps, Nancy Glass, Kathryn Laughon, Patti Horgas Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A., e-mail: bmoss@son. jhmi.edu Literature References: Thompson, M. P., Kaslow, N. J., Kingree, J. B., Puett, R., Thompson, N. J., Meadows, L. (1999) . Partner abuse and posttraumatic stress disorder as risk factors for suicide attempts in a sample of lowincome, inner-city women. Journal of Traumatic Stress 12(1): 59-72. Muelleman, R. L., Lenaghan, P. A., Pakieser, R. A. (1998) . Nonbattering presentations to the ED of women in physically abusive relationships. Am J Emerg Med 16 (2): 128-131. Campbell, J., Webster, D., Koziol-McLain, J., McFarlane, J. et.al. (2003) . Risk factors for intimate partner femicide. AJPH 93: 1089-1097. Objectives: 1. Explicate the relationship of intimate partner violence and suicide risk 2. Recognize the implications for assessment and intervention for abused women in terms of suicidality. Abstract: In our 12 city case control study to identify risk factors for femicide (homicide of women) in abusive intimate relationships, female suicidality was not associated with risk of femicide. Even so, suicide must be considered since it is an additional potential source of mortality for female abuse victims. The proportion of abused women who said they had attempted or seriously considered suicide was 6% among the 310 femicide victims (according to a proxy informant), 8% of the 183 attempted homicide victims, and 9% of the 324 randomly sampled abused controls. Among these 81 suicidal women, 28.4% were African American, 28.4% were Latina, 34.6% were anglo, and 8.6% were of other ethnic backgrounds, representing a lower proportion of African American women than in the sample overall. About 38% of the suicidal abused women had some college education while approximately 33% were not high school graduates and 45.7% were employed. Of the abused women who were suicidal, 19% had sought help for the violence they had experienced, including 47.6% who were seen in the mental health system during the year before they were killed. There was a significant association between severity of IPV and suicidality among these women. Using multivariate logistic regression we examined the risk factors for suicidality among the 324 abused women, a population based sample. Among risk factors tested were demographics and history of substance abuse of both partners, frequency and severity of stalking and harassment, and severity of violence. Significant predictors were a highly controlling partner, increasing severity of abuse, abuse during pregnancy, and male partner's threats to kill. The results of this analysis support routine screening for IPV in health care and women's substance abuse treatment settings with assessment for suicidality among women identified as battered, and assessment for suicidality in all domestic violence service agencies. Intimate partner violence and long-term psychosocial functioning in a national sample of American women Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to (1) discuss the major findings in the literature supporting the negative psychological correlates of intimate partner violence and (2) identify the major limitations of the research on the longitudinal psychosocial outcomes related to intimate partner violence. Abstract: Purpose: Research that documents the mental and physical consequences of intimate partner violence (IPV) tends to focus on the immediate effects of IPV in select samples of abused women (e.g., shelters). Using the fist and second waves of the National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH), this study examines the five-year psychosocial outcome of a nationally representative sample of women who reported IPV at wave one. Methods: The NSFH used a probability sample of non-institutional U.S.A. respondents that represented the population age 19 and older. This study included a subgroup of 3173 married or cohabitating women from wave one who were re-interviewed at wave two. Wave two degrees of depression, child behavior problems, life satisfaction, self-esteem, functional impairment, alcohol use, and social support in women who reported IPV at wave one (n ¼ 148) were compared to those with no IPV. Results: Women with IPV at baseline were significantly more likely to experience a greater degree of depressive symptoms and functional impairment as well as less self-esteem and life satisfaction at a five-year follow-up period than were women with no IPV. Conclusions: The findings of this study expand upon previous findings with selected samples of women that IPV compromises the mental health of women in the long-term. Logan, T. K., Walker, R. University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, U.S.A., e-mail: tklogan@uky.edu Abstract: Purpose: To examine the contextual differences in rural and urban women's experiences of partner victimization, barriers to services, and health, mental health, and substance use problems. Methods: This study uses multiple methods to examine contextual differences including: Focus groups with 160 women, in-depth interviews with 750 women, key informant surveys (n ¼ 109), and official state data from rural and urban areas. Results: Results suggest that general categories of violence indicate no differences in rates of violence but there were interesting similarities and differences among rural and urban women's experiences of victimization, barriers to services, and associated health, mental health, and substance abuse problems. Conclusions: Practice implications include: (1) The need to develop strategies to overcome multiple barriers women with victimization experiences face; (2) The need to develop interventions uniquely tailored to specific communities and, (3) The need to develop interventions in collaboration with target communities. Research implications include: (1) Multiple methods must be used to understand contextual differences in victimization and health=mental health problems, and (2) More research on barriers to services is needed in both rural and urban areas and how to diminish the major barriers identified. Biological aspects of sexual function in women at mid-life Abstract: There are a number of biological changes that occur as a result of decreased estradiol production which accompanies aging in women. In the vagina there is decreased elasticity, speed and volume of lubrication and vaginal expansion. Fewer orgasmic contractions occur. Overall, these changes result in a decreased intensity of physiological response and decreased rapidity of sexual response. Atrophy of the vagina due to decreased estrogen production can result in dysparuenia, vaginismus and avoidance of intercourse. There may also be postcoital dysuria or incontinence which further inhibits sexual interest. Androgens also play a role although there is no clear relationship between the levels of circulating androgen and sexual desire or frequency of sexual activity. Abstract: This workshop will integrate the latest information on the biology of sexuality in women in midlife with the important social and psychological determinants of sexual function and satisfactions. This has been an area of interest recently because of increased information about the importance of the special aspects of female sexual arousal and function and the controversies surrounding estrogen treatment. Women's sexuality has some factors that are different from male sexuality. The relationship context, emotional attunement, sensitivity of the partner and factors that are more general than the focused genital responses of males have been noted. Availability of partners is an important determinant for midlife and older women. These factors will be discussed. Both male and female sexual function are affected by physical and mental health including depression. Nada Stotland, Robinson Rush University Medical Center=Rush Medical College, Chicago, IL 60637-1713, U.S.A., e-mail: nadast@aol.com Literature Reference: Dennerstein, L., Lehert, P., Burger, H., et al. (1999) . Factors affecting sexual functioning of women in the mid-life years. Climacteric 2: 254-262. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to identify the interpersonal and social factors influencing the sexuality of women patients at mid-life and to apply knowledge of those factors to improve their clinical care and the sexual adjustment of their patients. Abstract: Women's sexual lives are influenced not only by biological and intrapsychic factors, but also by the contexts in which they grow up, reach maturity, and currently live. Social expectations about women's mid-life sexuality vary widely from one society and subculture to another, and over the course of history. In most cultures, it is young women who are viewed as objects of sexual desire. Interpersonal sexual expression is largely dependent on the availability, expectations, personal characteristics, and sexual interest and sensitivity of one or more partners. Some mid-life women have male partners whose sexual performance and interest have declined with age, illness, or disability. The advent of medications and surgical techniques enabling formerly impotent men to have intercourse requires adjustments on the part of their female partners. Women who lose partners by separation, divorce, or death face an ever-decreasing pool of potential new partners. When they do find partners, they may find their adult children either supportive or disapproving. Mid-life women may find that their physicians assume that they are sexually inactive and are neither knowledgeable nor comfortable discussing their sexual concerns. A knowledgeable and comfortable clinician can play a major role in facilitating the healthy sexual adjustment of mid-life women. Mental health and HIV risk among drug-involved female sex workers Objectives: Identify the linkages between HIV risk and mental health status among female street sex workers; Recognize the need for special HIV prevention=intervention techniques tailored for sex workers with mental health issues. Abstract: Purpose: This paper examines relationships between HIV sexual risk behaviors, victimization, and mental health status among druginvolved, street sex workers in Miami. The objective of the research is to compare the effectiveness of two interventions to reduce HIV and hepatitis risk, and exposure to violence. Methods: Sex workers are recruited into the study through targeted sampling techniques. Clients participate in a baseline interview regarding drug use, sexual behaviors, exposure to violence, and mental health status, and receive HIV=Hepatitis and violence prevention education. Pre-test counseling and blood testing for hepatitis A=B=C and HIV are then conducted. Test results, post-test counseling, and additional prevention education are provided two weeks later. Follow-ups occur 3, 6, and 12 months after enrollment. Results: This paper reports on the first 300 women for whom complete data are available. Their median age is 37 years; 74.2% are African American, 11.1% are white-Anglo, and 12.4% are Latina; 36.7% are currently homeless. As children, 65.8% were emotionally abused, 50.7% were physically abused, and 51.8% were sexually abused. Current victimization is also high: 15% were attacked with a weapon, 12.4% were forced to engage in sex, 18.6% were beaten, and 66% were abused emotionally. Mental health questionnaires indicate that 65.3% meet the criteria for depression, while 59.6% meet the criteria for an anxiety disorder. Preliminary logistic regression analyses indicate that women reporting childhood sexual and emotional abuse, as well as current emotional abuse, are significantly more likely to meet both depression and anxiety criteria. Similarly, depressed and anxious women are more likely to report engaging in unprotected vaginal sex in the past month, elevating their risk for HIV infection. Abstract: Purpose: To determine who is portrayed in psychotropic drug advertisements, across time and in three national psychiatric journals. Methods: All psychotropic drug advertisements portraying people were collected from the American Journal of Psychiatry (AJP), British Journal of Psychiatry (BJP), and Canadian Journal of Psychiatry (CJP) at three time intervals of 1981, 1991, and 2001 . The advertisements were rated using a specifically designed classification system including variables for patient demographics, patient portrayal, and product information. Results: 57% of the psychotropic drug advertisements featured women and 88% portrayed Caucasian patients. Statistically significant associations were detected between gender and the setting in which the patient was portrayed (2 ¼ 13.54, df ¼ 3, p < 0.004) , as well as gender and role (2 ¼ 29.41, df ¼ 3, p < 0.001) . Disproportionate gender representation was most notable in the 2001 time interval and in the AJP. Conclusions: In this survey of psychotropic drug advertisements, women and Caucasians were overrepresented compared to psychiatric epidemiologic data in all three countries. The impact of these advertisements on physician perception, diagnosis, and prescribing is unknown, but may be substantial. Future advertisements for psychotropic drugs should seek more balanced representations of gender and race. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should have an understanding of how feminist theories of women's development can contribute to an understanding of the prevalence alexithymia and psychosomatic disorders in women. Abstract: Research indicates that psychosomatic symptoms and the incidence of somatic-type behavioral disorders, such as eating disorders and LVIII smoking addiction, are more prevalent among women. Those presenting with these disorders are often alexithymic, which suggests that the alexithymic personality may also be more common in women than men. The purpose of this paper is to explore possible reasons for this gender disparity from a feminist perspective. The development of alexithymia is often understood via attachment theory, which posits that mis-attunements during the separationindividuation process of infant development, particularly during the language acquisition stage, preclude the ability to linguistically process affective experience. Although it is often theorized that alexithymic women who somaticize affect and self-soothe through addictions to food or other substances experienced such dysfunctional attachment, there remains a lack of understanding as to why these patterns are more common in women. Several feminist theorists maintain that socio-cultural factors shape the ways in which mothers attach to their infant sons and daughters. These theories are discussed in order to elucidate how particular cultural contexts may influence these interpersonal processes and the subsequent development of psychosomatic disorders in women. Suggestions for future research and examples of the author's own research with alexithymic=bulimic women will also be presented. Gender-related stress and ill health among women; a question of work-family imbalance or sex blindness? Objectives: The participants should be able to recognize how men in industrial and university settings may consider possibilities for equality at work. Abstract: Women and men in different industrial job settings answered a gender-related questionnaire developed from in-depth interviews. Significant differences in negative attitudes toward women were reported such as perceived qualitatively higher demands at work on women, perceived lack of support to women in the organisation, perceived neglect of women&#8217;s say at meetings. When self-reported health rated by women employed in a male-dominated industry was used as a dependent variable 35% of the variability was explained by the factor workplace culture, which combined perceived burdens on women in general, and on the individual woman. Results of a qualitative analysis of in-depth interviews with 29 men in different job settings such as industry and university, about perceptions and experiences of organisational views on women as employees and managers will be reported. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to recognize and understand sex differences in emotional and physical recovery from Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) surgery. Abstract: Purpose: Despite advances in research concerning women and Cardiovascular Disease, gaps related to women and Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG) surgery persist. Research suggests that women, as compared to men, report higher rates of depression and endure a more complicated post-operative course (1) . This study addresses why psychological adjustment after CABG surgery might be more difficult for women by examining sex differences as predictors of depression post-CABG. Methods: To date 65 of the required 120 subjects have been recruited at their pre-operative appointment (Time 1). These consenting, first time, elec-tive CABG patients not scheduled for a concomitant surgical procedure, are administered the depression module of the MINI Neuropsychiatric Interview and complete a self-report survey including the Beck Depression Inventory, ENRICHD Social Support Instrument, and the Cognitive Adaptation Theory Index (2) comprised of measures for self-esteem, mastery, and optimism. The process is repeated at the participants' post-operative appointment (Time 2). Results: Data analysis will begin in January 2004 and will be ready for presentation in March 2004. Implications: The adverse impact of depression on cardiac outcome is well documented. Advancing our understanding of the interplaying factors of depression could have valuable implications for improving the prognosis of both male and female CABG patients. (1998) . ''Reducing recidivism through a seamless system of care: components of effective treatment, supervision, and transition services in the community.' ' Washington, DC: Office of National Drug Control Policy. Wellisch, Jean, Prendergast, Michael, and Anglin, Douglas M. (1996) . ''Needs assessment adn services for drug-abusing women offenders: results from a national survey of community-based treatment programs.'' Women and Criminal Justice 8(1): p. 27-60. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to understand the impact of various system and offender-level characteristics on various offender outcomes for a sample of female drug-involved offenders under community supervision. Abstract: This study seeks to understand the impact of two different types of community supervision -traditional supervision services and coordinated supervision and drug treatment services (also known as the seamless system of services) on a sample of female drug-involved offenders under community supervision. In particular, satisfaction with and perceptions of fairness of probation and treatment services on treatment participation and completion rates, recidivism, drug use, and employment outcomes are examined. A blocked, randomized design study was conducted that included a baseline and follow-up interview with 41 female drug-involved offenders. In addition, official drug test and arrest records on this sample were collected. Preliminary examinations indicate that females who participated in the seamless system of care and completed treatment were more satisfied with their treatment experience and were more likely to feel they received fair treatment by their supervision officer -factors correlated with reduced recidivism, drug use, and improved employment outcomes. Additionally, these women also showed the most improvement in increasing their drug avoidance self-efficacy. The components of the seamless system will be discussed, as will other systemic factors that contribute to treatment participation and completion rates for females. Abstract: This is a preliminary analysis of the Brazilian GENASIS data (back translated questionnaire), a multinational study aimed at comparing patterns of alcohol use=abuse between men and women. Results from the first 525 interviewees showed: men, younger and single, drink more; abstinence was higher among women (76.4% vs 40.7%). Mostly, heavier drinkers (! 6 drinks-one drink ¼ 12 g ethanol): did not follow any religion, approved of drinking a lot under any circumstances; were married=living-together with people who also drank heavily; found it easier to talk about feelings, and found sexual activities more pleasurable when drinking (p < 0.05). Stratifying those who drink ! 6 drinks by gender (p < 0.05): 1. Most men were less than 35 years old, drank at meals and work, on weekdays before 5 pm, suffered more consequences, had more help to quit drinking, were smokers, had higher SRQ scores, and reported having been forced to observe sexual acts by non-family members; 2. Most women felt lonely, had been criticized for drinking, and reported having female friends who influenced them into drinking. Logistic regression analysis for drinking showed that a possible protection factor was not drinking at parties and not having a partner who drinks too much. Men were 8.7 times more at risk of drinking than women. Fapesp support 00=03150-6. Characterization of antepartum hospitalizations associated with depressive diagnoses Susan F. Meikle, William F. Lawrence, Metrecia Terrell, Claudia A. Steiner Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Rockville, MD, U.S.A., e-mail: smeikle@ahrq.gov Literature Reference: Jiang, H. J., Elixhauser, A., Nicholas, J. et al. (2000) Care of women in U.S. hospitals. In: Rockville, M. D. (2002) . Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. HCUP Fact Book No. 3; Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants will better understand the epidemiology of depressive diagnoses, hospital factors, demographic characteristics, and comorbidities of pregnancy for hospitalized pregnant women. Abstract: Purpose: Little is known about the epidemiology of depression in hospitalized pregnant women. We sought to describe hospitalizations associated with depressive diagnoses from a national hospital discharge database in the United States. Methods: Hospitalized antepartum pregnant women between the ages of 12-50 were identified in the 2000 Nationwide Inpatient Sample from the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project. Comorbidities of pregnancy (e.g. multiple gestation, hypertension) and depressive disorders were identified by ICD-9 codes. Factors such as length of stay, teaching status, rural=urban location, region, age and insurance payer were included in analysis. Multivariate linear regression modeling for length of stay was performed using variables when p ¼ .05 in univariate analysis. Results: Of the 351,135 hospitalizations identified, 22,621 (1.29%) had a depression-related diagnosis. Depressed pregnant women were either younger than 19 or older than 30 (p < .0006), more likely to have public versus private insurance (p < .0000), and hospitalized differentially between geographic regions (p ¼ .024). Multivariate modeling showed a longer length of stay of about 1 day for women with depressive disorders and was associated with some pregnancy comorbidities more frequently than others. Conclusions: In our analysis, depression was associated with longer hospital stay. Further understanding the impact of depression throughout the perinatal period is warranted. Objectives: At the conclusion of the presentation the participants should be able to recognize pregnancy anxiety disorders as risk factors for postnatal depression. Abstract: Purpose: A limited number of studies have evaluated the relation between anxiety disorders and postnatal depression (PND), and suggested that state-anxiety and anxiety disorders during pregnancy may be a risk factor for PND. The aim of the present study was to assess in a large sample of women the impact of anxiety disorders during pregnancy on the occurrence of a PND 6 weeks after delivery. Method: 497 mothers from the MATQUID prospective cohort study were recruited in the maternity ward of the University Hospital in Bordeaux, during the last trimester of pregnancy. The occurrence of anxiety disorders in the mother were evaluated during the 8th month of pregnancy (T1), with the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview and occurrence of PND, at 6 week post-partum (T2) with the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) (score >12). Multivariate logistic regressions were used to adjust for confounding factors. Results: Results show that 120 (24.1%) women presented with at least an anxiety disorder at T1 (Generalised anxiety=social phobia=obsessive compulsive disorder=agoraphobia=panic disorder, and 29 (5.8%) women with a PND at T2. Women presenting with anxiety disorders at T1 have a 2.6 increased risk to present with a PND at T2 (OR ¼ 2.6; 95%CI [1,14;6,05 p ¼ 0.023]), after adjustment for presence of major depression at T1, demographic factors, and marital adjustment. Conclusion: Anxiety disorder during pregnancy predict the occurrence of PND, independently from the existence of a prenatal maternal depression and other confounding factors. This finding may have implications for prevention of PND. Marie-Paule Austin, Saint, K., Lumley, J. University NSW Perinatal Psychiatrist, Randwick, 2031, Sydney, Australia, e-mail: m.austin@unsw.edu.au Abstract: Purpose: to evaluate the impact of an antenatal group CBT intervention on maternal and infant psychological outcomes in the perinatal period: ie. Both in pregnancy and postpartum. Method: a randomized controlled trial evaluating the efficacy of an antenatal group CBT intervention for a homogeneous sample of pregnant women identified as experiencing depression or anxiety (symptoms) or at risk of developing these in the subsequent perinatal period. These women are not experiencing relationship problems nor do they give a history of inadequate parenting or past abuse. Controls are given an information booklet. Results: at this stage analyses suggest that antenatal symptom scores (Edinburgh Depression Scale or EDS, State-Trait Anxiety Inventory or STAI, Rosenberg self-esteem Q, Locus of control Q or LOC) improve significantly in CBT group participants but not controls. The question remains as to whether this antenatal intervention makes a difference to postnatal outcomes. Postnatal data will be reported on approximately 80 group participants and 40controls returning followup data at 2 and 4 months postpartum including the Rosenberg, EPDS, STAI, Parenting Stress Index (PSI) and short infant temperament Q as reported by mother and father (SITQ). Full results will be available at presentation. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to recognize the validity of reports of depressive symptoms in early childhood in girls and understant the importance of documenting the developmental phenomenology of depression, which is one of the leading causes of disability in women. Abstract: Purpose: To examine the prevalence of depression, the association between depression and anxiety, and the relation between symptoms of depression and impairment in young girls. Method: Participants in the Pittsburgh Girls Study, a community sample of 2,451 5-to 8-year old girls, and their primary caregivers were interviewed using the Child Symptom Inventory and the Short Moods and Feelings Questionnaire to measure depression, the Screen for Child Anxiety and Related Emotional Disorders to measure anxiety, and the Child Global Assessment Scale to measure impairment. Results: Less than 1% of 5-8 year old girls met symptom criteria for major depression by caregiver report. Individual differences in continuous depression scores by both caregiver and child report were observed. Associations between depression and anxiety scores suggested that these constructs are associated but relatively independent in young girls. Agreement between caregivers and girls on depression symptoms was low. Both caregiver report and child report of depressive symptoms, however, explained unique variance in impairment. Conclusions: Although major depression is rare among 5-8 year olds girls, continuous measures of depressive symptoms yield significant indivi-dual differences. Correspondence between caregivers and children is also low, however, each informant contributes to the identification of impaired psychological functioning. From adolescence to adulthood: ''behavioral inoculations'' to prevent co-occurring disorders Nancy J. Kennedy, Center for Substance Abuse Prevention=SAMHSA= DHHS, Rockville, MD, U.S.A., e-mail: NKennedy@SAMHSA.gov Literature References: SAMHSA Report to Congress on the Prevention and Treatment of Co-occurring Substance Abuse Disorders and Mental Disorders, SAMHSA, DHHS, December 12, 2002 . Kessler, R. C., Nelson, C. B., McGonagle, K. A., et al. (1996 . The epidemiology of co-occurring additive mental disorders: Implications for prevention and service utilization. American Journal of Orthopsychiat y 66 (1) Abstract: Mental health providers acknowledge the importance of life's developmental stages and differences in gender. From adolescence to adulthood is a stage of rampant with developmental and emotional changes, especially for females. Panic disorders, depression, phobias, eating disorders and anxiety disorders are all more common among females. ''I am nothing'' and ''I am bad or wrong'' are core beliefs that have been identified among female survivors of childhood abuse who are in recovery. Experiences of feeling inconsequential include not feeling protected, not being believed when relating the abuse, being told lies to conceal the abuse, and not being prepared for life's transitions. When victims feel ''bad,'' they are saying that experiencing emotions is equated with trouble. This can lead to shutting down, social isolation and self-medication to ease the psychic pain. However, females who use alcohol and other illicit drugs internalize negative attitudes and lead to even more attendant problems, thereby avoiding help and treatment. But, hope is omnipresent as Kessler and others have referred to the ''window of opportunity'' to prevent co-occurring disorders. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration has articulated the problem and identified evidence-based, gender-specific, preventive and treatment strategies that can be utilized by consumers, communities, and providers. Objectives: At the conclusion of the presentation, the participants will be able to: Children and Adolescents publication. 2) Understand why gender specific, culturally competent mental health tools are needed for adolescent girls, adult women, community organizations, and clinicians. 3) Provide input into the content of the new BFWHW mental health tools. Abstract: Purpose: Bright Futures for Women's Health and Wellness (BFWHW) is a new Federally sponsored initiative to empower women at all ages to seek preventive health services and share in health care decision making. A current BFWHW foci is mental health. Building upon Bright Futures for Children and Adolescent Mental Health in Practice (BFCAMHP), this presentation will engage participants about the need for gender-specific mental health tools for adolescent females and adult women, clinicians, and community organizations. There is a growing basic research base on cognitive behavior theory and positive psychology, which needs to be translated. Methods: The BFCAMHP publication was developed by a number of experts, and is focused from infancy through adolescence. The BFWHW mental health tools are being informed by an evidence-based literature review, and an environmental scan of current tools. Results: BFCAMHP is widely used by the pediatric community and families. In March 2004, we will have early findings from the BFWHW mental health literature review to share. Conclusions: Gender-specific, culturally competent mental health promotion tools can help empower women to live healthy and fulfilling lives. Gaining mental health expert feedback early in the materials development process will strengthen the final tools. A nationally led professional network promotes practice development in perinatal mental health Cheryll Adams, Brige Coyle Community Practitioners ' and Health Visitors' Association, London, England, e-mail: adamsc.cphva@dial.pipex.com Literature Reference: Adams, C'Ante, Postnatal depression: where are we now and where should we be going?' Community Practioner 75; 7: 263-264. Objectives: Appreciate the value of professional networking at a national and global level both in driving the policy and practice agendas and supporting professional development through rapid information exchange and professional debate. Abstract: This paper will discuss the very positive outcomes from a UK wide professional network for Postnatal depression and Maternal Mental Health in the UK. Established by the Community Practitioners and Health Visitors Association for its membership of health visitors, the Network membership now includes psychiatrists, psychologists, community mental health nurses, midwives and overseas members. The Network is primarily used for the rapid exchange of information regarding research, practice development and education, for accessing subject expertise and for determining professional trends and gaps in services. It further serves as an excellent UK wide forum of professionals willing to support new programmes by piloting them with professional and client groups. The Network was launched in June 2001. Since then outcomes, some of which will be discussed, have included: The development of national guidelines for use of the EPDS as part of a mood assessment, 3 national conferences, development of a set of posters in 6 languages encouraging depressed mothers to self refer, publication of a set of picture booklets in Urdu, Bengali, Chinese, Arabic and Somali promoting the discussion of issues relating of emotional health with non English speaking mothers and other publications. Forum members have provided expertise to many national initiatives in the UK. Caron Zlotnick, Ivan Miller, Teri Pearlstein, Patrick Sweeney Brown University=Women and Infants Hospital, Butler Hospital, Providence, RI, U.S.A., e-mail: Caron_Zlotnick@brown.edu Literature Reference: Zlotnick, C., Johnson, S., Miller, I., Howard, M., Pearlstein, T. (2001) . Postpartum depression in women on public assistance: Pilot study of an interpersonally-oriented group. American Journal of Psychiatry 158: 638-640. Objectives: To demonstrate a knowledge about an interpersonally-based intervention for pregnant women on public assistance and at risk for postpartum depression. Abstract: Purpose: About 10-16% of parous women experience a postpartum depression which is associated with more severe depressive symptoms, social dysfunction, and marital maladjustment than depression unrelated to the postpartum period. Reducing the risk of postpartum depression in poor women is especially important since poverty is associated with twice the rate of postpartum depression and socioeconomic adversity amplifies the negative effects of postpartum depression on infant development. This present study builds upon a prior study (Zlotnick et al., 2001) which demonstrated the initial efficacy of an interpersonally oriented intervention in reducing the risk of postpartum depression in a sample of financially disadvantaged women. Method: Forty-seven pregnant women on public assistance at risk for postpartum depression were randomly assigned to an interpersonally-based intervention or to a treatment as usual condition. Structured diagnostic interviews were administered to assess for postpartum major depression. Results: Within three months of postpartum, 5 (22%) of the women in the treatment as usual condition had developed postpartum major depression compared to one (5%) in the intervention condition. Conclusion: Consistent with a previous preliminary randomized trial of this intervention with financially disadvantaged women, the present study found that an interpersonally-oriented intervention was successful in reducing the likelihood of major depression during a postpartum period of three months in a sample of financially disadvantaged women. Childhood maltreatment and depression in the perinatal period: a study contrasting antenatal and postnatal depression Brigitta Bende, Helen Sharp, Philip Bell, Jonathan Hill Royal Liverpool Children's Hospital, University Child Mental Health, Liverpool, United Kingdom, e-mail: brigitta.bende@lineone.net Abstract: Background: Childhood adversities such as parental low care and high control, childhood sexual abuse (CSA) and physical abuse are associated with depression in women, but their roles have not previously been jointly investigated in relation to antenatal and postnatal depression. Methods: A questionnaire-based study of a consecutive cohort of primiparous pregnant women (n ¼ 622) was conducted with follow up at 8 and 12 weeks postpartum (pp) (n ¼ 450). Antenatal assessments consisted of parental care and control using the Parental Bonding Instrument, and childhood sexual and physical abuse using a previously validated questionnaire. Antenatal and postnatal depression were assessed using the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS). Current social deprivation was assessed on the basis of postcodes using the Townsend index. Results: Physical abuse (OR 2.12 (95% CI 1.23-3.63, p ¼ .006), but not CSA or parental care and control, was independently associated with postnatal depression at 8 weeks pp whilst postnatal depression at 12 weeks pp was independently predicted by high maternal control (OR 3.09, 95% CI 1.69-5.64, p < .001) and physical abuse (OR 2.53, p ¼ .004) . Antenatal depression was predicted by high maternal control (OR 2.78, 95% CI 1.69-4.57, p < .001), low paternal care (OR 2.47, 95% CI 1.50-4.08, p < .001), and CSA (OR 2.24, p ¼ .017) . Antenatal depression strongly predicted postnatal depression at 8 weeks (OR 4.72, , p < .001) and 12 weeks (OR 8.89, p < .001) and partly mediated some of the effects of high maternal control at 12 weeks pp. High levels of current deprivation were more strongly associated with postnatal, than antenatal, depression. In contrast to persistent pnd, which was independently predicted by high maternal control and physical abuse and strongly associated with current social deprivation, transient pnd showed no such associations. The role of antenatal depression was also less in transient compared to persistent pnd. Conclusions: Childhood risk factors for antenatal depression resemble those for depression in women that occurs outside the perinatal period. There may be a smaller role for childhood adversities in generating risk for postnatal depression and risks differ with timing and persistence. Whilst persistent pnd is clearly associated with distal (childhood adversity) and proximal (antenatal depression, current social deprivation) mechanisms, those leading to transient pnd differ. Adjustment to motherhood may play more of a contributing role here. A new gender-specific measure of irritability: the born-steiner irritability scale description by men. Twin psychometric scales for rating irritability were developed at the Women's Health Concerns Clinic, St. Joseph's Healthcare, Hamilton, Ontario. The scales were constructed using items derived from spontaneous descriptions of irritability by patients and healthy controls, and some items from existing measures of irritability. Following a pre-test, the scales were reduced to the core items (annoyance, anger, tension, hostile behaviour, sensitivity) of irritability. The reliability study for the 14-item Self-Rating (Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.9257; mean inter-item correlation ¼ 0.4690) and the 5-item Observer-Rating (Cronbach's alpha ¼ 0.7418; mean inter-item correlation ¼ 0.3616) scales showed evidence for internal consistency and test-retest reliability (rs ¼ 0.704, p ¼ 0.01) in a relatively homogeneous sample, and 100% inter-rater agreement for 4 of 5 core items. There is early evidence that irritability is a distinctive phenomenon and that the measure can detect change in clinical status. The Born-Steiner Irritability Scale is poised to fill a significant gap in the assessment of emotional disturbances in women related to reproductive cyclicity. There will be a brief outline of the treatment implications and future studies. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to (a) report two indications of the prevalence; (b) describe demographic and clinical associated features; and (c) diagnose premenstrual exacerbation of depressive disorders. Abstract: Purpose: No published study has examined premenstrual exacerbation of depressive disorders in a representative sample. Knowledge gained should indicate the degree to which the phenomenon needs to be addressed in treatment, suggest whom to monitor, and facilitate diagnosis. Competing hypotheses were that premenstrual exacerbation is related to (a) history of depression, (b) menstrual cyclicity occurring in all females, or (c) a methodological artifact. Methods: In a epidemiologic prospective study, 900 depressed or nondepressed females from 13 thru 53-year-old completed semi-structured psychiatric diagnostic interviews and rated symptoms of depression daily for two menstrual cycles. Results: Depressed females had 1.34 (95% CI, 1.02-1.66) symptoms exacerbated premenstrually. Exacerbation was associated with deteriorated functioning, Ps < .004. Only 67.7% of non-depressed females taking antidepressant medication were asymptomatic all month long; the remainder still had symptoms premenstrually. Severity of depressive symptoms during the follicular phase was greater for depressed than non-depressed participants, Ps < .001; but the number of symptoms that became worse did not differ between groups, Ps < .97. Conclusions: Premenstrual exacerbation of depressive disorders is associated with deteriorated functioning over and above that already experienced by depressed females. Existing medication regimens may not address the problem in up to one-third of those otherwise treated effectively. Any depressed female, regardless of depressive history, may be susceptible. Premenstrual dysphoric and depressive disorders: are high reported rates of co-occurrence a function of treatment-seeking? Rush University Medical Center=Rush Medical College, Chicago, IL, U.S. A., e-mail: shartlag@hotmail.com Literature Reference: Breaux, C., Hartlage, S., Gehlert, S. (2000) . Relationships of premenstrual dysphoric disorder to major depression and anxiety disorders: A reexamination. J Psychsom Obstet Gynaecol 21: 17-24. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to (a) state evidence that DSM-IV-TR criteria for premenstrual dyspho-ric disorder (PMDD) identify women with a disorder that is distinct from other psychiatric disorders; and (b) present two hypotheses, which are consistent with current research, about the etiological relationship between PMDD and depressive disorders. Abstract: Purpose: The primary objective was to test in a representative sample the hypothesis that PMDD is related to depressive disorders. Methods: Participants were 888 Hispanic, black, or white females from 13 thru 53 years old. They completed symptom and functioning questionnaires daily for two menstrual cycles, and semi-structured psychiatric diagnostic interviews (e.g., the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV [SCID]). PMDD was defined according to all four DSM-IV-TR criteria. Results: Fourteen participants (1.6%) met criteria for PMDD. There was no evidence that the diagnostic category was related to current or lifetime psychopathology. Number of symptoms of PMDD was related only to lifetime depressive disorder. Conclusion: DSM-IV-TR criteria for PMDD identify females with a distinct disorder, which is seldom confused with other psychiatric disorders. The essential feature of PMDD, persistent cyclic severity of mood-related symptoms, appears related to past depression. Despite theory suggesting otherwise, there was little evidence that PMDD is related to panic or posttraumatic stress disorder. Participants' recollection that premenstrual disorders started at an earlier age than depressive disorders started may suggest that premenstrual disorders represent a causal risk factor for depressive disorders, but longitudinal studies are needed to test this hypothesis. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to state (a) evidence regarding possible predictors (e.g., oral contraceptive use) of PMDD; (b) whether the DSM-IV criterion of functional impairment excludes women from the diagnosis; and (c) whether criteria for PMDD identify females with a disorder that is distinct from other psychiatric disorders. Abstract: Purpose: Since the inception of DSM-III-R, there has been tremendous interest in whether PMDD should be included in the Manual. Some argued that the disorder doesn't exist and others that thousands of women would be labeled pathological. The objective was to determine the prevalence of PMDD in a sample drawn to statistically represent menstruating females. Methods: Residents in 89.9% of selected housing units in urban or rural Illinois answered screening questions. We enrolled 80.4% of eligible females from 13-55-years-old; 900 participants completed ratings of symptoms and functioning, and gave urine samples daily for two menstrual cycles. They completed health histories and semi-structured psychiatric diagnostic interviews. Results: Fourteen (1.6%) participants met all four DSM-IV criteria for PMDD. According to the effect size method, they experienced one of the first four symptoms listed in DSM-IV and 5 or more total symptoms in two consecutive cycles. One of these females had panic disorder and six symptoms of PMDD. All reported functional impairment pre-versus post-menstrually. Notably, 136 more females reported similar difficulty functioning, but did not meet full criteria for PMDD. Conclusions: The prevalence of PMDD appears low. Concern arises that stringent criteria for the disorder may not identify women with clinically significant distress. (2000) . Becoming a parent: The relation between prenatal expectations and postnatal experience. Journal of Family Psychology 14: 625-640. Kalmuss, D., Davidson, A., Cushman, L. (1992) . Parenting expectations, experiences, and adjustment to parenthood: A test of the violated expectations framework. Journal of Marriage and the Family 54: 516-526. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should be able to recognize the necessity of a psychometrically sound instrument for the assessment of expectations, and will gain further understanding of the association between expectations and maternal adjustment during the postpartum period. Abstract: Purpose: A growing body of literature suggests that one source of variability in individual adjustment to parenthood may lie in the role of expectations and violations thereof. More specifically, these violations refer to the discrepancy between mothers' beliefs about the outcome of future experiences relevant to the postpartum domain and actual outcome. Unfortunately, the measurement of expectations comes in varied forms, and there appears to be no ''gold standard'' instrument in this realm. The primary purpose of this study was to begin developing a measure that will assess both the nature of women's expectations about parenthood and the extent to which these expectations were violated. Methods: Expectations about parenthood and actual experiences were assessed retrospectively as a means of determining both the subjective importance of expectations and the relationship between discrepancies and reported mood. A total of 146 postpartum women completed the expectations questionnaire in addition to self-report measures of depression and anxiety. Results: Relevance of expectations to the postpartum domain are discussed in terms of initial structural analysis of the instrument, scores on self-report depression and anxiety questionnaires, and various demographic variables. Conclusions: This study provides a starting point for a psychometrically sound instrument that comprehensively and systematically assesses expectations about parenthood. Attachment and relationships during pregnancy: study with adolescent and adult mothers Objectives: The relevance of considering the mother's attachment style and quality of relationship and support from significant other in order to know more about important contextual and psychological aspects of pregnancy, namely regarding adolescent mothers. Abstract: Aim: To analyze differences between adolescent and adult mothers in terms of attachment style and significant relationships during pregnancy. Sample: 130 (66 adolescent and 64 adult) pregnant women recruited in the last trimester at the Maternity Júlio Dinis Hospital (Porto. Portugal). Instruments: ''Attachment Style Interview''; (ASI, Bifulco, Brown, & Harris, 1995) and ''Self-Evaluation and Social Support''; (SESS, Brown, Bifulco, Veiel, & Andrews, 1990) . Results: Adolescent mothers have more frequently an insecure attachment style and usually show more fear of intimacy and high levels of anger in significant relationships than adult mothers. Also, they seem to fell less confidence on their partner, but tend to have a more close relationship with the significant other (usually their own mothers) than adult mothers. Conclusions: The relevance of considering the mother's attachment style and quality of relationship and support from significant other in order to know more about important contextual and psychological aspects of pregnancy, namely regarding adolescent mothers. (3): 73-82. Stanton, J., Simpson, A., Wouldes, T. (2000) . A qualitative study of filicide by mentally ill mothers. Child Abuse and Neglect 24(11): 1451-1460. Objectives: At the conclusion of the session, the participant should: understand the scope of filicide (child murder by parents) and various motives, identify clusters of factors putting children at risk of filicide, and expand their risk assessment process when evaluating mentally ill parents. Abstract: While mentally ill filicide offenders make up only a proportion of child murderers, these are the offenders with whom mental health clinicians are most likely to come into contact prior to the act. The purpose of this study is to identify multiple commonly-occurring factors shared by mentally-ill filicide offenders, in order to identify potential risk factors that may be present in parents planning to kill their children. We hypothesized that parents who murdered their children and committed suicide or were Not Guilty by Reason of Insanity would have the following clustered factors: severe mental disorder, prior contact with mental health professional, severe depression, past suicide attempts, psychotic features, history of abuse=neglect eglect as child, poor social support, and over-attachment to the child. A retrospective review of coroner and state hospital charts looked at sixty factors, some of which were demographic and some of which were suspected risk factors. Research is in progress, and this poster will present data from this ongoing project examining filicide. Through careful examination of shared characteristics, clinicians may be assisted in assessment of filicide risk, as traditional risk factors for violence appear different than risk factors for mentally-ill filicides. Abstract: Purpose: A Regulator mothering orientation (Raphael-Leff, 1993) increases the risk of early postnatal depression (Sharp & ramwBell, 2001 ). The present study tested the hypothesis that greater directional discrepancy between antenatal expectations and subsequent experiences (E-E) of childbirth in particular, would predict postnatal depression symptoms (PND) in women with a Regulator orientation (interaction effect). Method: A sociodemographically representative sample of 205 primiparous women completed a maternal orientation measure assessing expectations within labour, childbirth, baby and motherhood domains in late pregnancy and subsequent experiences at 3 months postpartum. The GHQ depression subscale (GHQ-D; Surtees and Tansella, 1990) was completed on both occasions. Results: Hierarchical regression with postnatal GHQ-D as the DV showed that, after controlling for historical psychiatric risk factors, antenatal GHQ-D, and delivery E-E and regulator orientation separately, an E-E delivery discrepancy score Â Regulator orientation interactive term added significantly to the variance explained by the model (R2 change ¼ .023, p < .05). No such interactive effects were evident for the other E-E domains assessed. Conclusions: The impact of greater E-E disparity on PND regarding the delivery of a first child is magnified in women with a Regulator mothering orientation. The results are discussed within the context of Raphael-Leff's (1993) Facilitator-Reciprocator-Regulator theory. Objectives: This work demonstrates that telephone counseling may play a unique role in providing emotional help for young women suffering from eating disorders. In addition, it highlights the differential importance of the hotline to different types of ED callers. The findings suggests the need to develop a special hotline for ED. Abstract: Objective: The aim of the study was to differentiate helpseeking characteristics of specific categories of Eating Disordered callers to the Israeli hotline. Method: 32,835 calls received by the hotline center during one year, yielded 196 ED calls. Results: Results revealed that Anorexia Nervosa was over-represented among hotline callers compared to its prevalence in the general population. Anorexia and Bulimia Nervosa callers were characterized by a desire for counseling while Binge Eating Disorder callers, primarily expected emotional support. A striking finding was the high frequency (22%) of suicidal calls among the anorexic group. Discussion: The significance of the anonymous hotline as a means of offering emotional help are discussed. Eating behaviors in a group of university students: a preliminary report Objectives: In western societies, eating disorders are common among young women and adolescents. However, the dearth of related research in Turkey makes it difficult to assess the dimensions and the impact of the problem. Early diagnosis and treatment among risk groups will improve the prognosis while reducing the complications.This presentation will provide the participants with an idea about the eating behaviours of university students in Turkey. Abstract: In western societies, eating disorders are common among young women and adolescents. However, the dearth of related research in Turkey makes it difficult to assess the dimensions and the impact of the problem. The aim of this study is to investigate the basic characteristics related to eating behaviors in a group of university students. 450 consecutive students registering at Istanbul University were given a questionnaire including sociodemographic features, body image and eating habits. Mean age was 19 and half of the students were females. Average BMI was 21 kg=m 2 and 10% had BMI < 18, mainly consisting of girls (73%). 15% of whole group reported as feeling overweight and 65% of them were also girls. Induced vomiting, laxative or diuretic use, exercising was reported by 7%. Binge eating was reported by 21%. There were differences between female and male students with respect to perceiving themselves as overweight (F ¼ %20.9, M ¼ %10.7; X 2 ¼ 8.08, p < 0.01), dieting (F ¼ %27.4, M ¼ %3.3; X 2 ¼ 47.3, p < 0.001), presence of weight-losing periods with dieting (F ¼ %12.1, M ¼ %2.8, X 2 ¼ 13.02, p < 0.001). There is a tendency among young women towards strict dieting and having discomfortable feelings about their body image, although the prevalence in our study is lower compared to that of western studies. Objectives: For this overall symposium, we aim that those attending will develop a deeper appreciation of the benefit of being able to use all existing PPD paradigms flexibly. Explicitly, those attending will have an up to date knowledge of biomedical, psychological and socio-cultural paradigms of PPD and will understand how to apply each paradigm in the clinical situation. Abstract: PPD can be conceptualized from several different perspectives, with the main paradigms arguably being biomedical, psychological, sociocultural and feminist. There has been an upsurge of research from all these angles in PPD in recent years but each paradigm needs to have replication of its key findings. No studies adequately address all these domains of interest simultaneously. Each paradigm can justify its methods and its underpinning data post hoc; each can and often does mount criticisms against the others. Yet the clinicians dealing with women who have PPD need to be able to hold all paradigms in their minds and move flexibly between them when planning a comprehensive management package for the distressed PPD individual before them. These conceptual tensions will be outlined in the introductory presentation and themes outlined will be echoed in the subsequent presentations. The presenters are experienced Canadian clinicians and researchers who work daily with PPD. We want to promote the idea that practitioners and patients=clients alike will benefit from appreciating the breadth of ideas about PPD. No paradigm should be rejected as irrelevant. Education to ensure this broad, inclusive approach is often necessary with patient=clients lients as well as health policy makers. There is much yet to do. Objectives: To review feminist and sociocultural conceptualizations of postpartum distress and postpartum depression. Abstract: Feminist critics of modern Western medicine argue that the prevailing influence of predominantly middle-class, Caucasian men has resulted in health care practices and policies that do not serve the interests of women. Specifically, traditional clinical and research practices have marginalized women on the basis of ethnicity, class, age, or other characteristics. Feminist theorists have criticized, in particular, the biomedical model of postpartum depression (PPD) for its emphasis on hormones, which they argue pathologizes women's normal reproductive biology. Instead, some feminists consider PPD to be a justified response to social values and structures that put women at a disadvantage. In particular, the myth of the ''good mother'', which isubiquitous in Western media, may lead to expectations that mothering behaviours will come naturally and will always be enjoyable, and to beliefs that mothers should be essentially the sole caregivers for their infant, not wanting or needing the help of partners or other family members. This presentation will review feminist perspectives on PPD and will examine whether these theories are supported by what is known about prevalence and antecedents of PPD in non Western societies. Preliminary data from an ongoing qualitative study of women who have sought care for PPD and who are recent immigrants to Canada will be presented. Sophie Grigoriadis, Toronto General Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, e-mail: sophie.grigoriadis@utoronto.ca Literature References: Appleby, L., Warner, R., Whitton, A., et al. (1997) . A controlled study of fluoxetine and cognitive-behavioural counseling in the treatment of postnatal depression. BMJ 314: 932-936. Cohen, L. S., Viguera, A. C., Bouffard, S. M., et al. (2001) . Venlafaxine in the treatment of postpartum depression. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 62(8): 5 2-6. Objectives: Review the biomedical causes and treatments for Postpartum Depression. Abstract: Biological factors also contribute to the development of postpartum disorders. Postpartum Depression can have severe long-term consequences for both mother and infant yet knowledge of the etiology remains at the theoretical level. Although treatment is paramount, clinicians had little empirical evidence until recently to guide their treatment decisions. Currently, this area is receiving wider research attention and although more is urgently needed, there are now studies to base treatment decisions. Moreover, expert consensus guidelines have been developed. This presentation will briefly outline key current biomedical theories of Postpartum Depression and then evaluate and review all the current antidepressant clinical trials for the treatment and prevention of Postpartum Depression. Although the hormonal fluctuations that occur following childbirth are thought to be important, studies have failed to identify an etiological role. Treatment studies evaluating the use of hormones will also be examined. The expert consensus guidelines will be discussed in relation to the current empirical evidence. The cognitive-emotional model of first pregnancy: implications for postpartum depression Dawn M. Zinga, Department of Child and Youth Studies, Brock University, St. Catharines, Ontario, Canada, e-mail: dzinga@brocku.ca Literature References: Oatley, K., Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1996) . The communicative theory of emotions: Empirical tests, mental models, and implications for social interaction. In Abstract: Purpose: To develop a model that conceptualizes adjustment to first pregnancy in terms of physiological aspects of the maternal state, emotion, cognition, and social support. The physiological aspects of the maternal state create a state of readiness that facilitates emotional responses and prompts the attainment of psychological goals associated with positive adjustment. The physical and psychological aspects of pregnancy are functionally interconnected and emotions provide the bridge between physiological and psychological aspects. Methods: Women were recruited from prenatal classes and followed into early postpartum. Sixty-four participants completed questionnaires and a three-day emotion diary during pregnancy and the postpartum. Thoughts were examined qualitatively while emotions were assessed by the EPDS, BDI, STAI and the emotion diary. Results: Women reported levels of emotional variability, emotional intensity, emotional duration, trait STAI scores that differed as a function of pregnancy stage. Women also demonstrated thought patterns that were distinctly associated with pregnancy stages and revealed an increasing concentration of thoughts focused on the baby and the self as the pregnancy progressed. Conclusions: Women exhibit distinctive patterns of thoughts and emotions that provide partial support for the cognitive-emotional model of first pregnancy. Revisions to the model and its implications for postpartum depression are considered. Relations among young womens' abuse experiences, psychiatric disorders, and sexual risk behaviors Objectives: Demonstrate knowledge regarding relations among young women's experiences of violence, psychiatric diagnoses, and sexual risk behavior. Recognize how complex relations between violence in intimate or family relationships and mental health problems increase risk for HIV exposure. Abstract: To document significant associations among lifetime abuse experiences, psychiatric diagnoses, and sexual risk behaviors in a multiethnic community sample of young women in South Florida. Methods: Self-report data were collected using structured interviews as part of a longitudinal follow-up of an earlier school-based study of early adolescent risk factors for substance use. The 1803 young adults in the sample (mean ¼ 20.01 years) included 849 women. Participants were grouped according to extent of lifetime abuse experiences. Results: Cumulative lifetime abuse experiences were associated with increased risk for a broad range of lifetime and past year psychiatric disorders, as well as cumulative lifetime psychiatric disorders. Both cumulative lifetime abuse experiences and cumulative psychiatric disorders were independently associated with higher levels of sexual risk behaviors (e.g., number of sexual partners, unprotected intercourse, substance use before sex). In addition, cumulative abuse experiences were associated with higher risk for lifetime sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Conclusions: These data document complex relations increasing risk for HIV exposure among young women, and suggest the importance of implementing effective selected prevention programs for sexual risk behaviors and STDs among women with histories of abuse and psychiatric disorders. Defining and responding to wife abuse: using women's words in prevention education Paula C. Barata, Mary Jane McNally, Isabel Sales University of Toronto, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, e-mail: paula.barata@uhn.on.ca Literature References: Sattler, Cheryl, L. (2000) . Teaching to transcend: Educating women against violence. Albany, N. Y: State University of New York Press. Kelly, Liz. (1987) . The continuum of sexual violence. Hanmer, Jalna and Maynard, Mary. Women, violence, and social control. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press International Inc., pp. 46-60. Objectives: Participants will learn two techniques that can be used to educate immigrant women about wife abuse and help them challenge cultural stereotypes. These techniques demonstrate links between abusive acts and help separate patriarchy from ethnic culture so that a critique of patriarchy is not perceived as a personal attack. Abstract: Purpose: This study examined a group of immigrant women's definitions of wife abuse and beliefs about appropriate responses to abuse. The goals were to determine the breadth of definitions, and to examine cultural stereotyping. This information was sought in an effort to direct prevention education strategies that use a feminist analysis of wife abuse. Methods: One-on-one interviews were conducted with 163 Portuguesespeaking women living in Canada. The participants' open-ended answers were first coded freely using QSR NUD Ã IST, and then narrowed and grouped to facilitate a transformation into SPSS. Results: Participants defined wife abuse very broadly, mentioning abuse that ranged in severity, commonness, and kind. Participants provided substantially different responses to what women should do and what women actually do in response to abuse. Their responses and explanations demonstrate that they hold stereotypes about their own culture. Conclusion: The extensive scope of definitions suggests that a continuum of wife abuse, using women's own words, can be created as an educational technique to demonstrate how abusive acts are linked. The differences that emerged with respect to appropriate responses to abuse, suggest a technique that can help women challenge cultural stereotypes and see patriarchy as widespread rather than particular to their culture. Abstract: Background: Attachment theory and research have focussed on unresolved loss in childhood as a basis for later depression. However poor parental care and child sexual abuse, and not parental loss, have emerged as the most consistent predictors of adult depression. The 'U' classification in the AAI combines lack of resolution of loss and of trauma, and hence may conflate different processes. Method: Fifty two women aged 25-36, 26 with a history of child sexual abuse and 26 without, from a general population study of childhood experiences and adult depression, were given the Adult Attachment Interview (AAI) followed by the Childhood Experiences of Care and Abuse (CECA). The CECA assesses a range of positive and negative childhood experiences, and differs from the AAI in using multiple detailed questions and requiring examples of behaviours for rating. A different interviewer enquired about DSM IV Major Depression using the SADS-L. The AAI, CECA and SADS-L ratings were made blind to each other. Results: Both child sexual abuse (OR 6.5, 95%CI 1.8-23.6) and poor parental care (OR 4.5, 95% CI 1. 1-18.5) were independently associated with DSM Major Depression since age 16. Child sexual abuse was elicited in 16 AAI interviews, which means that 10 women reported CSA in the CECA but not the AAI. The 3-way classification of the AAI was 25 secure, 15 dismissing or preoccupied, and 12 unresolved with respect to loss or trauma. There was a non-significant association between lack of resolution and depression (7=12 vs 13=40, p ¼ .1). Of the 12 U ratings, eight had been made on the basis of unresolved loss, two unresolved sexual abuse, and two both. Adult depression was not associated with lack of resolution of mourning scores (Mann Witney U, p ¼ .77). However among those identified in the AAI and the CECA as having experienced CSA (N ¼ 16) , lack of resolution of the abuse was associated with adult depression (Mann Witney U, p ¼ .03). Within the remainder of the sample (N ¼ 36), CSA identified in the CECA was strongly associated with adult depression (OR 6.0, 95% CI 1.2-29.7). Among the 16 subjects identified by the AAI as having experienced CSA the reported perpetrator was a parent figure in five. Conclusions: On the basis of these findings from a sub-sample of a general population study of women, lack of resolution of CSA, but not of mourning, is associated with adult depression. The AAI is less likely to elicit accounts of CSA than an interview with multiple detailed probes, leading to an incorrect assignment of some subjects to a 'resolved' classification. Lack of resolution of mourning and of trauma may represent different processes, and hence should be analysed separately. The majority of reported perpetrators of CSA are not attachment figures, and so it cannot be assumed that lack of resolution of trauma assessed by the AAI reflects exclusively attachment processes. Objectives: At the conclusion of presentation, the participants would able to demonstrate enhanced understanding of South Asian women's perceptions about reasons of their compromised mental health after immigration, and coping styles. Discussion on practical implications will enable the participants to enhance their sociocultural sensitivity. Abstract: Authors: Ahmad, F., Shik, A., Vanza, R., Cheung, A., George, U., Stewart, D. E. Aim: This qualitative research aimed to elicit experiences and beliefs of recent South Asian immigrant women about their major health concerns after immigration. Methods: Four focus groups were conducted with 22 women. The audiotaped data were translated, transcribed, and analyzed by identification of themes and subcategories. Results: Mental health (MH) emerged as an overarching health concern. The compromised MH was reflected in verbal and symptomatic expressions such as feelings of loneliness, depression, anxiety, stress and fatigue. Participants discussed their susceptibility to MH problems; reasons; and coping styles. Participants perceived an increased susceptibility to MH problems for both themselves and for the general population due to the mechanistic lifestyle of the west. Many participants agreed that MH did not become a concern to them until they immigrated to Canada. The perceived reasons for compromised MH included: economic uncertainties, lack of free time, inability to meet gender role expectations, lack of social support, fear of getting sick, and dissatisfaction with the healthcare services. Participants' coping styles included: socialization, and greater emphasis on health awareness and preventative measures after immigration. Conclusion: Health and social care programs needs to address the compromised mental health of the studied group. 1. List those mental health disorders more common in women than men. 2. Identify where men and women have been more likely to seem care for their mental health problems. 3. Articulate how care delivery under a carve-out may differentially impact men's and women's access to any appropriate care as well as the intensity of that care. 4. Apply findings from a study using data from Puerto Rico to other comparable settings. Abstract: Behavioral health services are increasingly carved out of medical plans and instead delivered by managed behavioral health care organizations (MBHO's) under a separate contract. Prior studies reported that carveouts reduce treatment duration, although some reported that increased numbers of people enter treatment after a carve-out. Concern exists that carve-outs lead to undertreatment, and hamper coordination of psychiatric and other medical care. In addition, carve-outs may have differential effects on women's mental healthcare. There are well-documented epidemiologic disparities between genders, with unipolar depression and anxiety disorders twice as prevalent in women. Women's care is more fragmented during their childbearing years when vulnerability to mood disorders is highest. Given women's differential behavioral health characteristics and needs, there may be gender differences in how carve-outs affect: 1) access to any specialty care, and 2) intensity of treatment. In addressing these questions, this study benefits from interview data collected in three waves on a random community sample of adults living in low-income areas of Puerto Rico, where a carve-out was implemented across regions in stages. Respondents' mental health was assessed using standardized diagnostic instruments. They were asked about recent outpatient services utilization as well as their self-perception of mental health. Data collection began in 1992, before the introduction of managed care, and continued until 1998, when approximately two-thirds of the island's population were enrolled in carve-out plans. Preliminary results indicate that there appears to be a gender difference in the intensity of service use after the carve-out, with women's use per user declining more than men's. Methods: Interviews were conducted with 10 women who had been diagnosed and treated for puerperal psychosis (defined as a manic or psychotic episode according to DSM-IV criteria, with onset within 6 weeks of childbirth) during the last 10 years. Results: Three main categories were identified: 'puerperal psychosis as a separate form of mental illness', 'loss', and 'relationships and social roles'. Two higher order concepts were identified which emerged across and linked the three categories: 'living with emotions' and 'regaining and changing self' Conclusions: Women felt that the illness took away the ability to experience normal emotions, as affective responses were viewed as potentially pathogenic by their families and health professionals. Anger and frustration were directed towards health services: inadequate information about risk of further illness (puerperal and non-puerperal) left women unable to make informed decisions regarding further pregnancies and prophylaxis. Women's views of puerperal psychosis as a distinct form of illness also has implications for clinical management. The consequences of these findings for patients and clinicians will be discussed. (2000) . Gender differences in the neurotoxicity of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system: Implications for Parkinson's disease. The journal of Gender-Specific Medicine 3: 36-42. Objectives: Three major educational objectives include: 1) Illustrate a potential relationship between estrogen and Parkinson's Disease, 2) Demonstrate an extra-hypothalamic non-reproductive action of estrogen within the central nervous system and 3) Present a novel mechanism through which estrogen can exert this role as neuroprotectant. Abstract: The incidence of Parkinson's Disease is lower in women. In an attempt to understand this gender disparity, we have been examining the capacity for estrogen (E) to function as a neuroprotectant of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic (NSDA) system within animal models of Parkinson 's Disease. This presentation will consist of three parts. Part 1 provides a brief explanation for the supposition that gonadal steroid hormones can affect the NSDA system. From these findings emerged the hypothesis that E may function as a neuroprotectant of the NSDA system. In Part 2, we show results from a series of studies which demonstrate the conditions under which E, as well as the anti-E, tamoxifen, can exert this capacity. Finally, in Part 3, we present data which indicate a mechanism by which E can serve to preserve neurodegeneration within the NSDA system. 196-206. Ernst, M. et al. (2002) . Decision-making in a risk-taking task: A PET study. Neuropsychopharmacology 26: 682-691. Abstract: Purpose: To investigate sex related differences in decisionmaking and brain activity in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). Methods: 20 healthy subjects participated in this study (10 women and 10 men). Brain activity was measured using PET H2O15 while performing the Iowa Gambling Task. This task measures the ability to weigh short-term rewards against long-term losses and consistently activates the OFC. A control task matched the sensorimotor aspects of the task without requiring decision-making. Results: Men activated extensive regions of the right hemisphere including the lateral OFC, the DLPFC, and the parietal lobe. Women activated the left medial OFC. In comparison to women, men showed better task performance and greater lateralized brain activity to the right hemisphere. This was exemplified by greater activation in a large area of the right lateral OFC of men during their performance of the Iowa Gambling Task. In contrast, women had more activation in the left DLPFC, left medial frontal gyrus, and temporal lobe during this task. Conclusions: These observations indicate that gender differences contribute to the heterogeneity observed in both normal and abnormal brain functioning. These results also provide further evidence of sexual dimorphism in neurocognitive performance and brain function. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should understand the possible role of gonadal hormones in modulating the effects of cocaine in women. Abstract: Data collected in laboratory animals indicate that gonadal hormones affect the response to cocaine. This study investigated the ability of endogenous progesterone to modulate the effects of smoked cocaine in ten non-treatment seeking female cocaine smokers. A cocaine dose-response function (six doses of 0, 6, 12 or 25 mg cocaine base at 14 min intervals) was determined during 1) a normal follicular phase, 2) a normal luteal phase and 3) a follicular phase made to resemble the luteal phase by the administration of oral micronized progesterone. All women had normal ovulatory menstrual cycles ranging from 25 to 36 days. During the follicular phase that micronized progesterone was administered, mean progesterone levels were 6.6 ng=ml. Similarly, during the normal luteal phase mean progesterone levels were 7.2 ng=ml. Overall, micronized progesterone produced minimal changes in blood pressure or heart rate. ''Good Drug Effect,'' ''Drug Quality Ratings'' clusters and ratings of ''High'' were decreased during the follicular phase when progesterone was administered compared to the normal follicular phase, particularly after 25 mg cocaine. There was no evidence of side effects from micronized progesterone. These preliminary results indicate that exogenously administered progesterone during the follicular phase blunts the response to smoked cocaine in females. Impact of rotatory shift work on cardiovascular system, serum cortisol and salivary IGA levels Literature References: Cushman, L. F., Wade, C., Factor-Litvak, P., Kronenberg, F. et al. (1999) Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should recognize that many depressed women use complementary and alternative medicine (CAM), and that such use varies by individuals' socio-economic backgrounds. Clinicians, therefore, should improve communication with patients from various backgrounds about the benefits and potential dangers associated with CAM use. Abstract: Purpose: Depression is a common and disabling disorder among women. Though conventional treatment for depression has improved substantially, use of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) is still popular among depressed women. This study explores the relationship between CAM use and certain socio-economic factors among depressed women. Methods: Data are from a telephone survey of 3,921 women from four racial=ethnic groups (Non-Hispanic White, African-American, Mexican and Chinese), age 18 and older living in the United States, conducted by the Rosenthal Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, Columbia University in 2001. Results: The results of multiple logistic regression analyses of the total sample indicate that socio-demographic factors associated with CAM use are being White, being older, being currently employed, and having higher education. Women with depression are three times more likely than others to use CAM. However, among depressed women, only ethnicity is associated with CAM use. Depressed women from minority groups were less likely to use CAM than Whites. Conclusion: The racial=ethnic differences in CAM use may reflect differences in help-seeking behaviors and awareness of depressive symptoms. Necessary steps should be taken to reach depressed minority women to meet their mental health service needs. Psychosocial and endocrine effects of romantic partner interaction on stress-protection Objectives: The presentation gives an overview about protective effects of positive social interaction between romantic partners on endocrine and psychological stress response in women. Abstract: Positive social interaction has been shown to be associated with an increase of central nervous availability of the neuropeptide oxytocin. In animal studies, the peptide was endogenously stimulated by warmth and massage. The present study focuses on stress protective effects of different kinds of interaction between romantic partners in humans. Seventy-eight women participated in the standardized psychosocial stress test TSST consisting of an unprepared speech and a mental arithmetic task in front of an audience. One third of these women received social support from their partners. A second group received instructed shoulder-neck-massage from their partners immediately before stress and the third group came alone with no intervention before the stress test. Blood samples were collected at five times to analyze oxytocin levels. Subjective stress responses and cortisol were repeatedly assessed in the course of the study. The stressor induced an endocrine stress response in all groups (F ¼ 22, 64, p < .01) and, most important, massage before stress exposure significantly reduced the cortisol response compared to the other groups (F ¼ 2, 95, p ¼ .019). The results are in line with animal studies and demonstrate the need for cross-disciplinary research to understand the mechanisms of stress protective social behavior. Neonatal isolation abolishes the effect of estrus stage on the acute responses to cocaine Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, participants should recognize the importance of assessing gonadal hormonal stage when diagnosing or treating female drug addicts as well as in performing clinical and preclinical studies. Further, participants should appreciate the enduring effects of early life stress and its potential to affect treatment strategies. Abstract: We demonstrated that neonatal isolation (ISO) increases stimulant-induced striatal dopamine levels and acquisition of cocaine selfadministration in rats of both sexes. This study examines whether ISO alters cocaine's acute effects in adult female rats during different estrus stages. Litters were assigned to ISO (individual isolation; 1 hr=day; Postnatal days 2-9) or non-handled conditions and to one of four experiments. In Experiment 1, proestrus or estrus female rats were administered one of three cocaine doses (0, 5, 10 mg=kg) and activity monitored for 40-min. In Experiment 2, rats maintained on a fixed-ratio 15 schedule of food reinforcement were administered cocaine (0.3-30 mg=kg). The effects on response rates were determined in female rats during proestrus, estrus, and diestrus. In Experiment 3, proestrus or estrus female rats were administered cocaine (10 mg=kg) and plasma collected 15-min later. In Experiment 4, the estrus stages of female isolate and non-handled rats were tracked for 16 days. Cocaine induced dose-related increases in horizontal activity except in estrus non-handled females. Scheduled-controlled responding increased above baseline at the lowest cocaine doses in non-handled females during proestrus and diestrus but decreased during estrus. ISO blunted this estrus stage distinction leading to similar dose response functions across estrus stages. There were no significant estrus cycle or ISO effects on plasma cocaine levels but ISO tended to decrease the length of the diestrus stage. Results show that the estrus cycle stage modifies cocaine's acute behavioral effects and that these are attenuated by early life stress. Support: Donaghue Medical Research Foundation. Healthy teenage female athletes undergoing echocardiography screening report more somatic symptoms in comparison to males without significant structural heart disease Objectives: Studies have suggested that more women present with physical symptoms in comparison to men. However, there are no data available on the differences in the reporting of physical symptoms between teenage male and female athletes. Our objective was to evaluate the gender differences in physical symptoms in healthy teenage athletes. Abstract: Methods: A total of 829 high school athletes from Orange County, California, between the ages of 12 and 18 participated in a mass screening for cardiac abnormalities. The screening was conducted using a hand-carried cardiac ultrasound device. All participants were actively involved in a high school sports program. The athletes completed a questionnaire in regards to their athletic activities and physical symptoms (i.e. shortness of breath, chest pain, fatigue, dizziness, palpitations, leg edema). Results: There were 565 (68.2%) male and 264 (31.6%) female participants. Significantly more female teenage athletes reported physical symptoms (125, 47.3% vs. 148, 26.2% p < 0.001). Symptoms did not correlate with any valvular or cardiac abnormalities in either gender. The differences in the reporting of symptoms were significant for shortness of breath, chest pain, dizziness, and fatigue. Conclusion: There is a high prevalence of the reporting of physical symptoms in young healthy athletes without any relation to cardiac abnormalities. Furthermore, young female athletes report physical symptoms nearly twice as often as their male counterparts. The reason for this difference is unknown. Five year follow-up study of postpartum depression Objectives: Participants should be able to understand and treat postpatum disorders better. Abstract: Introduction: Postpartum depression affects one in ten women within six months of childbirth and this finding has been replicated in several studies across cultures. The research done so far has focussed mainly on its detection, clinical features, risk factors and short-term outcome. There is paucity of literature on long-term outcome of postpartum depression. There is some evidence to suggest that postpartum depression is different from other (non postpartum) forms of depression in terms of its aetiology, psychopathology and response to treatment. Purpose: To examine retrospectively the outcome of postpartum depression at five year follow-up and to study the various factors related to outcome. A comparison with the outcome of non-postpartum depression will help us understand the true nature of postnatal depression. The study was conducted at a Parent and Baby Day Unit which is a tertiary care service in Stoke on Trent in England in year 2002-3. Letters were sent to a sample of 150 subjects who received a diagnosis of postnatal depression in year 1997=98 at this clinic in order to follow them up in the community. It was possible to conduct face-to-face interviews with 29 subjects and the outcome of 118 subjects was assessed with the help of chart review of their medical and psychiatric notes. Results: Out of a sample of 147 subjects who could be reviewed, 116 did not have any further contact with either their tertiary perinatal services or their area mental health teams and they were asymptomatic at the time of their discharge within twelve months of index episode, 18 reported further episodes of depression and other psychiatric disorders, 12 had continuous illness lasting the entire period of five years and one had a protracted index episode lasting two and a half years. This paper compares the outcome of postnatal depression with that of other forms of depression. Prenatal specific psychopathological conditions and disorders, pregnancy outcome Ouriel Rosenblum, Danon, G., Graignic, R., Valente, M., Devouche, E., Jaricot, B., Heroux, C., LeNestour, A., Dayan, J., Creveuil, C., Maron, M., Delion, P., Valat, A., Thomas, P. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be able to determine what psychological and psychiatric conditions it is important to assess and manage during the perinat al period, prenatal anxiety and depression, borderline personality disorder and history of perinatal loss. Abstract: Many psychiatric and psychological conditions are now known to have an impact on pregnancy. Pregnancy and motherhood are optimal situations for screening and implementing therapeutic management for any disorder. For example, many studies on postnatal depression have shown a relationship between postpartum depression and infant cognitive outcome. However other situations have not been studied with as much care. The loss of a child during pregnancy may have huge consequences on the psychological balance of the mother, especially when a new pregnancy occurs following this death. Anxiety, sadness and guilt are the most common features seen in such circumstances. Borderline personality disorder (BLPD) is often linked with maternal history of child abuse and neglect. Assessing BLPD during pregnancy becomes a public mental health issue. Mother infant interactions of BLPD have shown intrusiveness and distorsion. A prospective cohort study of 632 women establishing links between prenatal depression and anxiety and physiological and psychological factors such as preterm labor, eating disorder, anxiety and depression will be presented. Assessing and suggesting early treatment for all these conditions will be discussed with specific programs for each pathology detailed. Assessing borderline personality disorder during pregnancy and immediate postpartum Objectives: The purpose of this presentation is that participants be able to search for and diagnose borderline personality disorder during pregnancy therefore enhancing specific perinatal management of borderline mother and infant. Abstract: Borderline personality disorder (BLPD) is the most common, most diagnosed and most agreed-upon diagnosis among personality disorder in DSM4. This personality disorder has many features that are socially impairing ie. unstable and intense interpersonal relationships, impulsivity, affective instability, inappropriate intense anger, and that strongly alter quality of life ie. chronic feelings of emptiness, identity disturbance, transient stress related paranoid ideation, self mutilation and=or suicidal behaviour Majority of personality disorder are young adult women. Therefore women with BLPD diagnosis are physiologically susceptible to undergo pregnancy and childbirth. However BLPD is not screened for during pre or immediate postpartum. BLPD is also linked with maternal history of child abuse and neglect. Assessing BLPD during pregnancy becomes a public mental health issue. Pregnancy and motherhood are optimal situations for screening and implementing therapeutic management for any disorder. We will review 30 cases of mothers with BLPD diagnosis and specific psychiatric perinatal management of such mother and infant cases. Mother infant interactions of BLPD have shown intrusiveness and distorsion. A specific program designed by our clinic to address these issues including treatment of maternal personality, mother infant relationship as well as body therapy for infant will be described. Objectives: To determine what psychological conditions during pregnancy are susceptible to be important for pregnancy, childbirth and mother-infant interaction outcome Abstract: A strong relationship exists between psychological condition of pregnancy, especially stress and depression and that of the postpartum period. Moreover, these prenatal conditions have a proven impact on physiological conditions of pregnancy, probably on the newborn's vigilance system by modifying hypothalamic-pituitary reactivity and an indirect effect on mother-infant interaction. Many studies on postnatal depression have shown a relationship between postpartum depression and infant cognitive outcome. However early intervention programs do not seem to have proven any difference in the risks that depression has for the child's development. It is a likely hypothesis that this relative inefficacy is linked with the tardiness of the interventions involved. They are unable to modify the conditions of foetal development and unable to durably transform the quality of interactions that will be established during the first months and that seem to be at the origin of patterns of communication and stable representations. We will present a prospective cohort study of 632 women establishing links between prenatal depression and anxiety and physiological and psychological factors such as preterm labor, eating disorder, anxiety and depression. Assessing and suggesting early treatment for these conditions will be discussed. Anne-Laure D. Sutter-Dallay, Giaconne-Marcesche, Verdoux Hlne Centre Hospitalier Charles Perrens, BORDEAUX CEDEX, France, e-mail: ALSutter@perrens.aquisante.fr Literature References: Field, T., Healy, B., Eastwood, M. R., Kedwardh, B., Shepherd, M. (1988) . Infants of depressed mothers show ''depressed''; behavior even with non depressed adults. Child Development 59: 1569-1579. Murray, L., Stanley, C., Hooper, R., King, F., Fiori-Cowley, A. (1996) . The role of infant factors in postnatal depression and mother-infant interactions. Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology 38: 109-119. Objectives: At the end of this presentation, the participants should be able to recognize the impact of the interactionnal skills of the newborns on the earliest mother-infant interactions Abstract: Purpose: Postnatal depression (PND) in the mother can interfere with mother-infant interactions, and may have a deleterious effect on child's psychoaffective development. A limited number of studies have suggested that certain neonatal characteristics may be risk factors for occurrence of PND. The aim of the present study was to assess which behavioral characteristics of the newborn infant are associated with an increased risk of PND. Method: 422 mothers from the MATQUID prospective cohort study were recruited during the last trimester of pregnancy. Infants were evaluated at 3 days (Brazelton Neonatal Behavior Scale), and PND was assessed at 6 weeks post-partum with the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. Results: Behavioral characteristics of the infant at day 3 predict the occurrence of PND in the following weeks, independently of other risk factors for PND. The lower the baby's; orientation performance, the higher the risk that the mother would present with PND 6 weeks after delivery. Conclusion: Orientation capacities play a key role in the interactional skills between the mother and her infant. A difficult infant to interact with may contribute to the risk of PND. Further prospective studies are required to explore mechanisms underlying the association between the characteristics of the infant and PND. Objectives: This presentation will describe the process undertaken by the author as the Chair of a Canadian governmental multidisciplinary task force sponsored by the Ontario Women's Health Council, charged with ''Achieving Best Practices in the Use of Hysterectomy''. Abstract: Introduction: Hysterectomy is one of the most common surgical procedures performed in American, European and Australian women. There are wide variations in prevalence rates from over 500=100,000 women in U.S.A., to under 200=100,000 women in Sweden, as well threefold variations within countries. Canada (484=100,000) has the world's second highest hysterectomy rate. The majority of hysterectomies are performed for discretionary reasons and designated to enhance quality of life. Methods: The expert panel selection, literature review, consultation with the key stakeholders, including women and healthcare providers, will be described, as well as the process of seeking consensus among the Expert Panel. Results: Women, physicians, and other experts, agree that informed medical decision-making about hysterectomy is highly desirable but practical factors often interfere. Women, nurse practitioners, and primary care physicians, need better and more accessible information about common gynecologic symptoms and disorders and optimal treatments. Expert opinions and clinical guidelines based on scientific findings are ideals that often vary enormously from clinical practice. Conclusions: The realities of lack of accessible information and equipment, professional territoriality, medical politics, financial factors, healthcare personnel shortages and women's expectations, all contribute to undercutting best practices in the use of hysterectomy. Women's mental health curriculum for OB=GYN residents: think of the possibilities. . . Nehama Dresner, Chicago, IL, U.S.A., e-mail: n-dresner@northwestern.edu; wellsprings@sbcglobal.net Abstract: Purpose: To enrich and broaden training of residents in Obstetrics and Gynecology by providing them varied and supervised exposure to academic and clinical aspects of women's mental health. Methods: All NUMS Ob=Gyn Residents will participate in this required rotation for 3-6 weeks and are invited to complete a research questionnaire before, after and six months after their rotation. Didactics: An extensive bibliography and packet of readings are provided. Monthly lecture series (yearlong) and weekly C=L and Women Mentak Health case conference (resident presents own case once) Clinical: Varied experiences with Attending supervision and multi-disciplinary teams in Psychiatry, HROB, Gyne-Oncology, HIV, General OB, Lactation, Social Work, Post Partum Adjustment, Breast Cancer in an outpatient setting with inpatient consultations. Results: Significant changes in attention to mental health issues, understanding of the impact of health problems and increased comfort in assessing LXXII counseling around these topics were found after completing the rotation and were sustained at six months. Conclusions: Integrating didactic and supervised clinical experiences into the early training of ob=gyn residents can improve their attentiveness to and comfort with the psycho-social aspects of their patients health and wellbeing, and should be more formally included into such curricula throughout the course of training to provide both education and support. Increasing biological evidence suggests that estrogen is related to cognitive function. However, fewer controlled studies have examined the relationship between postmenopause hormone use and general cognitive function in non-demented postmenopausal women. The relationship between estrogen and cognitive function among postmenopausal women remains controversial, and several methodological limitations have been found in a large number of studies. In order to help clarify this matter, our goal was to verify the effects of estrogen hormone replacement (EHR) on the cognitive performance of 59 women measured at baseline and 6 months later. We developed a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study design, by replacing the hormone with equine conjugated estrogen (premarin) 0.625 mg per day or placebo, during six cycles of 28 days each, in hysterectomized women, who were normal in all other aspects. Both groups had similar demographic and anthropometric data, physical examination, menopausal symptom test scores, and mood and anxiety test scores. The cognitive performance was measured using the following tests and scales: 1) Immediate and Delayed Verbal Recall; 2) Digit Span-Forward; 3) Digit Span-Backward; 4) Free Recall of Pleasant and Unpleasant Words; 5) Digit-Symbol Substitution Test (DSST); 6) Three Minute Reasoning Test; 7) Perceptual Speed and Accuracy Test from the battery ''Differential Aptitude Tests-DAT''; 8) The Paired Associate Learning Test; 8) Subjective Memory Questionnaire (SMQ). We also applied the Social Adjustment Scale (SAS) and psychometric tests. Conclusions: the present study has not provided evidence that there are any beneficial effects of EHR given to healthy elderly women on their cognitive abilities. Both groups were similar (p < 0.05). Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participant should be able to diagnose depressive and anxiety disorders in couples presenting for in-vitro fertilization. Abstract: Couples undergoing in-vitro fertilization (IVF) report significant psychological distress. Several studies have reported high prevalence rates of anxiety and depression in this population. The presentation will discuss significant findings from three studies carried out by the authors at an assisted reproduction center in Bombay. These studies evaluated the prevalence of depression and anxiety in couples presenting for IVF and reported a high prevalence of depression and anxiety in this population. In one study which evaluated 30 consecutive couples, 40% of the study group met DSM-IV criteria for an axis I mood or anxiety disorder: 15% had major depressive disorder, 18.3% had dysthymic disorder, and 6.7% had an anxiety disorder. Women had a significantly higher prevalence of depressive and anxiety disorders compared to men regardless of the etiology of infertility. However, men had a depressive or anxiety disorder only in the presence of a male factor as the etiology for infertility. Suicidal ideation was present in 30% of the study group, and was reported by significantly more women (50%) than men (10%). Across all scales, the factors of anxiety, depression and somatization were significantly higher than other factors. Seventy percent of couples had at least one partner with a psychiatric diagnosis. Another study covering 105 couples had similar findings. Objectives: 1. Demonstrate a knowledge base useful in clinical practice regarding the complex developmental process of families in a pregnancy following a perinatal loss. 2. Differentiate between unrecognized feelings of grief and symptoms of PTSD seen in parents in a subsequent pregnancy after a loss and identify interventions to help prevent PTSD. 3. Differeniate between prenatal attachment and unresolved grief in families and the need to address these differences to alleviate attachment disorders in the subsequent child. Abstract: Loss of a baby during pregnancy or the newborn period occurs in approximately one-third of all pregnancies with approximately 65% of families going on to have another pregnancy. Rather than feelings of starting anew, a subsequent pregnancy can reactivate emotions, triggering feelings of loss and attachment with the baby who died, both for the mothers and fathers. Research is now suggesting children born after a loss are at risk for attachment disorders which may be due in part to the lack of understanding for the special needs of these families in their subsequent pregnancies. This symposium will discuss the phenomenon of pregnancy after perinatal loss based on qualitative research findings from the two presentors. Dr. Cote-Arsenault will discuss the increased fear and anxiety seen in these families and the value of support groups. Dr. O'Leary will address the pregnancies from a perspective of the meaning of parenting during pregnancy after a loss for both mothers and fathers and suggest a model of intervention to help alleviate attachment disorders in the subsequent child. Objectives: 1. Gain an understanding of why symptoms of PTSD are seen in parents in a subsequent pregnancy after a loss and identify interventions to help prevent PTSD. 2. Address the concept of prenatal attachment and unresolved grief and how understanding these differences can help alleviate attachment disorders in the subsequent child. 3. Identify two themes that are different for fathers in a pregnancy after a loss compared to the mothers. Abstract: This symposium will discuss the phenomenon of pregnancy after perinatal loss based on qualitative research findings and clinical practice. Loss of a baby during pregnancy or the newborn period occurs in approximately one-third of all pregnancies with approximately 65% of families going on to have another pregnancy. Rather than feelings of starting anew, a subsequent pregnancy can reactivate emotions, triggering feelings of loss and attachment with the baby who died, both for the mothers and fathers. Research now suggests children born after a loss are at risk for attachment disorders. A preliminary study on adults who were these subsequent children verifies these findings. These findings may be due in part to the lack of understanding for the special needs of families in their subsequent pregnancies, now being found through research. The work for families in a subsequent pregnancy is not about unresolved feelings and letting go but rather helping parents to make meaning of their changed role of parenting. Dr. O'Leary will address pregnancy after loss from the perspective of parenting during pregnancy and the how the meaning of being a parent changes for both mothers and fathers. A model of intervention to help alleviate attachment disorders in the subsequent child will be presented. Objectives: Recognize the importance of supporting mothers with difficult infants during the first months of life and learn a psychoeducat onal, family centered approach to treating families affected by infantile colic. Abstract: Colic is traditionally viewed from a pediatric perspective as a common and benign condition that does not take into account the impact caring for an inconsolable infant has on a mother. Little attention has been directed towards understanding the effect colic can have on maternal mental health. A woman's sense of competence and self-esteem is often compromised when she feels she is not effectively meeting her infant's needs. Sleep deprivation, stress, anxiety, depression and strained marital relationships are symptoms associated with mothers whose infants have colic. Utilizing a family centered, multidisciplinary team approach the Infant Behavior, Cry, and Sleep Clinic has worked with over 500 families whose infants experience extreme colic. Our focus is on identifying and treating causes of infant irritability alleviating maternal distress and promoting healthy parent-infant relationships. Mothers are treated as playing a pivotal role in alleviating their infants distress, provided the opportunity to discuss the effect their infants' difficulties have on them, given developmental information that often legitimizes their concerns and validates their feelings and available social supports are explored. This presentation will explain the clinic's design and treatment strategies and provide information about mothers' attempts to cope with colic as illustrated with clinical case examples. Breslau, N., Kessler, R. C., Chilcoat, H. D., Schultz, L. R., Davis, G. C., Andreski, P. (1998) Trauma, posttraumatic stress disorder in the community: the 1996 Detroit Area Survey of Trauma. Archives of General Psychiatry 55 (7): 626-632. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participant will learn about exposure to traumatic events and PTSD in women, with a focus on clinical presentation, diagnosis and available treatment options for PTSD. Abstract: Studies prior to the September 11 terrorist attacks have reported that 61% of men and 51% of women experience at least one traumatic experience in their lifetime (1, 2) . Traumatic events have a significant negative impact on the individual and the community. They are associated with increased medical and psychiatric comorbidity, including depression, substance use disorders, and anxiety disorders, in particular, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). PTSD is a highly prevalent, chronic and disabling disorder, with a reported prevalence of 7.8% in the general population. It is associated with increased comorbid psychiatric illnesses, impairment in physical health, substantial psychosocial dysfunction and an increased risk of suicide. PTSD has been found to respond modestly well to psychosocial as well as pharmacological intervention. Gender differences exist in the liklihood of traumatic exposure and the subsequent risk of developing PTSD. Women are more likely to report rape, sexual molestation and childhood physical abuse. They are approximately twice as likely to develop PTSD following traumatic exposure as men (1, 2) . The presentation will discuss exposure to traumatic events and trauma-related disorders in women. It will further focus on PTSD in women, including gender differences in clinical presentation, course and treatment of PTSD. The cultural aspects of PTSD in women will be discussed. In addition, findings from a study assessing the prevalence of PTSD in survivors of an earthquake will be discussed. The presentation will aim for a comprehensive coverage of this increasingly recognised and treated disorder. Barbara F. Figueiredo, Rodrigues, A., Magarinho, R. inherited vulnerabilities and adverse family environments. Adult onset depression occurs in women who appear to have functioned well during childhood and adolescence, and come from families with few psychosocial risks. We propose that the severity of child sexual abuse is associated with age of onset. Sexual abuse involving intercourse is an overwhelming trauma leading to symptoms in childhood. By contrast children deal with contact child sexual abuse without intercourse with a coping strategy that delays the onset of depression until adult life; perhaps until the start of adult sexual relationships. Overall the findings are consistent with genetic and environmental influences in contrasting pathways to depression in women. Sofia Monteiro-Ferreira, Joã ao Monteiro-Ferreira Universidade de Coimbra, Servic°o de Psiquiatria -HUC Coimbra, Portugal, e-mail: ajmontferr@hotmail.com Objectives: Demonstrate the existance of significant correlations between depressed women and some of the variables of PAFS-Q and SRMFF questionnaires; demonstrate the existanceof ''family related variables of depression''; recognize them as protective factors against depression; recognize them as exposing factors of depression. Abstract: Objectives: To determine the family related variables that are connected with the development of depression in women. Design: Two groups of 50 women each were studied. One group-the experimental one-consisted of women who had been depressed at least once; the other-the control group-consisted of women who had never been depressed. Both groups were matched for age, schooling, marital status, number of children, job, and socio-economical status. Method: Both groups answered questions on the personal Authority in the Family System Questionnaire (PAFS-Q) and Self-Report Measure of Family Functioning (SRMFF) questionnaire. Once statistical means for each variable were obtained, we used t Test to calculate the differences between matched samples. Results: we found out that the experimental group showed less Intergenerational Intimacy, Intergenerational Individuation, Spousal Individuation and Spousal Intimacy, and Personal Authority; it also showed more Enmeshment. Significative differences for the other variables were not found. Conclusions: In families whose women have shown signs of previous depression there are levels of Individuation, Intimacy and Personal Authority significantly lower than in families where depression in women is absent. The importance of these variables -that we call ''family related variables of depression'' -both as protective factors against depression and exposing factors of depression is therefore a great one both in the diagnose and treatment of the majority of depressed women. Objectives: Participants will be able to describe: a) components of an integrated model of trauma-informed services for women's addictions treatment; b) approaches to cultural and linguistic adaptation of materials and services for poor, urban Latina and African-American women; and c) trauma-informed service system integration and clinical approaches that could be useful to other city health departments in metropolitan areas serving similar populations. Abstract: Purpose: Despite the recent proliferation of studies on violence against women, limited research is available on effective interventions for Latina and African-American women, especially those who abuse substances. The Boston Consortium of Services for Families in Recovery under the Boston Public Health Commission formed a partnership of various programs and stakeholders, to develop integrated=trauma-informed services for largely poor, urban, African-American and Latina women with co-occurring substance abuse, mental health, and trauma histories. Method: Most intervention participants (N ¼ 181) identified as African-American=Black (38.8%), Hispanic=Latina (31.5%). Service system enhancements included: shared philosophy, joint-planning mechanism, shared resources, consumer involvement, and staff cross-training. Clinical enhancements included: mental health=trauma screening, assessment and service coordination, and manualized group interventions on trauma, leadership, family reunification, economic planning, and parenting. Client data were collected at baseline and at 2, 6, 9 and 12 months follow-p. Results: Challenges included initial provider apprehension, communication across agencies, consumer integration, lack of staff trauma=mental health expertise, sustained client participation, and cultural=linguistic adaptation of materials=approaches. Strategies for overcoming challenges and lessons learned will be discussed. Conclusion: Trauma-informed and integrated addictions treatment can be achieved with carefully planned interventions, sustained effort and collaboration among diverse stakeholders=systems of care. Objectives: 1). Learn practical diagnostic tools and assessment strategies for substance abuse disorders among women 2). Learn alternative treatment strategies for use in women with trauma and psychiatric symptoms, and therefore decrease potential for substance use 3). Understand the benefits of integrating treatment for co-morbid substance abuse and psychiatric disorders Abstract: Despite the high rate of comorbidity of PTSD and substance abuse, most clinical programs treat PTSD or substance abuse, but rarely both. Many clinicians are trained to insist on abstinence first, yet being abstinent from substances does not resolve PTSD and some symptoms may worsen with abstinence. Most of the research that currently exists on PTSD has focused on male combat veterans, and recent efforts directed toward the treatment of women have tended to focus on recovery from acute trauma rather than chronic PTSD. Traditional means of treatment delivery to this population often fail to retain subjects due to unstable treatment alliances, multiple crises, erratic attendance and relapse. Alternate means of delivery are needed to reach this difficult-to-engage and retain population. Clinicians, researchers, and patients support an integrated model and view treating both disorders concurrently as more likely to succeed, more cost effective, and more sensitive to patient needs. According to Courtois (1999) in Women's Mental Health; A Comprehensive Textbook, psychoeducational groups that takes a structured, cognitive behavioral approach to teaching patients about the effects of trauma and PTSD symptom management techniques are being more frequently used by clinicians and show promise. In one study, in vivo exposure-based techniques, once a more predominant treatment for PTSD, showed marked decompensation rates when used to treat PTSD symptoms. Other therapies used in this study reduced PTSD symptoms nearly 50% more than the control group. According to Ritvo et al. (2003) who support the use of cognitive-behavioral techniques to treat substance abuse states the most important components in addiction are the powerfully held, distorted beliefs that drive unfortunate choices. Foa and colleagues (1991) note that Stress Inoculated Treatment (SIT), a cognitive-based approach which includes education, skill building, and application, was effective in treating fear, anxiety, tension, and depression in those with PTSD, and also that the SIT approach was indicated to be the most effective treatment of those assessed in the study for PTSD at immediate follow-up. Literature Reference: Moran, O'Hara (in preparation) Taking the partner's perspective: The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale -Partner (EPDS-P). Objectives: Participants will be introduced to a new partner rating scale of postpartum depression, the first of its kind. Participants will be familiar with postpartum depression rating scales in general and in the symptom presentation of postpartum women. The utility of and implications for a partner rating scale will be discussed. Abstract: Although there are self-report and clinician-rated measures of depressive symptomatology suitable for use with postpartum women, no measure exists that provides for the partner's rating of the woman's depressed mood. The partner's perceptions of women's postpartum depression symptomatology could be useful in 1) corroborating women's self-report 2) detecting additional symptoms, and 3) as a psychotherapeutic tool. The Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale -Partner (EPDS-P) is a 10item measure adapted from the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS). To address questions of reliability and validity of the EPDS-P, 101 couples were given multiple measures of depressive symptomatology, marital adjustment, and postpartum adjustment on several occasions from two days to six weeks postpartum. The reliability of the EPDS-P, evidenced by the measure's test-retest stability over a 4-week period and internal consistency was established. Substantial concurrent and predictive validity were found. The EPDS-P showed incremental validity over and above EPDS scores in predicting the woman's depressive symptomatology. Factor analysis revealed a two-factor structure for both the EPDS-P and the EPDS. Results supported the use of the EPDS-P as a valid partner-rating of postpartum depression. Emotional experiences of the partner after childbirth Objectives: At the conclusion of the presentation the participants should be able to demonstrate: 1) knowledge of the comorbidity of depression within postpartum couples; and 2) the implications of comorbid depression for treatment of the postpartum woman and her partner. Purpose: Many studies have demonstrated the risk for depression in postpartum women as well as the negative impact of their depressive symptoms on families. Some evidence suggests that depression in male partners has similar negative effects on the family and the potential negative impact of one depressed partner on the other has been noted. Little is known, however, about comorbid depression within postpartum couples. The goal of this study was to clarify the prevalence and comorbidity of depression in the partners of postpartum women. Methods: The prevalence and rates of comorbid depression within postpartum couples were assessed in a large community sample using the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale and the Inventory to Diagnose Depression. Both partners also completed measures of psychosocial adjustment, functioning and relationships. Results: The data suggest that comorbid depression clearly occurs among postpartum women and their partners. This comorbidity appears to have an impact on both interpersonal and general psychosocial functioning. Conclusions: Recognition of the occurrence of comorbid depression among postpartum women and their partners may have significant implications for mental health interventions before and during the postpartum period. The development of treatments for the male partner and the couple, including psychosocial or educational interventions, is indicated. Maternal anxiety and prenatal ultrasound markers in a multi-ethnic population Shari I. Lusskin, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, U.S.A., e-mail: shari.lusskin@med.nyu.edu Literature References: Punales-Morejon D. (1997) . Genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis: a multicultural perspective. Journal of the American Medical Women's Association. 52 (1): 30-32. Shipp, T. D., Bromley, B., Lieberman, E., Benacerraf, B. R. (2000) . The frequency of the detection of fetal echogenic intracardiac foci with respect to maternal race. Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology 15 (6): 460-462. Smith-Bindman, R., Hosmer, W., Feldstein, V. A., Deeks, J. J., Goldberg, J. D. (2000, 2001) . Second-Trimester Ultrasound to Detect Fetuses with Down Syndrome: A Meta-analysis. JAMA 2001; 285 (8): 1044-1055. 2000; 15(6) : 460-462. Objectives: Participants will be able to: 1) identify the common prenatal testing options available to most women and to understand their limitation; 2) consider the influence of cultural factors on attitudes towards prenatal testing and results of such tests; and 3) better discuss genetic testing options and results with pregnant psychiatric patients. Abstract: Background: This study attempted to quantitate maternal anxiety associated with detection of ''soft'' markers for aneuploidy on prenatal ultrasound (US)markers and to examine how the information was used by the patients. Methods: The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory for Adults (STAI) was given to a pregnant cohort before and following routine fetal ultrasound examination. Women with isolated fetal markers for aneuploidy were notified of the findings, but discouraged from pursuing amniocentesis. Rates of normal US, aneuploidy markers, anomalies, amniocentesis, and pregnancy outcomes were assessed across the ethnic groups. Pre-and post-US STAI surveys were scored and standardized with previously established norms. T-tests, Chisquare, and ANOVA where used where appropriate. Results: 523 women completed the STAI during the study period. 61% of the tested patients were Hispanic, 24% Asian, 7% Black, and 8% Caucasian. Maternal anxiety was decreased in women with normal fetal US, increased with aneuploidy markers, and the highest with anomalies (mean change in STAI scores: À1.5 AE 0.4 vs. 3.8 AE 1.3 vs. 20 AE 3.1, respectively, ANOVA, p < 0.05). Aneuploidy markers were more common among Hispanic and Asian fetuses (ANOVA, p < 0.05), without associated aneuploidy. Women with aneuploidy markers underwent amniocentesis as often as women with advanced maternal age (Chi-square, p ¼ NS). Conclusion: The detection of aneuploidy markers is associated with increased maternal anxiety and unnecessary amniocentesis, despite directive counseling not to pursue invasive testing. Treatment with ssris and cbt in postpartum depressed and anxious mothers and the impact on mother-infant interaction and infant development Shaila M. Misri, BC Women's Hospital and Health Centre, Reproductive Mental Health Program, Vancouver, BC, Canada, e-mail: smisri@cw.bc.ca Literature Reference: Appleby, L., Warner, R., Whitton, A., Faragher, B. (1997) . A controlled study of fluoxetine and cognitive-behavioural counselling in the treatment of postnatal depression. BMJ 314: 932 Objectives: Participants will be able to: 1) compare the use of SSRIs versus a combination therapy of SSRIs and CBT for the treatment of postpartum depression and anxiety; 2) understand how treatments may affect mother-infant interaction and infant development. Abstract: Purpose: To compare the efficacy of treatment with SSRIs (with or without Clonazepam) versus a combination treatment of SSRIs and CBT on symptoms of depression and anxiety in postpartum women. The secondary objective is to compare the effect of treatment with SSRIs versus a combination treatment of SSRIs and CBT on mother-infant interaction and infant development. Methods: Forty post partum women diagnosed with Depression and Anxiety were consented to the study. Patients were randomized blindly to either Group I (Paxil and CBT ) for weekly CBT sessions with a psychologist LXXVIII or Group II (Paxil). In group I, 17 completed the study and in Group II, 15 completed. Assessments at the first and last visit include HAM-D,HAM-A,YBOCS, CGIs, EPDS, PSI and videotaping of the participant and infant. All participants received Paxil at recommended starting doses. All patients were assessed at wks1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 , and 14 using the HAM-D, HAM-A, YBOCS, CGIi and CGIs. Results: Preliminary observations are the CBT and Paxil group mean%change was higher with HAM-A measures. There was no change in regards to dose of response and week of response between the two groups. Conclusions: Final analysis will also include: coding maternal-infant interaction and comparison of pre=post treatment, clonazepam data and assessment of sustained relief at a 6 month followup. Maria Corral, BC Women's Hospital and Health Centre, Reproductive Mental Health Program, Vancouver, BC, Canada, e-mail: corral@unixg.ubc.ca Literature References: Berle, J. (2000) . Seasonal and sleep changes in postpartum depression. APA Annual Meeting Abstracts, 149 Objectives: Participants will be able to: a) understand how women who have SAD or S-SAD may be at higher risk of recurrence postpartum if delivery occurs in the winter months and b) increased options for treatment in a population where medications may be refused. Abstract: Purpose: Postpartum depression (PPD) affects a significant proportion of women after childbirth. One of the risk factors for the development of PPD is a prior history of premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). Women who suffer from syndromes such as PMDD have been shown to exhibit a high proportion of seasonal variation symptoms. The purpose of this study was to determine whether women with PPD also demonstrate significant seasonal variation of symptoms. Method: Sixty-two women presenting to specialized women's health clinic at a major teaching hospital who were diagnosed with DSM-IV Major Depressive Disorder with Postpartum Onset, also completed the Seasonal Pattern Assessment Questionnaire (SPAQ). Their results were compared to those of a control group of 51 healthy postpartum women. Results: 29% of women with PPD met criteria for a diagnosis of SAD compared to only 12% in the control group; this represented a significant difference between the groups. In addition, 37% of women with PPD rated the seasonal variation in symptoms as being moderate to severe, whereas only 18% of healthy postpartum women felt their seasonal symptoms were problematic. Conclusions: These results may have significant clinical relevance in pregnancy planning for women with increased seasonality. Women who have significant seasonal mood changes may benefit from light therapy if their depression occurs postpartum. Objectives: At the conclusion of this presentation, the participants should be aware of the changing symptom patterns that occur during the premenstrual phase of the menstrual cycle in women before and after 40 years of age with a particular emphasis on differentiating perimenopausal symptoms from PMDD, and be able to use standardized rating scales to assist with diagnosis. Abstract: In order to study changing symptom patterns across the reproductive life cycle, all women admitted to the PMS clinic at BC Women's Hospital and Health Centre are administered rating scales to assess presenting symptoms and levels of distress. Symptoms reported, severity of symptoms and levels of distress are compared in women before and after 40 years of age using rating scales. This study is currently a work in progress and only preliminary results are available at this time. A review of the background literature, description of the rating scales used and updated results and conclusion will be presented at the symposium. Clinical interventions and service integration: lessons learned from the women, co-occurring disorders and violence study Elke Rechberger, Norma Finkelstein, Nancy VanDeMark, Luz Lopez, Rene Andersen, Paula Bjelajac 
